The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Principal Navigations, Voyages,
Traffiques, and Discoveries of The English Nation, Volume 10,
by Richard Hakluyt

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Principal Navigations, Voyages, Traffiques,
       and Discoveries of The English Nation, Volume 10
       Asia, Part III

Author: Richard Hakluyt

Release Date: April 8, 2004 [EBook #11948]

Language: English and French

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PRINCIPAL NAVIGATIONS, V10 ***




Produced by Karl Hagen and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team.
This file was produced from images generously made available by the
Canadian Institute for Historical Microreproductions





** Transcriber's Notes **

The printed edition from which this e-text has been produced retains the
spelling and abbreviations of Hakluyt's 16th-century original. In this
version, the spelling has been retained, but the following manuscript
abbreviations have been silently expanded:

- vowels with macrons = vowel + 'n' or 'm'
- q; = -que (in the Latin)
- y'e = the; y't = that; w't = with

This edition contains footnotes and two types of sidenotes. Most footnotes
are added by the editor. They follow modern (19th-century) spelling
conventions. Those that don't are Hakluyt's (and are not always
systematically marked as such by the editor). The sidenotes are Hakluyt's
own. Summarizing sidenotes are labelled [Sidenote: ] and placed before the
sentence to which they apply. Sidenotes that are keyed with a symbol are
labeled [Marginal note: ] and placed at the point of the symbol, except in
poetry, where they are placed at a convenient point. Additional notes on
corrections, etc. are signed 'KTH'

** End Transcriber's Notes **




THE PRINCIPAL

NAVIGATIONS, VOYAGES, TRAFFIQUES

AND

DISCOVERIES

OF

THE ENGLISH NATION.

COLLECTED BY

RICHARD HAKLUYT. PREACHER

AND

EDITED BY
EDMUND GOLDSMID, F.R.H.S.

VOL. X.

ASIA.

PART III.



NAVIGATIONS, VOYAGES, TRAFFIQUES, AND DISCOVERIES

OF THE

ENGLISH NATION IN ASIA.

The manner of the entring of Soliman the great Turke, with his armie into
  Aleppo in Syria, marching towards Persia against the Great Sophie, the
  fourth day of Nouember, 1553, noted by Master Anthony Ienkinson, present
  at that time.

There marched before the Grand Signior, otherwise called the great Turke,
6000 Esperes, otherwise called light horsemen very brave, clothed all in
scarlet.

After, marched 10000 men, called Nortans, which be tributaries to the Great
Turke, clothed all in yellow veluet, and hats of the same, of the Tartary
fashion, two foote long, with a great role of the same colour about their
foreheads, richly decked, with their bowes in their hands, of the Turkish
fashion.

After them marched foure Captaines, men of armes, called in Turkish
Saniaques, clothed all foure in crimson veluet, euery one hauing vnder his
banner twelue thousand men of armes well armed with their morrions vpon
their heads, marching in good order, with a short weapon by their sides,
called in their language, Simiterro.

After came 16000 Ianizaries, called the slaues of the Grand Signior, all a
foote, euery one hauing his harquebush, who be his gard, all clothed in
violet silke, and apparelled vpon their heads with a strange forme, called
Cuocullucia, fashioned in this sort: the entering in of the forehead is
like a skull made of white veluet, and hath a traine hanging downe behind,
in manner of a French hoode, of the same, colour, and vpon the forepart of
the said skull, iust in the middes of his forehead there is standing bolt
vpright like a trunke of a foote long of siluer, garnished most richly with
Goldsmiths worke, and precious stones, and in the top of the said trunke a
great bush of fethers, which waueth vp and downe most brauely when he
marcheth.

After this, there cam 1000. pages of honour; all clothed in cloth of gold,
the halfe of them carying harquebushes, and the other halfe, Turkish bowes,
with the trusses of arrowes, marching in good order.

Then came three men of armes well armed, and vpon their harnesse coates of
the Turkes fashion, of Libard skinnes, and murrions vpon their heads, their
speares charged, and all the end of their staffe hard by the head of the
speare, a horse taile died in a bloody colour, which is their ensigne: they
be the chalengers for the Turkes owne person.

After them came seuen pages of honour in cloth of siluer, vpon seuen white
horses, which horses were couered with cloth of siluer, all embrodered and
garnished with precious stones, emerauds, diamonds, and rubies most richly.

After them also came sixe more pages of honour, clothed in cloth of gold,
euery one hauing his bowe in his hand, and his fawchine of the Turkes
fashion by his side.

Immediately after them came the great Turke himselfe with great pompe and
magnificence, vsing in his countenance and gesture a wonderfull maiestie,
hauing onely on each side of his person one page clothed with cloth of
gold: he himselfe was mounted vpon a goodly white horse, adorned with a
robe of cloth of gold, embrodered most richly with the most precious
stones, and vpon his head a goodly white tucke, containing in length by
estimation fifteene yards, which was of silke and linnen wouen together,
resembling something Callicut cloth, but is much more fine and rich, and in
the top of his crowne, a litle pinnach of white Ostrich feathers, and his
horse most richly apparelled in all points correspondent to the same.

After him folowed sixe goodly yong ladies, mounted vpon fine white
hackneis, clothed in cloth of siluer, which were of the fashion of mens
garments, embrodered very richly with pearle and precious stones, and had
vpon their heads caps of Goldsmiths worke, hauing great flackets of haire,
hanging out on each side, died as red as blood, and the nailes of their
fingers died of the same colour, euery of them hauing two eunuches on each
side, and litle bowes in their hands, after an Antike fashion.

After marched the great Basha chiefe conductor of the whole army, clothed
with a robe of Dollymant crimson, and vpon the same another short garment
very rich, and about him fiftie Ianizaries afoote, of his owne gard, all
clothed in crimson veluet, being armed as the Turks owne Ianizaries.

Then after ensued three other Bashas, with slaues about them, being afoote,
to the number of three thousand men.

After came a companie of horsemen very braue, and in all points well armed,
to the number of foure thousand.

All this aforesayd army, most pompous to behold, which was in number foure
score and eight thousand men, encamped about the citie of Aleppo, and the
Grand Signior himselfe was lodged within the towne, in a goodly castle,
situated vpon a high mountaine: at the foote whereof runneth a goodly
riuer, which is a branch of that famous riuer Euphrates.

The rest of his armie passed ouer the mountaines of Armenia called now the
mountaines of Camarie, which are foure dayes iourney from Aleppo, appointed
there to tary the comming of the Grand Signior, with the rest of his army,
intending to march into Persia, to giue battel to the great Sophie. So the
whole armie of the Grand Signior, containing as well those that went by the
mountaines, as also those that came to Aleppo in company with him, with
horsemen and footemen, and the conductors of the camels and victuals, were
the number of 300000 men.

The camels which carried munition and vitailes for the said army, were in
number 200000.

       *       *       *       *       *

A note of the presents that were giuen at the same time in Aleppo, to the
  grand Signior, and the names of the presenters.

First the Basha of Aleppo, which is as a Viceroy, presented 100. garments
of cloth of gold, and 25. horses.

The Basha of Damasco, presented 100. garments of cloth of gold, and twentie
horses, with diuers sorts of comfits, in great quantitie.

The Basha of Aman presented 100. garments of cloth of gold, 20. horses, and
a cup of gold, with two thousand duckets.

The Saniaque of Tripolis presented six camels, charged all with silkes, 20.
horses, and a little clocke of gold, garnished with precious stones,
esteemed worth two hundred duckets.

The Consul of the company of the Venetians in Tripolis, came to kisse the
grand Signiors hand, and presented him a great basin of gold, and therein
4000. duckets Venetians.

       *       *       *       *       *

The safeconduct or priuiledge giuen by Sultan Solyman the great Turke, to
  master Anthony Ienkinson at Aleppo in Syria, in the yeere 1553.

Sultan Solyman, &c. to all Viceroyes, Saniaques, Cadies, and other our
Iusticers, Officers, and subiects of Tripolis in Syria, Constantinople,
Alexandria in AEgypt, and of all other townes and cities vnder our dominion
and iurisdiction: We will and command you, that when you shall see Anthony
Ienkinson, bearer of these present letters, merchant of London in England,
or his factor, or any other bearing the sayd letter for him, arriue in our
ports and hauens, with his ship or ships, or other vessels whatsoeuer, that
you suffer him to lade or vnlade his merchandise wheresoeuer it shall seeme
good vnto him, traffiking for himselfe ['himelfe' in source text--KTH] in
all our countreys and dominions, without hindering or any way disturbing of
him, his ship, his people or merchandise, and without enforcing him to pay
any other custome or toll whatsoeuer, in any sort, or to any persons
whatsoeuer they be, saue onely our ordinarie duties contained in our
custome houses, which when he hath paied, we will that he be franke and
free, as well for himselfe as for his people, merchandise, ship or ships,
and all other vessels whatsoeuer: and in so doing that he may traffike,
bargaine, sell and buy, lade and vnlade, in all our foresayd Countreys,
lands and dominions, in like sort, and with the like liberties and
priuiledges, as the Frenchmen and Venetians vse, and enioy, and more if it
be possible, without the hinderance or impeachment of any man. And
furthermore, wee charge and commaund all Viceroyes, and Consuls of the
French nation, and of the Venetians, and all other Consuls resident in our
Countreys, in what port or prouince soeuer they be, not to constraine, or
cause to constraine, by them, or the sayd Ministers and Officers whatsoeuer
they be, the sayd Anthony Ienkinson, or his factor, or his seruants, or
deputies, or his merchandise, to pay any kind of consullage, or other right
whatsoeuer, or to intermeddle or hinder his affaires, and not to molest nor
trouble him any manner of way, because our will and pleasure is, that he
shall not pay in all our Countreys, any other then our ordinarie custome.
And in case any man hinder and impeach him, aboue, and besides these our
present letters, wee charge you most expressly to defend and assist him
agaynst the sayd Consuls, and if they will not obey our present
commandement, that you aduertise vs thereof, that we may take such order
for the same, that others may take example thereby. Moreouer we commaund
all our Captaines of our Gallies, and their Lieutenants, be they Foister or
other Vessels, that when they shall finde the sayd Ienkinson, or his
factor, his ship or ships, with his seruaunts and merchandise, that they
hurt him not neither in body nor goods, but that rather they assist and
defend him agaynst all such as seeke to doe him wrong, and that they ayde
and helpe him with vitailes, according to his want, and that whosoeuer
shall see these presents, obey the same, as they will auoyd the penaltie in
doing the contrary. Made in Aleppo of Syria, the yeere 961. of our holy
prophet Mahomet, and in the yeere of Iesus, 1553. signed with the scepter
and signet of the grand Signior, with his owne proper hand.

       *       *       *       *       *

Letters concerning the voyage of M. John Newbery and M. Ralph Fitch, made
  by the way of the Leuant Sea to Syria, and ouerland to Balsara, and
  thence into the East Indies, and beyond, In the yeere 1583.

A letter written from the Queenes Majestie, to Zelabdin Echebar, King of
Cambaia, and sent by Iohn Newbery. In February Anno 1583.

Elizabeth by the grace of God &c. To the most inuincible, and most mightie
prince, lord Zelabdim Echebar king of Cambaya. Inuincible Emperor, &c. The
great affection which our Subjects haue, to visit the most distant places
of the world, not without good will and intention to introduce the trade of
marchandize of al nations whatsoeuer they can, by which meanes the mutual
and friendly trafique of marchandize on both sides may come, is the cause
that the bearer of this letter Iohn Newbery, ioyntly with those that be in
his company, with a curteous and honest boldnesse, doe repaire to the
borders and countreys of your Empire, we doubt not but that your imperiall
Maiestie through your royal grace, will fauourably and friendly accept him.
And that you would doe it the rather for our sake, to make vs greatly
beholding to your Maiestie; wee should more earnestly, and with more wordes
require it, if wee did think it needful. But by the singular report that is
of your imperial Maiesties humanitie in these vttermost parts of the world,
we are greatly eased of that burden, and therefore we vse the fewer and
lesse words: onely we request that because they are our subiects, they may
be honestly intreated and receiued. And that in respect of the hard iourney
which they haue vndertaken to places so far distant, it would please your
Maiestie with some libertie and securitie of voiage to gratifie it, with
such priuileges as to you shall seeme good: which curtesie if your
Imperiall maiestie shal to our subiects at our requests performe, wee
according to our royall honour, wil recompence the same with as many
deserts as we can. And herewith we bid your Imperial Maiestie to farewel.

       *       *       *       *       *

A letter written by her Maiestie to the King of China, in Februarie 1583.

Elizabeth by the grace of God Queene of England, &c. Most Imperial and
inuincible prince, our honest subiect Iohn Newbery the bringer hereof, who
with our fauour hath taken in hand the voyage which now hee pursueth to the
parts and countreys of your Empire, not trusting vpon any other ground then
vpon the fauour of your Imperiall clemencie and humanitie, is moued to
vndertake a thing of so much difficultie, being perswaded that hee hauing
entered into so many perils, your Maiestie will not dislike the same,
especially if it may appeare that it be not damageable vnto your royall
Maiestie, and that to your people it will bring some profite: of both which
things he not doubting, with more willing minde hath prepared himselfe for
his destinated voyage vnto vs well liked of. For by this meanes we
perceiue, that the profit which by the mutual trade on both sides, al the
princes our neighbors in the West do receiue, your Imperial maiestie and
those that be subiect vnder your dominion, to their great ioy and benefit
shal haue the same, which consisteth in the transporting outward of such
things whereof we haue plenty, and in bringing in such things as we stand
in need of. It cannot otherwise be, but that seeing that we are borne and
made to haue need one of another, and that wee are bound to aide one
another, but that your imperial Maiestie wil wel like of it, and by your
subiects with like indeuor wil be accepted. For the increase whereof, if
your imperial Maiestie shall adde the securitie of passage, with other
priuileges most necessary to vse the trade with your men, your maiestie
shall doe that which belongeth to a most honorable and liberal prince, and
deserue so much of vs, as by no continuance or length of time shalbe
forgotten. Which request of ours we do most instantly desire to be taken in
good part of your maiestie, and so great a benefit towards vs and our men,
we shall endeuor by diligence to requite when time shal serue thereunto.
The God Almighty long preserue your Imperial Maiestie.

       *       *       *       *       *

A letter of M. Iohn Newbery, written from Alepo, to M. Richard Hakluyt of
  Oxford, the 28 of May, Anno 1583.

Right wellbeloued, and my assured good friend, I heartily commend me vnto
you, hoping of your good health, &c. After we set saile from Grauesend,
which was the 13. day of February last, wee remained vpon our coast vntill
the 11. day of March, and that day we set saile from Falmouth, and neuer
ankered till wee arriued in the road of Tripolie in Syria, which was the
last day of Aprill last past, where wee stayed 14. dayes: and the twentie
of this present we came hither to Alepo, and with Gods helpe, within fiue
or sixe dayes goe from hence towards the Indies. [Sidenote: Abilfada Ismael
his Cosmographie.] Since my comming to Tripolis I haue made very earnest
inquirie both there and here, for the booke of Cosmographie of Abilfada
Ismael, but by no meanes can heare of it. Some say that possibly it may be
had in Persia, but notwithstanding I will not faile to make inquirie for
it, both in Babylon, and in Balsara, and if I can finde it in any of these
places, I wil send it to you from thence. The letter which you deliuered me
for to copy out, that came from M. Thomas Steuens in Goa, as also the note
you gaue mee of Francis Fernandas the Portugal, I brought thence with me
among other writings vnawares, the which I haue sent you here inclosed.
Here is great preparation for the warres in Persia, and from hence is gone
the Bassa of a towne called Rahemet, and shortly after goeth the Bassa of
Tripolis, and the Bassa of Damasco, but they haue not all with them aboue
6000. men from hence, and they goe to a towne called Asmerome, which is
three dayes iourney from Trapezunde, where they shal meete with diuers
captaines and souldiers that come from Constantinople and other places
thereabout, which goe altogether into Persia. This yeere many men goe into
the warres, and so hath there euery yeere since the beginning thereof,
which is eight yeeres or thereabouts, but very fewe of them returne againe.
Notwithstanding, they get of the Persians, and make castles and holds in
their countrey. I pray you make my hearty commendations to master Peter
Guillame, and master Philip Iones, and to M. Walter Warner, and to all the
rest of our friends. Master Fitch hath him heartily commended vnto you: and
so I commit you to the tuition of the Almightie, who blesse and keepe you,
and send vs a ioyfull meeting. From Alepo, the 28. of May 1583.

Your louing friend to command in all that I may.

Iohn Newberie.

       *       *       *       *

Another letter of the said M. Newberie, written to Master Leonard Poore of
  London from Alepo.

Right welbeloued, my very heartie commendations vnto you, and the rest of
my friends remembred. [Sidenote: March 11.] My last I sent you was the 25.
of February last, from Dele out of the Downes, after which time with
contrary windes wee remained vpon our owne coast, vntill the 11. day of
March, and then wee set saile from Falmouth, and the thirteenth day the
winde came contrary with a very great storme, which continued eight dayes,
and in this great storme wee had some of our goods wette, but God bee
thanked no great hurt done. [Sidenote: The last of April.] After which time
we sailed with a faire wind within the Streights, and so remained at Sea,
and ankered at no place vntil our comming into the roade of Tripolis in
Syria, which was the last day of April. This was a very good passage. God
make vs thankfull for it. The fourteenth day of this present wee came from
Tripolis, and the twentieth day arriued here in Alepo, and with the helpe
of God tomorrowe or next day, wee beginne our voyage towards Babylon and
Balsara, and so into India. Our friend Master Barret hath him commended to
you, who hath sent you in the Emanuel a ball of Nutmegs for the small
trifles you sent him, which I hope long since you haue receiued. Also hee
hath by his letter certified you in what order hee solde those things,
whereof I can say nothing, because I haue not seene the accompt thereof,
neither haue demaunded it: for euer since our comming hither hee hath bene
still busie about the dispatch of the shippe, and our voyage, and I
likewise in buying of things here to cary to Balsara, and the Indies.
[Sidenote: Currall. Amber greese. Sope. Broken glasse.] Wee haue bought in
currall for 1200. and odde ducats, and amber for foure hundreth ducates,
and some sope and broken glasse, with all other small trifles, all which
things I hope will serue very wel for those places that wee shall goe vnto.
All the rest of the accompt of the Barke Reinolds was sent home in the
Emanuel, which was 3600. ducats, which is 200. pound more then it was
rated. For master Staper rated it but 1100. li. and it is 1300. pound, so
that our part is 200. pound, besides such profit as it shall please God to
sende thereof: wherefore you shall doe very well to speake to M. Staper for
the accompt. And if you would content your selfe to trauell for three or
foure yeeres, I would wish you to come hither or goe to Cairo, if any goe
thither. For wee doubt not if you had remained there but three or foure
moneths, you would like so well of the place, that I thinke you would not
desire to returne againe in three or foure yeeres. And, if it should be my
chance to remaine in any place out of England, I would choose this before
all other that I know. My reason is, the place is healthfull and pleasant,
and the gaines very good, and no doubt the profit will bee hereafter
better, things being vsed in good order: for there should come in euery
ship the fourth part of her Cargason in money, which would helpe to put
away our commodities at a very good price. Also to haue two very good ships
to come together, would doe very well: for in so doing, the danger of the
voyage might be accompted as little as from London to Antwerpe. Master
Giles Porter and master Edmund Porter, went from Tripolis in a small barke
to Iaffa, the same day that we came from thence, which was the 14 day of
this present, so that no doubt but long since they are in Ierusalem: God
send them and vs safe returne. At this instant I haue received the account
of M. Barret, and the rest of the rings, with two and twentie duckats, two
medines in readie money. So there is nothing remaining in his hands but a
few bookes, and with Thomas Bostocke I left certaine small trifles, which I
pray you demaund. And so once againe with my hearty commendations I commit
you to the tuition of the almightie, who alwayes preserue vs. From Aleppo
the 29 of May 1583.

Yours assured,

Iohn Newberie.

       *       *       *       *       *

Another letter of Master Newberie to the aforesaide M. Poore, written from
  Babylon.

My last I sent you, was the 29 of May last past from Aleppo, by George Gill
the purser of the Tiger, which the last day of the same moneth came from
thence, and arriued at Feluge the 19 day of Iune, which Feluge is one dayes
iourney from hence. Notwithstanding some of our company came not hither
till the last day of the last moneth, which was for want of Camels to cary
our goods: for at this time of the yeere, by reason of the great heate that
is here, Camels are very scant to be gotten. And since our comming hither
we haue found very small sales, but diuers say that in the winter our
commodities will be very well sold, I pray God their words may prooue true.
I thinke cloth, kersies and tinne, haue neuer bene here at so low prices as
they are now. Notwithstanding, if I had here so much readie money as the
commodities are woorth, I would not doubt to make a very good profite of
this voiage hither, and to Balsara, and so by Gods helpe there will be
reasonable profite made of the voiage. [Sidenote: The best sort of spices
at Babylon. Balsara. Ormus.] But with halfe money and halfe commoditie may
be bought here the best sort of spices, and other commodities that are
brought from the Indies, and without money there is here at this instant
small good to be done. With Gods helpe two days hence, I minde to goe from
hence to Balsara, and from thence of force I must goe to Ormus for want of
a man that speaketh the Indian tongue. At my being in Aleppo I hired two
Nazaranies, and one of them hath bene twise in the Indies, and hath the
language very well, but he is a very lewde fellow, and therefore I will not
take him with me.

Here follow the prices of wares as they are worth here at this instant.

Cloues and Maces, the bateman, 5 duckats.

Cynamon 6 duckats, and few to be gotten.

Nutmegs, the bateman, 45 medins, and 40 medins maketh a duckat

Ginger, 40 medins.

Pepper, 75 medins.

Turbetta, the bateman, 50 medins.

Neel the churle, 70 duckats, and a churle is 27 rottils and a halfe of
Aleppo.

Silke, much better then that which commeth from Persia, 11 duckats and a
halfe the bateman, and euery bateman here maketh 7 pound and 5 ounces
English waight. From Babylon the 20 day of Iuly, 1583.

Yours, Iohn Newberie.

       *       *       *       *       *

Master Newberie his letter from Ormus, to M. Iohn Eldred and William Shals
 at Balsara.

Right welbeloued and my assured good friends, I heartily commend me vnto
you, hoping of your good healths, &c. To certifie you of my voiage, after I
departed from you, time wil not permit: but the 4 of this present we
arriued here, and the 10 day I with the rest were committed to prison, and
about the middle of the next moneth, the Captaine wil send vs all in his
ship for Goa. The cause why we are taken, as they say, is, for that I
brought letters from Don Antonio. But the trueth is, Michael Stropene was
the onely cause, vpon letters that his brother wrote him from Aleppo. God
knoweth how we shall be delt withall in Goa, and therefore if you can
procure our masters to send the king of Spaine his letters for our
releasement, you should doe vs great good: for they cannot with iustice put
vs to death. It may be that they will cut our throtes, or keepe vs long in
prison: Gods will be done. All those commodities that I brought hither, had
beene very well sold, if this trouble had not chanced. You shall do well to
send with all speed a messenger by land from Balsara to Aleppo, for to
certifie of this mischance, although it cost thirtie or fortie crownes, for
that we may be the sooner released, and I shalbe the better able to recouer
this againe which is now like to be lost: I pray you make my heartie
commendations, &c. from out of the prison in Ormuz, this 21 of September,
1583.

       *       *       *       *       *

His second letter to the foresaid Master Iohn Eldred and William Shales.

The barke of the Iewes is arriued here two daies past, by whom I know you
did write, but your letters are not like to come to my handes. This bringer
hath shewed me here very great courtesie, wherefore I pray you shew him
what fauor you may. About the middle of the next moneth I thinke we shall
depart from hence, God be our guide. I thinke Andrew will goe by land to
Aleppo, wherein I pray you further him what you may: but if he should not
goe, then I pray you dispatch away a messenger with is much speede as
possible you may. I can say no more, but do for me as you would I should do
for you in the like cause, and so with my very hearty commendations, &c.
From out of the prison in Ormuz, this 24 day of September, 1583.

Yours, Iohn Newberie.

       *       *       *       *       *

His third Letter to Maister Leonard Poore, written from Goa.

[Sidenote: Michael Stropine an Italian accused our men to be spies.] My
last I sent you was from Ormuz, whereby I certified you what had happened
there vnto me, and the rest of my company, which was, that foure dayes
after our arriuall there, we were all committed to prison, except one
Italian which came with me from Aleppo, whom the Captaine never examined,
onely demaunded what countryman he was, but I make account Michael
Stropene, who accused vs, had informed the Captaine of him. The first day
we arriued there, this Stropene accused vs that we were spies sent from Don
Antonio, besides diuers other lies: nothwithstanding if we had beene of any
other countrey then of England, we might freely haue traded with them. And
although we be Englishmen, I know no reason to the contrary, but that we
may trade hither and thither as well as other nations, for all nations doe,
and may come freely to Ormuz, as Frenchmen, Flemmings, Almains, Hungarians,
Italians, Greekes, Armenians, Nazaranies, Turkes and Moores, Iewes and
Gentiles, Persians, Moscouites, and there is no nation that they seeke for
to trouble, except ours: wherefore it were contrary to all iustice and
reason that they should suffer all nations to trade with them, and to
forbid vs. But now I haue as great liberty as any other nation, except it
be to go out of the countrey, which thing as yet I desire not But I thinke
hereafter, and before it be long, if I shall be desirious to go from hence,
that they wil not deny me licence. Before we might be suffered to come out
of prison, I was forced to put in suerties for 2000 pardaus, not to depart
from hence without licence of the viceroy Otherwise except this, we haue as
much libertie as any other nation, for I haue our goods againe, and haue
taken an house in the chiefest streete in the towtte, called the Rue
dreete, where we sell our goods.


[Sidenote: Two causes of our mens imprisonment at Ormus.] There were two
causes which moued the captaine of Ormus to imprison vs, and afterwards to
send vs hither. The first was, because Michael Stropene had accused vs of
many matters, which were most false. And the second was for that M. Drake
at his being at Maluco, caused two pieces of his ordinance to be shot at a
gallion of the kings of Portugall, as they say. But of these things I did
not know at Ormus: and in the ship that we were sent in came the chiefest
justice in Ormus, who was called Aueador generall of that place, he had
been there three yeeres, so that now his time was expired: which Aueador is
a great friend to the captaine of Ormus, who, certaine dayes after our
comming from thence, sent for mee into his chamber, and there beganne to
demaund of me many things, to the which I answered: and amongst the rest,
he said, that Master Drake was sent out of England with many ships, and
came to Maluco, and there laded cloues, and finding a gallion there of the
kings of Portugall, hee caused two pieces of his greatest ordinance to be
shot at the same: and so perceiuing that this did greatly grieue them, I
asked, if they would be reuenged of me for that which M. Drake had done: To
the which he answered, No: although his meaning was to the contrary.

He said moreouer, that the cause why the captaine of Ormus did send me for
Goa, was, for that the Viceroy would vnderstand of mee, what newes there
was of Don Antonio, and whether he were in England, yes or no, and that it
might be all for the best that I was sent hither, the which I trust in God
wil so fall out, although contrary to his expectation: for had it not
pleased God to put into the minds of the archbishop and other two Padres or
Iesuits of S. Pauls college to stand our friends, we might haue rotted in
prison. The archbishop is a very good man, who hath two yong men to his
seruantes, the one of them was borne at Hamborough, and is called Bernard
Borgers: [Sidenote: The author of the book of the East Indies.] and the
other was borne at Enchuysen, whose name is Iohn Linscot, who did vs great
pleasure; for by them the archbishop was many times put in minde of vs.
[Footnote: He was really born at Haarlem about 1563, and left the Texel in
1579 to go to Seville. Thence he went to Lisbon, where he entered the
service of Vicenzo Fonseca, archbishop of Goa, where he arrived in 1583. He
returned to Europe in 1589, having visited most of Southern Asia. His
principal work is his "Relation", published first in Dutch at the Hague in
1591. Curiously enough, the place erroneously named as his birth place in
the text, is where he died in 1611.] And the two good fathers of S. Paul,
who trauelled very much for vs, the one of them is called Padre Marke, who
was borne in Bruges in Flanders, and the other was borne in Wiltshire in
England, and is called [Marginal note: This is he whose letters to his
father from Goa are before put downe, and he was sometimes of New colledge
in Oxford.] Padre Thomas Steuans.

Also I chaunced to finde here a young man, who was borne in Antwerpe, but
the most part of his bringing vp hath beene in London, his name is Francis
de Rea, and with him it was my hap to be acquainted in Aleppo, who also
hath done me great pleasure here.

In the prison at Ormus we remained many dayes, also we lay a long time at
sea comming hither, and forthwith at our arriual here were caried to
prison, and the next day after were sent for before the Aueador, who is the
chiefest justice, to be examined: and when we were examined, he presently
sent vs backe againe to prison.

[Sidenote: Iames Storie their painter.] And after our being here in prison
13. dayes, Iames Storie went into the monastery of S. Paul, where he
remaineth, and is made one of the company, which life he liketh very well.

[Sidenote: They arriued at Goa the 20 of Nouember 1583.] And vpon S. Thomas
day (which was 22 dayes after our arriuall here) I came out of prison, and
the next day after came out Ralph Fitch, and William Bets.

If these troubles had not chanced, I had beene in possibility to haue made
as good a voyage as euer any man made with so much money. Many of our
things I haue solde very well, both here and at Ormus in prison,
notwithstanding the captaine willed me (if I would) to sell what I could
before we imbarked: and so with officers I went diuers times out of the
castle in the morning, and solde things, and at night returned againe to
the prison, and all things that I solde they did write, and at our
imbarking from thence, the captain gaue order that I should deliuer all my
mony with the goods into the hands of the scriuano, or purser of the ship,
which I did, and the scriuano made a remembrance, which he left there with
the captaine, that my selfe and the rest with money and goods he should
deliuer into the hands of the Aueador generall of India: but at our
arriuall here, the Aueador would neither meddle with goods nor money, for
that he could not proue any thing against vs: wherefore the goods remained
in the ship 9 or 10 daies after our arriual, and then, for that the ship
was to saile from thence, the scriuano sent the goods on shore, and here
they remained a day and a night, and no body to receiue them. In the end
they suffered this bringer to receiue them, who came with me from Ormus,
and put them into an house which he had hired for me, where they remained
foure or fiue daies. But afterward when they should deliuer the money, it
was concluded by the justice, that both the money and goods should be
deliuered into the positors hands, where they remained fourteene dayes
after my comming out prison. At my being in Aleppo, I bought a fountaine of
siluer and gilt, sixe kniues, sixe spoones, and one ['oue' in source
text--KTH] forke trimmed with corall for fiue and twentie chekins, which
the captaine of Ormus did take, and payed for the same twentie pardaos,
which is one hundred larines, and was worth there or here one hundred
chekins. Also he had fiue emrauds set in golde, which were woorth fiue
hundred or sixe hundred crownes, and payed for the same an hundred pardaos.
Also he had nineteene and a halfe pikes of cloth, which cost in London
twenty shillings the pike, and was worth 9 or 10 crownes the pike, and he
payed for the same twelue larines a pike. Also he had two pieces of greene
Kersies, which were worth foure and twentie pardaos the piece, and payd for
them sixteene pardaos a piece: besides diuers other trifles, that the
officers and others had in the like order, and some for nothing at all. But
the cause of all this was Michael Stropene, which came to Ormus not woorth
a penie, and now hath thirtie or fortie thousand crownes, and he grieueth
that any other stranger should trade thither but himselfe. But that shall
not skill, for I trust in God to goe both thither and hither, and to buy
and sell as freely as he or any other. Here is very great good to be done
in diuers of our commodities, and in like manner there is great profite to
be made with commodities of this countrey, to be carried to Aleppo.

It were long for me to write, and tedious for you to read of all things
that haue passed since my parting from you. But of all the troubles that
haue chanced since mine arrinal in Ormus, this bringer is able to certifie
you. I mind to stay here: wherefore if you will write vnto me, you may send
your letters to some friend at Lisbone, and from thence by the ships they
may be conueyed hither. Let the direction of your letters be either in
Portuguise or Spanish, whereby they may come the better to my hands. From
Goa this 20 day of Januarie. 1584.

       *       *       *       *       *

A Letter written from Goa by Master Ralph Fitch to Master Leonard Poore
  abouesaid.

Louing friend Master Poore, &c. Since my departure from Aleppo, I haue not
written vnto you any letters, by reason that at Babylon I was sicke of the
fluxe, and being sicke, I went from thence for Balsara, which was twelue
dayes joumey downe the riuer Tygris, where we had extreame hot weather,
which was good for my disease, ill fare, and worse, lodging, by reason our
boat was pestered with people. In eight daies, that which I did eate was
very small, so that if we had stayed two dayes longer vpon the water, I
thinke I had died: but comming to Balsara, presently I mended, I thanke
God. There we stayed 14 dayes, and then we imbarked our selues for Ormuz,
where we arriued the fifth of September, and were put in prison the ninth
of the same moneth, where we continued vntill the 11 of October, and then
were shipt for this citie of Goa in the captaines ship, with an 114 horses,
and about 200 men: [Sidenote: Diu. Chaul.] and passing by Diu and Chaul,
where we went on land to water the 20 of Nouember, we arriued at Goa the 29
of the said moneth, where for our better intertainment we were presently
put into a faire strong prison, where we continued vntill the 22 of
December. It was the will of God that we found there 2 Padres, the one an
Englishman, the other a Flemming. The Englishmans name is Padre Thomas
Steuens, the others Padre Marco, of the order of S. Paul. These did sue for
vs vnto the Viceroy and other officers, and stood vs in as much stead, as
our liues and goods were woorth: for if they had not stucke to vs, if we
had escaped with our liues, yet we had had long imprisonment.

After 14 dayes imprisonment they offered vs, if we could put in sureties
for 2000 duckats, we should goe abroad in the towne: which when we could
not doe, the said Padres found sureties for vs, that we should not depart
the countrey without the licence of the Viceroy. [Sidenote: The Italians
our great enemies for the trade in the East.] It doth spite the Italians to
see vs abroad: and many maruell at our deliuery. The painter is in the
cloister of S. Paul, and is of their order, and liketh there very well.
While we were in prison, both at Ormuz and here, there was a great deale of
our goods pilfered and lost, and we haue beene at great charges in gifts
and otherwise, so that a great deale of our goods is consumed. There is
much of our things which wil sell very well and some we shall get nothing
for. I hope in God that at the returne of the Viceroy, which is gone to
Chaul and to Diu, they say, to winne a castle of the Moores, whose returne,
is thought will be about Easter, then we shall get our libertie, and our
sureties discharged. Then I thinke it will be our best way, either one or
both to returne, because our troubles haue bene so great, and so much of
our goods spoyled and lost. But if it please God that I come into England,
by Gods helpe, I will returne hither againe. It is a braue and pleasant
countrey, and very fruitfull. The summer is almost all the yeere long, but
the chiefest at Christmas.

The day and the night are all of one length, very litle difference, and
marueilous great store of fruits. For all our great troubles, yet are we
fat and well liking, for victuals are here plentie and good cheape. And
here I will passe ouer to certifie you of strange things, vntill our
meeting, for it would be too long to write thereof. And thus I commit you
to God, who euer preserue you and vs all. From Goa in the East Indies the
25 of Ianuarie 1584.

Yours to command, Ralph Fitch.

       *       *       *       *       *

The voyage of M. Ralph Fitch marchant of London by the way of Tripolls in
  Syria, to Ormus, and so to Goa in the East India, to Cambaia, and all the
  kingdome of Zelabdim Echebar the great Mogor, to the mighty riuer Ganges,
  and downe to Bengala, to Bacola, and Chonderi, to Pegu, to Imahay in the
  kingdome of Siam, and backe to Pegu, and from thence to Malacca, Zeilan,
  Cochin, and all the coast of the East India: begunne in the yeere of our
  Lord 1583, and ended 1591, wherin the strange rites, maners, and customes
  of those people, and the exceeding rich trade and commodities of those
  countries are faithfully set downe and diligently described, by the
  aforesaid M. Ralph Fitch.

In the yeere of our Lord 1583, I Ralph Fitch of London merchant being
desirous to see the countreys of the East India, in the company of M. Iohn
Newberie marchant (which had beene at Ormus once before) of William Leedes
Ieweller, and Iames Story Painter, being chiefly set fourth by the right
worshipful Sir Edward Osborne knight, and M. Richard Staper citizens and
marchants of London, did ship my selfe in a ship of London called the
Tyger, wherein we went for Tripolis in Syria: and from thence we tooke the
way for Aleppo, which we went in seuen dayes with the Carouan. Being in
Aleppo, and finding good company, we went from thence to Birra, which is
two dayes and an halfe trauaile with Camels.

Birra is a little towne, but very plentifull of victuals: and neere to the
wall of the towne runneth the riuer of Euphrates. Here we bought a boate
and agreed with a master and bargemen, for to go to Babylon. The boats be
but for one voiage: for the streame doth runne so fast downewardes that
they cannot returne. They carie you to a towne which they call Felugia, and
there you sell the boate for a litle money, for that which cost you fiftie
at Birra you sell there for seuen or eight. From Birra to Felugia is
sixteene dayes iourney, it is not good that one boate goe alone, for if it
should chance to breake, you should haue much a doe to saue your goods from
the Arabians, which be alwayes there abouts robbing: and in the night when
your boates be made fast, it is necessarie that you keepe good watch. For
the Arabians that bee theeues, will come swimming and steale your goods and
flee away, against which a gunne is very good, for they doe feare it very
much. In the riuer of Euphrates from Birra to Felugia there be certaine
places where you pay custome, so many Medines for a some or Camels lading,
and certaine raysons and sope, which is for the sonnes of Aborise, which is
Lord of the Arabians and all that great desert, and hath some villages vpon
the riuer. Felugia where you vnlade your goods which come from Birra is a
little village: from whence you goe to Babylon in a day.

Babylon is a towne not very great but very populous, and of great traffike
of strangers, for that it is the way to Persia, Turkia and Arabia: and from
thence doe goe Carouans for these and other places. Here are great store of
victuals, which come from Armenia downe the riuer of Tygris. They are
brought vpon raftes made of goates skinnes blowne full of winde and bordes
layde vpon them: and thereupon they lade their goods which are brought
downe to Babylon, which being discharged they open their skinnes and carry
them backe by Camels, to serue another time. Babylon in times past did
belong to the kingdome of Persia, but nowe is subiecte to the Turke. Ouer
against Babylon there is a very faire village from whence you passe to
Babylon vpon a long bridge made of boats, and tyed to a great chaine of
yron, which is made fast on either side of the riuer. When any boates are
to passe vp or downe the riuer, they take away certaine boates vntill they
be past.

[Sidenote: The tower of Babel.] The tower of Babel is built on this side
the riuer Tygris, towardes Arabia from the towne about seuen or eight
miles, which tower is ruinated on all sides, and with the fall thereof hath
made as it were a litle mountaine, so that it hath no shape at all: it was
made of brickes dried in the sonne, and certain canes and leaues of the
palme tree layed betwixt the brickes. There is no entrance to be seene to
goe into it. It doth stand vpon a great plaine betwixt the riuers of
Euphrates and Tygris.

[Sidenote: Boyling pitch continually issuing out of the earth.] By the
riuer Euphrates two dayes iourney from Babylon at a place called Ait, in a
fielde neere vnto it, is a strange thing to see: a mouth that doth
continually throwe fourth against the ayre boyling pitch with a filthy
smoke: which pitch doth runne abroad into a great fielde which is alwayes
full thereof. The Moores say that it is the mouth of hell. By reason of the
great quantitie of it, the men of that countrey doe pitch their boates two
or three inches thicke on the outside, so that no water doth enter into
them. Their boates be called Danec. When there is great store of water in
Tigris you may goe from Babylon to Basora in 8 or 9 dayes: if there be
small store it will cost you the more dayes.

Basora in times past was vnder the Arabians, but now is subiecte to the
Turke. But some of them the Turke cannot subdue, for that they holde
certaine Ilandes in the riuer Euphrates which the Turke cannot winne of
them. They be theeues all and haue no setled dwelling, but remoue from
place to place with their Camels, goates, and horses, wiues and children
and all. They haue large blew gownes, their wiues eares and noses are
ringed very full of rings of copper and siluer, and they weare rings of
copper about their legs.

Basora standeth neere the gulfe of Persia, and is a towne of great trade of
spices, and drugges which come from Ormus. Also there is great store of
wheate, ryce, and dates growing thereabout, wherewith they serue Babylon
and all the countrey, Ormus, and all the partes of India. I went from
Basora to Ormus downe the gulfe of Persia in a certaine shippe made of
bourdes, and sowed together with cayro, which is threede made of the huske
of Cocoes, and certaine canes or strawe leaues sowed vpon the seames of the
bordes which is the cause that they leake very much. And so hauing Persia
alwayes on the left hande, and the coast of Arabia on the right hande we
passed many Ilandes, and among others the famous Ilande Baharim from whence
come the best pearles which be round and Orient.

Ormus is an Island in circuit about fiue and twentie or thirtie miles, and
is the driest Island in the world: for there is nothing growing in it but
onely salte; for their water, wood, or victuals, and all things necessary
came but of Persia, which is about twelue miles from thence. All the
Illands thereabout be very fruitful, from whence all kinde of victuals are
sent vnto Ormus. The Portugales haue a castle here which standeth neere
vnto the sea, wherein there is a Captaine for the king of Portugale hauing
vnder him a conuenient number of souldiers, whereof some part remaine in
the castle, and some in the towne. In this towne are marchants of all
Nations, and many Moores and Gentiles. Here is very great trade of all
sortes of spices, drugs, silke, cloth of silke, fine tapestrie of Persia,
great store of pearles which come from the Isle of Baharim, and are the
best pearles of all others, and many horses of Persia, which serue all
India; They haue a Moore to their king, which is chosen and gouerned by the
Portugales. Their women are very strangely attyred, wearing on their noses,
eares, neckes, armes and legges many rings, set with jewels, and lockes of
siluer and golde in their eares, and a long barre of golde vpon the side of
their noses. Their eares with the weight of theie [sic--KTH] iewels be
worne so wide, that a man may thrust three of his fingers into them. Here
very shortly after our arriuall wee were put in prison, and had part of our
goods taken from vs by the Captaine of the castle, whose name was Don
Mathias de Albuquerque; and from hence the eleuenth of October he shipped
vs and sent vs for Goa vnto the Viceroy, which at that time was Don
Francisco de Mascarenhas. The shippe wherein we were imbarked for Goa
belonged to the Captaine, and carried one hundred twentie and foure horses
in it. All marchandise carried to Goa in a shippe wherein are horses pay no
custome in Goa. The horses pay custome, the goods pay nothing; but if you
come in a ship which bringeth no horses, you are then, to pay eight in the
hundred for your goods. The first citie of India that we arriued at vpon
the fift of Nouember, after we had passed the coast of Zindi, is called
Diu, which standeth in an Iland in the kingdome of Cambaia, and is the
strongest towne that the Portugales haue in those partes. It is but litle,
but well stored with marchandise; for here they lade many great shippes
with diuerse commodities for the streits of Mecca, for Ormus, and other
places, and these be shippes of the Moores and of Christains. But the
Moores cannot passe, except they haue a passeport from the Portugales.
Cambaietta is the chiefe citie of that prouince, which is great and very
populous, and fairely builded for a towne of the Gentiles: but if there
happen any famine, the people will sell their children for very little. The
last king of Cambaia was Sultan Badu, which was killed at the seige of Diu,
and shortly after his citie was taken by the great Mogor, which is the king
of Agra and of Delli, which are fortie dayes iourney from the country of
Cambaia. Here the women weare vpon their armes infinite numbers of rings
made of Elephants teeth, wherein they take so much delight, that they had
rather be without their meate then without their bracelets. Going from Diu
we come to Daman the second towne of the Portugales in the countrey of
Cambaia which is distant from Diu fortie leagues. Here is no trade but of
corne and rice. They haue many villages vnder them which they quietly
possesse in time of peace, but in time of warre the enemie is maister of
them. From thence we passed by Basaim, and from Basaim to Tana, at both
which places is small trade but only of corn and rice. The tenth of
Nouember we arriued at Chaul which standeth in the firm land. There be two
townes, the one belonging to the Portugales, and the other to the Moores.
That of the Portugales is neerest to the sea, and commaundeth the bay, and
is walled round about. A little aboue that is the towne of the Moores which
is gouerned by a Moore king called Xa Maluco. Here is great traffike for
all sortes of spices and drugges, silke, and cloth of silke, sandales,
Elephants teeth, and much China worke, and much sugar which is made of the
nutte called Gagara: the tree is called the palmer; which is the
profitablest tree in the worlde: it doth alwayes beare fruit, and doth
yeeld wine, oyle, sugar, vineger, cordes, coles, of the leaues are made
thatch for the houses, sayles for shippes, mats to sit or lie on: of the
branches they make their houses, and broomes to sweepe, of the tree wood
for shippes. The wine doeth issue out of the toppe of the tree. They cut a
branch of a bowe and binde it hard, and hange an earthen pot vpon it, which
they emptie euery morning and euery euening, and still it and put in
certaine dried raysins, and it becommeth very strong wine in short time.
Hither many shippes come from all partes of India, Ormus, and many from
Mecca: heere be manie Moores and Gentiles. They haue a very strange order
among them, they worshippe a cowe, and esteeme much of the cowes doung to
paint the walles of their houses. They will kill nothing not so much as a
louse; for they holde it a sinne to kill any thing. They eate no flesh, but
liue by rootes, and ryce, and milke. And when the husbande dieth his wife
is burned with him, if shee be aliue: if shee will not, her head is shauen,
and then is neuer any account made of her after. They say if they should be
buried, it were a great sinne, for of their bodies there would come many
wormes and other vermine, and when their bodies were consumed, those wormes
would lacke sustenance; which were a sinne, therefore they will be burned.
In Cambaia they will kill nothing, nor haue any thing killed: in the towne
they haue hospitals to keepe lame dogs and cats, and for birds. They will
giue meat to the Ants.

Goa is the most principal citie which the Portugals haue in India, wherein
the Viceroy remaineth with his court. It standeth in an Iland, which may be
25. or 30. miles about. It is a fine citie, and for an Indian towne very
faire. The Iland is very faire, full of orchards and gardens, and many
palmer trees, and hath some villages. Here bee many marchants of all
nations. And the Fleete which commeth euery yeere from Portugal, which be
foure, fiue, or sixe great shippes, commeth first hither. And they come for
the most part in September, and remaine there fortie or fiftie dayes; and
then goe to Cochin, where they lade their Pepper for Portugall. Oftentimes
they lade one in Goa, the rest goe to Cochin which is from Goa an hundred
leagues southward. Goa standeth in the countrey of Hidalcan, who lieth in
the countrey sixe or seuen dayes iourney. His chiefe citie is called
Bisapor. [Sidenote: This wa the 20 of Nouember.] At our comming we were
cast into prison, and examined before the Iustice and demanded for letters,
and were charged to be spies, but they could prooue nothing by vs. We
continued in prison vntill the two and twentie of December, and then we
were set at libertie, putting in sureties for two thousand duckets not to
depart the towne; which sureties father Steuens an English Iesuite which we
found there, and another religious man a friend of his procured for vs. Our
sureties name was Andreas Taborer, to whom we paid 2150. duckats, and still
he demaunded more: whereupon we made sute to the Viceroy and Iustice to
haue our money againe, considering that they had had it in their hands
neere fiue moneths and could prooue nothing against vs. The Viceroy made vs
a very sharpe answere, and sayd we should be better sifted before it were
long, and that they had further matter against vs. Whereupon we presently
determined rather to seeke our liberties, then to bee in danger for euer to
be slaues in the countrey, for it was told vs we should haue the strapado.
Wherupon presently, the fift day of April 1585. in the morning we ranne
from thence. And being set ouer the riuer, we went two dayes on foote not
without feare, not knowing the way nor hauing any guide, for we durst trust
none. [Sidenote: Bellergan a towne.] One of the first townes which we came
vnto, is called Bellergan, where there is a great market kept of Diamants,
Rubies, Saphires, and many other soft stones. [Sidenote: Bisapor.] From
Bellergan we went to Bisapor which is a very great towne where the king
doeth keepe his court. Hee hath many Gentiles in his court and they be
great idolaters. And they haue their idols standing in the Woods, which
they call Pagodes. Some bee like a Cowe, some like a Monkie, some like
Buffles, some like peacockes, and some like the deuill. Here be very many
elephants which they goe to warre withall. Here they haue good store of
gold and siluer: their houses are of stone very faire and high. [Sidenote:
Gulconda.] From hence we went for Gulconda, the king whereof is called
Cutup de lashach. Here and in the kingdome of Hidalcan, and in the countrey
of the king of Decan, bee the Diamants found in the olde water. It is a
very faire towne, pleasant, with faire houses of bricke and timber, it
aboundeth with great store of fruites and fresh water. Here the men and the
women do go with a cloth bound about their middles without any more
apparell. We found it here very hote.

[Sidenote: Masulipatan.] The winter beginneth here about the last of May.
In these partes is a porte or hauen called Masulipatan, which standeth
eight dayes iourney from hence toward the gulfe of Bengala, whether come
many shippes out of India, Pegu, and Sumatra, very richly laden with
Pepper, spices, and other commodities. The countrie is very good and
fruitfull. [Sidenote: Seruidore.] From thence I went to Seruidore which is
a fine countrey, and the king is called, the king of Bread. The houses here
bee all thatched and made of lome. Here be many Moores and Gentiles, but
there is small religion among them. [Sidenote: Bellapore.] From thence I
went to Bellapore, and so to Barrampore, which is in the country of
Zelabdim Echebar. In this place their money is made of a kind of siluer
round and thicke, to the value of twentie pence, which is very good siluer.
It is marueilous great and a populous countrey. In their winter which is in
Iune, Iuly, and August, there is no passing in the streetes but with
horses, the waters be so high. The houses are made of lome and thatched.
Here is great store of cotton cloth made, and painted clothes of cotton
wooll: here groweth great store of corne and Rice. [Sidenote: Strange
mariages.] We found mariages great store both in townes and villages in
many places where wee passed, of boyes of eight or ten yeeres, and girles
of fiue or six yeeres old. They both do ride vpon one horse very trimly
decked, and are caried through the towne with great piping and playing, and
so returne home and eate of a banket made of Rice and fruits, and there
they daunce the most part of the night and so make an ende of the marriage.
They lie not together vntill they be ten yeeres old. They say they marry
their children so yoong, because it is an order that when the man dieth,
the woman must be burned with him: so that if the father die, yet they may
haue a father in lawe to helpe to bring vp the children which bee maried:
and also that they will not leaue their sonnes without wiues, nor their
daughters without husbands. [Sidenote: Mandoway a very strong town.] From
thence we went to Mandoway, which is a very strong towne. It was besieged
twelue yeeres by Zelabdim Echebar before he could winne it. It standeth
vpon a very great high rocke as the most part of their castles doe, and was
of a very great circuite. [Sidenote: Vgini.] From hence wee went to Vgini
and Serringe, where we ouertooke the ambassadour of Zelabdim Echebar with a
marueilous great company of men, elephants, and camels. Here is great trade
of cotton and cloth made of cotton, and great store of drugs. From thence
we went to Agra passing many riuers, which by reason of the raine were so
swollen, that wee waded and swamme oftentimes for our liues. [Sidenote:
Agra a great citie.] Agra is a very great citie and populous, built with
stone, hauing faire and large streetes, with a faire riuer running by it,
which falleth into the gulfe of Bengala. It hath a faire castle and a
strong with a very faire ditch. [Sidenote: The great Mogor.] Here bee many
Moores and Gentiles, the king is called Zelabdim Echebar: the people for
the most part call him The great Mogor. From thence we went for Fatepore,
which is the place where the king kept his court. The towne is greater then
Agra, but the houses and streetes be not so faire. Here dwell many people
both Moores and Gentiles. The king hath in Agra and Fatepore as they doe
credibly report 1000. elephants, thirtie thousand horses, 1400. tame Deere,
800. concubines: such store of Ounces, Tigers, Buffles, Cocks and Haukes,
that is very strange to see. He keepeth a great court, which they call
Dericcan. Agra and Fatepore are two very great cities, either of them much
greater then London and very populous. [Sidenote: The like is reported of
the cities of China.] Betweene Agra and Fatepore are 12. miles, and all the
way is a market of victuals and other things, as full as though a man were
still in a towne, and so many people as if a man were in a market. They
haue many fine cartes, and many of them carued and gilded with gold, with
two wheeles which be drawen with two litle Buls about the bignesse of our
great dogs in England, and they will runne with any horse, and carie two or
three men in one of these cartes: they are couered with silke or very fine
cloth, and be vsed here as our Coches be in England. Hither is great resort
of marchants from Persia and out of India, and very much marchandise of
silke and cloth, and of precious stones, both Rubies, Diamants, and
Pearles. The king is apparelled in a white Cabie made like a shirt tied
with strings on the one side, and a litle cloth on his head coloured
oftentimes with red or yealow. None come into his house but his eunuchs
which keepe his women. Here in Fatepore we staied all three vntill the 28.
of September 1585. and then master Iohn Newberie tooke his iourney toward
the citie of Lahor, determining from thence to goe for Persia and then for
Aleppo or Constantinople, whether hee could get soonest passage vnto, and
directed me to goe for Bengala and for Pegu, and did promise me, if it
pleased God, to meete me in Bengala within two yeeres with a shippe out of
England. [Sidenote: Wil. Leades serued the king of Cambaia.] I left William
Leades the ieweller in seruice with the king Zelabdim Echebar in Fatepore,
who did entertaine him very well, and gaue him an house and fiue slaues, an
horse, and euery day sixe S. S. in money. I went from Agra to Satagam in
Bengala, in the companie of one hundred and fourescore boates laden with
Salt, Opium, Hinge, Lead, Carpets, and diuers other commodities, downe the
riuer Iemena. The chiefe marchants are Moores and Gentiles. [Sidenote: The
superstitious ceremonies of the Bramanes.] In these countries they haue
many strange ceremonies. The Bramanes which are their priests, come to the
water and haue a string about their necks made with great ceremonies, and
lade vp water with both their hands, and turne the string first with both
their hands within, and then one arme after the other out. Though it be
neuer so cold, they will wash themselues in cold water or in, warme. These
Gentiles will eate no flesh nor kill any thing. They liue with rice,
butter, milke, and fruits. They pray in the water naked, and dresse their
meat and eate it naked, and for their penance they lie flat vpon the earth,
and rise vp and turne themselues about 30. or 40. times, and vse to heaue
vp their hands to the sunne, and to kisse the earth, with their armes and
legs stretched along out, and their right leg alwayes before the left.
Euery time they lie downe, they make a score on the ground with their
finger to know when their stint is finished. The Bramanes marke themselues
in the foreheads, eares and throates with a kind of yellow geare which they
grind, and euery morning they doe it. And they haue some old men which go
in the streetes with a boxe of yellow poudre, and marke men on their heads
and neckes as they meet them. And their wiues do come by 10. 20. and 30.
together to the water side singing, and there do wash themselues, and then
vse their ceremonies, and marke themselues in their foreheds and faces, and
cary some with them, and so depart singing. Their daughters be marred, at,
or before the age of 10 yeres. The men may haue 7. wiues. They be a kind of
craftie people, worse then the Iewes. When they salute one another, they
heaue vp their hands to their heads, and say Rame, Rame. [Sidenote:
Ganges.] From Agra I came to Prage, where the riuer Iemena entreth into the
mightie river Ganges, and Iemena looseth his name. Ganges commeth out of
the Northwest, and runneth East into the gulfe of Bengala. In those parts
there are many Tigers and many partriges and turtledoues, and much other
foule. Here be many beggars in these countries which goe naked, and the
people make great account of them: they call them Schesche. Here I sawe one
which was a monster among the rest. He would haue nothing vpon him, his
beard was very long, and with the haire of his head he couered his
priuities. The nailes of some of his fingers were two inches long, for he
would cut nothing from him, neither would he speake. He was accompanied
with eight or tenne, and they spake for him. When any man spake to him, he
would lay his hand vpon his brest and bowe himselfe, but would not speake.
Hee would not speake to the king. We went from Prage downe Ganges, the
which is here very broad. Here is great store of fish of sundry sorts, and
of wild foule, as of swannes, geese, cranes, and many other things. The
country is very fruitfull and populous. The men for the most part haue
their faces shauen, and their heads very long, except some which bee all
shauen saue the crowne: and some of them are as though a man should set a
dish on their heads, and shaue them round, all but the crowne. In this
riuer of Ganges are many Ilands. His water is very sweete and pleasant, and
the countrey adioyning very fruitfull. From thence wee went to Bannaras
which is a great towne, and great store of cloth is made there of cotton,
and Shashes for the Moores. In this place they be all Gentiles, and be the
greatest idolaters that euer I sawe. [Sidenote: A pilgrimage of the
Gentiles.] To this towne come the Gentiles on pilgrimage out of farre
countreys. Here alongst the waters side bee very many faire houses, and in
all of them, or for the most part they haue their images standing, which be
euill fauoured, made of stone and wood, some like lions, leopards, and
monkeis, some like men and women, and pecocks, and some like the deuil with
foure armes and 4. hands. They sit crosse legged, some with one thing in
their hands, and some another, and by breake of day and before, there are
men and women which come out of the towne and wash themselues in Ganges.
And there are diuers old men which vpon places of earth made for the
purpose, sit praying, and they giue the people three or foure strawes,
which they take and hold them betweene their fingers when they wash
themselues: and some sit to marke them in the foreheads, and they haue in a
cloth a litle Rice, Barlie, or money, which, when they haue washed
themselues, they giue to the old men which sit there praying. Afterwards
they go to diuers of their images, and giue them of their sacrifices. And
when they giue, the old men say certaine prayers, and then is all holy. And
in diuers places there standeth a kind of image which in their language
they call Ada. And they haue diuers great stones carued, whereon they poure
water, and throw thereupon some rice, wheate, barly, and some other things.
This Ada hath foure hands with clawes. Moreouer, they haue a great place
made of stone like to a well with steppes to goe downe; wherein the water
standeth very foule and stinketh: for the great quantitie of flowers, which
continually they throwe into it, doe make it stinke. There be alwayes many
people in it: for they say when they wash themselues in it, that their
sinnes be forgiuen them, because God, as they say, did wash himselfe in
that place. They gather vp the sand in the bottome of it, and say it is
holy. They neuer pray but in the water, and they wash themselues ouerhead,
and lade vp water with both their handes, and turne themselues about, and
then they drinke a litle of the water three times, and so goe to their gods
which stand in those houses. Some of them will wash a place which is their
length, and then will pray vpon the earth with their armes and legs at
length out, and will rise vp and lie downe, and kisse the ground twentie or
thirtie times, but they will not stirre their right foote. And some of them
will make their ceremonies with fifteene or sixteene pots litle and great,
and ring a litle bel when they make their mixtures tenne or twelue times:
and they make a circle of water round about their pots and pray, and diuers
sit by them, and one that reacheth them their pots: and they say diuers
things ouer their pots many times, and when they haue done, they goe to
their gods, and strowe their sacrifices which they thinke are very holy,
and marke many of them which sit by, in the foreheads, which they take as a
great gift. There come fiftie and sometime an hundred together, to wash
them in this well, and to offer to these idols. They haue in some of these
houses their idoles standing, and one sitteth by them in warme weather with
a fanne to blowe winde vpon them. And when they see any company comming,
they ring a litle bell which hangeth by them, and many giue them their
almes, but especially those which come out of the countrey. Many of them
are blacke and haue clawes of brasse with long nayles, and some ride vpon
peacocks and other foules which be euill fauoured, with long haukes bils,
and some like one thing and some another, but none with a good face. Among
the rest there is one which they make great account of: for they say hee
giueth them all things both foode and apparell, and one sitteth alwayes by
him with a fanne to make wind towards him. Here some bee burned to ashes,
some scorched in the fire and throwen into the water, and dogges and foxes
doe presently eate them. The wiues here doe burne with their husbands when
they die, if they will not their heads be shauen, and neuer any account is
made of them afterward. The people goe all naked saue a litle cloth bound
about their middle. Their women haue their necks, armes and eares decked
with rings of siluer, copper, tinne, and with round hoopes made of Iuorie,
adorned with amber stones, and with many agats, and they are marked with a
great spot of red in their foreheads, and a stroke of red vp to the crowne,
and so it runneth three manor of wayes. In their Winter, which is our May,
the men weare quilted gownes of cotton like to our mattraces and quilted
caps like to our great Grocers morters, with a slit to looke out at, and so
tied downe beneath their eares. If a man or woman be sicke and like to die,
they will lay him before their idols all night, and that shall helpe him or
make an ende of him. And if he do not mend that night, his friends will
come and sit with him a litle and cry, and afterwards will cary him to the
waters side and set him vpon a litle raft made of reeds, and so let him goe
downe the riuer. When they be maried the man and the woman come to the
water side, and there is an olde man which they call a Bramane, that is a
priest, a cowe and a calfe, or a cowe with calfe. Then the man and the
woman, cowe and calfe, and the olde man goe into the water together, and
they giue the olde man a white cloth of foure yards long, and a basket
crosse bound with diuers things in it: the cloth he laieth vpon the backe
of the cowe, and then he taketh the cowe by the ende of the taile, and
saieth certaine wordes: and she hath a copper or a brasse pot full of
water, and the man doeth hold his hand by the olde mans hand, and the wiues
hand by her husbands, and all haue the cowe by the taile, and they poure
water out of the pot vpon the cowes taile, and it runneth through all their
hands, and they lade vp water with their handes, and then the olde man
doeth tie him and her together by their [Marginal note: This tying of new
maried folks together by the clothes, was vsed by the Mexicans in old
time.] clothes. Which done, they goe round about the cowe and calfe, and
then they giue somewhat to the poore which be alwayes there, and to the
Bramane or priest they giue the cowe and calfe, and afterward goe to diuers
of their idoles and offer money, and lie downe flat vpon the ground and
kisse it diuers times, and then goe their way. Their chiefe idoles bee
blacke and euill fauoured, their mouthes monstrous, their eares gilded, and
full of jewels, their teeth and eyes of gold, siluer, and glasse, some
hauing one thing in their handes and some another. You may not come into
the houses where they stand, with your shooes on. They haue continually
lampes burning before them. From Bannaras I went to Patenaw downe the riuer
of Ganges: where in the way we passed many faire townes, and a countrey
very fruitfull: and many very great riuers doe enter into Ganges, and some
of them as great as Ganges, which cause Ganges to bee of a great breadth,
and so broad that in the time of rain, you cannot see from one side to the
other. These Indians when they bee scorched and throwen into the water, the
men swimme with their faces downewards, the women with their faces vpwards,
I thought they tied something to them to cause them to do so: but they say
no. There be very many thieues In this countrey, which be like to the
Arabians: for they haue no certaine abode, but are sometime in one place
and sometime in another. Here the women bee so decked with siluer and
copper, that it is strange to see, they use no shooes by reason of the
rings of siluer and copper, which they weare on their toes. [Sidenote: Gold
found.] Here at Patanaw they finde gold in this maner. They digge deepe
pits in the earth, and wash the earth in great holies, and therein they
finde the gold, and they make the pits round about with bricke, that the
earth fall not in. Patenaw is a very long and a great towne. In times past
it was a kingdom, but now it is vnder Zelabdim Echebar, the great Mogor.
The men are tall and slender, and haue many old folks among them: the
houses are simple, made of earth and couered with strawe, the streetes are
very large. In this towne there is a trade of cotton, and cloth of cotton,
much sugar, which they cary from hence to Bengala and India, very much
Opium and other commodities. He that is chiefe here vnder the king is
called Tipperdas, and is of great account among the people. Here in Patenau
I saw a dissembling prophet which sate vpon an horse in the market place,
and made as though he slept, and many of the people came and touched his
feete with their hands, and then kissed their hands. They tooke him for a
great man, but sure he was a lasie lubber. I left him there sleeping. The
people of these countries be much giuen to such prating and dissembling
hypocrites.

From Patanaw I went to Tanda which is in the land of Gouren. It hath in
times past bene a kingdom, but now is subdued by Zelabdim Echebar. Great
trade and traffique is here of cotton, and of cloth of cotton. The people
goe naked with a litle cloth bound about their waste. It standeth in the
countrey of Bengala. Here be many Tigers, wild Bufs, and great store of
wilde foule: they are very great idolaters. Tanda standeth from the riuer
Ganges a league, because in times past the riuer flowing ouer the bankes,
in time of raine did drowne the countrey and many villages, and so they do
remaine. And the old way which the riuer Ganges was woont to run, remaineth
drie, which is the occasion that the citie doeth stand so farre from the
water. From Agra downe the riuer Iemena, and downe the riuer Ganges, I was
fiue moneths comming to Bengala, but it may be sailed in much shorter time.

I went from Bengala into the countrey of Couche, [Marginal note: Couche:
this seemeth to be Quicheu, accounted by some among the prouinces of
China.] which lieth 25. daies iourny Northwards from Tanda. The king is a
Gentile, his name is Suckel Counse: his countrey is great, and lieth not
far from Cochin China: for they say they haue pepper from thence. The port
is called Cacchegate. All the countrie is set with Bambos or Canes made
sharpe at both the endes and driuen into the earth, and they can let in the
water and drowne the ground aboue knee deepe, so that men nor horses can
passe. They poison all the waters if any wars be. Here they haue much silke
and muske, and cloth made of cotton. The people haue eares which be
marueilous great of a span long, which they draw out in length by deuises
when they be yong. Here they be all Gentiles, and they will kil nothing.
They haue hospitals for sheepe, goates, dogs, cats, birds, and for all
other liuing creatures. When they be old and lame, they keepe them vntil
they die. If a man catch or buy any quicke thing in other places and bring
it thither, they wil giue him mony for it or other victuals, and keepe it
in their hospitals or let it go, They wil giue meat to the Ants. Their smal
mony is almonds, [Marginal note: In Mexico they vse likewise for small
money the fruit Cacao which are like almonds.] which oftentimes they vse to
eat. From thence I returned to Hugeli, which is the place where the
Portugals keep in the country of Bengala which standeth in 23. degrees of
Northerly latitude, and standeth a league from Satagan: they cal it Porto
Piqueno. We went through the wildernes, because the right way was full of
thieues, where we passed the countrey of Gouren, where we found but few
villages, but almost all wildernes, and saw many buffes, swine and deere,
grasse longer then a man, and uery [sic--KTH] many Tigers. [Sidenote: Porto
Angeli.] Not far from Porto Piqueno south westward, standeth an hauen which
is called Angeli, in the countrey of Orixa. It was a kingdom of it selfe,
and the king was a great friend to strangers. Afterwards it was taken by
the king of Patan which was their neighbour, but he did not enioy it long,
but was taken by Zelabdim Echebar, which is king of Agra, Delli, and
Cambaia. Orixi standeth 6. daies iourney from Satagan, south westwards.
[Sidenote: The like cloth may be made of the long grasse in Virginia.] In
this place is very much Rice, and cloth made of cotton, and great store of
cloth which is made of grasse, which they call Yerua, it is like a silke.
They make good cloth out of it which they send for India and diuers other
places. To this hauen of Angeli come, euery yeere many ships out of India,
Negapatan, Sumatra, Malacca, and diuers other places; and lade from thence
great store of Rice, and much cloth of cotton wooll, much sugar, and long
pepper, great store of butter, and other victuals for India. Satagam is a
faire citie for a citie of the Moores, and very plentifull of all things.
Here in Bengala they haue euery day in one place or other a great market
which they call Chandeau, and they haue many great boats which they cal
pericose, wherewithall they go from place to place and buy Rice and many
other things: these boates haue 24. or 26. oares to rowe them, they be
great of burthen, but haue no couerture. Here the Gentiles haue the water
of Ganges in great estimation, for hauing good water neere them, yet they
will fetch the water of Ganges a great way off, and if they haue not
sufficient to drinke, they will sprinkle a litle on them, and then they
thinke themselues well. From Satagam I trauelled by the countrey of the
king of Tippara or porto Grande, with whom the Mogores or Mogen haue almost
continuall warres. The Mogen which be of the kingdom of Recon and Rame, be
stronger then the king of Tippara, so that Chatigan or porto Grande is
oftentimes vnder the king of Recon.

There is a country 4. daies iourney from Couche or Quicheu before
mentioned, which is called Bottanter and the citie Bottia, the king is
called Dermain; the people whereof are very tall and strong, and there are
marchants which come out of China, and they say out of Muscouia or
Tartarie. And they come to buy muske, cambals, agats, silke, pepper and
saffron like the saffron of Persia. The countrey is very great, 3. moneths
iourney. There are very high mountains in this countrey, and one of them so
steep that when a man is 6. daies iourney off it, he may see it perfectly.
Vpon these mountains [Marginal note: These seeme to be the mountains of
Iamus, called by the people Cumao.] are people which haue eares of a spanne
long: if their eares be not long, they call them apes. They say that when
they be vpon the mountaines, they see ships in the Sea sayling to and fro;
but they know not from whence they come, nor whether they go. There are
marchants which come out of the East, they say, from vnder the sunne, which
is from China, which haue no beards, and they say there it is something
warme. But those which come from the other side of the mountains which is
from the North, say there it is very cold. [Sidenote: The apparel of the
Tartarie marchants.] These Northern merchants are apparelled with woollen
cloth and hats, white hosen close, and bootes which be of Moscouia or
Tartarie. They report that in their countrey they haue very good horses,
but they be litle: some men haue foure, fiue, or sixe hundred horses and
kine: they liue with milke and fleshe. [Sidenote: Cowe tailes in great
request.] They cut the tailes of their kine, and sell them very deere, for
they bee in great request, and much esteemed in those partes. The haire of
them is a yard long, the rumpe is aboue a spanne long: they vse to hang
them for brauerie upon the heades of their Elephantes: they bee much vsed
in Pegu and China: they buie and sell by scores vpon the ground. The people
be very swift on foote.

From Chatigan in Bengala, I came to Bacola; the king whereof is a Gentile,
a man very well disposed and delighteth much to shoot in a gun. His
countrey is very great and fruitful, and hath store of Rice, much cotton
cloth, and cloth of silke. The houses be very faire and high builded, the
streetes large, the people naked, except a litle cloth about their waste.
The women weare great store of siluer hoopes about their neckes and armes,
and their legs are ringed with siluer and copper, and rings made of
elephants teeth.

From Bacola I went to Serrepore which standeth vpon the riuer of Ganges,
the king is called Chondery. They be all hereabout rebels against their
king Zelabdim Echebar: for here are so many riuers and Ilands, that they
flee from one to another, whereby his horsemen cannot preuaile against
them. Great store of cotton cloth is made here.

Sinnergan is a towne sixe leagues from Serrepore, where there is the best
and finest cloth made of cotton that is in all India. The chiefe king of
all these countries is called Isacan, and he is chiefe of all the other
kings, and is a great friend to all Christians. The houses here, as they be
in the most part of India, are very litle, and couered with strawe, and
haue a fewe mats round about the wals, and the doore to keepe out the
Tygers and the Foxes. Many of the people are very rich. Here they will eate
no flesh, nor kill no beast: they liue of Rice, milke, and fruits. They goe
with a litle cloth before them, and all the rest of their bodies is naked.
Great store of Cotton cloth goeth from hence, and much Rice, wherewith they
serue all India, Ceilon, Pegu, Malacca, Sumatra, and many other places.

I went from Serrepore the 28. of Nouember 1586. for Pegu in a small ship or
foist of one Albert Carauallos, and so passing downe Ganges, and passing by
the Island of Sundiua, porto Grande, or the countrie of Tippera, the
kingdom of Recon and Mogen, leauing them on our left side with a faire wind
at Northwest: our course was South and by East, which brought vs to the
barre of Negrais in Pegu: if any contrary wind had come, we had throwen
many of our things ouer-boord: for we were so pestered with people and
goods, that there was scant place to lie in. From Bengala to Pegu is 90.
legues. We entred the barre of Negrais, which is a braue barre and hath 4.
fadomes water where it hath least. Three dayes after we came to Cosmin,
which is a very pretie towne, and standeth very pleasantly, very well
furnished with all things. [Sidenote: Ladders vsed to auoyd the danger of
wild beasts.] The people be very tall and well disposed; the women white,
round faced, with little eies: the houses are high built, set vpon great
high postes, and they go vp to them with long ladders for feare of the
Tygers which be very many. The countrey is very fruitful of all things.
Here are very great Figs, Orenges, Cocoes, and other fruits. [Sidenote:
Dwelling in boats.] The land is very high that we fall withall, but after
we be entred the barre, it is very lowe and full of riuers, for they goe
all too and fro in boates, which they call paroes, and keepe their houses
with wife and children in them.

From the barre of Nigrais to the citie of Pegu is ten dayes iourney by the
riuers. Wee went from Cosmin to Pegu in Paroes or boates, and passing vp
the riuers wee came to Medon, which is a prety towne, where there be a
wonderfull number of Paroes, for they keepe their houses and their markets
in them all vpon the water. They rowe too and fro, and haue all their
marchandizes in their boates with a great Sombrero or shadow ouer their
heads to keepe the sunne from them, which is as broad as a great cart
wheele made of the leaues of the Coco trees and fig trees, and is very
light.

From Medon we went to Dela, which is a very faire towne, and hath a faire
port into the sea, from whence go many ships to Malacca, Mecca, and many
other places. Here are 18. or 20. very great and long houses, where they
tame and keep many elephants of the kings: for thereabout in the
wildernesse they catch the wilde elephants. It is a very fruitfull
countrey. From Dela we went to Cirion, which is a good towne, and hath a
faire porte into the sea, whither come many ships from Mecca, Malacca,
Sumatra, and from diuers other places. And there the ships staie and
discharge, and send vp their goods in Paroes to Pegu. [Sidenote: Coches
caried on mens shoulders.] From Cirion we went to Macao, which is a prettie
towne, where we left our boates or Paroes, and in the morning taking
Delingeges, which are a kind of Coches made of cords and cloth quilted, and
caried vpon a stang betweene 3. or 4. men: we came to Pegu the same day.
Pegu is a citie very great, strong, and very faire, with walles of stone,
and great ditches round about it. There are two townes, the old towne and
the newe. In the olde towne are all the marchants strangers, and very many
marchants of the countrey. All the goods are sold in the olde towne which
is very great, and hath many suburbes round about it, and all the houses
are made of Canes which they call Bambos, and bee couered with strawe
['srawe' in source text--KTH]. In your house you haue a Warehouse which
they call Godon, which is made of bricke to put your goods in, for
oftentimes they take fire and burne in an houre foure or fiue hundred
houses: so that if the Gordon [sic--KTH] were not, you should bee in danger
to haue all burned, if any winde should rise, at a trice. In the newe towne
is the king, and all his Nobilitie and Gentrie. It is a citie very great
and populous, and is made square and with very faire walles, and a great
ditch roundabout it full of water, with many crocodiles in it: it hath
twenty gates, and they bee made of stone, for euery square fiue gates.
There are also many Turrets for Centinels to watch, made of wood, and
gilded with golde very faire. The streets are the fairest that euer I saw,
as straight as a line from one gate to the other, and so broad that tenne
or twelue men may ride a front thorow them. On both sides of them at euery
mans doore is set a palmer tree which is the nut tree: which make a very
faire shew and a very commodious shadow, so that a man may walke in the
shade all day. The houses be made of wood, and couered with tiles. The
kings house is in the middle of the city, and is walled and ditched round
about: and the buildings within are made of wood very sumptuously gilded,
and great workmanship is vpon the forefront, which is likewise very costly
gilded. And the house wherein his Pagode or idole standeth is couered with
tiles of siluer, and all the walles are gilded with golde. Within the first
gate of the kings house is a great large roome, on both sides whereof are
houses made for the kings elephants, which be marveilous great and faire,
and are brought vp to warres and in seruice of the king. [Sidenote: Foure
white elephants.] And among the rest he hath foure white elephants, which
are very strange and rare: for there is none other king which hath them but
he: if any other king hath one, hee will send vnto him for it. When any of
these white elephants is brought vnto the king, all the merchants in the
city are commanded to see them, and to giue him a present of halfe a ducat,
which doth come to a great summe: for that there are many merchants in the
city. After that you haue giuen your present you may come and see them at
your pleasure, although they stand in the kings house. [Sidenote: The king
of the white elephants.] This king in his title is called the king of the
white elephants. If any other king haue one, and will not send it him, he
will make warre with him for it: for he had rather lose a great part of his
kingdome, then not to conquere him. They do very great seruice vnto these
white elephants: euery one of them standeth in an house gilded with golde,
and they doe feede in vessels of siluer and gilt. One of them when he doth
go to the riuer to be washed, as euery day they do, goeth vnder a canopy of
cloth of golde, or of silke carried ouer him by sixe or eight men, and
eight or ten men goe before him playing on drummes, shawmes, or other
instruments: and when he is washed and commeth out of the riuer, there is a
gentleman which doth wash his feet in a siluer basin: which is his office
giuen him by the king. There is no such account made of any blacke
elephant, be he neuer so great. And surely there be woonderfull faire and
great, and some be nine cubites in height. And they do report that the king
hath aboue fiue thousand elephants of warre, besides many other which be
not taught to fight. This king hath a very large place wherein he taketh
the wilde elephants. It standeth about a mile from Pegu, builded with a
faire court within, and is in a great groue or wood: and there be many
huntsmen, which go into the wildernesse with she elephants: for without the
she they are not to be taken. And they be taught for that purpose: and
euery hunter hath fiue or sixe of them: and they say that they annoint the
she elephants with a certaine ointment, which when the wild elephant doth
smell, he will not leaue her. When they haue brought the wilde elephant
neere vnto the place, they send word vnto the towne, and many horse men and
footmen come out and cause the she elephant to enter into a strait way
which doeth go to the palace, and the she and the he do runne in: for it is
like a wood: and when they be in, the gate doth shut. Afterward they get
out the female: and when the male seeth that he is left alone, he weepeth
and crieth, and runneth against the walles, which be made of so strong
trees, that some of them doe breake their teeth with running against them.
Then they pricke him with sharpe canes, and cause him to go into a strait
house, and there they put a rope about his middle and about his feet, and
let him stand there three or foure dayes, without eating or drinking: and
then they bring a female to him, with meat and drinke, and within a few
dayes he becommeth tame. The chiefe force of the king is in these
elephants. And when they goe into the warres they set a frame of wood vpon
their backes, bound with great cordes, wherein sit foure or sixe men, which
fight with gunnes, bowes, and arrowes, darts and other weapons. And they
say that their skinnes are so thicke that a pellet of an harquebush will
scarse pearce them, except it be in some tender place. Their weapons be
very badde. They haue gunnes, but shoot very badly in them, darts and
swords short without points. The king keepeth a very great state: when he
sitteth abroad as he doth euery day twise, all his noblemen which they call
Shemines sit on ech side, a good distance off, and a great guard without
them. The Court yard is very great. If any man will speake with the king,
he is to kneele downe, to heaue vp his hands to his head, and to put his
head to the ground three times, when he entreth, in the middle way, and
when he commeth neere to the king: and then he sitteth downe and talketh
with the king: if the king like well of him, he sitteth neere him within
three or foure paces: if he thinke not well of him, he sitteth further off.
When he goeth to warre, he goeth very strong. [Sidenote: Odia a city in
Siam.] At my being there he went to Odia in the countrey of Siam with three
hundred thousand men, and fiue thousand elephants. Thirty thousand men were
his guard. These people do eate roots, herbs, leaues, dogs, cats, rats,
serpents, and snakes; they refuse almost nothing. When the king rideth
abroad, he rideth with a great guard, and many noblemen, oftentimes vpon an
elephant with a fine castle vpon him very fairely gilded with gold; and
sometimes vpon a great frame like an horsliter, which hath a little house
vpon it couered ouer head, but open on the sides, which is all gilded with
golde, and set with many rubies and saphires, whereof he hath infinite
store in his country, and is caried vpon sixteene or eighteene mens
shoulders. [Sidenote: This maner of cariage on mens shoulders is vsed in
Pegu, and in Florida.] This coach in their language is called Serrion. Very
great feasting and triumphing is many times before the king both of men and
women. This hath little force by sea, because he hath but very few ships.
He hath houses full of golde and siluer, and bringeth in often, but
spendeth very little, and hath the mines of rubies and saphires, and
spinelles. Neere vnto the palace of the king, there is a treasure
woonderfull rich; the which because it is so neere, he doth not account of
it: and it standeth open for all men to see in a great walled court with
two gates, which be alwayes open. There are foure houses gilded very
richly, and couered with lead: in euery one of them are Pagodes or Images
of huge stature and great value. In the first is the picture of a king in
golde with a crowne of golde on his head full of great rubies and saphires,
and about him there stand foure children of golde. In the second house is
the picture of a man in siluer, woonderfull great, and high as an house;
his foot is as long as a man, and he is made sitting, with a crowne on his
head very rich with stones. In the third house is the picture of a man
greater then the other, made of brasse, with a rich crowne on his head. In
the fourth and last house doth stand another, made of brasse, greater then
the other, with a crowne also on his head very rich with stones. In another
court not farre from this stand foure other Pagodes or idoles, maruellous
great, of copper, made in the same place where they do stand; for they be
so great that they be not to be remoued: they stand in foure houses gilded
very faire, and are themselues gilded all ouer saue their heads, and they
shew like a blacke Morian. Their expenses in gilding of their images are
wonderfull. The king hath one wife and aboue three hundred concubines, by
which they say he hath fourescore or fourescore and ten children. He
sitteth in iudgement almost euery day. [Sidenote: Paper of the leaues of a
tree.] They vse no speech, but giue vp their supplications written in the
leaues of a tree with the point of an yron bigger then a bodkin. These
leaues are an elle long, and about two inches broad; they are also double.
He which giueth in his supplication, doth stand in a place a little
distance off with a present. If his matter be liked of, the king accepteth
of his present, and granteth his request: if his sute he not liked of, he
returneth with his present; for the king will not take it.

In India there are few commodities which serue for Pegu, except Opium of
Cambaia, painted cloth of S. Thome, or of Masulipatan, and white cloth of
Bengala, which is spent there in great quantity. [Sidenote: An excellent
colour with a root called Saia.] They bring thither also much cotton, yarne
red coloured with a root which they call Saia, which will neuer lose his
colour: it is very wel solde here, and very much of it commeth yerely to
Pegu. By your money you lose much. The ships which come from Bengala, S.
Thome, and Masulipatan, come to the bar of Nigrais and to Cosmin. To
Martauan a port of the sea in the kingdome of Pegu come many ships from
Malacca laden with Sandall, Porcelanes, and other wares of China, and with
Camphora of Borneo, and Pepper from Achen in Sumatra. [Sidenote: Woollen
cloth and scarlets solde in Pegu.] To Cirion a port of Pegu come ships from
Mecca with woollen cloth, Scarlets, Veluets, Opium, and such like. There
are in Pegu eight Brokers, whom they call Tareghe, which are bound to sell
your goods at the price which they be woorth, and you giue them for their
labour two in the hundred: and they be bound to make your debt good,
because you sell your merchandises vpon their word. If the Broker pay you
not at his day, you may take him home, and keepe him in your house: which
is a great shame for him. And if he pay you not presently, you may take his
wife and children and his slaues, and binde them at your doore, and set
them in the Sunne; for that is the law of the countrey. [Sidenote: The
money of Pegu.] Their current money in these partes is a kinde of brasse
which they call Gansa, wherewith you may buy golde, siluer, rubies, ronske,
and all other things. The golde and siluer is marchandise, and is worth
sometimes more, and sometimes lesse, as other wares be. This brazen money
doeth goe by a weight which they call a biza; and commonly this biza after
our account is worth about halfe a crowne or somewhat lesse. [Sidenote: The
seuerall marchandises of Pegu.] The marchandise which be in Pegu, are
golde, siluer, rubies, saphires, spinelles, muske, beniamin or
frankincense, long pepper, tinne, leade, copper, lacca whereof they make
hard waxe, rice, and wine made of rice, and some sugar. The elephants doe
eate the sugar canes, or els they would make very much. [Sidenote: The
forme of their Temples or Varellaes.] And they consume many canes likewise
in making of their Varellaes or Idole Temples, which are in great number
both great and small. They be made round like a sugar loafe, some are as
high as a Church, very broad beneath, some a quarter of a mile in compasse:
within they be all earth done about with stone. They consume in these
Varellaes great quantity of golde; for that they be all gilded aloft: and
many of them from the top to the bottome: and euery ten or twelue yeeres
they must be new gilded, because the raine consumeth off the golde: for
they stand open abroad. If they did not consume their golde in these
vanities, it would be very plentifull and good cheape in Pegu. About two
dayes iourney from Pegu there is a Varelle or Pagode, which is the
pilgrimage of the Pegues: it is called Dogonne, and is of a woonderfull
bignesse, and all gilded from the foot to the toppe. [Sidenote: The
Tallipoies or Priests of Pegu.] And there is an house by it wherein the
Tallipoies which are their priests doe preach. This house is fiue and fifty
paces in length, and hath three pawnes or walks in it, and forty great
pillars gilded, which stand betweene the walks; and it is open on all sides
with a number of small pillars, which be likewise gilded: it is gilded with
golde within and without. There are houses very faire round about for the
pilgrims to lie in: and many goodly houses for the Tallipoies to preach in,
which are full of images both of men and women, which are all gilded ouer
with golde. It is the fairest place as I suppose, that is in the world: it
standeth very high, and there are foure wayes to it, which all along are
set with trees of fruits, in such wise that a man may goe in the shade
aboue two miles in length. And when their feast day is, a man can hardly
passe by water or by land for the great presse of people; for they come
from all places of the kingdome of Pegu thither at their feast. In Pegu
they haue many Tallipoies or priests, which preach against all abuses. Many
men resort vnto them. When they enter into their kiack, that is to say,
their holy place or temple, at the doore their is a great iarre of water
with a cocke or a ladle in it, and there they wash their feet; and then
they enter in, and lift vp their hands to their heads, first to their
preacher, and then to the Sunne, and so sit downe. [Sidenote: The apparell
of their priests.] The Tallipoies go very strangly apparelled with one
cambaline or thinne cloth next to their body of a browne colour, another of
yellow doubled many times vpon their shoulder: and those two be girded to
them with a broad girdle: and they haue a skinne of leather hanging on a
string about their necks, whereupon they sit, bare headed and bare footed:
for none of them weareth shoes; with their right armes bare and a great
broad sombrero or shadow in their hands to defend them in the Summer from
the Sunne, and in the Winter from the raine. When the Tallipoies or priests
take their Orders, first they go to schoole vntill they be twenty yeres
olde or more, and then they come before a Tallipoie appointed for that
purpose, whom they call Rowli: he is of the chiefest or most learned, and
he opposeth them, and afterward examineth them many times, whether they
will leaue their friends, and the company of all women, and take vpon them
the habit of a Tallipoie. If any be content, then he rideth vpon an horse
about the streets very richly apparelled, with drummes and pipes, to shew
that he leaueth the riches of the world to be a Tallipoie. In few dayes
after, he is caried vpon a thing like an horsliter, which they call a
serion, vpon ten or twelue mens shoulders in the apparell of a Tallipoie,
with pipes and drummes, and many Tallipoies with him, and al his friends,
and so they go with him to his house which standeth without the towne, and
there they leaue him. Euery one of them hath his house, which is very
little, set vpon six or eight posts, and they go vp to them with a ladder
of twelue or foureteene staues. Their houses be for the most part by the
hie wayes side, and among the trees, and in the woods. And they go with a
great pot made of wood or fine earth, and couered, tied with a broad girdle
vpon their shoulder, which cometh vnder their arme, wherewith they go to
begge their victuals which they eate, which is rice, fish, and herbs. They
demand nothing but come to the doore, and the people presently doe giue
them, some one thing, and some another: and they put all together in their
potte: for they say they must eate of their almes, and therewith content
themselues. [Sidenote: Obseruation of new moones.] They keepe their feasts
by the Moone: and when it is new Moone they keepe their greatest feast: and
then the people send rice and other things to that kiack or church of which
they be; and there all the Tallipoies doe meete which be of that Church,
and eate the victuals which are sent them. When the Tallipoies do preach,
many of the people cary them gifts into the pulpit where they sit and
preach. And there is one which sitteth by them to take that which the
people bring. It is diuided among them. They haue none other ceremonies nor
seruice that I could see, but onely preaching.

I went from Pegu to Iamahey [Marginal note: Iamahey fiue and twenty dayes
iourney Northeastward from Pegu.] which is in the countrey of the
Langeiannes, whom we call Iangomes; it is fiue and twenty dayes iourney
Northeast from Pegu. In which iourney I passed many fruitfull and pleasant
countreys. The countrey is very lowe, and hath many faire riuers. The
houses are very bad, made of canes, and couered with straw. Heere are many
wilde buffes and elephants. Iamahey is a very faire and great towne, with
faire houses of stone, well peopled, the streets are very large, the men
very well set and strong, with a cloth about them, bare headed and bare
footed: for in all these countreys they weare no shoes. The women be much
fairer then those of Pegu. Heere in all these countreys they haue no wheat.
They make some cakes of rice. Hither to Iamahey come many marchants out of
China, and bring great store of muske, golde, siluer, and many other things
of China worke. Here is great store of victuals: they haue such plenty that
they will not milke the buffles, as they doe in all other places. Here is
great store of copper and beniamin. In these countreys when the people be
sicke they make a vow to offer meat vnto the diuell, if they escape: and
when they be recouered they make a banket with many pipes and drummes and
other instruments, and dansing all the night, and their friends come and
bring gifts, cocos, figges, arrecaes, and other fruits, and with great
dauncing and reioycing they offer to the diuell, and say, they giue the
diuel to eat, and driue him out. When they be dancing and playing they will
cry and hallow very loud; and in this sort they say they driue him away.
And when they be sicke a Tallipoy or two euery night doth sit by them and
sing, to please the diuell that he should not hurt them. [Sidenote: They
burne their dead.] And if any die he is caried vpon a great frame made like
a tower, with a couering all gilded with golde made of canes caried with
foureteene or sixteene men, with drummes and pipes and other instruments
playing before him to a place out of the towne and there is burned. He is
accompanied with all his friends and neighbours, all men: and they giue to
the tallipoies or priests many mats and cloth: and then they returne to the
house and there make a feast for two dayes: and then the wife with all the
neighbours wiues and her friends go to the place where he was burned, and
there they sit a certaine time and cry and gather the pieces of bones which
be left vnburned and bury them, and then returne to their houses and make
an end of all mourning. And the men and women which be neere of kin do
shaue their heads, which they do not vse except it be for the death of a
friend: for they much esteeme of their haire.

Caplan [Marginal note: Caplan is the place the rubies and other precious
stones are found.] is the place where they finde the rubies, saphires, and
spinelles: it standeth sixe dayes iourney from Aua in the kingdome of Pegu.
There are many great high hilles out of which they digge them. None may go
to the pits but onely those which digge them.

In Pegu, and in all the countreys of Aua, Langeiannes, Siam, and the
Bramas, the men weare bunches or little round balles in their priuy
members: some of them ware two and some three. They cut the skin and so put
them in, one into one side and another into the other side; which they do
when they be 25 or 30 yeeres olde, and at their pleasure they take one or
more of them as they thinke good. When they be maried the husband is for
euery child which his wife hath, to put in one vntill he come to three and
then no more: for they say the women doe desire them. They were inuented
because they should not abuse the male sexe. For in times past all those
countries were so giuen to that villany, that they were very scarce of
people. It was also ordained that the women should not haue past three
cubits of cloth in their nether clothes, which they binde about them; which
are so strait, that when they go in the streets, they shew one side of the
leg bare aboue the knee. [Sidenote: Anthony Galuano writeth of these bals.]
The bunches aforesayd be of diuers sorts: the least be as big as a litle
walnut, and very round: the greatest are as big as a litle hennes egge:
some are of brasse and some of siluer: but those of siluer be for the king,
and his noble men. These are gilded and made with great cunning, and ring
like a litle bell. There are some made of leade, which they call Selwy
because they ring but litle: and these be of lesser price for the poorer
sort. The king sometimes taketh his out, and giueth them to his noblemen as
a great gift: and because he hath vsed them, they esteeme them greatly.
They will put one in, and heale vp the place in seuen or eight dayes.

The Bramas which be of the kings countrey (for the king is a Brama) haue
their legs or bellies, or some part of their body, as they thinke good
themselues, made black with certaine things which they haue: they vse to
pricke the skinne, and to put on it a kinde of anile or blacking, which
doth continue alwayes. And this is counted an honour among them: but none
may haue it but the Bramas which are of the kings kinred.

[Sidenote: The people of Pegu weare no beards.] These people weare no
beards: they pull out the haire on their faces with little pinsons made for
that purpose. Some of them will let 16 or 20 haires grow together, some in
one place of his face and some in another, and pulleth out all the rest:
for he carieth his pinsons alwayes with him to pull the haires out assoone
as they appeare. If they see a man with a beard they wonder at him. They
haue their teeth blacked both men and women, for they say a dogge hath his
teeth white, therefore they will blacke theirs.

The Pegues if they haue a suite in the law which is so doubtfull that they
cannot well determine it, put two long canes into the water where it is
very deepe: and both the parties go into the water by the poles, and there
sit men to iudge, and they both do diue vnder the water, and he which
remaineth longest vnder the water doth winne the sute.

The 10 of January I went from Pegu to Malacca, passing by many of the ports
of Pegu, as Martauan, the Iland of Taui, from whence commeth great store of
tinne, which serueth all India, the Ilands of Tanaseri, Iunsalaon, and many
others; and so came to Malacca the 8 of February, where the Portugals haue
a castle which standeth nere the sea. And the countrey fast without the
towne belongeth to the Malayos, which is a kinde of proud people. They go
naked with a cloth about their middle, and a litle roll of cloth about
their heads; Hither come many ships from China and from the Malucos, Banda,
Timor, and from many other Ilands of the Iauas, which bring great store of
spices and drugs, and diamants and other iewels. The voyages into many of
these Ilands belong vnto the captaine of Malacca: so that none may goe
thither without his licence: which yeeld him great summes of money euery
yeere. The Portugals heere haue often times warres with the king of Achem
which standeth in the Iland of Sumatra: from whence commeth great store of
pepper and other spices euery yeere to Pegu and Mecca within the Red sea,
and other places.

[Sidenote: The voyage to Iapan.] When the Portugals go from Macao in China
to Iapan, they carry much white silke, golde, muske, and porcelanes: and
they bring from thence nothing but siluer. They haue a great caracke which
goeth thither euery yere, and she bringeth from thence euery yere abouve
sixe hundred thousand crusadoes: and all this siluer of Iapan, and two
hundred thousand crusadoes [Marginal note: Eight hundred thousand crusadoes
in siluer imployed yerely by the Portugals in China.] more in siluer which
they bring yeerely out of India, they imploy to their great aduantage in
China: and they bring from thence golde, muske, silke, copper, porcelanes,
and many other things very costly and gilded. When the Portugales come to
Canton in China to traffike, they must remaine there but certaine dayes:
and when they come in at the gate of the city, they must enter their names
in a booke, and when they goe out at night they must put out their names.
They may not lie in the towne all night, but must lie in their boats
without the towne. And their dayes being expired, if any man remaine there,
they are euill vsed and imprisoned. The Chinians are very suspitious, and
doe not trust strangers. It is thought that the king doth not know that any
strangers come into his countrey. And further it is credibly reported that
the common people see their king very seldome or not at all, nor may not
looke vp to that place where he sitteth. And when he rideth abroad he is
caried vpon a great chaire or serrion gilded very faire, wherein there is
made a little house, with a latice to looke out at: so that he may see
them, but they may not looke vp at him: and all the time that he passeth by
them, they heaue vp their hands to their heads, and lay their heads on the
ground, and looke not vp vntil he be passed. The order of China is when
they mourne, that they weare white thread shoes, and hats of straw. The man
doth mourne for his wife two yeeres, the wife for her husband three yeeres:
the sonne for his father a yeere, and for his mother two yeres. And all the
time which they mourne they keepe the dead in the house, the bowels being
taken out and filled with chownam or lime, and coffined: and when the time
is expired they carry them out playing and piping, and burne them. And when
they returne they pull off their mourning weeds, and marry at their
pleasure. A man may keepe as many concubines as he will, but one wife
onely. [Sidenote: The writing of the people of China &c.] All the Chineans,
Iaponians, and Cauchin Chineans do write right downwards, and they do write
with a fine pensill made of dogs or cats haire.

Laban is a Iland among the Iauas from whence come the diamants of the New
water. And they finde them in the riuers: for the king will not suffer them
to digge the rocke.

Iamba is an Iland among the Iauas also, from whence come diamants. And the
king hath a masse of earth which is golde; it groweth in the middle of a
riuer: and when the king doth lacke gold, they cut part of the earth and
melt it, whereof commeth golde. This masse of earth doth appeare but once
in a yere; which is when the water is low: and this is in the moneth of
April.

Bima is another Iland among the Iauas, where the women trauell and labour
as our men do in England, and the men keepe house and go where they will.

The 29 of March 1588, I returned from Malacca to Martauan, and so to Pegu,
where I remained the second time vntill the 17 of September, and then I
went to Cosmin, and there tooke shipping; and passing many dangers by
reason of contrary windes, it pleased God that we arriued in Bengala in
Nouember following: where I stayed for want of passage vntill the third of
February 1589, and then I shipped my selfe for Cochin. In which voyage we
endured great extremity for lacke of fresh water: for the weather was
extreme hote, and we were many marchants and passengers, and we had very
many calmes, and hote weather. Yet it pleased God that we arriued in Ceylon
the sixth of March, where we stayed fiue dayes to water, and to furnish our
selues with other necessary prouision. This Ceylon is a braue Iland, very
fruitfull and faire; but by reason of continuall warres with the king
thereof, all things are very deare: for he will not suffer any thing to be
brought to the castle where the Portugals be: wherefore often times they
haue great want of victuals. Their prouision of victuals commeth out of
Bengala euery yere. The king is called Raia, and is of great force: for he
commeth to Columbo, which is the place where the Portugals haue their fort,
with an hundred thousand men, and many elephants. But they be naked people
all of them; yet many of them be good with their pieces which be muskets.
When the king talketh with any man, he standeth vpon one legge, and setteth
the other foot vpon his knee with his sword in his hand: it is not their
order for the king to sit but to stand. His apparell is a fine painted
cloth made of cotton wooll about his middle: his haire is long and bound vp
with a little fine cloth about his head: all the rest of his body is naked.
His guard are a thousand men, which stand round about him, and he in the
middle; and when he marcheth, many of them goe before him, and the rest
come after him. They are of the race of the Chingalayes, which they say are
the best kinde of all the Malabars. Their eares are very large; for the
greater they are, the more honourable they are accounted. Some of them are
a spanne long. The wood which they burne is Cinamom wood, and it smelleth
very sweet. There is great store of rubies, saphires, and spinelles in this
Iland: the best kinde of all be here; but the king will not suffer the
inhabitants to digge for them, lest his enemies should know of them, and
make warres against him, and so driue him out of his countrey for them.
They haue no horses in all the countrey. The elephants be not so great as
those of Pegu, which be monstrous huge: but they say all other elephants do
feare them, and none dare fight with them, though they be very small. Their
women haue a cloth bound about them from their middle to their knee: and
all the rest is bare. All of them be blacke and but little, both men and
women. Their houses are very little, made of the branches of the palmer or
coco-tree, and couered with the leaues of the same tree.

The eleuenth of March we sailed from Ceylon, and so doubled the cape of
Comori. Not far from thence, betweene Ceylon and the maine land of
Negapatan, they fish for pearles. And there is fished euery yere very much;
which doth serue all India, Cambaia, and Bengala, it is not so orient as
the pearle of Baharim in the gulfe of Persia. From cape de Comori we passed
by Coulam, which is a fort of the Portugals: from whence commeth great
store of pepper, which commeth for Portugall: for oftentimes there ladeth
one of the caracks of Portugall. Thus passing the coast we arriued in
Cochin the 22 of March, where we found the weather warme, but scarsity of
victuals: for here groweth neither corne nor rice: and the greatest part
commeth from Bengala. They haue here very bad water, for the riuer is farre
off. [Sidenote: People with swollen legges mentioned also by Ioh. Huygen.]
This bad water causeth many of the people to be like lepers, and many of
them haue their legs swollen as bigge as a man in the waste, and many of
them are scant able to go. These people here be Malabars, and of the race
of the Naires of Calicut: and they differ much from the other Malabars.
These haue their heads very full of haire, and bound vp with a string: and
there doth appeare a bush without the band wherewith it is bound. The men
be tall and strong, and good archers with a long bow and a long arrow,
which is their best weapon: yet there be some caliuers among them, but they
handle them badly.

[Sidenote: How pepper groweth.] Heere groweth the pepper; and it springeth
vp by a tree or a pole, and is like our iuy berry, but something longer
like the wheat eare: and at the first the bunches are greene, and as they
waxe ripe they cut them off and dry them. The leafe is much lesser then the
iuy leafe and thinner. All the inhabitants here haue very little homes
couered with the leaues of the coco-trees. The men be of a reasonable
stature; the women little; all blacke, with a cloth bound about their
middle hanging downe to their hammes; all the rest of their bodies be
naked: they haue horrible great eares with many rings set with pearles and
stones in them. The king goeth incached, as they do all; he doth not
remaine in a place aboue fiue or sixe dayes: he hath many houses, but they
be but litle: his guard is but small: he remooueth from one house to
another according to their order. All the pepper of Calicut and course
cinamom groweth here in this countrey. The best cinamom doth come from
Ceylon, and is pilled from fine yoong trees. Here are very many palmer or
coco trees, which is their chiefe food: for it is their meat and drinke:
and yeeldeth many other necessary things, as I haue declared before.

[Sidenote: Or Calicut or Cananor.] The Naires which be vnder the king of
Samorin, which be Malabars, haue alwayes wars with the Portugals. The king
hath alwayes peace with them; but his people goe to the sea to robbe and
steale. Their chiefe captaine is called Cogi Alli; he hath three castles
vnder him. When the Portugals complaine to the king, he sayth he doth not
send them out: but he consenteth that they go. They range all the coast
from Ceylon to Goa, and go by foure or fiue parowes or boats together: and
haue in euery one of them fifty or threescore men, and boord presently.
They do much harme on that coast, and take euery yere many foists and boats
of the Portugals. Many of these people be Moores. This kings countrey
beginneth twelue leagues from Cochin, and reacheth neere vnto Goa. I
remained in Cochin vntill the second of Nouember, which was eight moneths;
for that there was no passage that went away in all that time: if I had
come two dayes sooner I had found a passage presently. From Cochin I went
to Goa, where I remained three dayes. From Cochin to Goa is an hundred
leagues. From Goa I went to Chaul, which is threescore leagues, where I
remained three and twenty dayes: and there making my prouision of things
necessary for the shippe, from thence I departed to Ormus; where I stayed
for a passage to Balsara fifty dayes. From Goa to Ormus is foure hundred
leagues.

Here I thought good, before I make an end of this my booke, to declare some
things which India and the countrey farther Eastward do bring forth.

The pepper groweth in many parts of India, especially about Cochin: and
much of it doeth grow in the fields among the bushes without any labour:
and when it is ripe they go and gather it. The shrubbe is like vnto our iuy
tree: and if it did not run about some tree or pole, it would fall down and
rot. When they first gather it, it is greene; and then they lay it in the
Sun, and it becommeth blacke.

The ginger groweth like vnto our garlick, and the root is the ginger: it is
to be found in many parts of India.

The cloues doe come from the Iles of the Moluccoes, which be diuers Ilands:
their tree is like to our bay tree.

The nutmegs and maces grow together, and come from the Ile of Banda: the
tree is like to our walnut tree, but somewhat lesser.

The white sandol is wood very sweet and in great request among the Indians;
for they grinde it with a litle water, and anoynt their bodies therewith:
it commeth from the Isle of Timor.

Camphora is a precious thing among the Indians, and is solde dearer than
golde. I thinke none of it commeth for Christendome. That which is
compounded commeth from China: but that which groweth in canes and is the
best, commeth from the great Isle of Borneo.

Lignum Aloes commeth from Cauchinchina.

The beniamin commeth out of the countreys of Siam and Iangomes.

The long pepper groweth in Bengala, in Pegu, and in the Ilands of the
Iauas.

The muske commeth out of Tartarie, and is made after this order, by report
of the marchants which bring it to Pegu to sell; In Tartarie there is a
little beast like vnto a yong roe, which they take in snares, and beat him
to death with the blood: after that they cut out the bones, and beat the
flesh with the blood very small, and fill the skin with it: and hereof
commeth the muske.

Of the amber they holde diuers opinions; but most men say it commeth out of
the sea, and that they finde it vpon the shores side.

The rubies, saphires, and spinnelles are found in Pegu.

The diamants are found in diuers places, as in Bisnagar, in Agra, in Delli,
and in the Ilands of the Iauas.

The best pearles come from the Iland of Baharim in the Persian sea, the
woorser from the Piscaria neere the Isle of Ceylon, and from Aynam a great
Iland on the Southermost coast of China.

Spodium and many other kindes of drugs come from Cambaia.

Now to returne to my voyage; from Ormus I went to Balsara or Basora, and
from Basora to Babylon: and we passed the most part of the way by the
strength of men by halling the boat vp the riuer with a long cord. From
Babylon I came by land to Mosul, which standeth nere to Niniue, which is
all ruinated and destroyed: it standeth fast by the riuer of Tigris. From
Mosul I went to Merdin, which is in the countrey of the Armenians; but now
there dwell in that place a people which they call Cordies or Curdi. From
Merdin I went to Orfa, which is a very faire towne, and it hath a goodly
fountaine full of fish, where the Moores hold many great ceremonies and
opinions concerning Abraham: for they say he did once dwell there. From
thence I went to Bir, and so passed the riuer of Euphrates. From Bir I went
to Aleppo, where I stayed certaine moneths for company; and then I went to
Tripolis; where finding English shipping, I came with a prosperous voyage
to London, where by Gods assistance I safely arriued the 29 of April 1591,
hauing bene eight yeeres out of my natiue countrey.

       *       *       *       *       *

The report of Iohn Huighen van Linchoten concerning M. Newberies and M.
  Fitches imprisonment, and of their escape, which happened while he was in
  Goa.

In the moneth of December, Anno 1583, there arriued in the towne and Iland
of Ormus, foure English men, which came from Aleppo in the countrey of
Syria, hauing sailed out of England, and passed thorow the straights of
Gibralter to Tripoli a towne and hauen lying on the coast of Syria, where
all the ships discharge their wares and marchandises, and from thence are
caried by land vnto Aleppo, which is nine dayes iourney. In Aleppo there
are resident diuers marchants and factours of all nations, as Italians,
French men, English men, Armenians, Turks and Moores, euery man hauing his
religion apart, paying tribute vnto the great Turke. In that towne there is
great traffique, for that from thence euery yeere twise, there trauell two
Caffyls, that is, companies of people and camels, which trauell vnto India,
Persia, Arabia, and all the countreys bordering on the same, and deale in
all sorts of marchandise, both to and from those countreys, as I in another
place haue already declared. Three of the sayd English men aforesayd, were
sent by a company of English men that are resident in Aleppo, to see if in
Ormus they might keepe any factours, and so traffique in that place, like
as also the Italians do, that is to say, the Venetians which in Ormus, Goa,
and Malacca haue their factours, and traffique there, aswell for stones and
pearles, as for other wares and spices of those countreyes, which from
thence are caried ouer land into Venice. [Sidenote: Iohn Newbery had beene
in Ormus before. Anno. 1581.] One of these English men had bene once before
in the sayd towne of Ormus, and there had taken good information of the
trade, and vpon his aduise and aduertisement, the other were as then come
thither with him, bringing great store of marchandises with them, as
Clothes, Saffron, all kindes of drinking glasses, and Haberdashers wares,
as looking glasses, kniues, and such like stuffe: and to conclude, brought
with them all kinde of small wares that may be deuised. And although those
wares amounted vnto great summes of money, notwithstanding it was but onely
a shadow or colour, thereby to giue no occassion to be mistrusted, or seen
into: for that their principall intent was to buy great quantities of
precious stones, as Diamants, Pearles, Rubies, &c. to the which end they
brought with them a great summe of money and golde, and that very secretly,
not to be deceiued or robbed thereof, or to runne into any danger for the
same. They being thus arriued in Ormus, hired a shoppe, and beganne to sell
their wares: which the Italians perceiuing, whose factours continue there
(as I sayd before) and fearing that those English men finding good vent for
their commodities in that place, would be resident therin, and so dayly
increase, which would be no small losse and hinderance vnto them, did
presently inuent all the subtile meanes they could to hinder them: and to
that end they went vnto the Captaine of Ormus, as then called Don Gonsalo
de Meneses, telling him that there were certaine English men come into
Ormus, that were sent onely to spie the countrey; and sayd further, that
they were heretikes: and therefore they sayd it was conuenient they should
not be suffered so to depart without being examined, and punished as
enemies, to the example of others. The Captaine being a friend vnto the
English men, by reason that one of them which had bene there before, had
giuen him certaine presents, would not be perswaded to trouble them, but
shipped them with all their wares in a shippe that was to saile for Goa,
and sent them to the Viceroy, that he might examine and trie them, as he
thought good: where when they were arriued, they were cast into prison, and
first examined whether they were good Christians or no: and because they
could speake but badde Portugall, onely two of them spake good Dutch, as
hauing bene certaine yeres in the Low countreyes, and there traffiked,
there was a Dutch Iesuite born in the towne of Bruges in Flanders, that had
bene resident in the Indies for the space of thirty yers, sent vnto them,
to vndermine and examine them: wherein they behaued themselues so well,
that they were holden and esteemed for good Catholicke Christians: yet
still suspected, because they were strangers, and specially English men.
The Iesuites still tolde them that they should be sent prisoners into
Portugall, wishing them to leaue off their trade of marchandise, and to
become Iesuites, promising them thereby to defend them from all trouble.
The cause why they sayd so, and perswaded them in that earnest maner, was,
for that the Dutch Iesuite had secretly bene aduertised of great summes of
money which they had about them, and sought to get the same into their
fingers, for that the first vowe and promise they make at their entrance
into their Order, is to procure the welfare of their sayd Order, by what
meanes soeuer it be. But although the English men denied them, and refused
the Order, saying, that they were vnfit for such places, neuerthelesse they
proceeded so farre, that one of them, being a Painter that came with the
other three for company, to see the countreys, and to seeke his fortune,
and was not sent thither by the English marchants, partly for feare, and
partly for want of meanes to relieue himselfe, promised them to become a
Iesuite: and although they knew and well perceiued he was not any of those
that had the treasure, yet because he was a Painter, whereof there are but
few in India, and that they had great need of him to paint their Church,
which otherwise would cost them great charges, to bring one from Portugall,
they were very glad thereof, hoping in time to get the rest of them with
all their money into their fellowship: so that to conclude, they made this
Painter a Iesuite, where he remained certaine dayes, giuing him good store
of worke to doe, and entertaining him with all the fauour and friendship
they could deuise, and all to winne the rest, to be a pray for them: but
the other three continued still in prison, being in great feare, because
they vnderstood no man that came to them, nor any man almost knew what they
sayd: till in the end it was tolde them that certaine Dutch men dwelt in
the Archbishops house, and counsell giuen them to send vnto them, whereat
they much reioyced, and sent to me and an other Dutch man, desiring vs at
once to come and speake with them, which we presently did, and they with
teares in their eyes made complaint vnto vs of their hard vsage, shewing vs
from point to point (as it is sayd before) why they were come into the
countrey, withall desiring vs for Gods cause, if we might by any meanes, to
helpe them, that they might be set at liberty vpon sureties, being ready to
endure what iustice should ordaine for them, saying, that if it were found
contrary, and that they were other then trauelling marchants, and sought to
finde out further benefit by their wares, they would be content to be
punished. With that we departed from them, promising them to do our best:
and in the end we obtained so much of the archbishop, that he went vnto the
Viceroy to deliuer our petition, and perswaded him so well, that he was
content to set them at libertie, and that their goods should be deliuered
vnto them againe, vpon condition they should put in sureties for two
thousand pardawes, not to depart the countrey before other order should be
taken with them. Thereupon they presently found a Citizen of the towne that
was their surety for two thousand pardawes, to whom they payed in hand one
thousand and three hundred pardawes, and because they sayd they had no more
ready money, he gaue them credit, seeing what store of marchandise they
had, whereby at all times if need were, he might be satisfied: and by that
meanes they were deliuered out of prison, and hired themselues an house,
and beganne to set open shoppe: so that they vttered much ware, and were
presently well knowen among all the marchants, because they alwayes
respected gentlemen, specially such as bought their wares, shewing great
courtesie and honour vnto them, whereby they woon much credit, and were
beloued of all men, so that euery man favoured them, and was willing to doe
them pleasure. To vs they shewed great friendship, for whose sake the
Archbishop fauoured them much, and shewed them very good countenance, which
they knew well how to increase, by offering him many presents, although he
would not receiue them, neither would euer take gift or present at any mans
hands. Likewise they behaued themselues so discreetly that no man caried an
euill eye, no, nor an euill thought towards them. Which liked not the
Iesuites, because it hindred them from that they hoped for, so that they
ceased not still by this Dutch Iesuite to put them in feare, that they
should be sent into Portugall to the King, counselling them to yeeld
themselues Iesuits into their Cloister, which if they did, he sayd they
would defend them from all troubles, saying further, that he counselled
them therein as a friend, and one that knew for certaine that it was so
determined by the Viceroyes Priuy councell: which to effect he sayd they
stayed but for shipping that should saile for Portugall, with diuers other
perswasions, to put them in some feare, and so to effect their purpose. The
English men to the contrary, durst not say any thing to them, but answered,
that as yet they would stay a while, and consider thereof, thereby putting
the Iesuites in comfort, as one among them, being the principall of them
(called Iohn Newbery) complained vnto me often times, saying that he knew
not what to say or thinke therein, or which way he might be ridde of those
troubles: but in the end they determined with themselues to depart from
thence, and secretly by meanes of other friendes they imployed their money
in precious stones; which the better to effect, one of them was a Ieweller,
and for the same purpose came with them. Which being concluded among them,
they durst not make knowen to any man, neither did they credite vs so much,
as to shew vs their mindes therein, although they tolde vs all whatsoeuer
they knew. But on a Whitsunday they went abroad to sport themselues about
three miles from Goa, in the mouth of the riuer in a countrey called
Bardes, hauing with them good store of meate and drinke. And because they
should not be suspected, they left their house and shoppe, with some wares
therein vnsolde, in custody of a Dutch boy, by vs prouided for them, that
looked vnto it. This boy was in the house not knowing their intent, and
being in Bardes, they had with them a Patamar, which is one of the Indian
postes, which in the Winter times carieth letters from one place to the
other, whom they had hired to guide them: and because that betweene Bardes
and the firme land there is but a little riuer, in a maner halfe drie, they
passed ouer it on foot, and so trauelled by land, being neuer heard of
againe: but it is thought they arriued in Aleppo, as some say, but they
know not certainely. [Sidenote: The Arabian tongue generall in the East.]
Their greatest hope was that Iohn Newbery could speake the Arabian tongue,
which is vsed in all those countreys, or at the least vnderstood: for it is
very common in all places there abouts, as French with vs. Newes being come
to Goa, there was a great stirre and murmuring among the people, and we
much woondered at it: for many were of opinion that we had giuen them
counsell so to do: and presently their surety seised vpon the goods
remaining, which might amount vnto aboue two hundred pardawes; and with
that and the money he had received of the English men, he went vnto the
Viceroy, and deliuered it vnto him: which the Viceroy hauing receiued
forgaue him the rest. This flight of the English men grieued the Iesuites
most, because they had lost such a praye, which they made sure account of:
whereupon the Dutch Iesuite came to vs to aske vs if we knew thereof,
saying, that if he had suspected so much, he would haue dealt otherwise,
for that he sayd, he once had in his hands of theirs a bagge wherein was
forty thousand veneseanders (ech veneseander being two pardawes) which was
when they were in prison. And that they had alwayes put him in comfort to
accomplish his desire: vpon the which promise he gaue them their money
againe, which otherwise they should not so lightly haue come by, or
peraduenture neuer, as he openly sayd: and in the ende he called them
hereticks, and spies, with a thousand other railing speeches, which he
vttered against them. The English man that was become a Iesuite, hearing
that his companions were gone, and perceiuing that the Iesuites shewed him
not so great fauour, neither vsed him so well as they did at the first,
repented himselfe; and seeing he had not as then made any solemne promise,
and being counselled to leaue the house, and tolde that he could not want a
liuing in the towne, as also that the Iesuites could not keepe him there
without he were willing to stay, so they could not accuse him of any thing,
he tolde them flatly that he had no desire to stay within the Cloister. And
although they vsed all the meanes they could to keepe him there, yet he
would not stay, but hired an house without the Cloister, and opened shoppe,
where he had good store of worke: and in the end married a Mestizos
daughter of the towne, so that he made his account to stay there while he
liued. By this English man I was instructed of all the wayes, trades, and
voyages of the countrey, betweene Aleppo and Ormus, and of all the
ordinances and common customes which they vsually holde during their voyage
ouer the land, as also of the places and townes where they passed. And
since those English mens departures from Goa, there neuer arriued any
strangers, either English or others, by land, in the sayd countreys, but
onely Italians which dayly traffique ouer land, and vse continuall trade
going and comming that way.

       *       *       *       *       *

The voyage of M. Iohn Eldred to Trypolis in Syria by sea, and from thence
  by land and riuer to Babylon and Balsara. 1583.

I departed out of London in the ship called the Tiger, in the company of M.
Iohn Newbery, M. Ralph Fitch, and sixe or seuen other honest marchants vpon
Shroue munday 1583, and arriued in Tripolis of Syria the first day of May
next insuing: at our landing we went on Maying vpon S. Georges Iland, a
place where Christians dying aboord the ships, are woont to be buried. In
this city our English marchants haue a Consull, and our nation abide
together in one house with him, called Fondeghi Ingles, builded of stone,
square, in maner like a Cloister, and euery man hath his seuerall chamber,
as it is the vse of all other Christians of seuerall nations. [Sidenote:
the description of Tripolis in Syria.] This towne standeth vnder a part of
the mountaine of Libanus two English miles distant from the port: on the
side of which port, trending in forme of an halfe Moone, stand fiue blocke
houses or small forts, wherein is some very good artillery, and the forts
are kept with about an hundred Ianisaries. Right before this towne from the
seaward is a banke of mouing sand, which gathereth and increaseth with the
Western winds, in such sort, that, according to an olde prophesie among
them, this banke is like to swallow vp and ouerwhelme the towne: for euery
yere it increaseth and eateth vp many gardens, although they vse all policy
to diminish the same, and to make it firme ground. The city is about the
bignesse of Bristow, and walled about, though the walles be of no great
force. The chiefe strength of the place is in a Citadell, which standeth on
the South side within the walles, and ouerlooketh the whole towne, and is
strongly kept with two hundred Ianisaries and good artillery. [Sidenote:
Store of white silke.] A riuer passeth thorow the midst of the city,
wherewith they water their gardens and mulbery trees, on which there grow
abundance of silke wormes, wherewith they make great quantity of very white
silke, which is the chiefest naturall commodity to be found in and about
this place. This rode is more frequented with Christian marchants, to wit,
Venetians, Genouois, Florentines, Marsilians, Sicilians, Raguses, and
lately with English men, then any other port of the Turks dominions.
[Sidenote: The city of Hammah.] From Tripolis I departed the 14 of May with
a carauan, passing three dayes ouer the ridge of mount Libanus, at the end
whereof we arriued in a city called Hammah, which standeth on a goodly
plaine replenished with corne and cotton wooll. On these mountaines which
we passed grow great quantity of gall trees, which are somewhat like our
okes, but lesser and more crooked: on the best tree a man shall not finde
aboue a pound of galles. This towne of Hammah is fallen and falleth more
and more to decay, and at this day there is scarse one halfe of the wall
standing, which hath bene very strong and faire: but because it cost many
mens liues to win it, the Turke will not haue it repaired; and hath written
in the Arabian tongue ouer the castle gate, which standeth in the midst of
the towne, these words: Cursed be the father and the sonne that shall lay
their hands to the repairing hereof. Refreshing our selues one day here, we
passed forward with camels three dayes more vntill we came to Aleppo, where
we arriued the 21 of May. This is the greatest place of traffique for a dry
towne that is in all those parts: for hither resort Iewes, Tartarians,
Persians, Armenians, Egyptians, Indians, and many sorts of Christians, and
enioy freedome of their consciences, and bring thither many kinds of rich
marchandises. In the middest of this towne also standeth a goodly castle
raised on high, with a garrison of foure or fiue hundred Ianisaries. Within
four miles round about are goodly gardens and vineyards and trees, which
beare goodly fruit neere vnto the riuers side, which is but small; the
walles are about three English miles in compasse, but the suburbs are
almost as much more. The towne is greatly peopled. We departed from thence
with our camels the last day of May with M. Iohn Newbery and his company,
and came to Birrah in three dayes, being a small towne situated vpon the
riuer Euphrates, where it beginneth first to take his name, being here
gathered into one chanell, whereas before it commeth downe in manifolde
branches, and therefore is called by the people of the countrey by a name
which signifieth a thousand heads. Here is plenty of victuals, whereof we
all furnished our selues for a long iourney downe the aforesayd riuer. And
according to the maner of those that trauell downe by water, we prepared a
small barke for the conueyance of our selues and of our goods. [Sidenote:
Euphrates shallow.] These boates are flat bottomed, because the riuer is
shallow in many places: and when men trauell in the moneth of Iuly, August,
and September, the water being then at the lowest, they are constrained to
cary with them a spare boat or two to lighten their owne boates, if they
chance to fall on the sholds. [Eight and twenty days iourney by riuer.] We
were eight and twenty dayes vpon the water betweene Birrah and Felugia,
where we disimbarked our selues and our goods. Euery night after the Sun
setteth, we tie our barke to a stake, go on land to gather sticks, and set
on our pot with rice or brused wheat, and hauing supped, the marchants lie
aboord the barke, and the mariners vpon the shores side as nere as they can
vnto the same. [Sidenote: Arabians vpon the riuer of Euphrates.] In many
places vpon the riuers side we met with troops of Arabians, of whom we
bought milke, butter, egges, and lambs, and gaue them in barter, (for they
care not for money) glasses, combes, corall, amber, to hang about their
armes and necks, and for churned milke we gaue them bread and pomgranat
peeles, wherewith they vse to tanne their goats skinnes which they churne
withall. [Sidenote: The Arabian women weare golde rings in their nostrels.]
Their haire, apparell, and colour are altogether like to those vagabond
Egyptians, which heretofore haue gone about in England. Their women all
without exception weare a great round ring in one of their nostrels, of
golde, siluer, or yron, according to their ability, and about their armes
and smalles of their legs they haue hoops of golde, siiuer or yron. All of
them as wel women and children as men, are very great swimmers, and often
times swimming they brought vs milke to our barke in vessels vpon their
heads. These people are very theeuish, which I prooued to my cost: for they
stole a casket of mine, with things of good value in the same, from vnder
my mans head as he was asleepe: and therefore trauellers keepe good watch
as they passe downe the riuer. [Sidenote: Euphrates described.] Euphrates
at Birrah is about the breadth of the Thames at Lambeth, and in some places
narrower, in some broader: it runneth very swiftly, almost as fast as the
riuer of Trent: it hath diuers sorts of fish in it, but all are scaled,
some as bigge as salmons, like barbils. We landed at Felugia the eight and
twentieth of Iune, where we made our abode seuen dayes, for lacke of camels
to cary our goods to Babylon: the heat at that time of the yere is such in
those parts, that men are loth to let out their camels to trauell. This
Felugia is a village of some hundred houses, and a place appointed for
discharging of such goods as come downe the riuer: the inhabitants are
Arabians. Not finding camels here, we were constrained to vnlade our goods,
and hired an hundred asses to cary our marchandises onely to New Babylon
ouera short desert, in crossing whereof we spent eighteene houres
trauelling by night, and part of the morning, to auoid the great heat.

[Sidenote: The ruines of olde Babylon.] In this place which we crossed
ouer, stood the olde mighty city of Babylon, many olde ruines whereof are
easily to be seene by day-light, which I Iohn Eldred haue often beheld at
my good leasure, hauing made three voyages betweene the new city of Babylon
and Aleppo ouer this desert. Here also are yet standing the ruines of the
olde tower of Babel, which being vpon a plaine ground seemeth a farre off
very great, but the nerer you come to it, the lesser and lesser it
appeareth; sundry times I haue gone thither to see it, and found the
remnants yet standing aboue a quarter of a mile in compasse, and almost as
high as the stone worke of Pauls steeple in London, but it sheweth much
bigger. The bricks remaining in this most ancient monument be halfe a yard
thicke, and three quarters of a yard long, being dried in the Sunne onely,
and betweene euery course of bricks there lieth a course of mattes made of
canes, which remaine sound and not perished, as though they had bene layed
within one yeere. The city of New Babylon ioineth vpon the aforesayd small
desert where the Olde city was, and the riuer of Tigris runneth close vnder
the wall, and they may if they will open a sluce, and let the water of the
same runne round about the towne. It is aboue two English miles in
compasse, and the inhabitants generally speake three languages, to wit, the
Persian, Arabian and Turkish Tongues: the people are of the Spaniards
complexion: and the women generally weare in one of the gristles of their
noses a ring like a wedding ring, but somewhat greater, with a pearle and a
Turkish stone set therein: and this they do be they neuer so poore.

[Sidenote: Rafts borne vpon bladders of goat skins.] This is a place of
very great traffique, and a very great thorowfare from the East Indies to
Aleppo. The towne is very well furnished with victuals which come downe the
riuer of Tigris from Mosul which was called Niniuie in olde time. They
bring these victuals and diuers sorts of marchandises vpon rafts, borne
vpon goats skins blowenvp full of wind in maner of bladders. And when they
haue discharged their goods, they sel the rafts for fire, and let the wind
out of their goats skins, and cary them home againe vpon their asses by
land, to make other voyages downe the riuer. The building here is most of
bricke dried in the Sun, and very litle or no stone is to be found: their
houses are all flat-roofed and low. [Sidenote: Seldome rain.] They haue no
raine for eight moneths together, nor almost any clouds in the skie night
nor day. Their Winter is in Nouember, December, Ianuary and February, which
is as warme as our Summer in England in a maner. This I know by good
experience, because my abode at seuerall times in this city of Babylon hath
bene at the least the space of two yeeres. As we come to the city, we passe
ouer the riuer of Tigris on a great bridge made with boats chained together
with two mighty chaines of yron. [Sidenote: Eight and twenty dayes iourney
more by riuer, from Babylon to Balsara.] From thence we departed in flat
bottomed barks more strong and greater then those of Euphrates, and were
eight and twenty dayes also in passing downe this riuer to Balsara, but we
might haue done it in eighteene or less, if the water had bene higher. Vpon
the waters side stand by the way diuer townes resembling much the names of
the olde prophets: the first towne they call Ozeah, and another Zecchiah.
Before we come to Balsara by one dayes iourney, the two riuers of Tigris
and Euphrates meet, and there standeth a castle called Curna, kept by the
Turks, where all marchants pay a small custome. Here the two riuers ioyned
together begin to be eight or nine miles broad: here also it beginneth to
ebbe and flow, and the water ouerflowing maketh the countrey all about very
fertile of corne, rice, pulse, and dates. The towne of Balsara is a mile
and an halfe in circuit: all the buildings, castle and wals, are made of
bricke, dried in the Sun. The Turke hath here fiue hundred Ianisaries,
besides other souldiers continually in garison and pay, but his chiefe
strength is of gallies which are about fiue and twenty or thirty very faire
and furnished with goodly ordinance. To this port of Balsara come monethly
diuers ships from Ormuz, laden with all sorts of Indian marchandise, as
spices, drugs, Indico and Calecut cloth. These ships are vsually from forty
to threescore tunnes, hauing their planks sowed together with corde made of
the barke of Date trees, and in stead of Occam they vse the shiuerings of
the barke of the sayd trees, and of the same they also make their tackling.
[Sidenote: Ships made without yron in the Persian gulfe.] They haue no kind
of yron worke belonging to these vessels, saue only their ankers. From this
place six dayes sailing downe the gulfe, they goe to a place called Baharem
in the mid way to Ormus: there they fish for pearles foure moneths in the
yeere, to wit, in Iune, Iuly, August, and September. [Sidenote: Zelabdim
Echebar king of Cambaia.] My abode in Balsara was iust sixe moneths, during
which time I receiued diuers letters from M. Iohn Newberry from Ormus, who
as he passed that way with her Maiesties letters to Zelabdim Echebar king
of Cambaia, and vnto the mighty emperour of China, was traiterously there
arrested, and all his company, by the Portugals, and afterward sent
prisoner to Goa; where after a long and cruell imprisonmeat, he and his
companions were deliuered vpon sureties, not to depart the towne without
leaue, at the sute of one father Thomas Steuens, an English religious man
which they found there: but shortly after three of them escaped, whereof
one, to wit, M. Ralph Fitch, is since come into England. The fourth, which
was a painter called Iohn Story, became religious in the college of S. Paul
in Goa, as we vnderstood by their letters. [Sidenote: He returneth from
Balsara to Aleppo.] I and my companion William Shales hauing dispatched our
businesse at Balsara, imbarked our selues in company of seuenty barks all
laden with marchandise, hauing euery barke 14. men to draw them, like our
Westerne bargemen on the Thames, and we were forty foure dayes comming vp
against the streame to Babylon, [Sidenote: Their provision of victuals.]
where arriuing and paying our custome, we with all other sorts of marchants
bought vs camels, hired vs men to lade and driue them, furnished our selues
with rice, butter, bisket, hony made of dates, onions and dates: and euery
marchant bought a proportion of liue muttons, and hired certaine shepheards
to driue them with vs: we also bought vs tents to lie in and to put our
goods under: [Sidenote: A Carauan of foure thousand Camels.] and in this
our carauan were foure thousand camels laden with spices, and other rich
marchandises. These camels will liue very well two or three dayes without
water: their feeding is on thistles, wormewood, magdalene, and other strong
weeds which they finde vpon the way. The gouernment and deciding of all
quarels and dueties to be payed, the whole carauan commiteth to one
speciall rich marchant of the company, of whose honesty they conceiue best.
In passing from Babylon to Aleppo, we spent forty dayes, trauelling twenty,
or foure and twenty miles a day, resting ourselues commonly from two of the
clocke in the afternoone, vntill three in the morning, at which time we
begin to take our iourney. Eight dayes iourney from Babylon toward Aleppo,
neere vnto a towne called Heit, as we crosse the riuer Euphrates by boates,
about 3. miles from the town there is a valley wherein are many springs
throwing out abundantly at great mouths, a kinde of blacke substance like
vnto tarre, which serueth all the countrey to make stanch their barkes and
boates: euery one of these springs maketh a noise like vnto a Smiths forge
in the blowing and puffing out of this matter, which neuer ceaseth night
nor day, and the noise may be heard a mile off continually. This vale
swalloweth vp all heauie things that come vpon it. The people of the
countrey call it in their language Babil gehenham, that is to say, Hell
doore. As we passed through these deserts, we saw certaine wild beasts, as
wild asses all white, Roebucks, wolfes, leopards, foxes, and many hares,
whereof we chased and killed many. Aborise the king of the wandring
Arabians in these deserts hath a dutie of 40. s. sterling, vpon euery
Camels lode, which he sendeth his officers to receiue of the Carauans, and
in consideration hereof, he taketh vpon him to conduct the sayd Carauans if
they need his helpe, and to defend them against certaine prowling thieues.
[Sidenote: William Barret Consul in Aleppo.] I and my companion William
Shales came to Aleppo with the Carauan the eleuenth of Iune, 1584. where we
were ioyfully receiued 20. miles distant from the towne by M. William
Barret our Consull, accompanied with his people and Ianissaries, who fell
sicke immediately and departed this life within 8. dayes after, and elected
before his death M. Anthonie Bate Consul of our English nation in his
place, who laudably supplied the same roome 3. yeeres. [Sidenote: Two
voyages more made to Babylon.] In which meane time I made two voyages more
vnto Babylon, and returned by the way aforesayd, ouer the deserts of
Arabia. And afterwards, as one desirous to see other parts of the countrey,
I went from Aleppo to Antioch, which is thence 60. English miles, and from
thence went downe to Tripolis, where going aboord a small vessell, I
arriued at Ioppe, and trauelled to Rama, Lycia, Gaza, Ierusalem, Bethleem,
to the riuer of Iordan, and the sea or lake of Zodome, and returned backe
to Ioppe, and from thence by sea to Tripolis, of which places because many
others haue published large discourses, I surcease to write. Within few
dayes after imbarking my selfe at Tripolis the 22. of December, I arriued
(God be thanked) in safety here in the riuer of Thames with diuers English
marchants, the 26. of March, 1588, in the Hercules of London, which was the
richest ship of English marchants goods that euer was knowen to come into
this realme.

       *       *       *       *       *

The second letters Patents graunted by the Queenes Maiestie to the Right
  worshipfull companie of the English Marchants for the Leuant, the seuenth
  of Ianuarie 1592.

Elizabeth by the grace of God Queene of England, France, and Irelande,
defender of the faith &c. To all our Officers, ministers and subiects, and
to all other people aswell within this our Realme of England, as else where
vnder our obeysance and iurisdiction or otherwise vnto whom these our
letters shal be seene, shewed, or read greeting.

Where our well beloued subiects Edward Osborne knight Alderman of our citie
of London, William Hareborne Esquire, and Richard Staper of our saide citie
Marchant, haue by great aduenture and industrie with their great cost and
charges by the space of sundry late yeeres trauelled, and caused trauell to
be taken aswell by secrete and good meanes, as by daungerous wayes and
passages both by lande and sea to finde out and set open a trade of
marchandize and traffike into the landes, Ilandes, Dominions, and
territories of the great Turke, commonly called the Grand Signior, not
before that time in the memorie of any man now liuing knowen to be commonly
vsed and frequented by way of marchandize by any the marchantes or other
subiects of vs or our progenitors: And also haue by their like good meanes
and industrie and great charges procured of the sayde Grand Signior in our
name, amitie, safetie and freedome for trade and traffike of marchandize to
be vsed and continued by our subiects within his sayd dominions, whereby we
perceiue and finde that both many good actions haue beene done and
performed, and hereafter are likely continually to be done and performed
for the peace of Christendome: Namely by the reliefe and discharge of many
Christians which haue beene, and which hereafter may happen to be in
thraldome and bondage vnder the sayde Grand Signior and his vassals or
subiects. And also good and profitable vent and vtterance of the
commodities of our Realme, and sundrie other great benefites to the
aduancement of our honour and dignitie Royall, the maintenance of our
Nauie, the encrease of our customes, and the reuenues of our Crowne, and
generally the great wealth of our whole Realme.

And whereas we are enformed of the sayd Edward Osborne knight, William
Hareborne and Richard Staper, that George Barne, Richard Martine, Iohn
Harte knights, and other marchants of our sayd Citie of London haue by the
space of eight or nine yeeres past ioyned themselues in companie, trade and
traffike with them the sayd Edward Osborne knight, William Hareborne and
Richard Staper, into the sayde dominions of the sayd great Turke, to the
furtherance thereof and the good of the Realme.

And whereas further it is made knowen vnto vs, that within fewe yeeres how
past our louing and good subjects, Thomas Cordall, Edward Holmeden, William
Garraway and Paul Banning, and sundry other merchants of our said Citie of
London, haue likewise at their great costes and charges, builded and
furnished diuerse good and seruiceable shippes and therewith to their like
costs and charges haue traded and frequented, and from time to time doe
trade and frequent and traffike by sea with the commodities of our Realme
to Venice, Zante, Candie, and Zephalonia, and other the dominions of the
Segniorie and State of Venice, and thereby haue made and mainteyned, and
doe make and continually maintains diuers good shippes with mariners
skilfull and fitte and necessarie for our seruice: and doe vent out of our
Realme into those partes diuerse commodities of our Realme, and returne
hither into our sayde Realme many good and necessarie commodities for the
common wealth thereof: All which traffike, as well inward as outward vntill
it hath beene otherwise brought to passe by the sayde endeuours, costs, and
charges of our sayde subiects, was in effect by our subiectes wholy
discontinued.

Knowe yee, that hereupon we greatly tendring the wealth of our people and
the encouragement of them and other our louing subiects in their good
enterprises for the aduancement of lawfull traffike to the benefite of our
common wealth, haue of our speciall grace, certaine knowledge, and meere
motion giuen and graunted, and by these presents for vs, our heyres, and
successours, doe giue and graunt vnto our sayd trustie and welbeloued
subiectes Edwarde Orborne Knight, George Barne Knight, George Bonde
knight, Richard Martine knight, Iohn Harte knight, Iohn Hawkins knight,
William Massam, Iohn Spencer, Richard Saltonstall, Nicholas Mosley Alderman
of our sayde Citie of London, William Hareborne, Edwarde Barton, William
Borrough Esquires, Richard Staper, Thomas Cordall, Henrie Paruis, Thomas
Laurence, Edwarde Holmeden, William Garraway, Robert Dowe, Paul Banning,
Roger Clarke, Henrie Anderson, Robert Offley, Philip Grimes, Andrewe
Banning, Iames Staper, Robert Sadler, Leonarde Power, George Salter,
Nicholas Leate, Iohn Eldred, William Shales, Richard May, William Wilkes,
Andrewe Fones, Arthur Iackson, Edmund Ansell, Ralph Ashley, Thomas
Farrington, Roberte Sandie, Thomas Garraway, Edwarde Lethlande, Thomas
Dalkins, Thomas Norden, Robert Bate, Edward Sadler, Richard Darsall,
Richard Martine Iunior, Ralph Fitch, Nicholas Pearde, Thomas Simons, and
Francis Dorrington, [Marginal note: The marchants aboue named be made a
fellowship and companie for 12 yeeres by the name of the Gouernor and
companie of the marchants of the Leuant.] that they and euery of them by
the name of Gouernour and company of Marchants of the Leuant shall from
hence foorth for the terme of twelue yeeres next ensuing the date hereof
bee one bodie, fellowshippe and companie of themselues, both in deede and
in name: And them by the name of Gouernour and companie of marchantes of
the Leuant wee doe ordayne, incorporate, name, and declare by these
presentes, and that the same fellowshippe and companie from hence foorth
shall and may haue one Gouernour. [Sidenote: Sir Edward Osborne appointed
the first Gouernour.] And in consideration that the sayde Edwarde Osborne
Knight hath beene of the chiefe setters foorth and actors in the opening
and putting in practise of the sayde trade to the dominions of the sayde
Grand Signor: Wee doe therefore specially make, ordaine, and constitute the
sayde Edwarde Osborne Knight, to bee nowe Gouernour during the time of one
whole yeere nowe next following, if hee so long shall liue: and after the
expiration of the sayde yeere, or decease of the sayde Edward Osborne the
choyse of the next Gouernour, and so of euery Gouernour from time to time
during the sayde terme of twelue yeeres to be at the election of the sayde
fellowshippe or companie of marchantes of the Leuant or the more part of
them yeerely to be chosen, [Sidenote: A priuiledge for the East Indies.]
and that they the sayde Sir Edward Osborne, and all the residue of the
sayde fellowshippe or companie of Marchantes of the Leuant and euerie of
them, and all the sonnes of them and of euery of them, and all such their
apprentises and seruants of them and of euery of them, which haue beene or
hereafter shall be imployed in the sayde trade by the space of foure yeeres
or vpwardes by themselues, their seruantes, factors or deputies, shall and
may by the space of twelue yeeres from the day of the date of these our
letters Patents freely traffike, and vse the trade of Marchandize as well
by sea as by lande into and from the dominions of the sayde Grand Signor,
and into and from Venice, Zante, Candie and Zephalonia, and other the
dominions of the Signiorie and State of Venice, and also by lande through
the Countries of the sayde Grand Signor into and from the East India,
lately discouered by John Newberie, Ralph Fitch, William Leech, and Iames
Storie, sent with our letters to that purpose at the proper costs and
charge of the sayde Marchants or some of them: and into and from euerie of
them in such order, manner, forme, libertie and condition fo all intentes
and purposes as shall be betweene them of the sayde fellowshippe or
companie of Marchantes of the Leuant or the more part of them for the time
being limited and agreed, and not otherwise, without any molestation,
impeachment, or disturbance; any lawe, statute, vsage, or diuersitie of
Religion or faith, or any other cause or matter whatsoeuer to the contrarie
notwithstanding.

And that the sayde Governour and companie of Marchantes of the Leuant, or
the greater part of them for the better gouernement of the sayde
fellowshippe and companie, shall and may within fortie dayes next and
immediatly following after the date hereof, and so from hence foorth
yeerely during the continuance of this our graunt, assemble themselues in
some conuenient place, and that they or the greater parte of them being so
assembled, shall and may elect, ordaine, nominate, and appoint twelue
discreete and honest persons of the sayde companie to be assistants to the
sayde Gouernour, and to continue in the sayde office of assistants, vntill
they shall die or bee remoued by the sayde Gouernour and companie or the
greater part of them. And if it happen the sayde assistantes or any of them
to die, or be remooued from their sayde office at anie time during the
continuance of this our graunt: that then and so often it shall and may bee
lawfull to and for the sayde Gouernour and companie of marchantes of the
Leuant, or the greater part of them to elect and chuse one or more other
persons of the sayd companie into the place or places of euery such person
or persons so dying or happening to be remooued, as is aforesayde. And wee
will and ordaine that the same person or persons so as is aforesaide to be
elected shall be of the sayd number of assistants of the sayde companie.
And this to be done so often as the case shall so require. And that it
shall and may be lawfull to and for the sayde Edwarde Orborne Knight,
George Barne Knight, George Bonde knight, Richard Martine knight, Iohn Hart
knight, Iohn Hawkins knight, William Massam, Iohn Spencer, Richard
Saltonstall, Nicholas Mosley, William Hareborne, Edwarde Barton, William
Borrough, Richard Staper, Thomas Cordall, Henrie Paruis, Thomas Laurence,
Edwarde Holmeden, William Garraway, Robert Dowe, Paul Banning, Roger
Clarke, Henrie Anderson, Robert Offley, Philip Grimes, Andrewe Banning,
Iames Staper, Robert Sadler, Leonarde Power, George Salter, Nicholas Leate,
John Eldred, William Shales, Richard May, William Wilkes, Andrewe Fones,
Arthur Iackson, Edmund Ansell, Ralph Ashley, Thomas Farrington, Robert
Sandie, Thomas Garraway, Edwarde Lethlande, Thomas Dalkins, Thomas Norden,
Robert Bate, Edward Sadler, Richard Darsall, Richard Martine Iunior, Ralph
Fitch, Nicholas Pearde, Thomas Simons, and Francis Dorrington aforesayde,
or any of them to assemble themselues for or about any the matters, causes
or affaires or businesses of the sayde trade in any place or places for the
same conuenient from time to time during the sayde terme of twelue yeeres
within our dominions or else where. And that also it shall and may be
lawfull for them or the more part of them to make, ordaine and constitute
reasonable lawes and orders for the good gouernment of the sayde companie,
and for the better advancement and continuance of the sayde trade and
traffike: the same lawes and ordinances not being contrarie or repugnant to
the lawes, statutes or customes of our Realme: And the same lawes and
ordinances so made to put in vse, and execute accordingly, and at their
pleasures to reuoke and alter the same lawes and ordinances or any of them
as occasion shall require.

And we doe also for vs, our heyres and successors of our speciall grace,
certaine knowledge, and meere motion graunt to and with the sayd Gouernour
and companie of marchantes of the Leuant, that when and as often at any
time during the sayde terme and space of twelue yeeres as any custome,
pondage, subsidie or other duetie shall be due and payable vnto vs, our
heires, or successors for any goods or marchandize whatsoeuer, to be
carried or transported out of this our port of London into any the
dominions aforesayde, or out of or from any the sayde dominions vnto our
sayde port of London, that our Customers, and all other our officers for
receites of custome, pondage, subsidie or other duetie vnto whom it shall
appertaine, shall vpon the request of the sayde Gouernour for the time
being, giue vnto the sayde companie three monethes time for the payment of
the one halfe, and other three monethes for the payment of the other halfe
of their sayde custome, pondage, or other subsidie or duetie for the same,
receiuing good and sufficient bonde and securitie to our vse for the
payment of the same accordingly. And vpon receipt of the sayde bonde to
giue them out their cockets or other warrants to lade out and receiue in
the same their goods by vertue hereof without any disturbance. And that
also as often as at any time during the sayde terme of twelue yeeres any
goods or marchandize of any of the sayde companie laden from this our port
of London in any the dominions beforesayde shall happen to miscarie before
their safe discharge in the partes for and to the which they be sent: That
then and so often so much custome, pondage, and other subsidie as they
answered vs for the same, shall after due proofe made before the Treasurour
of England for the time being of the sayde losse, and the iust quantitie
thereof, be by the vertue hereof allowed vnto them, by warrant of the sayde
Treasurour to the sayde Customers in the next marchandize that they shall
or may shippe for those partes, according to the true rates of the
customes, pondage, or subsidies heretofore payde for the goods so lost or
any part or parcell thereof.

And for that the sayde companie are like continually to bring into this our
Realme a much greater quantitie of forren commodities from the forren
Countreyes, places, or territories aforesaide, then here can be spent for
the necessarie vse of the same, which of necessitie must be transported
into other countreyes, and there vented, we for vs, our heires and
successors of our speciall grace, certaine knowledge, and meere motion doe
graunt to and with the sayd Gouernour and companie that at all times from
time to time during the space of thirteene moneths next after the discharge
of any the sayde goods so brought in, and the subsidies, pondage, customes
and other duties for the same being before hande payde or compounded for as
aforesayd, it shall be lawfull for them or any of them or any other person
or persons whatsoeuer being naturall subiects of the Realme which may or
shall buy the same of them or any of them to transport the same in English
bottomes freely out of this Realme without payment of any further custome,
pondage, or other subsidie to vs, our heires or successors for the same,
whereof the sayde subsidies, pondage, or customes or other duties shall be
so formerly payde and compounded for, as aforesayd, and so proued. And the
sayd customer by vertue hereof shall vpon due and sufficient proofe thereof
made in the custome house giue them sufficient cocket or certificate for
the safe passing out thereof accordingly. And to the ende no deceipt be
vsed herein to vs our heires, and successors, certificate shall be brought
from our collector of custome inwardes to our customer outwardes that the
sayd marchandizes haue within the time limited answered their due custome,
subsidie, pondage and other duties for the same inwards.

And furthermore we of our ample and aboundant grace, meere motion, and
certaine knowledge haue graunted, and by these presents for vs our heyres
and successours doe graunt vnto the said Gouernours and companie of
marchantes of the Leuant, that they and such onely as be and shall be of
that companie, shall for the sayd terme of twelue yeeres haue, vse, and
enioy the whole and onely trade and traffike, and the whole entire and
onely libertie, vse, and priuilege of trading and traffiking, and vsing
feate of marchandise by and through the Leuant seas otherwise called the
Mediterran seas into and from the sayd dominions of the Grand Signor, and
dominions of the state of Venice; and by and through the sayd Grand Signors
dominions to and from such other places in the East Indies discouered as
aforesayd. And that they the sayd Gouernour and companie of marchants of
the Leuant and euery particular and seuerall person of that companie their
and euery one of their servants, factors, and deputies shall haue full and
free authoritie, libertie, facultie, licence, and power to trade and
trafficke by and through the sayde Leuant seas into and from all and euery
the sayd dominions of the sayde Grand Signor, and the dominions of the
state of Venice, and the sayde Indies, and into and from all places where
by occasion of the sayd trade they shall happen to arriue or come, whither
they be Christians, Turkes, Gentiles, or others: And by and through the
sayd Leuant seas into and from all other seas, riuers, portes, regions,
territories, dominions, coastes and places with their ships, barkes,
pinases and other vessels, and with such mariners and men as they will
leade or haue with them, or sende for the sayde trade as they shall thinke
good at their owne costes and expenses.

And for that the shippes sayling into the sayde Countreyes must take their
due and proper times to proceede in these voyages, which otherwise as we
well perceiue cannot be performed in the rest of the yeere following:
Therefore we of our speciall grace, certaine knowledge, and meere motion,
for vs, our heyres and successors doe graunt to and with the sayd Gouernour
and companie of Marchantes of the Leuant, that foure good shippes well
furnished with ordinance and other munition for their defence, and two
hundred mariners English men to guide and sayle in the same four shippes at
all times during the sayde twelue yeeres shall quietly bee permitted and
suffered to depart and goe in the sayde voyages, according to the purport
of these presents, without any stay or contradiction by vs, our heyres and
successors, or by the Lorde high Admirall or any other officer or subject
of vs, our heires or successours in any wise: Any restraint, lawe, statute,
vsage or matter whatsoeuer to the contrarie notwithstanding.

Prouided neuerthelesse, that if wee shall at any time within the sayde
twelue yeeres haue iust cause to arme our Nauie in warrelike manner in
defence of our Realme, or for offence of our enemies: and that it shall be
founde needefull and conuenient for vs to ioyne to our Nauie the shippes of
our subjects to be also armed for warres to such number as cannot bee
supplied if the sayd foure shippes should be permitted to depart as aboue
is mentioned; then vpon knowledge giuen by vs or our Admirall to the sayde
Gouernour or companie about the fifteenth day of the moneth of March, or
three moneths before the saide companie shall beginne to make readie the
same foure shippes that we may not spare the sayd foure ships and the
marriners requisite for them to be out of our Realme during the time that
our Nauie shal be vpon the seas, that then the sayde companie shall
forbeare to send such foure shippes for their trade of marchandise vntill
that we shall retake our sayd Nauie from the sayd service.

And further our will and pleasure is, and wee doe by these presentes graunt
that it shall be lawfull to and for the sayd Gouernour and companie of
Marchantes of the Leuant to haue and vse in and about the affaires of the
sayde companie a common seale for matters concerning the sayde companie and
trade. And that also it shall be lawfull for the Marchants, Mariners, and
Sea men, which shall be vsed and imployed in the sayde trade and voyage to
set and place in the toppes of their ships or other vessels the Armes of
England with the redde-crosse in white ouer the same as heretofore they
haue vsed.

And we of our further Royall fauour and of our especiall grace, certaine
knowledge, and meere motion haue graunted and by these presents for vs, our
heyres and successors doe graunt to the sayd Gouernour and companie of
Marchants of the Leuant, that the sayde landes, territories, and dominions
of the sayde Grand Signor, or the dominions of the Signiorie of Venice, or
any of them within the sayde Leuant or Mediterran seas shall not be
visited, frequented, or haunted by the sayde Leuant sea by way of
marchandize by any other our subiects during the saide terme of twelue
yeeres contrarie to the true meaning of these presentes. And by vertue of
our prerogatiue Royall, which wee will not in that behalfe haue argued or
brought in question, wee straightly charge, commaunde and prohibite for vs,
our heyres and successours all our subiects of what degree or qualitie
soeuer they bee, that none of them directly or indirectly doe visite,
haunt, frequent, trade, traffike or aduenture by way of marchandise into or
from any of the sayd dominions of the sayd Grand Signor, or the dominions
of the saide Segniorie of Venice, by or through the sayde Leuant sea other
then the sayd Gouernour and companie of marchants of the Leuant, and such
particular persons as be or shall be of that companie, their factors,
agents, seruants and assignes. And further for that wee plainely
vnderstande that the States and Gouerours of the citie and Segniorie of
Venice haue of late time set and raysed a newe impost and charge ouer and
besides their auncient impost, custome, and charge of and vpon all manner
of marchandize of our Realme brought into their dominions, and also of and
vpon all marchandise caried or laden from their sayd Countrey or dominions
by our subiectes or in the ships or bottoms of any of our subiectes to the
great and intollerable charge and hinderance of our sayd subiects trading
thither, wee therefore minding the redresse thereof, doe also by these
presents for vs, our heires and successors further straightly prohibite and
forbid not onely the subiects of the sayde State and Segniorie of Venice,
but also of all other Nations or Countries whatsoeuer other then the sayd
Gouernour and companie of marchants of the Leuant, and such onely as be or
shall be of that companie, their factors, agents, seruantes, and assignes:
That they or any of them during the sayde terme of twelue yeeres, shall
bring or cause to be brought into this our Realme of Englande, or any part
thereof anie manner of small fruites called corrants, being the raysins of
Corinth, or wine of Candie, vnlesse it be by and with the licence, consent,
and agreement of the sayde Gouernour and companie in writing vnder their
sayd common seale first had and obteyned vpon paine vnto euery such person
and persons that shall trade and traffike into any the sayde dominions of
the State and Segniorie of Venice by sea, or that shall bring or cause to
be brought into our saide Realme any of the said corrants being the raysins
of Corinth, or wines of Candia, other then the sayd companie in paine of
our indignation, and of forfaiture and losse as well of the shippe and
ships with the furniture thereof, as also of the goods, marchandize, and
thinges whatsoeuer they be of those which shall attempt or presume to
commit or doe any matter or thing contrarie to the prohibition aforesayd.
The one half of all the saide forfeitures to be to vs, our heires and
successours, and the other halfe of all and euery the sayde forfeitures we
doe by these presents, of our speciall grace, certaine knowledge, and meere
motion clearely and wholie for vs, our heires and successors, giue and
graunt vnto the saide Gouernour and companie of marchantes of the Leuant.

And further all and euery the sayde offendours for their sayde contempt to
suffer imprisonment during our pleasures, and such other punishment as to
vs for so high a contempt shall seeme meete and conuenient, and not to be
in any wise deliuered vntill they and euery of them shall be come bounde
vnto the sayd Gouernour for the time being in the summe of one thousand
poundes or lesse at no time, then after to sayle or traffike by sea into
any the dominions aforesaide, or to bring or cause to be brought from any
the places aforesayde any corrants, raysins of Corinth, or wines of Candia
contrarie to our expresse commaundement in that behalfe herein set downe
and published.

Prouided alwayes, and our expresse will is notwithstanding the premisses
that if our sayde subiects shall at any time hereafter be recompensed of
and for all such newe impostes and charges as they and euery of them shall
pay, and likewise be freely discharged of and from the payment of all
manner of newe imposte or taxe for any of their marchandise which they
hereafter shall bring into or from any the dominions of the sayde State or
Segniorie of Venice, and from all bondes and other assurances by them or
any of them to be made for or in that behalfe, that then immediatly from
and after such recompence and discharge made as aforesayde our sayde
prohibition and restraint in these presentes mentioned, shall not be of any
strength or force against the sayde Citie or State of Venice, or any the
subiects thereof, but for and during such time onely and in such case when
hereafter the sayde State of Venice shall againe beginne to taxe or leuie
any manner of newe imposte within the sayde dominions vpon any the goods or
marchandizes of our sayde subiects heereafter to be brought into any the
dominions of the said State or Segniorie of Venice. Any thing in these our
letters Patents contayned to the contrarie thereof in any wise
notwithstanding.

And further wee straightly charge and commaunde, and by these presentes
prohibite all and singular Customers and Collectors of our Customes,
pondage, and subsidies, and all other Officers within our porte and Citie
of London and else where, to whom it shall appertaine and euery of them,
That they or any of them by themselues, their clarkes, or substitutes shall
not receiue or take, or suffer to be receiued or taken for vs in our name,
or to our vse, or in the name, or vnto the vse of our heires or successors
of any person or persons, any summe or summes of money, or other
consideration during the sayde terme of twelue yeeres for any custome,
pondage, taxe or subsidie of any corrants, raysins of Corinth, or wines of
Candie aforesayd saue onely of and in the name of the sayde Gouernour and
companie of marchantes of the Leuant, or of some of that companie without
the consent of the sayde Gouernour and companie in writing vnder their sayd
common seale, first had and obteyned, and vnto them shewed for the
testifying their sayd consent. And for the better and more sure obseruation
thereof wee will and graunt for vs, our heires or successors by these
presentes, that our Treasurour and Barons of the Exchequer for the time
being by force of these presentes, and the inrollment thereof in the sayde
Court of our Exchequour, at all and euery time and times during the sayde
terme of twelue yeeres, at and vpon the request of the sayde Gouernour and
companie, their Attourney or Attourneys, Deputies or assignes, shall and
may make and direct vnder the seale of the sayde Court one or more
sufficient writte or writtes close or patent, vnto euery or any of the sayd
Customers, or other Officers to whom it shall appertaine, commaunding them
and euery of them thereby, that neither they nor any of them at any time or
times during the sayd space of twelue yeeres shall take entrie of any
corants, raisins of Corinth, or wines of Candia, or take or make any
agreement for any custome, pondage, or other subsidie for any of the sayd
corants, raisins of Corinth, or wines of Candie, with any person or persons
whatsoeuer, other then with, or in the name and by the priuitie of the sayd
gouernour and company or some of the same company.

And further of our special grace, certaine knowledge, and meere motion we
haue condescended and graunted, and by these presents for vs our heires and
successours doe condescend and graunt to the sayd Gouernour and company of
merchants of Leuant, that wee, our heires and successours, during the sayd
terme, will not graunt libertie, licence, or power to any person or persons
whatsoeuer contrary to the tenour of these our letters patents, to saile,
passe, trade, or traffique by the sayd Leuant Sea, into, or from the sayde
dominions of the sayd Grand Signior or the dominions of the State of Venice
or any of them, contrary to the true meaning of these presents, without the
consent of the sayd Gouernour and Companie or the most part of them.

And whereas Henry Farrington and Henry Hewet haue not yet assented to bee
incorporated into the sayd societie of Gouernour and companie of marchants
of Leuant, neuerthelesse sithence, as we be informed, they haue bene
traders that way heretofore; our will and pleasure is, and we doe hereby
expressely commaund and charge that if it happen at any time within two
moneths next following after the date hereof, the sayd Henry Farrington and
Henry Hewet or either of them, do submit themselues to be of the sayd
companie, and doe giue such assurance as the sayd Gouernour and companie,
or the more part of them shall allow of, to beare, pay, and performe such
orders, constitutions, paiments and contributions, as other of the sayd
company shall be ordered to beare, pay, and performe, that then euery of
the sayd Henry Farrington and Henry Hewet so doing and submitting himselfe,
shall vpon his or their request vnto the sayd Gouernour bee admitted into
the sayd companie and corporation of Gouernour and companie of marchants of
Leuant, and haue and enioy the same, and as great liberties, priuileges,
and preheminences, as the rest of the sayde corporation or companie may, or
ought to haue by vertue of this our graunt. Any thing in these presents
contained to the contrary notwithstanding.

And our will and pleasure is, and hereby wee doe also ordaine that it shall
and may bee lawfull, to, and for the sayde Gouernour and company of
marchants of Leuant or the more part of them, to admit into, and to be of
the sayd companie, any such as haue bene or shall bee employed as seruants,
factors, or agents in the trade of marchandise by the sayd Leuant seas,
into any the countreys, dominions or territories of the sayd Grand Signior
or Signiorie or State of Venice, according as they or the most part of them
shall thinke requisite.

And where Anthony Ratcliffe, Steuen Some, and Robert Brooke Aldermen of the
saide Citie of London, Simon Laurence, Iohn Wattes, Iohn Newton, Thomas
Middleton, Robert Coxe, Iohn Blunt, Charles Faith, Thomas Barnes, Alexander
Dansey, Richard Aldworth, Henry Cowlthirste, Caesar Doffie, Martine Bonde,
Oliuer Stile and Nicholas Stile Marchants of London for their abilities and
sufficiencies haue bene thought fit to be also of the sayd Company of the
saide gouernour and Company of Marchants of Leuant: Our will and pleasure
and expresse commaundement is, and wee doe hereby establish and ordeine,
that euery such of the same Anthony Radcliffe, Steuen Some, Robert Brooke,
Simon Laurence, Iohn Wattes, Iohn Newton, Thomas Midleton, Robert Coxe,
Iohn Blunt, Charles Faith, Thomas Barnes, Alexander Dansey, Richard
Aldworth, Henry Cowlthirste, Caesar Doffie, Martine Bonde, Oliuer Style, and
Nicholas Style, as shall pay vnto the saide Gouernour and company of
Marchants of Leuante the summe of one hundred and thirtie poundes of
lawfull English money within two monethes next after the date hereof
towards the charges that the same Company haue already bene at in and about
the establishing of the sayde trades shall from hencefoorth bee of of the
same company of the Marchants of Leuant as fully and amply and in like
maner, as any other of that societie or Company.

Prouided also, that wee, our heires and successours at any time during the
sayd twelue yeeres may lawfully appoynt and authorize two other persons
exercising the lawfull trade of marchandize, and being fit men to bee of
the sayd companie of Gouernour and companie of marchants of Leuant, so that
the sayd persons to bee nominated or authorized, shall aide, doe, beare,
and paie such payments and charges touching and concerning the same trade
and Companie of marchants of Leuant, ratablie as other of the sayd Companie
of marchants of Leuant shall, and doe, or ought to beare and pay: and doe
also performe and obserue the orders of the sayd Companie allowable by this
our graunt, as others of the same doe or ought to doe; And that such two
persons so to bee appoynted by vs our heires or successours, shall and may
with the sayd Company vse the trade and feate of marchandise aforesayd, and
all the liberties and priuileges herein before granted, according to the
meaning of these our letters patents, any thing in these our letters
patents contained to the contrary notwithstanding.

Prouided also, that if any of the marchants before by these presents named
or incorporated, to bee of the said fellowship of Gouernour and companie of
the merchants of Leuant, shall not bee willing to continue or bee of the
same companie, and doe giue notice thereof, or make the same knowen to the
sayd Gouernour, within two moneths next after the date hereof, that then
such person so giuing notice, shall no furthur or any longer be of that
companie, or haue trade into those parties, nor be at any time after that
of the same corporation or companie, or vse trade into any territories or
countries aforesayd.

Prouided alwayes neuerthelesse, that euery such person so giuing notice and
hauing at this present any goods or marchandises in any the Territories or
countreys of the sayd Grand Signior, or Segniorie or State of Venice, may
at any time within the space of eighteene moneths next, and immediately
following after the date hereof, haue free libertie, power and authoritie
to returne the same or the value thereof into this Realme, without vsing
any traffique there, but immediately from thence hither, paying, bearing,
answering, and performing all such charges, dueties, and summes of money
ratably as other of the same corporation or company doe or shall pay,
beare, answere, or performe for the like.

Prouided also, that if any of the persons before by these presents named or
incorporated to bee of the sayd fellowship of Gouernour and Companie of the
marchants of Leuant, or which hereafter shall bee admitted to bee of the
sayde Corporation or Companie, shall at any time or times hereafter refuse
to be of the sayd Corporation or Companie, or to beare, pay or be
contributorie to, or not beare and pay such ratable charges and allowances,
or to obserue or performe such ordinances to bee made as is aforesayd, as
other of the same company are, or shall bee ordered, to beare, paie, or
performe, that then it shall and may bee lawfull for the rest of the sayd
Gouernour and companie of marchants of Leuant, presently to expell,
remooue, and displace euery such person so refusing, or not bearing or
paying out, of, and from the sayd Corporation, and companie, and from all
priuilege, libertie, and preheminence which any such person should, or
might claime, or haue by vertue of this our graunt, and in place of them to
elect others exercising the lawfull trade of marchandise to bee of the sayd
Company. And that euery such person so expelled, remooued, or displaced by
consent of the sayd Gouernour and companie of marchants of Leuant, or the
more part of them, shall bee from thencefoorth vtterly disabled to take any
benefite by vertue of this priuilege, or any time after to bee admitted or
receiued againe into the same, any thing in these presents contained to the
contrary notwithstanding.

Provided alwayes, that if it shall hereafter appears to vs, our heires and
successours, that this graunt or the continuance thereof in the whole or in
any part thereof, shall not bee profitable to vs, our heires and
successours, or to this our realme, that then and from thencefoorth, vpon
and after eighteene moneths warning to bee giuen to the sayd companie by
vs, our heires and successours, this present graunt shall cease, bee voyd,
and determined to all intents, constructions and purposes.

And further of our speciall grace, certaine knowledge, and meere motion, we
haue condescended and graunted, and by these presents for vs, our heires
and successors, doe condescend and graunt to the sayde Gouernour and
companie of marchants of Leuant, that if at the ende of the sayd terme of
twelue yeeres it shall seeme meete and conuenient to the sayde Gouernour
and Companie, or any the parties aforesayd, that this present graunt shall
bee continued: And if that also it shall appear vnto vs, our heires and
successours, that the continuance thereof shall not bee preiudiciall or
hurtfull to this our realme, but that wee shall finde the further
continuance thereof profitable for vs, our heires and successours and for
our realme with such conditions as are herein mentioned, or with some
alteration or qualification thereof, that then wee, our heires and
successours at the instance and humble petition of the sayde Gouernour and
Companie, or any of them so suing for the same, and such other person and
persons our subiectes as they shall nominate and appoint, or shall bee by
vs, our heires and successours newly nominated, not exceeding in number
twelue, new letters patents vnder the great seale of England in due forme
of lawe with like couenants, graunts, clauses, and articles, as in these
presents are contained, or with addition of other necessarie articles or
changing of these in some partes, for, and during the full terme of twelue
yeeres then next following. Willing now hereby, and straightly commannding
and charging all and singular our Admirals, Vice-admirals, Iustices,
Maiors, Shiriffes, Escheators, Constables, Bailiffes, and all and singular
other our Officers, Ministers, Liege-men and subiects whatsoeuer, to bee
aiding, fauouring, helping, and assisting vnto the sayd companie and their
successours, and to their Deputies, Officers, Factors, seruants, assignes
and ministers, and euery of them, in executing and enioying the premisses
as well on land as on Sea, from time to time, and at all times when you or
any of you shal thereto bee required, any Statute, Acte, ordinance,
Prouiso, Proclamation or restraint heretofore had, made, set foorth,
ordained or prouided, or any other matter, cause or thing whatsoeuer to the
contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

Although expresse mention of the true yeerely value or certaintie of the
premisses, or any of them, or of any other gifts or graunts by vs, or any
of our progenitours to the sayde Gouernour and Companie of the marchants of
Leuant before this time made, in these presents is not made: Or any
Statute, Acte, Ordinance, prouision, proclamation or restraint to the
contrary thereof before this time had, made, done, or prouided, or any
other matter, thing or cause whatsoeuer, in any wise notwithstanding. In
witnesse whereof we haue caused these our letters to be made patents.
Witnesse our selfe at Westminster the seuenth day of Ianuarie in the foure
and thirtieth yeere of our raigne.

Per breue de priuato Sigillo.

Bailie.

       *       *       *       *       *

Voyage D'outremer et Retour de Jerusalem en France par la voie de terre,
  pendant le cours des annees 1432 et 1433, par Bertrandon de la
  Brocquiere, conseiller et premier ecuyer tranchant de Philippe-le-bon,
  duc de Bourgogne; ouvrage extrait d'un Manuscript de la Bibliotheque
  Nationale, remis en Francais Moderne, et publie par le citoyen Legrand
  d'Aussy.

Discours Preliminaire.

Les relations de voyages publiees par nos Francais remontent fort haut.

Des les commencemens du V'e siecle, Rutilius Claudius Numatianus en avoit
donne une, qui ne nous est parvenue qu'incomplete, parce que apparemment la
mort ne lui permit pas de l'achever. L'objet etoit son retour de Rome dans
la Gaule, sa patrie. Mais, comme il n'avoit voyage que par mer, il ne put
voir et decrire que des ports et des cotes; et de la necessairement a
resulte pour son ouvrage, une monotonie, qu'un homme de genie auroit pu
vaincre sans doute, mais qu'il etoit au dessus de ses forces de surmonter.
D'ailleurs, il a voulu donner un poeme: ce qui l'oblige a prendre le ton
poetique, et a faire des descriptions poetiques, ou soi-disant telles.
Enfin ce poeme est en vers elegiaques. Or qui ne sait que cette sorte de
versification, dont le propre est de couper la pensee de deux en deux vers
et d'assujettir ces vers au retour continuel d'une chute uniforme, est peut
etre celle de toutes qui convieent le moins en genre descriptif? Quand
l'imagination a beaucoup a peindre; quand sans cesse elle a besoin de
tableaux brillans et varies, il lui faut, pour developper avantageusement
toutes ses richesses, une grande liberte; et elle ne peut par consequent
s'accommoder d'une double entrave, dont l'effet infaillible seroit
d'eteindre son feu.

Payen de religion, Rutilius a montre son aversion pour la religion
chretienne dans des vers ou, confondant ensemble les chretiens et les
Juifs, il dit du mal des deux sectes.

C'est par une suite des memes sentimens qu'ayant vu, sur sa route, des
moines dans lile Capraia, il fit contre le monachisme ces autres vers, que
je citerai pour donner une idee de sa maniere.

    Processu pelagi jam se Capraria tollit;
      Squalet lucifugis insula plena viris.
    Ipsi se monachos, Graio cognomine, dicunt,
      Quod, soli, nullo vivere teste, volunt.
    Munera fortunae metuunt, dum damna verentur:
      Quisquam sponte miser, ne miser esse queat.
    Quaenam perversi rabies tam crebra cerebri,
      Dum mala formides, nec bona posse pati?

[Footnote: "He afterwards," says Gibbon, "mentions a religious madman on
the isle of Gorgona. For such profane remarks, Rutilius and his
accomplices, are styled, by his commentator, Barthius, rabiosi canes
diaboli."]

Son ouvrage contient des details precieux pour le geographe; il y en a meme
quelques uns pour l'antiquaire et l'historien: tels par exemple, que sa
description d'un marais salant, et l'anecdote des livres Sibyllins brules a
Rome par l'ordre de Stilicon.

[Footnote: The verses relating to Stilicho are very spirited and elegant. I
will transcribe them.

    Quo magis est facinus diri Stilichonis acerbum,
      Proditor arcani qui fuit imperii,
    Romano generi dum nititur esse superstes,
      Crudelis summis miscuit ima furor.
    Dumque timet, quicquid se fecerat ipse timeri,
      Immisit Latiae barbara tela neci.
    Visceribus nudis armatum condidit hostem,
      Illatae cladis liberiore dolo.
    Ipsa satellitibus pellitis Roma patebat,
      Et captiva prius, quam caperetur, erat.
    Nec tantum Geticis grassatus proditor armis:
      Ante Sibyllinae fata cremavit opis.
    Odimus Althaeam consumti funere torris:
      Niseum crinem flere putantur aves:
    At Stilicho aeterni fatalia pignora regni;
      Et plenas voluit praecipitare colus.
    Omnia Tartarei cessent tormenta Neronis,
      Consumat Stygias tristior umbra faces.
    Hic immortalem, mortalem perculit ille:
      Hic mundi matrem perculit, ille suam.

Claudian draws a very different portrait of Stilicho. Indeed, as Gibbon
observes, "Stilicho, directly or indirectly, is the perpetual theme of
Claudian."]

Enfin on y remarque quelques beaux vers, et particulierement celui-ci sur
une ville ruinee.

Cernimus exemplis oppida posse mori.

Mais il peche par la composition, Ses tableaux sont secs et froids; sa
maniere petite et mesquine. Du reste, point de genie, point d'imagination,
et par consequent, point d'invention ni de coloris. Voila ce qu'il
presente, ou au moins ce que j'ai cru y voir; et ce sont probablement ces
defauts qui ont fait donner a son poeme le nom degradant d'Itineraire, sous
lequel il est connu.

Nous en avons une traduction Francaise par le Franc de Pompignan.
[Footnote: Melanges de litter. de poes. et d'hist. par l'Acad. de
Montauban. p.81.]

Vers 505, Arculfe, evoque Gaulois, etoit alle en pelerinage a Jerusalem. A
son retour, il voulut en publier la relation; et il chargea de cette
redaction un abbe ecossais, nomme Adaman, auquel il donna des notes tant
manuscrites que de vive voix. La relation composee par Adaman, intitulee:
De locis sanctis, est divisee en trois livres: a ete imprimee par Gretser,
puis, plus complete encore, par Mabillon. [Footnote: Acta ord. S. Bened.
sec. 3.1.2 p. 502.]

Arculfe, apres avoir visite la Terre Sainte, setoit embarque pour
Alexandrie. D'Alexandrie, il avoit passe a l'ile de Cypre, et de Cypre a
Constantinople, d'ou il etoit revenu en France. Un pareil voyage promet
assurement beaucoup; et certes l'homme qui avoit a decrire la Palestine,
l'Egypte et la capitale de l'Empire d'Orient pouvoit donner une relation
interessante. Mais pour l'execution d'un projet aussi vaste il falloit une
philosophie et des connoissance que son siecle etoit bien loin d'avoir.
C'est un pelerinage, et non un voyage, que publie le prelat. Il ne nous
fait connoitre ni les lois, ni les moeurs, ni les usages des peuples, ni
ce qui concerne les lieux et la contree qu'il parcourt, mais les reliques
et les objets de devotion qu'on y reveroit.

Ainsi dans son premier livre, qui traite de Jerusalem, il vous parlera de
la colonne ou Jesus fut flagelle, de la lance qui lui perca le cote, de son
suaire, d'une pierre sur laquelle il pria et qui porte l'empreinte de ses
genoux, d'une autre pierre sur laquelle il etoit quand il monta au ciel, et
qui porte l'empreinte de ses pieds, d'un linge tissu par la Vierge et qui
le represente: du figuier ou se pendit Judas; enfin de la pierre sur
laquelle expira saint Etienne, etc etc.

Dans son second livre, ou il parcourt les divers lieux de la Palestine que
visitoient les pelerins, il suit les memes erremens. A Jericho, il cite la
maison de la courtisane Raab; dans la vallee de Mambre, les tombeaux
d'Adam, d'Abraham, d'Isaac, de Jacob, de Sara, de Rebecca, de Lia; a
Nazareth, l'endroit ou l'ange vint annoncer a Marie qu'elle seroit mere en
restant vierge; a Bethleem, la pierre sur laquelle Jesus fut lave a sa
naissance; les tombeaux de Rachel, de David, de saint Jerome, de trois des
bergers qui vinrent a l'adoration, etc.

Le troisieme livre enfin est consacre en grand partie a Constantinople;
mais il n'y parle que de la vraie croix, de saint George, d'une image de la
Vierge, qui, jettee par un Juif dans les plus degoutantes ordures, avoit
ete ramassee par un chretien et distilloit une huile miraculeuse.

Pendant bien des siecles, les relations d'outre mer ne continrent que les
pieuses et grossieres fables qu'imaginoient journellement les Orientaux
pour accrediter certains lieux qu'ils tentoient. d'eriger en pelerinages,
et pour soutirer ainsi a leur profit l'argent des pelerins. Ceux-ci
adoptoient aveuglement tous les contes qu'on leur debitoit; et ils
accomplissoient scrupuleusement toutes les stations qui leur etoient
indiquees. A leur retour en Europe, c'etoitla tout ce qu'ils avoient a
raconter; mais cetoitla aussi tout ce qu'on leur demandoit.

Cependant notre saint (car a sa mort il a ete declare tel, ainsi que son
redacteur Adaman) a, dans son second livre, quelques phrases historiques
sur Tyr et sur Damas. Il y parle egalement et avec plus de details encore
d'Alexandrie; et je trouve meme sous ce dernier article deux faits qui
m'ont paru dignes d'attention.

L'un concerne les crocodiles, qu'il represente comme si multiplies dans la
partie inferieure du Nil, que des l'instant ou un boeuf, un cheval, un ane,
s'avancoient sur les bords du fleuve, ils etoient saisis par eux, entraines
sous les eaux, et devores; tandis qu'aujourd'hui, si l'on en croit le
rapport unanime de nos voyageurs modernes, il n'existe plus de crocodiles
que dans la haute Egypte; que c'est un prodige d'en voir descendre un
jusqu'au Caire, et que du Caire a la mer on n'en voit pas un seul.

L'autre a rapport a cet ile nommee Pharos, dans laquelle le
Ptolemee-Philadelphe fit construire une tour dont les feux servoient de
signal aux navigateurs, et qui porta egalement le nom de Phare. On sait
que, posterieurement a Ptolemee, l'ile fut jointe au continent par un mole
qui, a chacune de ses deux, extremites, avoit un pont; que Cleopatre acheva
l'isthme, en detruisant les ponts et en faisant la digue pleine; enfin
qu'aujourd'hui l'ile entiere tient a la terre ferme. Cependant notre prelat
en parle comme si, de son temps, elle eut ete ile encore: "in dextera parte
portus parva insula habetur, in qua maxima turris est quam, in commune,
Graeci ac Latini, ex ipsius rei usu, Pharum vocitaverunt." Il se trompe sans
doute. Mais, probablement, a lepoque ou il la vit, elle n'avoit que sa
digue, encore: les atterrissemens immenses qui en ont fait une terre, en la
joignant au continent, sont posterieurs a lui; et il n'aura pas cru qu'un
mole fait de main d'homme empechat une ile d'etre ce que l'avoit faite la
nature.

Au neuvieme siecle, nous eumes une autre sorte de Voyage par Hetton, moine
et abbe de Richenou, puis eveque Bale. Cet homme, habile dans les affaires,
et employe comme tel par Charlemagne, avoit ete en 811 envoye par lui en
ambassade a Constantinople. De retour en France, il y publia, sur sa
mission, une relation, que jusqu'ici l'on n'a pas retrouvee, et que nous
devons d'autant plus regretter qu'infailliblement elle nous fourniroit des
details curieux sur un Empire dont les rapports avec notre France etoient
alors si multiplies et si actifs. Peut etre au reste ne doit on pas la
regarder comme tout-a-fait perdue; et il seroit possible qu'apres etre
restee pendant plusieurs siecles ensevelie dans un manuscrit ignore, le
hasard l'amenat un jour sous les yeux de quelqu'un de nos savans, qui la
donneroit au public.

C'est ce qui est arrive pour celle d'un autre moine Francais nomme Bernard;
laquelle, publiee en 870, a ete retrouvee par Mabillon et mise par lui au
[Footnote: Ubi supra. p. 523.] jour. Ce n'est, comme celle d'Arculfe, qu'un
voyage de Terre Sainte a la verite beaucoup plus court que le sien, ecrit
avec moins de pretention, mais qui, a l'exception de quelques details
personnels a l'auteur, ne contient de meme qu'une seche enumeration des
saints lieux: ce qui l'a fait de meme intituler: De locis sanctis.

Cependant la route des deux pelerins fut differente. Arculfe etoit alle
directment en Palestine, et de la il s'etoit embarque une seconde fois pour
voir Alexandrie. Bernard, au contraire, va d'abord debarquer a Alexandrie.
Il remonte le Nil jusqu'a Babylone, redescend a Damiette, et, traversant le
desert sur des chameaux, il se rend par Gaza en Terre Sainte.

La, il fait, comme saint Arculfe, differens pelerinages, mais moins que lui
cependant, soit que sa profession ne lui eut point permis les meme
depenses, soit qu'il ait neglige de les mentionner tous.

Je remarquerai seulement que dans certaines eglises on avoit imagine,
depuis l'eveque, de nouveaux miracles, et qu'elles en citoient dont il ne
parle pas, et dont certainement il eut fait mention s'ils avoient eu lieu
de son temps. Tel etoit celui de l'eglise de Sainte-Marie, ou jamais il ne
pleuvoit, disoit-on, quoiqu'elle fut sans toit. Tel celui auquel les Grecs
ont donne tant de celebrite, et qui, tous les ans, la veille de Paques,
s'operoit dans l'eglise du Saint-Sepulcre, ou un ange descendoit du ciel
pour allumer les cierges: ce qui fournissoit aux chretiens de la ville un
feu nouveau, qui leur etoit communique par le patriarche, et qu'ils
emportoient religieusement chez eux.

Bernard rapporte, sur son passage du desert, une anecdote qui est a
recueillir: c'est que, dans la traversee de cette immense mer de sable, des
marchands paiens et chretiens avoient forme deux hospices, nommes l'un
Albara, l'autre Albacara, ou les voyageurs trouvoient a se pourvoir de tous
les objets dont ils pouvoient avoir besoin pour leur route.

Enfin l'auteur nous fait connoitre un monument forme par Charlemagne dans
Jerusalem en faveur de ceux qui parloient _la langue Romane_, et que les
Francais, et les gens de lettres specialement, n'apprendront pas, sans
beaucoup de plaisir, avoir existe.

Ce prince, la gloire de l'Occident, avoit, par ses conquetes et ses grandes
qualites, attire l'attention d'un homme qui remplissoit egalement l'Orient
de sa renommee: c'etoit le celebre calife Haroun-al-Raschild. Haroun,
empresse de temoigner a Charles l'estime et la consideration qu'il lui
portoit, lui portoit, lui avoit envoye des ambassadeurs avec des presens
magnifiques; et ces ambassadeurs, disent nos historiens, etoient meme
charges de lui presenter, de la part de leur maitre, les cles de Jerusalem.

Probablement Charles avoit profite de cette faveur pour etablir dans la
ville un hopital ou hospice, destine aux pelerins de ses etats Francais.
Tel etoit l'esprit du temps. Ces sortes de voyages etant reputes l'action
la plus sainte que put imaginer la devotion, un prince qui les favorisoit
croyoit bien meriter de la religion. Charlemagne d'ailleurs avoir le gout
des pelerinages; et son historien Eginhard [Footnote: Vita Carol. Mag. Cap.
27.] remarque avec surprise que, malgre la predilection qu'il portoit a
celui de Saint-Pierre de Rome, il ne l'avoit fait pourtant que <i>quatre
fois</i> dans sa vie.

Mais souvent le grand homme se montre grand encore jusqu'au sein des
prejuges qui l'entourent. Charles avoit ete en France le restaurateur des
lettres; il y avoit retabli l'orthographe, regenere l'ecriture, forme de
belles bibliotheques: il voulut que son hospice de Jerusalem eut une
bibliotheque aussi a l'usage des pelerins. L'etablissement la possedoit
encore tout entiere, au temps de Bernard: "nobilissimam habens
bibliothecam, studio Imperatoris;" et l'empereur y avoit meme attache, tant
pour Pentretien du depot et celui du lieu, que pour la nourriture des
pelerins, douze manses situees dans la vallee de Josaphat, avec des terres,
des vignes et un jardin.

Quoique notre historien dut etre rassasie de pelerinages, il fit neanmoins
encore, a son retour par l'Italie, celui de Rome: puis quand il fut rentre
en France, celui du mont Saint-Michael.

Sur ce dernier, il observe que ce lieu, situe au milieu d'une greve des
cotes de Normandie, est deux fois par jour, au temps du flux, baigne des
eaux de la mer. Mais il ajoute que, le jour de la fete du saint l'acces du
rocher et de la chapelle reste libre; que l'Ocean y forme, comme fit la Mer
rouge, au temps de Moise, deux grands murs, entre lesquels on peut passer a
pied sec; et que ce miracle, que n'a lieu que ce jour-la, dure tout le
jour.

Notre litterature nationale possedoit quatre voyages; un des cotes
d'Isalie, un de Constantinople, deux de Terre-Sainte. Au treizieme siecle,
une cause fort etrange lui en procura deux de Tartarie.

Cette immense contree dont les habitans, en divers temps et sous differens
noms, ont peuple, conquis, ou ravage la tres-grande partie de l'Europe et
de l'Asie, se trouvoit pour ainsi dire tout entiere en armes.

Fanatises par les incroyables conquetes d'un de leurs chefs, le fameux
Gengis-Kan; persuades que la terre entiere devoit leur obeir, ces nomades
belliqueux et feroces etoient venus, apres avoir soumis la Chine, se
precipiter sur le nord-est de l'Europe. Par tout ou s'etoient portees leurs
innombrables hordes, des royaumes avoient ete ravages; des nations entieres
exterminees ou trainees en esclavage; la Hongrie, la Pologne, la Boheme,
les frontieres de l'Autriche, devastees d'une maniere effroyable. Rien
n'avoit pu arreter ce debordement qui, s'il eprouvoit, vers quelque cote,
une resistance, se jetoit ailleurs avec plus de fureur encore. Enfin la
chretiente fut frappee de terreur, et selon l'expression d'un de nos
historiens, elle trembla jusqu'a l'Ocean.

Dans cette consternation generale, Innocent IV voulut se montrer le pere
commun des fideles. Ce tendre pere se trouvoit a Lyon, ou il etoit venu
tenir un concile pour excommunier le redoutable Frederic II, qui trois fois
deja l'avoit ete vainement par d'autres papes. La, en accablant l'empereur
de toutes ses foudres, Innocent forme un projet dont l'idee seule annonce
l'ivresse de la puissance; celui d'envoyer aux Tartares des lettres
apostoliques, afin de les engager a poser les armes et a embrasser la
religion chretienne: "ut ab hominum strage desistement et fidei veritatem
reciperent." [Footnote: Vincent Bellovac. Spec histor. lib. xxxii. cap. 2.]
Il charge de ses lettres un ambassadeur; et l'ambassadeur est un
Frere-mineur nomme Jean du Plan de Carpin (Joannes de Plano Carpini,) qui
le jour de Paques, 1245, part avec un de ses camarades, et qui en chemin se
donne un troisieme compagnon, Polonois et appele Benoit.

Soit que l'ordre de Saint-Dominique eut temoigne quelque deplaisir de voir
un pareil honneur defere exclusivement a l'ordre de Saint Francois; soit
qu'Innocent craignit pour ses ambassadeurs les dangers d'un voyage aussi
penible; soit enfin par quelque motif que nous ignorons, il nomma une
seconde ambassade, a laquelle il fit prendre une autre route, et qui fut
composee uniquement de Freres-precheurs. Ceux-ci, au nombre de cinq,
avoient pour chef un nomme Ascelin, et parmi eux etoit un frere Simon, de
Saint-Quentin, dont j'aurai bientot occasion de parler. Ils etoient, comme
les Freres-mineurs, porteurs de lettres apostoliques, et avoient aupres des
Tartares la meme mission, celle de determiner ce peuple formidable a
s'abstenir de toute guerre et a recevoir le bapteme.

De Carpin cependant avoit, avec la sienne, recu l'ordre particulier et
secret d'examiner attentivement et de recueillir avec soin tout ce qui chez
ce peuple lui paroitroit digne de remarque. Il le fit; et a son retour il
publia une relation, qui est composee dans cet esprit, et qu'en consequence
il a intitulee Gesta Tartarorum. Effectivement il n'y emploie, en details
sur sa route et sur son voyage, qu'un seul chapitre. Les sept autres sont
consacres a decrire tout ce qui concerne les Tartares; sol, climat, moeurs,
usages, conquetes, maniere de combattre, etc. Son ouvrage est imprime dans
la collection d'Hakluyt. J'en ai trouve parmi les manuscrits de la
Bibliotheque nationale (No. 2477, a la page 66) un exemplaire plus complet
que celui de l'edition d'Hakluyt, et qui contient une assez longue preface
de l'auteur, que cette edition n'a pas. Enfin, a l'epoque ou parut ce
Voyage, Vincent de Beauvais l'avoit insere en grande partie dans son
Speculum historiale.

Ce frere Vincent, religieux dominicain, lecteur et predicateur de saint
Louis, avoit ete invite par ce prince a entreprendre differens ouvrages,
qu'en effet il mit au jour, et qui aujourd'hui forment une collection
considerable. De ce nombre est une longue et lourde compilation historique,
sous le titre de Speculum historiale, dans laquelle il a fait entrer et il
a fondu, comme je viens de le dire, la relation de notre voyageur. Pour
rendre celle-ciplus interessante et plus complete, il y a joint, par une
idee assez heureuse, certains details particuliers que lui fournit son
confrere Simon de Saint-Quentin, l'un des associes d'Ascelin dans la
seconde ambassade. Ayant eu occasion de voir Simon a son retour de
Tartarie, il apprit de lui beaucoup de choses qu'il a inserees en plusieurs
endroits de son Miroir et specialement dans le 32'e et dernier livre. La,
avec ce qu'avoit ecrit et publie de Carpin, et ce que Simon lui raconta de
vive voix, il a fait une relation mixte, qu'il a divisee en cinquante
chapitres; et c'est celle que connoissent nos modernes. Bergeron en a donne
une traduction dans son recueil des voyages faits pendant le douzieme
siecle et les trois suivans. Cependant il a cru devoir separer ce qui
concernoit de Carpin d'avec ce qui appartient a Simon, afin d'avoir des
memoires sur la seconde ambassade comme on en avoit sur la premiere. Il a
donc detache du recit de Vincent six chapitres attribues par lui a Simon;
et il en a fait un article a part, qu'il a mis sous le nom d'Ascelin, chef
de la seconde legation. C'est tout ce que nous savons de celle ci.

Quant au succes qu'eurent les deux ambassades, je me crois dispense d'en
parler. On devine sans peine ce qu'il dut etre; et il en fut de meme de
deux autres que saint Louis, quoique par un autre motif, envoya peu apres
dans la meme contree.

Ce monarque se rendoit en 1248 a sa desastreuse expedition d'Egypte, et il
venoit de relacher en Cypre avec sa flotte lorsqu'il recut dans cette ile,
le 12 Decembre, une deputation des Tartares, dont les deux chefs portoient
les noms de David et de Marc. Ces aventuriers se disoient delegues vers lui
par leur prince, nouvellement converti a la foi chretienne, et qu'ils
appeloient Ercalthay. Ils assuroient encore que le grand Kan de Tartarie
avoit egalement recu le bapteme, ainsi que les principaux officiers de sa
cour et de son armee, et qu'il desiroit faire alliance avec le roi.

Quelque grossiere que fut cette imposture, Louis ne put pas s'en defendre.
Il resolut d'envoyer, au prince et au Kan convertis une ambassade pour les
feliciter de leur bonheur et les engager a favoriser et a propager dans
leurs etats la religion chretienne. L'ambassadeur qu'il nomma fut un
Frere-precheur nomme Andre Longjumeau ou Longjumel, et il lui associa deux
autres Dominicains, deux clercs, et deux officiers de sa maison.

David et Marc, pour lui en imposer davantage, affecterent de se montrer
fervens chretiens. Ils assisterent avec lui fort devotieusment aux offices
de Noel; mais ils lui firent entendre que ce seroit une chose fort agreable
au Kan d'avoir une tente en ecarlate. C'etoit-la que vouloient en venir les
deux fripons. Et en effet le roi en commanda une magnifique, sur laquelle
il fit broder l'Annonciation, la Passion, et les autres mysteres du
christianisme. A ce present il en ajouta, un autre, celui de tout ce qui
etoit necessaire, soit en ornemens soit en vases et argenterie pour une
chapelle. Enfin il donna des reliques et du bois de la vraie croix:
c'est-a-dire ce que, dans son opinion, il estimoit plus que tout au monde.
Mais une observation que je ne dois point omettre ici, parce qu'elle
indique l'esprit de cette cour Romaine qui se croyoit faite pour commander
a tous les souverains: c'est que le legat que le pape avoit place dans
l'armee du roi pour l'y representer et ordonner en son nom, ecrivit, par la
voie des ambassadeurs, aux deux souverains Tartares, et que dans sa lettre
il leur annoncoit qu'il les adoptoit et les reconnoissoit enfans de
l'eglise. Il en fut pour ses pretentions et les avances de sa lettre, ainsi
que le roi, pour sa tente, pour sa chappelle et ses reliques. Longjumeau,
arrive en Tartarie, eut beau chercher le prince Ercalthay et ce grand Kan
baptise avec sa cour; il revint comme il etoit parti. Cependant il devoit
avoir, sur cette contree, quelques renseignemens. Deja il y avoit voyage,
disoit-on; et meme quand David parut devant lui en Cypre, il pretendit le
reconnoitre, comme l'ayant vu chez les Tartares.

Ces circonstances nous ont ete transmises par les historiens du temps. Pour
lui, il n'a rien laisse sur sa mission. On diroit qu'il en a eu honte.

Louis avoit ete assez grossierement dupe pour partager un peu ce sentiment,
ou pour en tirer au moins une lecon de prudence. Et neanmoins tres-peu
d'annees apres il se laissa tromper encore: c'etoit en 1253; et il se
trouvoit alors en Asie.

Quoique au sortir de sa prison d'Egypte tout lui fit une loi de retourner
en France, ou il avoit tant de plaies a fermer et tant de larmes a tarir,
une devotion mal eclairee l'avoit conduit en Palestine. La, sans songer ni
a ses sujets ni a ses devoirs de roi, non seulement il venoit de perdre
deux annees, presque uniquement occupe de pelerinages; mais malgre
l'epuisement des finances de son royaume, il avoit depense des sommes
tres-considerables a relever et a fortifier quelques bicoques que les
chretiens de ces contrees y possedoient encore.

Pendant ce temps, le bruit courut qu'un prince Tartare nomme Sartach avoit
embrasse le christianisme. Le bapteme d'un prince infidele etoit pour Louis
une de ces beatitudes au charme desquelles il ne savoit pas resister. Il
resolut d'envoyer une ambassade a Sartach pour le feliciter, comme il en
avoit envoye une a Ercalthay. Sa premiere avoit ete confiee a des
Freres-precheurs; il nomma, pour celle-ci, des Franciscains, et pour chef
frere Guillaume Rubruquis. Deja Innocent avoit de meme donne successivement
une des deux siennes a l'un des deux autres. Suivre cet exemple etoit pour
Louis une grande jouissance. Il avoit pour l'un et pour l'autre une si
tendre affection, que tout son voeu, disoit-il, eut ete de pouvoir se
partager en deux, afin de donner a chacun des deux une moitie de luimeme.

Rubruquis, rendu pres de Sartach, put s'y convaincre sans peine combien
etoient fabuleux les contes que de temps en temps les chretiens orientaux
faisoient courir sur ces pretendues conversions de princes Tartares. Pour
ne pas perdre tout-a-fait le fruit de son voyage il sollicita pres de ce
chef la permission de precher l'evangile dans ses etats. Sartach repondit
qu'il n'osoit prendre sur lui une chose aussi extraordinaire; et il envoya
le convertisseur a son pere Baathu, qui le renvoya au grand Kan.

Pour se presenter devant celui-ci, Rubruquis et ses deux camarades se
revetirent chacun d'une chape d'eglise. L'un d'eux portoit une croix et un
missel, l'autre un encensoir, lui une bible et un psautier et il s'avance
ainsi entre eux deux en chantant des cantiques. Ce spectacle, que d'apres
ses prejuges monastiques, il croyoit imposant, et qui n'etoit que
burlesque, ne produisit rien, pas meme la risee du Tartare; et peu content
sans doute d'un voyage tres-inutile il revint en rendre compte au roi.

Louis n'etoit plus en Syrie. La mort de Blanche sa mere l'avoit rappele
enfin en France, d'ou il n'auroit jamais du sortir, et ou neanmoins il ne
se rendit qu'apres une annee de retard encore. Rubruquis s'appretoit a l'y
suivre quand il recut de son provincial une defense de partir, avec ordre
de se rendre au couvent de Saint-Jean d'Acre, et la d'ecrire au roi pour
l'instruire de sa mission. Il obeit. Il envoya au monarque une relation,
que le temps nous a conservee, et qui, comme la precedente, se trouve
traduite dans Bergeron; mais c'est a la contrariete despotique d'un
superieur dur et jaloux que nous la devons. Peut-etre que si le voyageur
avoit obtenu permission de venir a la cour, il n'eut rien ecrit.

Ainsi des quatre ambassadeurs monastiques envoyes en Tartarie tant par
Innocent que par le roi, il n'y a que les deux Franciscains de Carpin et
Rubruquis, qui aient laisse des memoires; et ces ouvrages, quoiqu'ils se
ressentent de leur siecle et particulierement de la profession de ceux qui
les composerent, sont cependant precieux pour nous par les details
interessans qu'ils contiennent sur une contree lointaine dont alors on
connoissoit a peine le nom, et avec laquelle nous n'avons depuis cette
epoque conserve aucun rapport.

On y admirera sur tout le courage de Rubruquis, qui ne craint pas de
declarer assez ouvertement au roi que David etoit un imposteur qui l'avoit
trompe. Mais Louis avoit le fanatisme du proselytisme et des conversions;
et c'est-la chez certains esprits une maladie incurable.

Dupe deux fois, il le fut encore par la suite pour un roi de Tunis qu'on
lui avoit represente comme dispose a se faire baptiser. Ce bapteme fut
long-temps sa chimere. Il regardoit comme le plus beau jour de sa vie celui
ou il seroit le parrain de ce prince. Il eut consenti volontiers,
disoit-il, a passer le reste de sa vie dans les cachots d'Afrique, si a ce
prix il eut pu le voir chretien. Et ce fut pour etre le parrain d'un
infidele qu'il alla sur les cotes de Tunis perdre une seconde flotte et une
seconde armee, deshonorer une seconde fois les armes Francaises qu'avoit
tant illustrees la journee de Bovines, enfin perir de la peste au milieu de
son camp pestifere, et meriter ainsi, par les malheurs multiplies de la
France, d'etre qualifie martyr et saint.

Quant a Bergeron, il n'est personne qui ne convienne qu'en publiant sa
traduction il a rendu aux lettres et aux sciences un vrai service, et je
suis bien loin assurement de vouloir en deprecier le merite. Cependant je
suis convaincu qu'elle en auroit d'avantage encore s'il ne se fut point
permis, pour les differens morceaux qu'il y a fait entrer, une traduction
trop libre, et surtout s'il s'y fut interdit de nombreux retranchemens qui
a la verite nous epargnent l'ennui de certains details peu faits pour
plaire, mais qui aussi nous privent de l'inestimable avantage d'apprecier
l'auteur et son siecle. Lui-meme, dans la notice preliminaire d'un des
voyages qu'il a imprimes, il dit l'avoir tire d'un Latin assez grossier ou
il etoit ecrit selon le temps, pour le faire voir en notre angue avec un
peu plus d'elegance et de clarte. [Footnote: Tome I. p. 160, a la suite du
Voyage de Rubruquis.] De-la il est arrive qu'en promettant de nous donner
des relations du treizieme et du quatorzieme sieecle [sic--KTH], il nous en
donne de modernes, qui toutes ont la meme physionomie a peu pres, tandis
que chacune devroit avoir la sienne propre.

Le recueil de Bergeron, bon pour son temps, ne l'est plus pour le notre.
Compose d'ouvrages qui contiennent beaucoup d'erreurs, nous y voudrions des
notes critiques, des discussions historiques, des observations savantes; et
peut-etre seroit-ce aujourd'hui une entreprise utile et qui ne pourroit
manquer d'etre accueillie tres-favorablement du public, que celle d'une
edition nouvelle des voyages anciens, faite ainsi, surtout si l'on y
joignoit, autant qu'il seroit possible, le texte original avec la
traduction. Mais cette traduction, il faudrait qu'elle fut
tres-scrupuleusement fidele. Il faudroit avant tout s'y interdire tout
retranchement, ou au moins en prevenir et y presenter en extrait ce qu'on
croiroit indispensable de retrancher. Ce n'est point l'agrement que
s'attend de trouver dans de pareils ouvrages celui qui entreprend la
lecture; c'est l'instruction. Des le moment ou vous les denaturerez, ou
vous voudrez leur donner une tournure moderne et etre lu des jeunes gens et
des femmes, tout est manque. Avez-vous des voyages, quels qu'ils soient, de
tel ou tel siecle? Voila ce que je vous demande, et ce que vous devez me
faire connoitre.

Si parmi ceux de nos gens de lettres qui avec des connoissances en histoire
et en geographie reunissent du courage et le talent des recherches, il s'en
trouvoit quelqu'un que ce travail n'effrayat pas, je la previens que, pour
ce qui concerne le Speculum historiale, il en existe a la Bibliotheque
nationale quatre exemplaires manuscrits, sous les numeros 4898, 4900, 490l,
et 4902.

Les deux Voyageurs du quatorzieme siecle qui ont publie des relations ne
sont point nes Francais; mais tous deux ecrivirent primitivement dans notre
langue: ils nous appartiennent a titre d'auteurs, et sous ce rapport je
dois en parler. L'un est Hayton l'Armenien; l'autre, l'Anglais Mandeville.

Hayton, roi d'Armenie; avoit ete depouille de ses etats par les Sarrasins.
Il imagina d'aller solliciter les secours des Tartares, qui en effet
prirent les armes pour lui et le retablirent. Ses negociations et son
voyage lui parurent meriter d'etre transmis a la posterite, et il dressa
des memoires qu'en mourant il laissa entre les mains d'Hayton son neveu,
seigneur de Courchi.

Celui-ci, apres avoir pris une part tres-active tant aux affaires d'Armenie
qu'aux guerres qu'elle eut a soutenir encore, vint se faire Premontre en
Cypre, ou il apprit la langue Francaise, qui portee la par les Lusignans, y
etoit devenue la langue de la cour et celle de tout ce qui n'etoit pas
peuple.

De Cypre, le moine Hayton ayant passe a Poitiers, voulut y faire connoitre
les memoires de son oncle, ainsi que les evenemens dans lesquels lui-meme
avoit ete, ou acteur, ou temoin. Il intitula ce travail Histoire d'Orient,
et en confia la publication a un autre moine nomme de Faucon, auquel il le
dicta de memoire en Francais. L'ouvrage eut un tel succes que, pour en
faire jouir les peuples auxquels notre langue etoit etrangere, Clement V.
chargea le meme de Faucon de le traduire en Latin. Celui-ci fit paroitre en
1307, sa version, dont j'ai trouve parmi le les manuscrits de la
Bibliotheque nationale trois exemplaires sous les numeros 7514, 7515--A, et
6041. (Page 180) a la fin du numero 7515, on lit cette note de l'editeur,
qui donne la preuve de ce que je viens de dire du livre.

"Explicit liber Historiarum Parcium [Partium] Orientis, a religioso, viro
fratre Haytono, ordinis beati Augustini, domino Churchi, consanguineo regis
Armeniae, compilato [compilatus] ex mandato summi pontificis domini
Clementis papae quinti, in civitate pictaviensi regni Franchiae: quem ego
Nicolaus Falconi, primo scripsi in galico ydiomate, sicut idem frater H.
michi [mihi] ore suo dictabat, absque nota sive aliquo [Footnote:
L'exemplaire no. 5514 ajoute a verbo ad verbum.] exemplari. Et de gallico
transtuli in latinum; anno domini M deg.CCC deg.. septimo, mense Augusti."

Bergeron a publie l'histoire d'Hayton. Mais, au lieu donner le texte
Francais original, au ou moins la version Latine de l'editeur, il n'a donne
qu'une version Francaise de ce Latin: de sorte que nous n'avons ainsi
qu'une traduction de traduction.

Pour ce qui regarde Mandeville, il nous dit que ce voyageur composa son
ouvrage dans les trois langues, Anglaise, Francaise et Latine. C'est une
erreur. J'en ai en ce moment sous les yeux un exemplaire manuscrit de la
Bibliotheque nationale, no. 10024 [Footnote: Il y en a dans la meme
bibliotheque un autre exemplaire note 7972; mais celui-ci, mutile,
incomplet, tresdifficile a lire, par la blancheur de son encre, ne peut
gueres avoir de valeur qu'en le collationant avec l'autre.] ecrit en 1477
ainsi que le porte une note finale du copiste. Or, dans celui-ci je lis ces
mots:

Je eusse mis cest livre en latin, pour plus briefment delivrez (pour aller
plus vite, pour abreger le travail). Mais pour ce que plusieurs ayment et
endendent mieulx romans [le francais] que latin, l'ai-ge [je l'ai] mis en
Romans, affin que chascun l'entende, et que les seigneurs et les chevaliers
et aultres nobles hommes qui ne scevent point de latin, ou petit [peu] qui
ont este oultre-mer, saichent se je dy voir [vrai], ou non.

D'ailleurs, au temps de Mandeville, c'etoit la langue Francaise qu'on
parloit en Angleterre. Cette langue y avoit ete portee par
Guillaume-le-Conquerant. On ne pouvoit enseigner qu'elle dans les ecoles.
Toutes les sentences des Tribunaux, tous les actes civils devoient etre en
Francais; et quand Mandeville ecrivoit en Francais, il ecrivoit dans sa
langue. S'il se fut servi de la Latine, c'eut ete pour etre lu chez les
nations qui ne connoissoient pas la notre.

A la verite, son Francais se ressent du sol. Il a beaucoup d'anglicismes et
de locutions vicieuses; et la raison n'en est pas difficile a deviner. On
sait que plus un ruisseau s'eloigne de sa source, et plus ses eaux doivent
s'alterer. Mais c'est la, selon moi, le moindre defaut de l'auteur. Sans
gout, sans jugement, sans critique, non seulement il admet indistinctement
tous les contes et toutes les fables qu'il entend dire; mais il en forge
lui-meme a chaque instant.

A l'entendre il s'embarqua l'an 1332, jour de Saint-Michel; il voyagea
pendant trente-cinq ans, et parcourut une grande partie de l'Asie et de
l'Afrique. Eh bien, ayez comme moi le courage de le lire; et si vous lui
accordez d'avoir vu peut-etre Constantinople, la Palestine et l'Egypte (ce
que moi je me garderois bien de garantir), a coup sur au moin vous resterez
convaincu que jamais i, ne mit le pied dans tous ces pays dont il parle a
l'aveugle; Arabie, Tartarie, Inde, Ethiopie, etc. etc.

Au moins, si les fictions qu'il imagine offroient ou quelque agrement ou
quelque interet! s'il ne faisoit qu'user du droit de mentir, dont se sont
mis depuis si long-temps en possession la plupart des voyageurs! Mais chez
lui ce sont des erreurs geographiques si grossieres, des fables si sottes,
des descriptions de peuples et de contrees imaginaires si ridicules, enfin
des aneries si revoltantes, qu'en verite on ne sait quel nom lui donner. Il
en couteroit d'avoir a traiter de charlatan un ecrivain. Que seroit-ce donc
si on avoit a la qualifier de hableur effronte? Cependant comment designer
le voyageur qui nous cite des geans de trente pieds de long; des arbres
dont les fruits se changent en oiseaux qu'on mange; d'autres arbes qui tous
les jours sortent de terre et s'en elevent depuis le lever du soleil
jusqu'a midi, et qui depuis midi jusqu'au soir y rentrent en entier; un val
perilleux, dont il avoit pres la fiction dans nos vieux romans de
chevalerie, val ou il dit avoir eprouve de telles aventures
qu'infalliblement il y auroit peri si precedemment il n'auoit receu Corpus
Domini (s'il n'avoit communie); un fleuve qui sort du paradis terrestre et
qui, au lieu d'eau, roule des pierres precieuses; ce paradis qui, dit-il,
est au commencement de la terre et place si haut qu'il touche de pres la
lune; enfin mille autres impostures ou sottisses de meme espece, qui
denotent non l'erreur de la betise et de la credulite, mais le mensonge de
la reflexion et de la fraude?

Je regarde meme comme tels, ces trente-cinq ans qu'il dit avoir employes a
parcourir le monde sans avoir songe a revenir dans sa patrie que quand
enfin la goute vint le tourmenter.

Quoiqu'il en existe trois editions imprimees, l'une en 1487 chez Jean Cres,
l'autre en 1517 chez Regnault, la troisieme en 1542 chez Canterel, on ne le
connoit guere que par le court extrait qu'en a publie Bergeron. Et en effet
cet editeur l'avoit trouve si invraisemblable et si fabuleux qu'il l'a
reduit a douze pages quoique dans notre manuscrit il en contienne cent
soixante et dix-huit.

Dans le quinzieme siecle, nous eumes deux autres voyages en Terre-Sainte:
l'un que je publie aujourd'hui; l'autre, par un carme nomme Huen, imprime
en 1487, et dont je ne dirai rien ici, parce qu'il est posterieur a
l'autre.

La meme raison m'empechera de parler d'un ouvrage mis au jour par Mamerot,
chantre et chanoine de Troyes. D'ailleurs celui-ci, intitule passages faiz
oultre-mer par les roys de France et autres princes et seigneurs Francois
contre les Turcqs et autres Sarrasins et Mores oultre-marins, n'est point,
a proprement parler, un voyage, mais une compilation historique des
differentes craisades qui ont eu lieu en France, et que l'auteur, d'apres
la fausse Chronique de Turpin et nos romans de chevalerie, fait commencer a
Charlemagne. La Bibliotheque nationale possede de celui-ci un magnifique
exemplaire, orne d'un grand nombre de belles miniatures et tableaux.

Je viens a l'ouvrage de la Brocquiere; mais celui-ci demande quelque
explication.


Seconde Partie.

La folie des Croisades, comme tous les genres d'ivresse, n'avoit eu en
France qu'une certaine duree, ou, pour parler plus exactement, de meme que
certaines fievres, elle s'etoit calmee apres quelques acces. Et assurement
la croisade de Louis-le-Jeune, les deux de saint Louis plus desastreuses
encore, avoient attire sur le royaume assez de honte et de malheurs pour y
croire ce fanatisme eteient a jamais.

Cependent la superstition cherchoit de temps a le rallumer. Souvent, en
confession et dans certains cas de penitence publique, le clerge imposoit
pour satisfaction un pelerinage a Jerusalem, ou un temps fixe de croisade.
Plusieurs fois meme les papes employerent tous les ressorts de leur
politique et l'ascendant de leur autorite pour renouer chez les princes
chretiens quelqu'une de ces ligues saintes, ou leur ambition avoit tant a
gagner sans rien risquer que des indulgences.

Philippe-le-Bel, par hypocrisie de zele et de religion, affecta un moment
de vouloir en former une nouvelle pour la France. Philippe-de-Valois, le
prince le moins propre a une enterprise si difficile et qui exigeoit tant
de talens, parut s'en occuper pendant quelques annees. Il recut une
ambassade du roi d'Armenie, entama des negociations avec la cour de Rome,
ordonna meme des preparatifs dans le port de Marseille. Enfin dans
l'intervalle de ces mouvemens, l'an 1332, un dominicain nomme Brochard
(surnomme l'Allemand, du nom de son pays), lui presenta deux ouvrages
Latins composes a dessein sur cet objet.

L'un, dans lequel il lui faisoit connoitre la contree qui alloit etre le
but de la conquete, etoit une description de la Terre-Sainte; et comme il
avoit demeure vingt-quatre ans dans cette contree en qualite de
missionnaire et de predicateur, peu de gens pouvoient alleguer autant de
droits que lui pour en parler.

L'autre, devise en deux livres, par commemoration des deux epees dont il
est mention dans l'Evangile, sous-divise en douze chapitres a l'honneur des
douze apotres, traitoit des differentes routes entre lesquelles l'armee
avoit a choisir, des precautions de detail a prendre pour le succes de
l'entreprise, enfin des moyens de diriger et d'assurer l'expedition.

Quant a celui-ci, dont les matieres concernent entierement la marine et
l'art militaire, on est surpris de voir l'auteur l'avoir entrepris, lui qui
n'etoit qu'un simple religieux. Mais qui ne sait que, dans les siecles
d'ignorance, quiconque est moins ignorant que ses contemporains, s'arroge
le droit d'ecrire sur tout? D'ailleurs, parmi les conseils que Brochard
donnoit au roi et a ses generaux, son experience pouvoit lui en avoir
suggere quelquesuns d'utiles. Et apres tout, puisque dans la classe des
nobles auxquels il eut appartenu de traiter ces objets, il ne se trouvoit
personne peut-etre qui put offrir et les memes connoissances locales que
lui et un talent egal pour les ecrire, pourquoi n'auroit-il pas hasarde ce
qu'ils ne pouvoient faire?

Quoiqu'il en soit du motif et de son excuse, il paroit que l'ouvrage fit
sur le roi et sur son conseil une impression favorable. On voit au moins,
par la continuation de la Chronique de Nangis, que le monarque envoya <i>in
terram Turcorum</i> Jean de Cepoy et l'eveque de Beauvais avec quelque peu
d'infanterie <i>ad explorandos portus et passus, ad faciendos aliquas
munationes et praeparationes victualium pro passagio Terre Sanctae</i>; et
que la petite troupe, apres avoir remporte quelques avantages aussi
considerables que le permettoient ses foibles forces, revint en France l'an
1335. [Footnote: Spicil. t. II. p. 764.]

Au reste tout ce fracas d'armemens, de preparatifs et de menaces dont le
royaume retentit pendant quelques annees, s'evanouit en un vain bruit. Je
ne doute point que, dans les commencemens, le roi ne fut de bonne foi. Sa
vanite s'etoit laissee eblouir par un projet brillant qui alloit fixer sur
lui les yeux de l'Asie et de l'Europe; et les esprits mediocres ne savent
point resister a la seduction de pareilles chimeres. Mais bientot, comme
les caracteres foibles, fatigue des difficultes, il chercha des pretextes
pour se mettre a l'ecart; et dans ce dessein il demanda au pape des titres
et de l'argent, que celui-ci n'accorda pas. Alors on ne parla plus de
l'expedition; et tout ce qu'elle produisit fut d'attirer la colere et la
vengeance des Turcs sur ce roi d'Armenie, qui etoit venu en France
solliciter contre eux une ligue et des secours.

Au siecle suivant, la meme fanfaronnade eut lieu a la cour de Bourgogne,
quoique avec un debut plus serieux en apparence.

L'an 1432, cent ans apres la publication des deux ouvrages de Brochard,
plusieurs grands seigneurs des etats de Bourgogne et officiers du duc
Philippe-le-Bon font le pelerinage de la Terre-Sainte. Parmi eux est son
premier ecuyer tranchant nomme la Brocquiere. Celui-ci, apres plusieurs
courses devotes dans le pays, revient malade a Jerusalem, et pendant sa
convalescence il y forme le hardi projet de retourner en France par la voie
de terre. C'etoit s'engager a traverser toute la partie occidentale d'Asie,
toute l'Europe orientale; et toujours, excepte sur la fin du vovage, a
travers la domination musulmane. L'execution de cette entreprise, qui
aujourd'hui meme ne seroit point sans difficultes, passoit alors pour
impossible. En vain ses camarades essaient de l'en detourner: il s'y
obstine; il part, et, apres avoir surmonte tous les obstacles, il revient,
dans le cours de l'annee 1433, se presenter au duc sous le costume
Sarrasin, qu'il avoit ete oblige de prendre, et avec le cheval qui seul
avoit fourni a cette etonnante traite.

Une si extraordinaire aventure ne pouvoit manquer de produire a la cour un
grand effet. Le duc voulut que le voyageur en redigeat par ecrit la
relation. Celui-ci obeit; mais son ouvrage ne parut que quelques annees
apres, et meme posterieurement a l'annee 1438, puisque cette epoque y est
mentionnee, comme on le verra ci-dessous.

Il n'etoit guere possible que le duc eut journellement sous les yeux son
ecuyer tranchant sans avoir quelquefois envie de le questionner sur celte
terre des Mecreans; et il ne pouvoit guere l'entendre, sur-tout a table,
sans que sa tete ne s'echauffat, et ne format aussi des chimeres de
croisade et de conquete.

Ce qui me fait presumer qu'il avoit demande a la Brocquiere des
renseignemens de ce genre, c'est que celui-ci a insere dans sa relation un
long morceau sur la force militaire des Turcs, sur les moyens de les
combattre vigoureusement, et, quoiqu'avec une armee mediocre mais bien
conduite et bien organisee, de penetrer sans risques jusqu'a Jerusalem.
Assurement un episode aussi etendu et d'un resultat aussi important est a
remarquer dans un ouvrage presente au duc et compose, par ses ordres; et
l'on conviendra qu'il n'a guere pu y etre place sans un dessein formel et
une intention particuliere.

En effet on vit de temps en temps Philippe annoncer sur cet objet de grands
desseins; mais plus occupe de plaisirs que de gloire, ainsi que le prouven
les quinze batards connus qu'il a laisses, toute sa forfanterie s'evaporoit
en paroles. Enfin cependant un moment arriva ou la chretiente, alarmee des
conquetes rapides du jeune et formidable Mahomet II. et de l'armement
terrible qu'il preparoit contre Constantinople, crut qu'il n'y avoit plus
de digue a lui opposer qu'une ligue generale.

Le duc, qui, par l'etendue et la population de ses etats, etoit plus
puissant que beaucoup de rois, pouvoit jouer dans la coalition un role
important. Il affecta de se montrer en scene un des premiers; et pour le
faire avec eclat, il donna dans Lille en 1453 une fete splendide et
pompeuse, ou plutot un grand spectacle a machines, fort bizarre dans son
ensemble, fort disparate dans la multitude de ses parties, mais le plus
etonnant de ceux de ce genre que nous ait transmis l'histoire. Ce spectacle
dont j'ai donne ailleurs la description, [Footnote: Hist. de la vie privee
des Francais, t. III, p. 324.] et qui absorba en pur faste des sommes
considerables qu'il eut ete facile dans les circonstances d'employer
beaucoup mieux, se termina par quelques voeux d'armes tant de la part du
duc que de celle de plusieurs seigneurs de sa cour: et c'est tout ce qui en
resulta. Au reste il eut lieu en fevrier, et Mahomet prit Constantinople en
Mai.

La nouvelle de ce desastre, les massacres horribles qui avoieni accompagne
la conquete, les suites incalculables qu'elle pouvon avoir sur le sort de
la chretiente, y rependirent la consternation. Le duc alors crut qu'il
devoit enfin se prononcer autrement que par des propos et des fetes. Il
annonca une croisade, leva en consequence de grosses sommes sur ses sujets,
forma meme une armee et s'avanca en Allemagne. Mais tout-a-coup ce lion
fougueux s'arreta. Une incommodite qui lui survint fort a propos lui servit
de pretexte et d'excuse; et il revint dans ses etats.

Neanmoins il affecta de continuer a parler croisades comme auparavant. Il
chargea meme un de ses sujets, Joseph Mielot, chanoine de Lille, de lui
traduire en Francais les deux traites de Brochard dont j'ai parle
ce-dessus. Enfin, quand le Pape Pie II. convoqua dans Mantoue en 1459, une
assemblee de princes chretiens pour former une ligue contre Mahomet, il ne
manqua pas d'y envoyer ses ambassadeurs, a la tete desquels etoit le duc de
Cleves.

Mielot finit son travail en 1455, et le court preambule qu'il a mis en tete
l'annonce. Les deux traductions se trouvent dans un de ces manuscrits que
la Bibliotheque nationale a recus recemment de la Belgique. Elles sont,
pour l'ecriture, de la meme main que le voyage de la Brocquiere; mais
quoique des trois ouvrages celui-ci ait du paroitre avant les deux autres,
tout trois cependant, soit par economie de reliure, soit par analogie de
matieres, ont ete reunis ensemble; et ils forment ainsi un gros volume
in-folio, numerote 514, relie en bois avec basane rouge, et intitule au
dos, Avis directif de Brochard.

Ce manuscrit, auquel son ecriture, sa conservation, ses miniatures, et le
beaux choix de son velin donnent deja beaucoup de prix, me paroit en
acquerir d'avantage encore sous un autre aspect, en ce qu'il est compose,
selon moi, des traites originaux presentes par leurs auteurs a
Philippe-le-Bon, ou de l'exemplaire, commande par lui a l'un de ses
copistes sur l'autographe des auteurs, pour etre place dans sa
bibliotheque.

Je crois voir la preuve de cette assertion non seulement dans la beaute du
manuscrit, et dans l'ecusson du prince, qui s'y trouve armorie en quatre
endroits, et deux foix avec sa devise <i>Aultre n'aray</i>; mais encore
dans la vignette d'un des deux frontispices, ainsi que dans la miniature de
l'autre.

Cette vignette, qui est en tete du volume, represente Mielot a genoux,
faisant l'offrande de son livre au duc, lequel est assis et entoure de
plusieurs courtisans, dont trois portent, comme lui, le collier de la
Toison.

Dans la miniature qui precede le Voyage, on voit la Brocquiere faire de la
meme maniere son offrande. Il est en costume Sarrasin, ainsi qu'il a ete
dit ci-dessus, et il a aupres de lui son cheval, dont j'ai parle.

Quant a ce duc Philippe qu'on surnomma le Bon, ce n'est point ici le lieu
d'examiner s'il merita bien veritablement ce titre glorieux, et si
l'histoire n'auroit pas a lui faire des reproches de plus d'un genre. Mais,
comme litterateur, je ne puis m'empecher de remarquer ici, a l'honneur de
sa memoire, que les lettres au moins lui doivent de la reconnoissance; que
c'est un des princes qui, depuis Charlemagne jusqu'a Francois I'er, ait le
plus fait pour elles; qu'au quinzieme siecle il fut dans les deux
Bourgognes, et dans la Belgique sur-tout, ce qu'au quatorzieme Charles V.
avoit ete en France; que comme Charles, il se crea une bibliotheque,
ordonna des traductions et des compositions d'ouvrages, encouragea les
savans, les dessinateurs, les copistes habile; enfin qu'il rendit peut-etre
aux sciences plus de services reels que Charles, parce qu'il fut moins
superstitieux.

Je donnerai, dans l'Histoire de la litterature Francaise, a laquelle je
travaille, des details sur ces differens faits. J'en ai trouve des preuves
multipliees dans les manuscrits, qui de la Belgique ont passe a la
Bibliotheque nationale, ou, pour parler plus exactement, dans les
manuscrits de la bibliotheque de Bruxelles, qui faisoient une des portions
les plus considerables de cet envoi.

Cette bibliotheque, pour sa partie Francaise, qui est specialement confiee
a ma surveillance, et qu'a ce titre j'ai parcourue presque en entier, etoit
composee de plusieurs fonds particuliers, dont les principaux sont:

1 deg.. Un certain nombre de manuscrits qui precedemment avoient forme la
bibliotheque de Charles V, celle de Charles VI, celle de Jean, duc de
Berri, frere de Charles V, et qui pendant les troubles du royaume sous
Charles VI, et dans les commencemens du regne de son fils, furent pilles et
enleves par les ducs de Bourgogne. Ceux de Jean sont reconnoissables a sa
signature, apposee par lui a la derniere page du volume et quelquefois en
plusieurs autres endroits. On reconnoit ceux de deux rois a l'ecu de France
blasonne qu'on y a peint, a leurs epitres dedicatoires, a leurs vignettes,
qui representent l'offrande du livre fait au monarque, et le monarque
revetu du manteau royal. Il en est d'autres, provenus de ces deux depots,
sur l'enlevement desquels je ne puis alleguer des preuves aussi
authentiques, parce que dans le nombre il s'en trouvoit beaucoup qui
n'etoient point ornes de miniatures, ou qui n'avoient point ete offerts au
roi, et qui par consequent ne peuvent offrir les memes signalemens que les
premiers; mais j'aurois, pour avancer que ceux-la ont ete pris egalement,
tant de probabilites, tant de conjectures vraisemblables, qu'elles
equivalent pour moi a une preuve positive.

2 deg.. Les manuscrits qui appartinrent legitimement aux ducs de Bourgogne,
c'est-a-dire qui furent, ou acquis par eux, ou dedies et presentes a eux,
ou commandes par eux, soit comme ouvrages, soit comme simples copies. Dans
la classe des dedies, le tres-grand nombre l'a ete a Philippe-le-Bon; dans
celle des faits par ordre, presque tous furent ordonnes par lui: et c'est
la qu'on voit, comme je l'ai dit plus haut, l'obligation qui lui ont les
lettres et tout ce qu'il fit pour elles.

3 deg.. Les manuscrits qui, apres avoir appartenu a des particuliers, ou a de
grands seigneurs des estats de Bourgogne, ont passe en differens temps et
d'une maniere quelconque dans la bibliotheque de Bruxelles. Parmi ceux-ci
l'on doit distinguer specialenient ceux de Charles de Croy, comte de
Chimay, parrain de Charles-Quint, chevalier de la toison, fait en 1486
prince de Chimay par Maximilien. Les siens sont assez nombreux, et ils
portent pour signe distinctif ses armoiries et sa signature, appose par
lui-meme.

De tout ceci il resulte, quant au merite de la collection Francaise de
Bruxelles, qu'elle ne doit guere offrir que des manuscrits modernes. J'en
ai effectivement peu vu qui soient precieux par leur anciennete, leur
rarete, la nature de l'ouvrage; mais beaucoup sont curieux par leur
ecriture, leur conservation, et specialement par leurs miniatures; et ces
miniatures seront un objet interessant pour les personnes qui, comme moi,
entreprendont l'histoire des arts dans les bas siecles. Elles leur
prouveront qu'en Belgique l'etat florissant de certaines manufactures y
avoit fort avance l'art de la peinture et du dessin. Mais je reviens aux
trois traites de notre volume.

Je ne dirai qu'un mot sur la description de la Palestine par Brochard,
parce que l'original Latin ayant, ete imprime elle est connue, et que
Mielot, dans le preambule de sa traduction, assure, ce dont je me suis
convaincu, n'y avoir adjouste rien de sien. Brochard, de son cote, proteste
de son exactitude. Non seulement il a demeure vingt-quatre ans dans le
pays, mais il l'a traverse dans son double diametre du nord au sud, depuis
le pied de Liban jusqu'a Bersabee; et du couchant au levant, depuis la
Mediterranee jusqu'a la mer Morte. Enfin il ne decrit rien qu'il n'ait,
pour me servir des termes de son traducteur, veu corporellement, lui,
estant en iceulx lieux.

La traduction commence au folio 76 de notre volume, et elle porte pour
titre: Le livre de la description de la Terre-Saincte, fait en l'onneur et
loenge de Dieu, et complete jadis, l'an M.III'e.XXXII, par frere Brochard,
l'Aleman, de l'ordre des Preescheurs.

Son second ouvrage etant inedit, j'en parlerai plus au long, mais
uniquement d'apres la traduction de Mielot.

Le volume est compose de deux parties, et porte pour titre, Advis directif
(conseils de marche et de direction) pour faire le passage d'oultremer.

On a pour ce passage, dit Brochard, deux voies differentes, la terre et la
mer; et il conseille au roi de les employer toutes les deux a la fois, la
premiere pour l'armee, la seconde pour le transport des vivres, tentes,
machines, et munitions de guerre, ainsi que pour les personnes qui sont
accoutumees a la mer.

Celle-ci exigera dix a douze galeres, qu'on pourra, par des negociations et
des arrangemens, obtenir des Genois et des Venitiens. Les derniers
possedent Candie, Negrepont et autres iles, terres, ou places importantes.
Les Genois ont Pera, pres de Constantinople, et Caffa, dans la Tartarie.
D'ailleurs les deux nations connoissent bien les vents et les mers d'Asie,
de meme que la langue, les iles, cotes et ports du pays.

Si l'on choisit la voie de mer, on aura le choix de s'embarquer, soit a
Aigues-Mortes soit a Marseille ou a Nice: puis on relachera en Cypre, comme
fit Saint Louis. Mais la mer et le sejour des vaisseaux ont de nombreux
inconveniens, et il en resulte de facheuses maladies pour les hommes et
pour les chevaux. D'ailleurs on depend des vents: sans cesse on est reduit
a craindre les tempetes et le changement de climat. Souvent meme, lorsqu'on
ne comptoit faire qu'une relache, on se voit force de sejourner. Ajoutez a
ces dangers les vins de Cypre, qui de'leur nature sont trop ardents. Si
vous y mettez de l'eau, ils perdent toute leur saveur; si vous n'en mettez
point, ils attaquent le cerveau et brulent les entrailles. Quand Saint
Louis hiverna dans l'ile, l'armee y eprouva tous ces inconveniens. Il y
mourut deux cens et cinquante, que contes, que barons, que chevaliers, des
plus noble qu'il eust en son ost.

Il est un autre passage compose de mer et de terre, et celui-ci offre deux
routes; l'une, par l'Afrique, l'autre par l'Italie.

La voie d'Afrique est extremement difficile, a raison des chateaux
fortifies qu'on y rencontrera, du manque de vivres auquel on sera expose,
de la traversee des deserts et de l'Egypte qu'il faudra franchir. Le chemin
d'ailleurs est immense par sa longueur. Si l'on part du detroit de
Gibraltar, on aura, pour arriver a deux petites journees de Jerusalem, 2500
milles a parcourir; si l'on part de Tunis, on en aura 2400. Conclusion: la
voie d'Afrique est impracticable, il faut y renoncer.

Celle d'Italie presente trois chemins divers. L'un par Aquilee, par
l'Istrie, la Dalmatie, le royaume de Rassie (Servie) et Thessalonique
(Salonique), la plus grande cite de Macedoine, laquelle n'est qu'a huit
petites journees de Constantinople. C'est la route que suivoient les
Romains quand ils alloient porter la guerre en Orient. Ces contrees sont
fertiles; mais le pays est habite de gens non obeissans a l'eglise de Rome.
Et quant est de leur vaillance et hardiesse a resister, je n'en fais nulle
mention, neant plus que de femmes.

Le second est par la Pouille. On s'embarqueroit a Brandis (Brindes), pour
debarquer a Duras (Durazzo) qui est a monseigneur le prince de Tarente.
Puis on avanceroit par l'Albanie, par Blaque et Thessalonique.

La troisieme traverse egalement la Pouille: mais il passe par Ydronte
(Otrante), Curpho (Corfou) qui est a mondit seigneur de Tarente, Desponte,
Blaque, Thessalonique. C'est celui qu'a la premiere croisade prirent
Robert, comte de Flandre; Robert, duc de Normandie; Hugues, frere du roi
Philippe I'er, et Tancrede, prince de Tarente.

Apres avoir parle du passage par mer et du passage compose de terre et de
mer, Brochard examine celui qui auroit lieu entierement par terre.

Ce dernier traverse l'Allemagne, la Hongrie et la Bulgarie. Ce fut celui
qu'a la meme premiere expedition suivit une grande partie de l'armee de
France et d'Allemagne, sous la conduite de Pierre l'hermite, et c'est celui
que l'auteur conseille au roi.

Mais quand on est en Hongrie on a deux routes a choisir: l'une par la
Bulgarie, l'autre par l'Esclavonie, qui fait partie du royaume de Rassie.
Godefroi de Bouillon, ses deux freres, et Baudouin, comte de Mons, prirent
la premiere. Raimond, comte de Saint-Gilles, et Audemare, eveque du Puy et
legat du Saint-Siege, prirent la seconde, quoique quelques auteurs
pretendent qu'ils suivirent celle d'Aquilee et de Dalmatie.

Si le roi adoptoit ce passage par terre, l'armee, arrivee en Hongrie,
pourrait se diviser en deux; et alors, pour la plus grande commodite des
vivres, chacune des deux parties suivroit un des deux chemins; savoir,
l'une, celui de la Bulgarie; l'autre, celui de l'Esclavonie. Le roi
prendroit la premiere route, comme la plus courte. Quant aux Languedociens
et Provencaux, qui sont voisins de l'Italie, il leur seroit permis d'aller
par Brindes et Otrante. Leur rendezvous seroit a Thessalonique, ou ils
trouveroint le corps d'armee, qui auroit pris par Aquilee.

A ces renseignemens sur les avantages et les inconveniens des des divers
passages, le dominicain en ajoute quelques autres sur les princes par les
etats desquels il faudra passer, et sur les ressources que fourniront ces
etats.

La Rassie est un pays fertile, dit il; elle a en activite cinq mines d'or,
cinq d'argent, et plusieurs autres qui portent or et argent. Il ne faudroit
pour la conquete de cette contree que mille chevaliers et six mille hommes
d'infanterie. Ce seroit un joyel (joyau) gracieux et plaisant a acquerir.

L'auteur veut qu'on ne fasse aucun traite d'alliance ni avec ce roi ni meme
avec l'empereur Grec; et, pour mieux motiver sont assertion, il rapporte
quelques details sur le personnel de ces princes, et principalement sur le
premier, qu'il dit etre un usurpateur.

Quant a l'autre, il demande non seulement qu'on ne fasse avec lui ni paix
ni treve, mais encore qu'on lui declare la guerre. En consequence il donne
des moyens pour assieger Constantinople, Andrinople et Thessalonique. Et
comme, d'apres ce qui es-arrive, il ne doute nullement de ce qui doit
arriver encore, c'est-a dire de la prise de Constantinople, il propose
divers reglemens pour gouverner l'empire d'Orient quand on l'aura conquis
une seconde fois, et pour le ramener a la religion Romaine.

Il termine ses avis directifs par avertir les croises de se mettre en garde
contre la prefidie des Grecs, ainsi que contre les Syriens, les Hassassins
et autres habitans de l'Asie. Il leur detaille une partie des pieges qu'on
leur tendra, et leur enseigne a s'en garantir.

Brochard, dans sa premiere partie, a conduit par terre jusqu'a
Constantinople l'ost de Nostre Seigneur, et il lui a fait prendre cette
ville. Dans la seconde il lui fait passer le detroit et le mene en Asie. Au
reste il connoissoit tres-bien ces contrees; et independamment de ses
vingt-quatre ans de sejour dans la Palestine, il avoit parcouru encore
l'Armenie, la Perse, l'empire Grec, etc.

Selon lui, ce qui, dans les croisades precedentes, avoit fait echouer les
rois de France et d'Angleterre, c'est que mal adroitement on attaquoit a la
fois et les Turcs et le soudan d'Egypte. Il propose de n'attaquer que les
premiers, et de n'avoir affaire qu'a eux seuls.

Pour le faire avec succes il donne des renseigemens sur la Turquie, nommee
Anachely (Anotolie) par les Grecs; sur la maniere de tirer par mer des
vivres pour l'armee; sur l'espoir bien fonde de reussir contre un peuple
necessairement abandonne de Dieu, parce que sa malice est accomplie; contre
un peuple qui interieurement est affoibli par des guerres intestines et par
le manque de chefs; dont la cavalerie est composee d'esclaves; qui, avec
peu de courage et d'industrie n'a que des chevaux petits et foibles, de
mauvaises armes, des arcs Turquois et des haubergeons de cuir qu'on
pourrait appeler des cuirasses [Footnote: Le haubert et le haubergeon
(sorte de haubert plus leger et moins lourd) etoient une sorte de chemise
en mailles de fer, laquelle descendoit jusqu'a micuisse. Les haubergeons
Turcs, au contraire, etoient si courts qu'on pouvoit selon l'auteur, les
qualifier du nom de cuirasses.]; contre un peuple enfin qui ne combat qu'en
fuyant, et qui, apres les Grecs et les Babyloniens, est le plus vil de tout
Orient, en fais d'armes.

L'auteur declare en finissant que dans tout cet Orient il n'est presque
aucune nation qu'il n'ait veue aller en bataille, et que la seule puissance
de France, sans nuls aydes quelsconques, peut defaire, non seulement les
Turcs et les Egyptiens [Footnote: Les Turcs et les Egyptiens! frere
Brochard, vous oubliez Louise-le-Jeune et saint Louis.], mais encore les
Tartres (Tatars) fors (excepte) les Indiens, les Arabes, et les Persains.

La collection de Bruxelles contient un autre exemplaire de l'Advis
directif, in fol pap miniat. No. 352. Celui-ci forme un volume a part. Sa
vignette represente Brochard travaillant a son pupitre. Vient ensuite une
miniature ou on le voit presentant son livre au roi: puis une autre ou le
roi est en marche avec son armee pour la Terre Sainte.

J'ai egalement trouve dans la meme collection les deux traites Latins de
l'auteur, reunis en un seul volume in fol. pap. No. 319, couvert en basane
rouge. Le premier porte en titre: Directorium ad passagium faciendum,
editum per quemdam fratrem ordinis Predicatorum, scribentem experta et visa
potius quam audita; ad serenissimum principemet dominum Philippum, regem
Francorum, anno Domini M.CCC'mo. xxxii deg..

Le second est intitule: Libellus de Terra Sancta, editus a fratre Brocardo,
Theutonico, ordinis fratrum predicatorum. A la fin de celui-ci on lit qu'il
a ete ecrit par Jean Reginaldi, chanoine de Cambrai. Comme l'autre est
incontestablement de la meme main, je de doute nullement qu'il ne soit
aussi de Reginaldi.

Il me reste maintenant a faire connoitre notre troisieme ouvrage Francais,
ce Voyage de la Brocquiere que je publie aujourd'hui.

L'auteur etoit gentilhomme, et l'on s'en apercoit sans peine quand il parle
de chevaux, de chateaux forts et de joutes.

Sa relation n'est qu'un itineraire qui souvent, et surtout dans la
description du pays, et des villes, presente un peu de monotonie et des
formes peu variees; mais cet itineraire est interessant pour l'histoire et
la geographie du temps. Elles y trouveront des materiaux tres-precieux, et
quelquefois meme des tableaux et des apercus qui ne sont pas sans merite.

Le voyageur est un homme d'un esprit sage et sense, plein de jugement et de
raison. On admirera l'impartialite avec laquelle il parle des nations
infideles qu'il a occasion de connoitre, et specialement des Turcs, dont la
bonne foi est bien superieure, selon lui, a celle de beaucoup de chretiens.

Il n'a guere de la superstition de son siecle que la devotion pour les
pelerinages et les reliques; encore annonce-t-il souvent peu de foi sur
l'authenticite des reliques qu'on lui montre.

Quant aux pelerinages, on verra en le lisant combien ils etoient multiplies
en Palestine, et son livre sera pour nous un monument qui, d'une part,
constatera l'aveugle credulite avec laquelle nos devots occidentaux avoient
adopte ces pieuses fables; et de l'autre l'astuce criminelle des chretiens
de Terre-Sainte, qui pour soutirer l'argent des croises et des pelerins, et
se faire a leurs depens un revenu, les avoient imaginees.

La Brocquiere ecrit en militaire, d'un style franc et loyal qui annonce de
la veracite et inspire la confiance; mais il ecrit avec negligence et
abandon; de sorte que ses matieres n'ont pas toujours un ordre bien
constant, et que quelquefois il commence a raconter un fait dont la suite
se trouve a la page suivante. Quoique cette confusion soit rare, je me suis
cru permis de la corriger et de rapprocher ce qui devoit etre reuni et ne
l'etoit pas.

Notre manuscrit a, pour son orthographe, le defaut qu'ils ont la plupart,
c'est que, dans certains noms, elle varie souvent d'une page a l'autre, et
quelquefois meme dans deux phrases qui se suivent. On me blameroit de
m'astreindre a ces variations d'une langue qui, alors incertaine,
aujourd'hui est fixee. Ainsi, par exemple, il ecrit Auteriche, Autherice,
Austrice, Ostrice. Je n'emploierai constamment que celui d'Autriche.

Il en sera de meme des noms dont l'orthographe ne varie point dans le
manuscrit, mais qui en ont aujourd'hui une differente. J'ecrirai Hongrie,
Belgrade, Bulgarie, et non Honguerie, Belgrado, Vulgarie.

D'autres noms enfin ont change en entier et ne sont plus les memes. Nous ne
disons plus la mer Majeure, la Dunoe; mais la mer Noire, le Danube. Quant a
ceux-ci je crois interessant pour cela de les citer une fois. Ainsi la
premiere fois que dans la relation le mot Dunoe s'offrira, j'ecrirai Dunoe;
mais par la suite je dirai toujours Danube et il en sera de meme pour les
autres.

On m'objectera, je m'y attends, qu'il est mal de preter a un auteur des
expressions qui n'etoient ni les siennes ni souvent meme celles de son
siecle; mais, apres avoir bien pese les avantages et les inconveniens d'une
nomenclature tres-litterale, j'ai cru reconnoitre que cette exactitude
rigoureuse rendroit le texte inintelligible ou fatigant pour la plupart des
lecteurs; que si l'on veut qu'un auteur soit entendu, il faut le faire
parler comme il parleroit lui-meme s'il vivoit parmi nous; enfin qu'il est
des choses que le bon sens ordonne de changer ou de supprimmer, et qu'il
seroit ridicule, par exemple, de dire, comme la Brocquiere, un seigneur
hongre, pour un seigneur Hongrois; des chretiens vulgaires, pour des
chretiens Bulgares, etc.

       *       *       *       *       *

VOYAGE DE LA BROCQUIERE.

Cy commence le voyage de Bertrandon de la Brocquiere en la Terre d'Oultre
  Mer l'an de grace mil quatre cens et trente deux.

Pour animer et enflammer le coeur des nobles hommes qui desirent voir le
monde;

Et par l'ordre et commandement de tres-haut, tres-puissant et mon
tres-redoute seigneur, Philippe, par la grace de Dieu, duc de Bourgogne, de
Lothrik (Lorraine), de Brabant et de Limbourg; comte de Flandres, d'Artois
et de Bourgogne; [Footnote: La Bourgogne etoit divisee en deux parties,
duche et comte. Cette derniere, qui depuis fut connue sous le nom de
Franche-Comte, commenca des-lors a prendre ce nom; voila pourquoi l'auteur
designe a la fois Philippe et comme duc de Bourgogne, et comme comte de
Bourgogne.] palatin de Hainaut, de Hollande, de Zelande et de Namur;
marquis du Saint-Empire; seigneur de Frise, de Salins et de Malines:

Je, Bertrandon de la Brocquiere, natif du duche de Guienne, seigneur de
Vieux-Chateau, conseiller et premier ecuyer tranchant de mondit
tres-redoute seigneur;

D'apres ce que je puis me rappeler et ce que j'avois consigne en abrege
dans un petit livret en guise de memorial, j'ai redige par ecrit ce peu de
voyage que j'ai fait;

Afin que si quelque roi ou prince chretien vouloit entreprendre la conquete
de Jerusalem et y conduire par terre une armee, ou si quelque noble homme
vouloit y voyager, les uns et les autre pussent connoitre, depuis le duche
de Bourgogne jusqu'a Jerusalem, toutes les villes, cites, regions,
contrees, rivieres, montagnes et passages du pays, ainsi que les seigneurs
auxquels ils appartiennent.

La route d'ici a la cite sainte est si connue que je ne crois pas devoir
m'arreter a la decrire. Je passerai donc legerement sur cet article, et ne
commencerai a m'etendre un peu que quand je parlerai de la Syrie. J'ai
parcouru ce pays entier, depuis Gazere (Gaza), qui est l'entree de
l'Egypte, jusqu'a une journee d'Halep, ville situee au nord sur la
frontiere et ou j'on se rend quand on veut aller en Perse.

J'avois resolu de faire le saint pelerinage de Jerusalem. Determine a
l'accomplir, je quittai, au mois de Fevrier l'an 1432, la cour de mon
tres-redoute seigneur, qui alors etoit a Gand. Apres avoir traverse la
Picardie, la Champagne, la Bourgogne, j'entrai en Savoie ou je passai le
Rhone, et arrivai a Chamberi par le Mont-du-Chat.

La commence une longue suite de montagnes, dont la plus haute, nommee mont
Cenis, forme un passage dangereux dans les temps de neige. Par-tout la
route, etant couverte et cachee, il faut avoir, si l'on ne veut pas se
perdre, des guides du pays, appeles marrons. Ces gens vous recommandent de
ne faire en chemin aucune sorte de bruit qui puisse etonner la montagne,
parce qu'alors la neige s'en detache et vient tres-impetueusement tomber au
bas. Le mont Cenis separe l'Italie de la France.

Descendu de la dans le Piemont, pays beau et agreable, qui par trois cotes
est clos de hautes montagnes, je passai par Turin, ou je traversai le Po;
par Ast, qui est au duc d'Orleeans; par Alexandrie, dont la plupart des
habitans sont usuriers, dit-on; par Plaisance, qui appartient au nuc de
Milan; enfin par Bologne-la-Grasse, qui est au pape. L'empereur Sigismond
etoit dans Plaisance. Il venoit de Milan, ou il avoit recu sa seconde
couronne, et alloit a Rome chercher la troisieme. [Footnote: En 1414,
Sigismond, elu empereur, avoit recu la couronne d'argent a Aix-la-Chapelle.
Au mois de Novembre 1431, peu avant le passage de notre voyageur, il avoit
recu a Milan la couronne de fer. Ce ne fut qu'en 1443 qu'il recut a Rome,
des mains du pape, celle d'or.]

De Bologne, pour arriver dans l'etat des Florentins, j'eus a passer une
autre chaine de montagnes (l'Apennin). Florence est une grande ville ou la
commune se gouverne par ellememe. De trois en trois mois elle se choisit,
pour son administration, des magistrats qu'elle appelle prieurs, et qui
sont pris dans diverses professions. Tant qu'ils restent en place on les
honore; mais, quand leurs trois mois sont expires, chacun retourne a son
etat. [Footnote: Pour donner une idee favorable du talent de la Brocquiere,
ne pourroit-on pas citer le court et bel eloge qu'il fait ici du
gouvernmement representatif et republicain qu'avoit alors Florence?]

De Florence j'allai a Mont-Poulchan (Monte-Pulciano), chateau bati sur une
hauteur et entoure de trois cotes par un grand lac (le lac de Perouse); a
Espolite (Spolete); a Mont-Flaschon (Monte Fiascone); enfin a Rome.

Rome est connue. On sait par des ecrits veridiques que pendant sept cents
ans elle a ete maitresse du monde. Mais quand ces ecrits, ne
l'attesteroient pas, on n'en auroit pas moins la preuve dans tous ces beaux
edifices qu'on y voit encore, dans ces grands palais, ces colonnes de
marbre, ces statues et tous ces monumens aussi merveilleux a voir qu'a
decrire.

Joignez a cela l'immense quantite de belles reliques qu'elle possede, tant
de choses qui N. S. a touchees, tant de saints corps d'apotres, de martyrs,
de confesseurs et de vierges; enfin plusieurs eglises, ou les saints
pontifes ont accorde plein pardon de peine et de coulpe (indulgence
pleniere).

J'y vis Eugene IV, Venitien, qui venoit d'etre elu pape.[Footnote: On va
voir que la Brocquiere sortit de Rome le 25 Mars, et Eugene avoit ete elu
dans les premiers jours du mois.] Le prince de Salerne lui avoit declare la
guerre. Celui-ci etoit un Colonne, et neveu du pape Martin.[Footnote:
Martin V, predecesseur d'Eugene, etoit de la maison des Colonne, et il y
avoit inimitie declaree entre cette famille et celle des Ursins. Eugene,
des qu'il se vit etabli sur le Saint-Siege, prit parti entre ces deux
maisons. Il se declara pour la seconde contre la premiere, et sur-tout
contre ceux des Colonne, qui etoient neveux de Martin. Ceux ci prirent les
armes et lui firent la guerre.]

Je sortis de Rome le 25 Mars, et passant par une ville du comte de
Thalamone, parent du cardinal des Ursins, par Urbin; par la seigneurie des
Malatestes, par Reymino (Rimini), par Ravenne, qui est aux Venitiens, je
traversai trois fois le Po (trois branches de l'embouchure du Po), et vins
a Cloge (Chiosa), ville des Venitiens qui autrefois avoit un bon port,
lequel fut detruit par eux quand les Jennevois (Genois) vinrent assieger
Venise. [Footnote: Jennevois ou Gennevois. Les auteurs de ce temps
appellent toujours ainsi les Genois. Je n'emploierai desormais que cette
derniere denomination, l'autre etant aujourd'hui exclusivement consacree
aux habitans de Geneve.] Enfin, de Cloge je me rendis a Venise, qui en est
distante de vingt-cinq milles.

Venise, grande et belle ville, ancienne et marchande, est batie au milieu
de la mer. Ses divers quartiers, separes par les eaux, forment des iles; de
sorte qu'on ne peut aller de l'une a l'autre qu'en bateau.

On y possede le corps de sainte Helene, mere de l'empereur Constantin,
ainsi que plusieurs autres que j'ai vus, et specialement plusieurs des
Innocens, qui sont entiers. Ceux-ci se trouvent dans une ile qu'on appelle
Reaut (Realto), ile renommee par ses fabriques de verre.

Le gouvernement de Venise est sage. Nul ne peut etre membre du conseil ou y
posseder quelque emploi s'il n'est noble et ne dans la ville. Il y a un duc
qui sans cesse, pendant le jour, est tenu d'avoir avec lui six des anciens
du conseil les plus remarquables. Quand il meurt, on lui donne pour
successeur celui qui a montre le plus de sagesse et le plus de zele pour le
bien commun.

Le 8 Mai je m'embarquai, pour accomplir mon voyage, sur une galee (galere)
avec quelques autres pelerins. Elle cotoya l'Esclavonie, et relacha
successivement a Pole (Pola), Azarre (Zara), Sebenich (Sebenico) et Corfo
(Corfou).

Pola me parut avoir ete autrefois une grande et forte ville. Elle a un
tres-beau port. On voit a Zara le corps de ce saint Simeon a qui N. S. fut
presente dans le temple. Elle est entouree de trois cotes par la mer, et
son port, egalement beau, est ferme d'une chaine de fer. Sebenico
appartient aux Venitiens, ainsi que l'ile et la ville de Corfou, qui, avec
un tres-beau port, a encore deux chateaux.

De Corfou nous vinmes a Modon, bonne et belle ville de Moree, qu'ils
possedent aussi; a Candie, ile tres-fertile, dont les habitans sont
excellens marins et ou la seigneurie de Venise nomme un gouverneur qui
porte le titre de duc, mais qui ne reste en place que trois ans; a Rhodes,
ou je n'eus que le temps de voir la ville; a Baffe, ville ruinee de l'ile
de Cypre; enfin a Jaffe, en la sainte terre de permission.

C'est a Jaffa, que commencent les pardons de ladite sainte terre. Jadis
elle appartint aux chretiens, et alors elle etoit forte; maintenant elle
est entierement detruite, et n'a plus que quelques cahuttes en roseaux, ou
les pelerins se retirent pour se defendre de la chaleur du soleil. La mer
entre dans la ville et forme un mauvais havre peu profond, ou il est
dangereux de rester, parce qu'on peut etre jete a la cote par un coup de
vent. Elle a deux sources d'eau douce, dont l'une est couverte des eaux de
mer quand le vent de Ponent souffle un peu fort. Des qu'il debarque au port
quelques pelerins, aussitot des truchemens et autres officiers du soudan
[Footnote: C'est du Soudan d'Egypte, qu'il s'agit ici. C'etoit a lui
qu'obeissoient alors la Palestine et la Syrie. Il en sera souvent mention
dans le cours du voyage.] viennent pour s'assurer de leur nombre, pour leur
servir de guides, et recevoir en son nom le tribut d'usage.

Rames (Ramle), ou nous nous rendimes de Jaffe, est une ville sans
murailles, mais bonne et marchande, sise dans un canton agreable et
fertile. Nous allames dans le voisinage visiter ung village ou monseigneur
saint Georg fu martirie; et de retour a Rames, nous reprimes notre route,
et arrivames en deux jours en la sainte cite de Jherusalem, ou nostre
Seigneur Jhesu Crist recut mort et passion pour nous.

Apres y avoir fait les pelerinages qui sont d'usage pour les pelerins, nous
fimes ceux de la montagne ou Jesus jeuna quarante jours; du Jourdain, ou il
fut baptise; de l'eglise de Saint-Jean, qui est pres du fleuve; de celle de
Sainte-Marie-Madelaine et de Sainte-Marthe, ou notre Seigneur ressuscita le
Ladre (Lazare); de Bethleem, ou il prit naissance; du lieu ou naquit
Saint-Jean-Baptiste; de la maison de Zacharie; enfin de Sainte-Croix, ou
crut l'arbre de la vraie croix: apres quoi nous revinmes a Jerusalem.

Il y a dans Bethleem des cordeliers qui ont une eglise ou ils font le
service divin; mais ils sont dans une grande sujetion des Sarrasins. La
ville n'a pour habitans, que des Sarrasins et quelques chretiens de la
ceinture. [Footnote: L'an 235 de l'hegire, 856 de l'ere chretienne, le
calife Motouakkek astreignit les chretiens et les Juifs a porter une large
ceinture de cuir, et aujourd'hui encore ils la portent dans l'Orient. Mais
depuis cette epoque les chretiens d'Asie, et specialement ceux de Syrie,
qui sont presque tous Nestoriens ou Jacobites, furent nommes chretiens de
la ceinture.]

Au lieu de la naissance de sainte Jean Baptiste, on montre une roche qui,
pendant qu'Herode persecutoit les innocens, s'ouvrit miraculeusement en
deux. Sainte Elisabeth y cacha son fils; aussitot elle se ferma, et
l'enfant y resta, dit-on, deux jours entiers.

Jerusalem est dans un fort pays des montagnes, et c'est encore aujourd'hui
une ville assez considerable, quoiqu'elle paroisse l'avoir ete autrefois
bien davantage. Elle est sous la domination du soudan; ce qui doit faire
honte et douleur a la chretiente. Il n'y a de chretiens Francs que deux
cordeliers qui habitent au Saint-Sepulcre, encore y sont ils bien vexes des
Sarrasins; et je puis en parler avec connoissance de cause, moi qui pendant
deux mois en ai ete le temoin.

Dans l'eglise du Sepulcre se trouvent aussi d'autres sortes de chretiens:
Jacobites, Ermenins (Armeniens), Abecins (Abyssins), de la terre du pretre
Jehan, et chretiens de la ceinture; mais de tous ce sont les Francs qui
eprouvent la sujetion la plus dure.

Apres tous ces pelerinages accomplis, nous en entreprimes un autre
egalement d'usage, celui de Sainte-Catherine au mont Sinai; et pour
celui-ci nous nous reunimes dix pelerins: messire Andre de Thoulongeon,
messire Michel de Ligne, [Footnote: On sait que le nom de messire ou de
monseigneur etoit un titre qu'on donnoit aux chevaliers.] Guillaume de
Ligne son frere, Sanson de Lalaing, Pierre de Vaudrey, Godefroi de Thoisi,
Humbert Buffart, Jean de la Roe, Simonnet (le nom de la famile est en
blanc), et moi. [Footnote: Ces noms, dont le cinq premiers sont ceux de
grands seigneurs des etats du duc de Bourgogne, attestent que plusieurs
personnes de la cour du duc s'etoient reunies pour le voyage d'outremer, et
ce sont probablement celles qui s'embarquerent a Venise avec notre auteur,
quoique jusqua present il ne les ait pas nommees. Toulongeon, cette meme
annee 1432, fut cree chevalier de la toison d'or; mais il ne recut pas
l'ordre, parce qu'il etoit pelerin et qu'il mourut en route.]

Pour l'instruction de ceux qui, comme moi, voudroient l'entreprendre, je
dirai que l'usage est de traiter avec le grand trucheman de Jerusalem; que
celui-ci commence par percevoir un droit pour le soudan et un autre pour
lui, et qu'alors il envoie prevenir le trucheman de Gaza, qui a son tour
traite du passage avec les Arabes du desert. Ces Arabes jouissent du droit
de conduire les pelerins; et comme ils ne sont pas toujours fort soumis au
soudan, on est oblige de se servir de leurs chameaux, qu'ils louent a deux
ducats par bete.

Le Sarrasin qui remplissoit alors l'emploi de grand trucheman se nommoit
Nanchardin. Quand il eut recu la reponse des Arabes, il nous assembla
devant la chapelle qui est a l'entree et a la gauche de l'eglise de Saint
Sepulcre. La il prit par ecrit nos ages, noms, surnoms et signalemens
tres-detailles, et en envoya le double au grand trucheman du Caire. Ces
precautions ont lieu pour la surete des voyageurs, afin que les Arabes ne
puissent en retenir aucun; mais je suis persuade qu'il y entre aussi de la
mefiance, et qu'on craint quelque echange ou quelque substitution qui fasse
perdre le tribut.

Prets a partir, nous achetames du vin pour la route, et fimes notre
provision de vivre, excepte celle de biscuit, parce que nous devions en
trouver a Gaza. Nanchardin nous fournit, pour notre monture et pour porter
nos provisions, des anes et des mulets. Il nous donna un trucheman
particulier, nomme Sadalva, et nous partimes.

Le premier lieu par lequel nous passames est un village, jadis beaucoup
plus considerable et maintenant habite par des chretiens de la ceinture,
qui cultivent des vignes. Le second est une ville appellee Saint-Abraham;
et situee dans la vallee d'Hebron, ou Notre Seigneur forma premierement
Adam, notre premier pere. La sont inhumes ensemble Abraham, Isaac et Jacob,
avec leurs femmes. Mais ce tombeau est aujourd'hui enferme dans une mosquee
de Sarrasins. Nous desirions fort d'y entrer, et nous avancames meme
jusqu'a la porte; mais nos guides et notre trucheman nous dirent qu'ils
n'oseroient nous y introduire de jour, a cause des risques qu'ils
courroient, et que tout chretien qui penetre dans une mosquee est, mis a
mort, a moins qu'il ne renonce a sa foi.

Apres la vallee d'Hebron nous en traversames une autre fort grande, pres de
laquelle on montre la montagne ou saint Jean Baptiste fit sa penitence. De
la nous vinmes en pays desert loger dans une de ces maisons que la charite
a fait batir pour les voyageurs, et qu'on appelle kan, et du kan nous nous
rendimes a Gaza.

Gaza, situee dans un beau pays, pres de la mer et a l'entree du desert, est
une forte ville, quoique sans fermeture aucune. On pretend quelle appartint
jadis au fort Sanson. On y montre encore son palais, ainsi que les colonnes
de celui qu'il abbattit; mais je n'oserois garantir que ce sont les memes.

Souvent les pelerins y sont traites durement, et nous en aurions fait
l'epreuve sans le seigneur (le gouverneur), homme d'environ soixante ans et
ne Chercais (Circassien), qui recut nos plaintes et nous rendit justice.
Trois fois nous fumes obliges de paroitre devant lui: l'une a raison de nos
epees que nous portions; les deux autres pour des querelles que nous
cherchoient les Moucres Sarrasins du pays.

Plusieurs de nous vouloient acheter des anes, parce que le chameau a un
branle tres-dur qui fatigue extremement quand on n'y est pas accoutume. Un
ane a Gaza se vendoit deux ducats; et les Moucres vouloient, non seulement
nous empecher d'en acheter, mais nous forcer d'en louer des leurs, et de
les louer cinq ducats chacun jusqu'a Sainte Catherine. Le proces fut porte
devant le seigneur. Pour moi, qui jusque-la n'avois point cesse de monter
un chameau, et qui me proposois de ne point changer, je leur demandai de
m'apprendre comment je pourrois monter un chameau et un ane tout a la fois.
Le seigneur prononca en notre faveur, et il decida que nous ne serions
obliges de louer des anes aux Moucres qu'autant que cela nous conviendroit.

Nous achetames les nouvelles provisions qui nous etoient necessaires pour
continuer notre voyage; mais, la veille de notre depart, quatre d'entre
nous tomberent malades, et ils retournerent a Jerusalem. Moi, je partis
avec les cinq autres, et nous vinmes a un village situe a l'entre du
desert, et le seul qu'on trouve depuis, Gaza jusqu'a Sainte Catherine. La
messire Sanson de Lalaing nous quitta et s'en retourna aussi; de sort que
je restai dans la compagnie de messire Andre (de Toulongeon), Pierre de
Vaudrei, Godefroi (de Toisi) et Jean de la Roe.

Nous voyageames ainsi deux journees dans le desert, sans y rien voir
absolument qui merite d'etre raconte. Seulement un matin, avant le lever du
soleil, j'apercus courir un animal a quatre pattes, long de trois pieds
environ, et qui n'avoit guere en hauteur plus qu'une palme. A sa vue nos
Arabes s'enfuirent, et la bete alla se cacher dans une broussaille qui se
trouvoit la. Messire Andre et Pierre de Vaudrey mirent pied a terre, et
coururent a elle l'epee en main. Elle se mit a crier comme un chat qui voit
approcher un chien. Pierre de Vaudrey la frappa sur le dos de la pointe de
son epee; mais il ne lui fit aucun mal, parce qu'elle est couverte de
grosses ecailles, comme un esturgeon. Elle s'elanca sur messire Andre, qui
d'un coup de la sienne lui coupa la cou en partie, la tourna sur le dos,
les pieds en l'air, et la tua. Elle avoit la tete d'un fort lievre, les
pieds comme les mains d'un petit enfant, et une assez longue queue,
semblable a celle des gros verdereaux (lezards verts). Nos Arabes et notre
trucheman nous dirent qu'elle etoit fort dangereuse. [Footnote: D'apres la
description vague que donne ici la Brocquiere, il paroit que l'animal dont
il parle est le grand lezard appele monitor, parce qu'on pretend qu'il
avertit da l'approche du crocodile. Quant a la terreur qu'en avoient les
Arabes, elle n'etoit point fondee.]

A la fin de la seconde journee je fus saisi d'une fievre ardente, si forte
qu'il me fut impossible d'aller plus loin. Mes quatre compagnons, bien
desoles de mon accident, me firent monter un ane, et me recommanderent a un
de nos Arabes, qu'ils chargerent de me reconduire a Gaza, s'il etoit
possible.

Cet homme eut beaucoup soin de moi; ce qui ne leur est point ordinaire
vis-a-vis des chretiens. Il me tint fidele compagnie, et me mena le soir
passer la nuit dans un de leurs camps, qui pouvoit avoir quatre-vingts et
quelques tentes, rangees en forme de rues. Ces tentes sont faites avec deux
fourches qu'on plante en terre par leur gros bout a une certaine distance
l'une de l'autre. Sur les deux fourches est posee en traverse une perche et
sur la perche une grosse couverture en laine ou en gros poil.

Quand j'arrivai, quatre ou cinq Arabes de la connoissance du mien vinrent
au devant de nous. Ils me descendirent de mon ane, me firent coucher sur un
matelas que je portois, et la, me traitant a leur guise, ils me petirent et
me pincerent tant avec les [Footnote: C'est ce que nous appelons masser.
Cette methode est employee dans beaucoup de contrees de l'Orient pour
certaines maladies.] mains que, de fatigue et de lassitude, je m'endormis
et reposai six heures.

Pendant tout ce temps aucun d'eux ne me fit le moindre deplaisir, et ils ne
me prirent rien. Ce leur etoit cependant chose bien aisee; et je devois
d'ailleurs les tenter, puisque je portois sur moi deux cents ducats, et que
j'avois deux chameaux charges de provisions et de vin.

Je me remis en route avant le jour pour regagner Gaza: mais quand j'y
arrivai je ne retrouvai plus ni mes quatre compagnons, ni meme messire
Sanson de Lalaing. Tous cinq etoient retournes a Jerusalem, et ils avoient
emmene avec eux le truceman. Heureusement je trouvai un Juif Sicilien de
qui je pus me faire entendre. Il fit venir pres de moi un vieux Samaritain
qui, par un remede qu'il me donna, appaisa la grande ardeur que j'endurois.

Deux jours apres, me sentant un peu mieux, je partis dans la compagnie d'un
Maure. Il me mena par le chemin de la marine (de la cote.) Nous passames
pres d'Esclavonie (Ascalon), et vinmes, a travers un pays toujours agreable
et fertile, a Ramle, d'ou je repris le chemin de Jerusalem.

La premiere journee, je rencontrai sur ma route l'amiral (commandant) de
cette ville. Il revenoit d'un pelerinage avec une troupe de cinquante
cavaliers et de cent chameaux, montes presque tous par des femmes et des
enfans qui l'avoient accompagne au lieu de sa devotion. Je passai la nuit
avec eux; et, le lendemain, de retour a Jerusalem, j'allai loger chez les
cordeliers, a l'eglise du mont de Sion, ou je retrouvai mes cinq camarades.

En arrivant je me mis au lit pour me faire traiter de ma maladie, et je ne
fus gueri et en etat de partir que le 19 d'Aout. Mais pendant ma
convalescence je me rappelai que plusieurs fois j'avois entendu differentes
personnes dire qu'il etoit impossible a un chretien de revenir par terre de
Jerusalem en France. Je n'oserois pas meme, aujourd'hui que j'ai fait le
voyage, assurer qu'il est sur. Cependant il me sembla qu'il n'y a rien
qu'un homme ne puisse entreprendre quand il est assez bien constitue pour
supporter la fatigue, et qu'il possede argent et sante. Au reste, ce n'est
point par jactance que je dis cela; mais, avec l'aide de Dieu et de sa
glorieuse mere, qui jamais ne manque d'assister ceux qui la prient de bon
coeur, je resolus de tenter l'aventure.

Je me tus neanmoins pour le moment sur mon projet, et ne m'en ouvris pas
meme a mes compagnons. D'ailleurs je voulois, avant de l'entreprendre,
faire encore quelques autres pelerinages, et specialement ceux de Nazareth
et du mont Thabor. J'allai donc prevenir de mon dessein Nanchardin, grand
trucheman du soudan a Jerusalem, et il me donna pour mon voyage un
trucheman particulier. Je comptois commerce par celui du Thabor, et deja
tout etoit arrange; mais quand je fus au moment de partir, le gardien chez
qui je logeois m'en detourna, et s'y opposa meme de toutes ses forces. Le
trucheman, de son cote, s'y refusa, et il m'annonca que je ne trouverois
dans les circonstances personne pour m'accompagner, parce qu'il nous
faudroit passer sur le territoire de villes qui etoient en guerre, et que
tout recemment un Venitien et son trucheman y avoient ete assassines.

Je me restreignis done au second pelerinage, et messire Sanson de Lalaing
voulut m'y accompagner, ainsi que Humbert. Nous laissames au mont de Sion
messire Michel de Ligne, qui etoit malade. Son frere Guillaume resta pres
de lui avec an serviteur pour le garder. Nous autres nous partimes le jour
de la mi-aout, et notre intention etoit de nous rendre a Jaffa par Ramle,
et de Jaffa a Nazareth; mais avant de me mettre en route, j'allai au
tombeau de Notre Dame implorer sa protection pour mon grand voyage.
J'entendis aux cordeliers le service divin, et je vis la des gens qui se
disent chretiens, desquels il y en a de bien estranges, selon nostre
maniere.

Le gardien de Jerusalem nous fit l'amitie de nous accompngner jusqu'a
Jaffa, avec un frere cordelier du couvent de Beaune. La ils nous
quitterent, et nous primes une barque de Maures qui nous conduisit au port
d'Acre.

Ce port est beau, profond et bien ferme. La ville elle-meme paroit avoir
ete grande et forte; mais il n'y subsiste plus maintenant que trois cent
maisons situees a l'une de ses extremites, et assez loin de la marine.
Quant a notre pelerinage, nous ne pumes l'accomplir. Des marchands
Venitiens que nous consultames nous en detournerent, et nous primes le
parti d'y renoncer. Il nous apprirent en meme temps qu'on attendoit a Barut
une galere de Narbonne. Mes camarades voulurent en profiter pour retourner
en France, eten consequence nous primes le chemin de cette ville.

Nous vimes en route Sur, ville fermee et qui a un bon port, puis Saiette
(Seyde), autre port de mer assez bon. [Footnote: Sur est l'ancienne Tyr;
Saiette, l'ancienne Sidon; Barut, l'ancienne Berite.] Pour Barut, elle a
ete plus considerable qu'elle ne l'est aujourd'hui; mais son port est beau
encore, profond et sur pour les vaisseaux. On voit a l'une de ses pointes
les restes d'un chateau fort qu'elle avoit autrefois, et qui est detruit.
[Footnote: Les notions que nous donne ici la Brocquiere sont interessantes
pour la geographie. Elles prouvent que tous ces ports de Syrie, jadis si
commercans et si fameux, aujourd'hui si degrades et si completement
inutiles, etoient de son temps propres encore la plupart au commerce.]

Moi qui n'etois occupe que de mon grand voyage, j'employai mon sejour dans
cette ville a prendre sur cet objet des renseignemens et j'ai m'adressai
pour cela a un marchand Genois nomme Jacques Pervezin. Il me conseilla
d'aller a Damas; m'assura que j'y trouverois des marchands Venitiens,
Catalans, Florentins, Genois et autres, qui pourroient me guider par leurs
conseils, et me donna meme, pour un de ses compatriotes appele Ottobon
Escot, une lettre de recommendation.

Resolu de consulter Escot avant de rien entreprendre, je proposai a messire
Sanson d'aller voir Damas, sans cependant lui rien dire de mon projet. Il
accepta volontiers la proposition, et nous partimes, conduit par un moucre.
J'ai deja dit qu'en Syrie les moucres sont des gens dont le metier est de
conduire les voyageurs et de leur louer des anes et des mulets.

Au sortir de Barut nous eumes a traverser de hautes montagnes jusqu'a une
longue plaine appelee vallee de Noe, parce que Noe, dit-on, y batit son
arche. La vallee a tout au plus une lieue de large; mais elle est agreable
et fertile, arrosee par deux rivieres et peuplee d'Arabes.

Jusqu'a Damas on continue de voyager entre des montagnes au pied desquelles
on trouve beaucoup de villages et de vignobles. Mais je previens ceux qui,
comme moi, auront a les traverser, de songer a se bien munir pour la nuit;
car de ma vie je n'ai eu aussi froid. Cette excessive froidure a pour cause
la chute de la rosee; et il en est ainsi par toute la Syrie. Plus la
chaleur a ete grande pendant le jour, plus la rosee est abondante et la
nuit froide.

II y a deux journees de Barut a Damas.

Par toute la Syrie les Mahometans ont etabli pour les chretiens une coutume
particuliere qui ne leur permet point d'aller a cheval dans les villes.
Aucun d'eux, s'il est connu pour tel, ne l'oseroit, et en consequence notre
moucre, avant d'entrer, nous fit mettre pied a terre, messire Sanson et
moi.

A peine etions nous entres qu'une douzaine de Sarrasins s'approcha pour
nous regarder. Je portois un grand chapeau de feutre, qui n'est point
d'usage dans le pays. Un d'eux vint le frapper par dessous d'un coup de
baton, et il me le jeta par terre. J'avoue que mon premier mouvement fut de
lever le poing sur lui. Mais le moucre, se jetant entre nous deux, me
poussa en arriere, et ce fut pour moi un vrai bonheur; car en un instant
trente ou quarante autres personnes accoururent, et, si j'avois frappe, je
ne sais ce que nous serions devenus.

Je dis ceci pour avertir que les habitans de cette ville sont gens mechants
qui n'entendent pas trop raison, et que par consequent il faut bien se
garder d'avoir querrelle avec eux. Il en est de meme ailleurs. J'ai eprouve
par moi-meme qu'il ne faut vis-a-vis d'eux ni faire le mauvais, ni se
montrer peureux; qu'il ne feut ni paroitre pauvre, parce qu'ils vous
mepriseroient; ni riche, parce qu'ils sont tres avides, ainsi que
l'experimentent tous ceux qui debarquent a Jaffa.

Damas peut bien contenir, m'a-t-on dit, cent mille ames. [Footnote: Il y
dans le texte cent mille hommes. Si, par ce mot hommes, l'auteur entend les
habitans males, alors, pour comprendre les femmes dans la population, il
faudroit compter plus de deux cent mille individus au lieu de cent mille.
S'il entend les personnes en etat de porter les aimes, son etat de
population est trop fort et ne peut etre admis.] La ville est riche,
marchande, et, apres le Caire, la plus considerable de toutes celles que
possede le soudan. Au levant, au septentrion et au midi, elle a une grande
plaine; au ponant, une montagne au pied de laquelle sont batis les
faubourgs. Elle est traversee d'une riviere qui s'y divise en plusieurs
canaux, et fermee dans son enceinte seulement de belles murailles; car les
faubourgs sont plus grands que la ville. Nulle part je n'ai vu d'aussi
grands jardins, de meilleurs fruits, une plus grande abondance d'eau. Cette
abondance est telle qu'il y a peu de maisons, m'a-t-on dit, qui n'aient
leur fontaine.

Le seigneur (le gouverneur) n'a, dons toute la Syrie et l'Egypte, que le
seul soudan qui lui soit superieur en puissance. Mais comme en differens
temps quelques-uns d'eux se sont revoltes, les soudans ont pris des
precautions pour les contenir. Du cote de terre est un grand et fort
chateau qui a des fosses larges et profonds. Ils y placent un capitaine a
leur choix, et jamais ce capitaine n'y laisse entrer le gouverneur.

En 1400 Damas fut detruite en cendres par le Trambulant (Tamerlan). On voit
encore des vestiges de ce desastre; et vers la porte qu'on appelle de
Saint-Paul, il y a un quartier tout entier qui n'est pas rebati.

Dans la ville est un kan destine a servir de depot de surete aux negocians
pour leurs marchandises. On l'appelle kan Berkot, et ce nom lui a ete
donne, parce qu'il fut originairement la maison d'un homme nomme ainsi.
Pour moi, je crois que Berkot etoit Francais; et ce qui me le fait
presumer, c'est que sur une pierre de sa maison sont sculptees des fleurs
de lis qui paroissent aussi anciennes que les murs.

Quoi qu'il en soit de son origine, ce fut un tres-vaillant homme, et qui
jouit encore dans le pays d'une haute renommee. Jamais, pendant tout le
temps qu'il vecut et qu'il eut de l'autorite, les Persiens et Tartres
(Persans et Tatars) ne purent gagner en Syrie la plus petite portion de
terrain. Des qu'il apprenoit qu'une de leurs armes y portoit les armes, il
marchoit contre elle jusqu'a une riviere au-dela d'Alep, laquelle separe la
Syrie de la Perse, et qu'a vue de pays je crois etre celle qu'on appelle
Jehon, et qui vient tomber a Misses en Turcomanie. On est persuade a Damas
que, s'il eut vecu, Tamerlan n'auroit pas ose porter ses armes de ce
cote-la. Au reste ce Tamerlan rendit honneur a sa memoire quand il prit la
ville. En ordonnant d'y tout mettre a feu, il ordonna de respecter la
maison de Berkot; il la fit garder pour la defendre de l'incendie, et elle
subsiste encore.

Les chretiens ne sont vus a Damas qu'avec haine. Chaque soir on enferme les
marchands dans leurs maisons. Il y a des gens preposes pour cela, et le
lendemain ils viennent ouvrir les portes quand bon leur semble.

J'y trouvai plusieurs marchands Genois, Venitiens, Catalans, Florentins et
Francais. Ces derniers etoient venus y acheter differentes choses,
specialement des epices, et ils comptoient aller a Barut s'embarquer sur la
galere de Narbonne qu'on y attendoit. Parmi eux il y avoit un nomme Jacques
Coeur, qui depuis a joue un grand role en France et a ete argentier du roi.
Il nous dit que la galere etoit alors a Alexandrie, et que probablement
messire Andre viendroit avec ses trois camarades la prendre a Barut.

Hors de Damas et pres des murs on me montra le lieu ou saint Paul, dans une
vision, fut renverse de cheval et aveugle. Il se fit aussitot conduire a
Damas pour y recevoir le bapteme, et l'endroit ou on le baptisa est
aujourd'hui une mosquee.

Je vis aussi la pierre sur laquelle saint George monta a cheval quand il
alla combattre le dragon. Elle a deux pieds en carre. On pretend
qu'autrefois les Sarrasins avoient voulu l'enlever, et que jamais, quelques
moyens qu'ils aient employes, ils n'ont pu y reussir.

Apres avoir vu Damas nous revinmes a Barut, messire Sanson et moi: nous y
trouvames messire Andre, Pierre de Vaudrey, Geoffroi de Thoisi et Jean de
la Roe, qui deja s'y etoient rendus, comme me l'avoit annonce Jacques
Coeur. La galere y arriva d'Alexandrie trois ou quatre jours apres; mais,
pendant ce court intervalle, nous fumes temoins d'une fete que les Maures
celebrerent a leur ancienne maniere.

Elle commenca le soir, au coucher du soleil. Des troupes nombreuses,
eparses ca et la, chantoient et poussoient de grands cris. Pendant ce temps
on tiroit le canon du chateau, et les gens de la ville lancoient en l'air,
bien haut et bien loin, une maniere de feu plus gros que le plus gros
fallot que je visse oncques allume. Ils me dirent qu'ils s'en servoient
quelquefois a la mer pour bruler les voiles d'un vaisseau ennemi. Il me
semble que, comme c'est chose bien aisee et de une petite despense, on
pourroit l'employer egalement, soit a consumer un camp ou un village
couvert en paille, soit dans un combat de cavalerie, a epouvanter les
chevaux.

Curieux d'en connoitre la composition, j'envoyai vers celui qui le faisoit
le valet de mon hote, et lui fis demander de me l'apprendre. Il me repondit
qu'il n'oseroit, et que ce seroit pour lui une affaire trop dangereuse, si
elle etoit sue; mais comme il n'est rien qu'un Maure ne fasse pour de
l'argent, je donnai a celui-ci un ducat, et, pour l'amour du ducat, il
m'apprit tout ce qu'il savoit, et me donna meme des moules en bois et
autres ingrediens que j'ai apportes en France.

La veille de l'embarquement je pris a part messire Andre de Toulongeon, et
apres lui avoir fait promettre qu'il ne s'opposeroit en rien a ce que
j'allois lui reveler, je lui fis part du projet que j'avois forme de
retourner par terre. Consequemment a sa parole donnee, il ne tenta point de
m'en empecher; mais il me representa tout ce que j'allois courir de
dangers, et celui sur-tout de me voir contraint a renier la foi de
Jesus-Christ. Au reste j'avoue que ses representations etoient fondees, et
que de tous les perils dont il me menacoit il n'en est point, excepte celui
de renier, que je n'aie eprouves. II engagea egalement ses camarades a me
parler; mais ils eurent beau faire, je les laissai partir et demeurai.

Apres leur depart je visitai une mosquee qui jadis avoit ete une tres-belle
eglise, batie, disoit-on, par sainte Barbe. On ajoute que quand les
Sarrasins s'en furent empares, et que leurs crieurs voulurent y monter pour
annoncer la priere, selon leur usage, ils furent si battus que depuis ce
jour aucun d'eux n'a ose y retourner.

II y a aussi un autre batiment miraculeux qu'on a change en eglise. C'etoit
auparavant une maison de Juifs. Un jour que ces gens-la avoient trouve une
image de Notre Seigneur, ils se mirent a la lapider, comme leurs peres
jadis l'avoient lapide lui-meme; mais l'image ayant verse du sang, ils
furent tellement effrayes du miracle, qu'ils se sauverent, allerent
s'accuser a l'eveque, et donnerent meme leur maison en reparation du crime.
On en a fait une eglise, qui aujourd'hui est desservie par des cordeliers.

Je logeai chez un marchand Venitien nomme Paul Barberico; et comme je
n'avois nullement renonce a mes deux pelerinages de Nazareth et du Thabor,
malgre les obstacles que j'y avois rencontres et tout ce qu'on m'avoit dit
pour m'en detourner, je le consultai sur ce double voyage. Il me procura un
moucre qui se chargea de me conduire, et qui s'engagea meme pardevant lui a
me mener sain et sauf jusqu'a Damas, et a lui en rapporter un certificat
signe par moi. Cet homme me fit habiller en Sarrasin; car les Francs, pour
leur surete, quand ils voyagent, ont obtenu du soudan de prendre en route
cet habillement.

Je partis donc de Barut avec mon moucre le lendemain du jour ou la galere
avoit mis a la voile, et nous primes le chemin de Saiette, entre la mer et
les montagnes. Souvent ces montagnes s'avancent si pres du rivage qu'on est
oblige de marcher sur la greve, et quelquefois elles en sont eloignees de
trois quarts de lieue.

Apres une heure de marche je trouvai un petit bois de hauts sapins que les
gens du pays conservent bien precieusement. Il est meme severement defendu
d'en abattre aucun; mais j'ignore la raison de ce reglement.

Plus loin etoit une riviere assez profonde. Mon moucre me dit que c'etoit
celle qui vient de la vallee de Noe, mais qu'elle n'est pas bonne a boire.
Elle a un pont de pierre, pres duquel se trouve un kan ou nous passames la
nuit.

Le lendemain je vins a Seyde, ville situee sur la marine (sur la mer), et
fermee du cote de terre par des fosses peu profonds.

Sur, que les Maures nomment Four, est situee de meme. Il est abreuve par
une fontaine qu'on trouve a un quart de lieue vers le midi, et dont l'eau,
tres-bonne, vient, par-dessur des arches, se rendre dans la ville.

Je ne fis que la traverser, et elle me parut assez belle; cependant elle
n'est pas forte, non plus que Seyde, toutes deux ayant ete detruites
autrefois, ainsi qu'il paroit par leurs murailles, qui ne valent pas, a
beaucoup pres, celles de nos villes.

La montagne, vers Sur, s'arrondit en croissant, et s'avance par ses deux
pointes jusqu'a la mer. L'espace vide entre l'une et l'autre n'a point de
villages; mais il y en a beaucoup le long de la montagne.

Une lieue au-dela on trouve une gorge qui vous oblige de passer sur une
falaise au haut de laquelle est une tour. Les cavaliers qui vont de Sur a
Acre n'ont point d'autre route que ce passage, et la tour a ete construite
pour le garder.

Depuis ce defile jusqu'a Acre les montagnes sont peu elevees, et l'on y
voit beaucoup d'habitations qui, pour la plupart, sont remplies d'Arabes.
Pres de la ville je rencontrai un grand seigneur du pays nomme Fancardin.
Il campoit en plein champ, et portoit avec lui ses tentes.

Acre, entouree de trois cotes par des montagnes, quoique avec une plaine
d'environ quatre lieues, l'est de l'autre par la mer. J'y fis connoissance
d'un marchand de Venise, nomme Aubert Franc, qui m'accueillit bien et qui
me procura sur mes deux pelerinages des renseignemens utiles dont je
profitai.

A l'aide de ses avis je me mis en route pour Nazareth, et, apres avoir
traverse une grande plaine, je vins a la fontaine dont Notre Seigneur
changea l'eau en vin aux noces d'Archeteclin; [Footnote: Architriclinus est
un mot Latin forme du Grec, par lequel l'Evangile designe le maitre d'hotel
ou majordome qui presidoit aux noces de Cana. Nos ignarans auteurs des bas
siecles le prirent pour un nom d'homme, et cet homme ils en firent un
saint, qu'ils appelerent saint Architriclin. Dans la relation de la
Brocquiere, Architriclin est le marie de Cana.] elle est pres d'un village
ou l'on dit que naquit saint Pierre.

Nazareth n'est qu'un autre gros village bati entre deux montagnes; mais le
lieu ou l'ange Gabriel vint annoncer a la vierge Marie qu'elle seroit mere
fait pitie a voir. L'eglise qu'on y avoit batie est entierement detruite,
et il n'en subsiste plus qu'une petite chose (case), la ou Nostre-Dame
estoit quand l'angele lui apparut.

De Nazareth j'allai au Thabor, ou fut faite la transfiguration de Notre
Seigneur, et plusieurs autres miracles. Mais comme les paturages y attirent
beaucoup d'Arabes qui viennent y mener leurs betes, je fus oblige de
prendre pour escorte quatre autres hommes, dont deux etoient Arabes
eux-memes.

La montee est tres-rude parce qu'il n'y a point de chemin; je la fis a dos
de mulet, et j'y employai deux heures. La cime se termine par un plateau
presque rond, qui peut avoir en longeur deux portees d'arc et une de large.
Jadis il fut enceient d'une muraille dont on voit encore des restes avec
des fosses, et dans le pourtour, en dedans du mur, etoient plusieurs
eglises, et specialement une ou l'on gagne encore, quoiqu'elle soit ruinee,
plain pardon de paine et de coulpe.

Au levant du Thabor, et au pied de la montagne, on apercoit Tabarie
(Tiberiade), au-dela de laquelle coule le Jourdain; au couchant est une
grande plaine fort agreable par ses jardins remplis de palmiers portant
dattes, et par de petits bosquets d'arbres, plantes comme des vignes, et
sur lesquels croit le coton. Au lever du soleil ceux-ci presentent un
aspect singulier. En voyant leurs feuilles vertes couvertes de coton, on
diroit qu'il a neige sur eux. [Footnote: Il est probable qu'ici le voyageur
s'est trompe. Le cotonnier a par ses feuilles quelque ressemblance avec
celles de la vigne. Elles sont lobees de meme; mais le coton nait dans des
capsules, et non sur des feuilles. On connoit en botanique plusieurs arbres
dont les feuilles sont couvertes a leur surface exterieure d'un duvet
blanc; mais on n'en connoit aucune qui produise du coton.]

Ce fut dans cette plaine que je descendis pour me reposer et diner; car
j'avois apporte des poulets crus et du vin. Mes guides me conduisirent dans
une maison dont le maitre, quand il vit mon vin, me prit pour un homme de
distinction et m'accueillit bien. Il m'apporta une ecuelle de lait, une de
miel, et une branche chargee de dattes nouvelles. C'etoit la premiere fois
de ma vie que j'en voyois. Je vis encore comment on travailloit le coton,
et pour ce travail les ouvriers etoient des hommes et des femmes. Mais la
aussi mes guides voulurent me ranconner, et, pour me reconduire a Nazareth
ou je les avois pris, ils exigerent de moi un marche nouveau.

Je n'avois point d'epee, car j'avoue que je l'aurois tiree, et c'eut ete
folie a moi, comme c'en seroit une a ceux qui m'imiteroient. Le resultat de
la querelle fut que, pour me debarrasser d'eux, il me fallut leur donner
douze drachmes de leur monnoie, lesquelles valent un demi-ducat. Des qu'ils
les eurent recues ils me quitterent tous quatre; de sorte que je fus oblige
de m'en revenir seul avec mon moucre.

Nous avions fait peu de chemin, quand nous vimes venir a nous deux Arabes
armes a leur maniere et montes sur de superbes chevaux. Le moucre, en les
voyant, eut grande peur. Heureusement ils passerent sans nous rien dire;
mais il m'avoua que, s'ils m'eussent soupconne d'etre chretien, nous etions
perdus, et qu'ils nous eussent tues tous deux sans remission, ou pour le
moins depouilles en entier.

Chacun d'eux portoit une longue et mince perche ferree par les deux bouts,
don't l'un etoit tranchant, l'autre arrondi, mais garni de plusieurs
taillans, et long d'un empan. Leur ecu (bouclier) etoit rond, selon leur
usage, convexe dans la partie du milieu, et garni au centre d'une grosse
pointe de fer; mais depuis cette pointe jusqu'au bas il etoit orne de
longues franges de soie. Ils avoient pour vetement des robes dont les
manches, larges de plus d'un pied et demi, depassoient leur bras, et pour
toque un chapeau rond termine en pointe, de laine cramoisie, et velu; mais
ce chapeau, au lieu d'avoir sa toile tortillee tout autour, comme l'ont les
autres Maures, l'avoit pendante fort bas des deux cotes, dans toute sa
largeur.

Nous allames de la loger a Samarie, parce que je voulois visiter la mer de
Tabarie (lac de Tiberiade), ou l'on dit que saint Pierre pechoit
ordinairement, et y a aucuns (quelques) pardons; c'etoient les quatre-temps
de Septembre. Le moucre me laissa seul toute la journee. Samarie est situee
sur la pointe d'une montagne. Nous n'y entrames qu'a la chute de jour, et
nous en sortimes a minuit pour nous rendre au lac. Le moucre avoit prefere
cette heure, afin d'esquiver le tribut que paient ceux qui s'y rendent;
mais la nuit m'empecha de voir le pays d'alentour.

J'allai ensuite au puits qu'on nomme puits de Jacob, parce que Jacob y fut
jete par ses freres. Il y a la une belle mosquee, dans laquelle j'entrai
avec mon moucre, parce que je feignis d'etre Sarrasin.

Plus loin est un pont de pierre sur lequel on passe le Jourdain, et qu'on
appelle le pont de Jacob, a cause d'une maison qui s'y trouve, et qui fut,
dit-on, celle de ce patriarche. Le fleuve sort d'un grand lac situe au pied
d'une montagne vers le nordouest (nord-ouest), et sur la montagne est un
beau chateau possede par Nancardin.

Du lac je pris le chemin de Damas. Le pays est assez agreable, et quoiqu'on
y marche toujours entre deux rangs de montagnes, il a constamment une ou
deux lieues de large. Cependant on y trouve un endroit fort etrange. La le
chemin est reduit uniquement a ce qu'il faut pour le passage des chevaux
tout le reste, a gauche, dans une largeur et une longueur d'une lieue
environ, ne presente qu'un amas immense de cailloux pareils a ceux de
riviere, et dont la plupart sont gros comme des queues de vin.

Au debouche de ce lieu est un tres-beau kan, entoure de fontaines et de
ruisseaux. A quatre ou cinq milles de Damas il y en a un autre, le plus
magnifique que j'aie vu de ma vie. Celui-ci est pres d'une petite riviere
formee par des sources; et en general plus on approche de la ville et plus
le pays est beau.

La je trouvai un Maure tout noir qui venoit du Caire a course de chameau,
et qui etoit venu en huit jours, quoiqu'il y eut, me dit-on, seize journees
de marche. Son chameau lui avoit echappe: a l'aide de mon moucre je parvins
a le lui faire reprendre. Ces coureurs ont une selle fort singuliere, sur
laquelle ils sont assis les jambes croisees; mais la rapidite des chameaux
qui les conduisent est si grande que, pour resister a l'impression de
l'air, ils se font serrer d'un bandage la tete et le corps.

Celui-ci etoit porteur d'un ordre du soudan. Une galere et deux galiotes du
prince de Tarente avoient pris devant Tripoli de Syrie une griperie
[Footnote: Griperie, grip, sorte de batiment pour aller en course, vaisseau
corsaire.] de Maures: le soudan, par represailles, envoyoit saisir a Damas
et dans toute la Syrie tous les Catalans et les Genois qui s'y trouvoient.
Cette nouvelle, dont je fus instruit par mon moucre, ne m'effraya pas.
J'entrai hardiment dans la ville avec les Sarrasins, parce que, habille
comme eux, je crus n'avoir rien a craindre. Mon voyage avoit dure sept
jours.

Le lendemain de mon arrivee je vis la caravane qui revenoit de la Mecque.
On la disoit composee de trois mille chameaux: et en effet elle employa
pour entrer dans la ville pres de deux jours et deux nuits. Cet evenement
fut, selon l'usage, une grande fete. Le seigneur de Damas, ainsi que les
plus notables, allerent au devant de la caravane, par respect pour
l'Alkoran qu'elle avoit. Ce livre est la loi qu'a laissee aux siens
Mahomet. Il etoit enveloppe d'une etoffe de soie peinte et chargee de
lettres morisque, et un chameau le portoit, couvert lui-meme egalement de
soie.

En avant du chameau marchoient quatre menestrels (musiciens) et une grande
quantite de tambours et de nacquaires (timbales) qui faisoient ung hault
bruit. Devant et autour de lui etoient une trentaine d'hommes dont les uns
portoient des arbaletes, les autres des epees nues, d'autres de petits
canons (arquebuses) qu'ils tiroient de temps en temps. [Footnote: L'auteur
ne dit pas si ces arquebuses etoient a fourchette, a meche, a rouet; mais
il est remarquable que nos armes a feu portatives; dont l'invention etoit
encore assez recente en Europe, fussent des-lors en usage chez les
Mahometans d'Asie.] Par derriere suivoient huit vieillards, qui montoient
chacun un chameau de course pres duquel on menoit en lesse leur cheval,
magnifiquement couvert et orne de riches selles, selon la mode du pays.
Apres eux enfin venoit une dame Turque, parente de grand-seigneur: elle
etoit dans une litiere que portoient deux chameaux richement pares et
couverts. Il y avoit plusieurs de ces animaux couverts de drap d'or.

La caravane etoit composee de Maures, de Turcs, Barbes (Barbaresques),
Tartres (Tatars), Persans et autres sectateurs du faux prophete Mahomet.
Ces gens-la pretendent que, quand ils ont fait une fois le voyage de la
Mecque, ils ne peuvent plus etre damnes. Cest ce que m'assura un esclave
renegat. Vulgaire (Bulgare) de naissance, lequel appartenoit a la dame dont
je viens de parler. Il s'appeloit Hayauldoula, ce qui en Turc signifie
serviteur de Dieu, et pretendoit avoir ete trois fois a la Mecque. Je me
liai avec lui, parce qu'il parloit un peu Italien, et souvent meme il me
tenoit compagnie la nuit ainsi que le jour.

Plusieurs fois, dans nos entretiens, je l'interrogeai sur Mahomet, et lui
demandai ou reposoit son corps. Il me repondit que c'etoit a la Mecque; que
la fiertre (chasse) qui le renfermoit se trouvoit dans une chapelle ronde,
ouverte par le haut: que c'etoit par cette ouverture que les pelerins
alloient voir la fiertre, et que parmi eux il y en avoit qui, apres l'avoir
vue, se faisoient crever les yeux, parce qu'apres cela le monde ne pouvait
rien offrir, disoient-ils, qui meritat leur regards. Effectivement il y en
avoit deux dans la troupe, l'un d'environ seize ans, l'autre de vingt-deux
a vingt-trois, qui c'etoient fait aveugler ainsi.

Hayauldoula me dit encore que c'nest point a la Mecque qu'on gagne les
pardons, mais a Meline (Medine), ville ou saint Abraham fist faire une
maison qui y est encoires. [Footnote: Notre voyageur a confondu: c'est a
Medine, et non a la Mecque, qu'est le tombeau de Mahomet; c'est a la
Mecque, et non a Medine, qu'est la pretendue maison d'Abraham, que les
pelerins gagnent les pardons et que se fait le grand commerce.] La maison
est en forme de cloitre, et le pelerins en font le tour.

Quant a la ville, elle est sur le bord de la mer. Les hommes de la terre du
pretre Jean (les Indiens) y apportent sur de gros vaisseaux les epices et
autres marchandises que produit leur pays. C'est la que les Mahometans vont
les acheter. Ils les chargent sur des chameaux ou sur d'autres betes de
somme, et les portent au Caire, a Damas et autres lieux, ainsi qu'on sait.
De la Mecque a Damas il y a quarante journees de marche a travers le
desert; les chaleurs y sont excessives, et la caravane avoit eu plusieurs
personnes etouffees.

Selon l'esclave renegat, celle de Medine doit annuellement etre compossee
de sept cent mille personnes; et quand ce nombre n'est pas complet, Dieu;
pour le remplir, y envoie des agnes. Au grand jour du jugement Mahomet fera
entrer en paradis autant de personnes qu'il voudra, et la ils auront a
discretion du lait et des femmes.

Comme sans cesse j'entendois parler de Mohomet, je voulus savoir sur lui
quelque chose, et m'adressai pour cela a un pretre qui dans Damas etoit
attache au consul des Venitiens, qui disoit souvent la messe a l'hotel
confessoit les marchands de cette nation, et, en cas de danger, regloit
leurs affaires. Je me confessai a lui, je reglai les miennes, et lui
demandai s'il connoissoit l'historie de Mahomet. Il me dit que oui, et
qu'il savoit tout son Alkoran. Alors je le suppliai le mieux qu'il me fut
possible de rediger par ecrit ce qu'il en connoissoit, afin que je pusse le
presenter a monseigneur le duc. [Footnote: Le duc de Bourgogne, auquel
etoit attache la Brocquiere. Par tout ce que cit ici le voyageur on voit
combien peu etoit connu en Europe le fondateur de l'Islamisme et l'auteur
du Koran.] Il le fit avec plaisir, et j'ai apporte avec moi son travail.

Mon projet etoit de me rendre a Bourse. On m'aboucha en consequence avec un
Maure qui s'engagea dam'y conduire en suivant la caravane. Il me demandoit
trente ducats et sa depense: mais on m'avertit de me defier des Maures
comme gens de mauvaise foi, sujets a fausser leur promesse, et je m'abstins
de conclure. Je dis ceci pour l'instruction des personnes qui auroient
affaire a eux; car je les crois tels qu'on me les a peints. Hayauldoula me
procura de son cote la connoissance de certains marchands du pays de Karman
(de Caramanie). Enfin je pris un autre moyen.

Le grand-Turc a pour les pelerins qui vont a la Mecque un usage qui lui est
particulier, au moins j'ignore si les autres puissances Mahometanes
l'observent aussi: c'est que, quand ceux de ses etats partent, il leur
donne a son choix un chef auquel ils sont tenus d'obeir ainsi qu'a lui.
Celui de la caravane s'appeloit Hoyarbarach; il etoit de Bourse, et c'etoit
un des principaux habitans.

Je me fis presenter a lui par mon hote et par une autre personne, comme un
homme qui vouloit aller voir dans cette ville un frere qu'il y avoit, et
ils le prierent de me recevoir dans sa troupe et de m'y accorder surete. Il
demanda si je savois l'Arabe, le Turc, l'Hebreu, la langue vulgaire, le
Grec; et comme je repondis que non: Eh bien, que veut-il donc devenir?
reprit-il.

Cependant, sur la representation qu'on lui fit que je n'osois, a cause de
la guerre, aller par mer, et que s'il daignoit m'admettre je ferois comme
je pourrois, il y consentit, et apres s'etre mis les deux mains sur sa tete
et avoir touche sa barbe, il dit en Turc que je pouvois me joindre a ses
esclaves; mais il exigea que je fusse vetu comme eux.

D'apres cela j'allai aussitot, avec un de mes deux conducteurs, au marche
qu'on appelle bathsar (bazar). J'y achetai deux longues robes blanches qui
me descenoient jusqu'au talon, une toque accomplie (turban complet), une
ceinture de toile, une braie (calecon) de futaine pour y mettre le bas de
ma robe, deux petits sacs ou besaces, l'un pour mon usage, l'autre pour
suspendre a la tete de mon cheval quand je lui ferois manger son orge et sa
paille: une cuiller et une saliere de cuir, un tapis pour coucher; anfin un
paletot (sorte de pour-point) de panne blanche que je fis couvrir de toile,
et qui me servit beaucoup la nuit J'achetai aussi un tarquais blanc et
garni (sorte de carquois), auquel pendoient une epee et des couteaux: mais
pour le tarquais et l'epee je ne pus en faire l'acquisition que
secretement; car, si ceux qui ont l'administration de la justice l'avoient
su, le vendeur et moi nous eussions couru de grands risques.

Les epees de Damas sont le plus belles et les meilleures de tout la Syrie;
mais c'est une chose curieuse de voir comment ils les brunissent. Cette
operation se fait avant la trempe. Ils ont pour cela une petite piece de
bois dans laquelle est ente un fer; ils la passent sur la lame et enlevent
ainsi se; inegalites de meme qu'avec un rabot on enleve celles du bois;
ensuite ils la trempent, puisla polissent. Ce poli est tel que quand
quelqu'un veut arranger son turban, il se sert de son epee comme d'un
mirior. Quant a la trempe, elle est si parfaite que nulle part encore je
n'ai vu d'epee trancher aussi bien.

On fait aussi a Damas et dans le pays des miroirs d'acier qui grossissent
les objets comme un miroir ardent. J'en ai vu qui, quand on les exposoit au
soleil, percoient, a quinze ou seize pieds de distance, une planche et y
mettoient le feu.

J'achetai un petit cheval, qui se trouva tres-bon. Avant de partir je le
fis ferrer a Damas; et de la jusqu'a Bourse, quoiqu'il y ait pres de
cinquante journees, je n'eus rien a fair a ses pieds, excepte a l'un de
ceux de devant, ou il prit une enclosure qui trois semaines apres le fit
boiter. Voici comme ils ferrent leurs chevaux.

Les fers sont legers, tres-minces, allonges sur les talons, et plus amincis
encore la que vers la pince. Ils n'ont point de retour [Footnote: Je crois
que par retour la Brocquiere a entendu ce crochet nomme crampon qui est aux
notres, et qu'il a voulu dire que ceux de Damas etoient plats.] et ne
portent que quartre trous, deux de chaque cote. Les clous sont carres, avec
une grosse et lourde tete. Faut-il appliquer le fer: s'il est besoin qu'on
le retravaille pour l'ajuster, on le bat a froid sans le mettre au feu, et
on le peut a cause de son peu d'epaisseur. Pour parer le pied du cheval on
se sert d'une serpette pareille a celle qui est d'usage en-de-ca de la mer
pour tailler la vigne.

Les chevaux de ce pays n'ont que le pas et le galop. Quand on en achete, on
choisit ceux qui ont le plus grand pas: comme en Europe on prend de
preference ceux qui trottent le mieux. Ils ont les narines tres-fendues
courent tres bien, sont excellens, et d'ailleurs coutent tres-peu,
puisqu'ils ne mangent que la nuit, et qu'on ne leur donne qu'un peu d'orge
avec de la paille picquade (hachee). Jamais ile ne boivent que
l'apres-midi, et toujours, meme a l'ecurie, on leur laisse la bride en
bouche, comme aux mules. La ils sont attaches par les pieds de derriere et
confondus tous ensemble, chevaux et jumens. Tous sont hongres, excepte
quelques'uns qu'on garde comme etalons. Si vous avez affaire a un homme
riche, et que vouz alliez le trouver chez lui, il vous menera, pour vous
parler, dans son ecurie: aussi sont-elles tenues tres-fraiches et
tres-nettes.

Nous autres, nous aimons un cheval entier, de bonne race; les Maures
n'estiment que les jumens. Chez eux, un grand n'a point honte de monter une
jument que son poulain suit par derriere. [Footnote: Ce trait fait allusion
aux prejuges alors en usage chez les chevaliers d'Europe. Comme ils avoient
besoin, pour les tournois et les combats, de chevaux tres-forts, ils ne se
servoient que de chevaux entiers, et se seroient crus deshonores de monter
une jument.] J'en ai vu d'une grande beaute, et qui se vendoient jusqu'a
deux et trois cents ducats. Au reste, leur coutume est de tenir leurs
chevaux sur le maigre (de ne point les laisser engraisser).

Chez eux, les gens de bien (gens riches, qui ont du bien) portent tons,
quand ils sont a cheval, un tabolcan (petit tambour), dont ils se servent
dans les batailles et les escarmouches pour se rassembler et se rallier;
ils l'attachent a arcon de leur selle, et le frappent avec une baguette de
cuir plat. J'en achetai un aussi, avec des eperons et des bottes vermeilles
qui montoient jusqu'aux genoux, selon la coutume du pays.

Pour temoigner ma reconnoissance a Hoyarbarach j'allai lui offrir un pot de
gingembre vert. Il le refusa, et ne ce fut qu'a force d'instances et de
prieres que je vins a bout de le lui faire accepter. Je n'eus de lui
d'autre parole et d'autre assurance que celle dont j'ai parle cidessus.
Cependant je ne trouvai en lui que franchise et layaute, et plus peut-etre
que j'en aurois eprouve de beaucoup de chretiens.

Dieu, qui me favorisoit en tout dans l'accomplissement de mon voyage, me
procura la connoissance d'un Juif de Caffa qui parloit Tartare et Italien;
je le priai de m'aider a mettre en ecrit dans ces deux langues toutes les
choses dont je pouvois avoir le plus de besoin en route pour moi et pour
mon cheval. Des notre premiere journee, arrive a Ballec, je tirai mon
papier pour savoir comment on appeloit l'orge et la paille hachee que je
voulois faire donner a mon cheval. Dix ou douze Turcs qui etoient autour de
moi se mirent a rire en me voyant. Ils s'approcherent pour regarder mon
papier, et parurent cussi etonnes de mon ecriture que nous le sommea de la
leur; neanmoins ils me prirent en amitie, et firent tous leurs efforts pour
m'apprendre a parler. Ils ne se laissoient point de me repeter plusieurs
fois la meme chose, et la redisoient si souvent et de tant de manieres,
qu'il falloit bien que je la retinsse; aussi, quand nous nous separames,
savois-je deja demander pour moi et pour mon cheval tout ce qui m'etoit
necessaire.

Pendant le sejour que fit a Damas la caravane, j'allai visiter un lieu de
pelerinage, qui est a seize milles environ vers le nord, et qu'on nomme
Notre-Dame de Serdenay. Il faut, pour y arriver, traverser une montagne qui
peut bien avoir un quart de lieue, et jusqu'a laquelle s'etendent les
jardins de Damas; on descend ensuite dans une vallee charmante, remplie de
vignes et de jardins, et qui a une belle fontaine dont l'eau est bonne. La
est une roche sur laquelle on a construit un petit chateau avec une eglise
de callogero (de caloyers), ou se trouve une image de la Vierge, peinte sur
bois: sa tete, dit-on est portee par miracle; quant a la maniere, je
l'ignore. On ajoute qu'elle sue toujours, et que cette sueur est une huile.
[Footnote: Plusieurs de nos cuteurs du treizieme siecle font mention de
cette vierge de Serdenay, devenue fameuse pendant les croisades, et ils
parlent de sa sueur huileuse, qui passoit pour faire beaucoup de miracles.
Ces fables d'exsudations, miraculeuses etoient communes en Asie. On y
vantoit entre autres celle qui decouloit du tombeau de l'eveque Nicolas,
l'un de ces saints dont l'existence est plus que douteuse. Cette liqueur
pretendue de Nicolas etoit meme un objet de culte; et nous lisons qu'en
1651, un cure de Paris en ayant recut une phiole, il demanda et obtint de
l'archeveque la permission de l'exposer a la veneration des fideles, (Hist.
de la ville et du diocese de Paris, par Lebeuf. t. I., part. 2, p. 557.)]
Tout ce que je puis dire, c'est que quand j'y allai on me montra, au bout
de l'eglise, derriere le grand autel, une niche pratiquee dans le mur, et
que la je vis l'image, qui est une chose plate, et qui peut avoir un pied
et demi de haut sur un de large. Je ne puis dire si elle est de bois ou de
pierre, parce qu'elle etoit couverte entierement de drapeaux. Le devant
etoit ferme par un treillis de fer, et au-dessous il y avoit un vase qui
contenoit de l'huile. Une femme qui etoit la vint a moi; elle remua les
drapeaux avec une cuillere d'argent, et voulut me faire, le signe de la
croix au front, aux tempes et sur la poitrine. Il me sembla que tout cela
etoit une pratique pour avoir argent; cependant je ne veux point dire
par-la que Notre-Dame n'ait plus de pouvoir encore que cette image.

Je revins a Damas, et, la ville du depart, je reglai mes affaires et
disposai ma conscience, comme si j'eusse du mourir; mais tout-a-coup je me
vis dans l'embarras.

J'ai parle du courier qu'avoit envoye le Soudan pour faire arreter les
marchands Genois et Catalans qui se trouvoient dans ses Etats. En venu de
cet ordre, on prit mon hote, qui etoit Genois; ses effets furent saisis, et
l'on placa chez lui un Maure pour les garder. Moi, je cherchai a lui sauver
tout ce que je pourrois, et afin que le Maure ne s'en apercut pas, je
l'enivrai. Je fus arrete a mon tour, et conduit devant un des cadis, gens
qu'ils regardent comme nous nos eveques, et qui sont charges d'administrer
la justice.

Le cadi me renvoya vers un autre, qui me fit conduire en prison avec les
marchands. Il savoit bien pourtant que je ne l'etois pas; mais cette
affaire m'etoit suscitee par un trucheman qui vouloit me ranconner, comme
il l'avoit deja tente a mon premier voyage. Sans Autonine Mourrouzin,
consul de Venise, il m'eut fallu payer; mais je restai en prison, et
pendant ce temps la caravane partit.

Pour obtenir ma liberte, le consul et quelques autres personnes furent
obliges de faire des demarches aupres du roi (gouverneur) de Damas,
alleguant qu'on m'avoit arrete a tort et sans cause, et que le trucheman le
savoit bien. Le seigneur me fit venir devant lui avec un Genois nomme
Gentil Imperial, qui etoit un marchand de par le Soudan, pour aller acheter
des esclaves a Caffa. Il me demanda qui j'etois, et ce que je venois faire
a Damas; et, sur ma reponse que j'etois Francais, venu en pelerinage a
Jerusalem, il dit qu'on avoit tort de me retenir, et que je pouvois partir
quand il me plairoit.

Je partis donc, le lendemain 6 Octobre, accompagne d'un moucre, que je
chargeai d'abord de transporter hors de la ville mes habillemens Turcs,
parce qu'il n'est point permis a un chretien d'y paroitre avec la toque
blanche.

A peu de distance est une montagne ou l'on montre une maison qu'on dit
avoir ete celle de Cain; et, pendant la premiere journee, nous n'eumes que
des montagnes, quoique le chemin soit bon; mais a la seconde nons trouvames
un beau pays, et il continua d'etre agreable jusqu'a Balbec.

C'est la que mon moucre me quitta, et que je trouvai la caravane. Elle
etoit campee pres d'une riviere, a cause de la chaleur qui regne dans le
pays; et cependant les nuits y sont tres-froides (ce qu'on aura peine a
croire), et les rosees tres-abondantes. J'allai trouver Hoyarbarach, qui me
confirma la permission qu'il m'avoit donnee de venir avec lui, et qui me
recommenda de ne point quitter la troupe.

Le lendemain matin, a onze heures, je fis boire mon cheval, et lui donnai
la paille et l'avoine, selon l'usage de nos contrees. Pour cette fois les
Turcs ne me dirent rien; mais le soir, a six heures, quand, apres l'avoir
fait boire, je lui attachai sa besace pour qu'il mangeat, ils s'y
opposerent et detacherent le sac. Telle est leur coutume: leur chevaux ne
mangent qu'a huit, et jamais ils n'en laissent manger un avant les autres,
a moins que ce ne soit pour paitre l'herbe.

Le chef avoit avec lui un mamelus (mamelouck) du soudan, qui etoit Cerquais
(Circassien), et qui alloit dans la pays de Karman chercher un de ses
freres. Cet homme, quand il me vit, seul, et ne sachant point la langue du
pays, volut charitablement me servir de compagnon, et il me prit avec lui.
Cependant, comme il n'avoit point de tente, nous fumes souvent obliges de
passer la nuit dans des jardins sous des arbres.

Ce fut alors qu'il me fallut apprendre a coucher sur la dure, a ne boire
que de l'eau, a m'asseoir a terre, les jambes croisees. Cette posture me
couta d'abord beaucoup; mais ce a quoi j'eus plus de peine encore a
m'accoutumer, fut d'etre a cheval avec des etriers courts. Dans le
commencemens je souffrois si fort, que, quand j'etois descendu, je ne
pouvois remonter sans aide, tant les jarrets me faisoient mal; mais lorsque
j'y fus accoutume, cette maniere me parut plus commode que la notre.

Des le jour meme je soupai avec mon mamelouck, et nous n'eumes que du pain,
du fromage et du lait. J'avois, pour manger, une nappe, a la mode des gens
riches du pays. Elles ont quatre pieds de diametre, et sont rondes, avec
des coulisses tout autour; de sorte qu'on peut les fermer comme une bourse.
Veulent-ils manger, ils les etendent; ont-ils mange, ils les resserrent, et
y renferment tout ce qui reste, sans vouloir rien perdre, ni une miette de
pain, ni un grain de raisin. Mais ce que j'ai remarque, c'est qu'apres leur
repas, soit qu'il fut bon, soit qu'il fut mauvais, jamais ils ne manquoient
de remercier Dieu tout haut.

Balbec est une bonne ville, bien fermee de murs, et assez marchande. Au
centre etoit un chateau, fait de tres-grosses pierres. Maintenant il
renferme une mosquee dans laquelle est, dit-on, une tete humaine qui a des
yeux si enormes, qu'un homme passeroit aisement la sienne a travers leur
ouverture. Je ne puis assurer le fait, attendu que pour entrer dans la
mosquee il faut etre Sarrasin.

De Balbec nous allames a Hamos, et campames sur une riviere. Ce fut la que
je vis comment ils campent et tendent leurs pavillons. Les tentes ne sont
ni tres-hautes ni tres-grandes; de sorte qu'il ne faut qu'un homme pour les
dresser, et que six a huit personnes peuvent s'y tenir a l'aise pendant les
chaleurs du jour. Dans le cours de la journee ils en otent le bas, afin de
donner passage a l'air. La nuit, ils le remettent pour avoir plus chaud. Un
seul chameau en porte sept ou huit avec leurs mats. Il y en a de
tres-belles.

Mon compagnon, le mamelouck, et moi, qui n'en avions point, nous allames
nous etablir dans un jardin. Il y vint aussi deux Turquemans (Turcomans) de
Satalie, qui revenoient de la Mecque, et qui souperent avec nous. Mais
quand ces deux hommes me virent bien vetu, ayant bon cheval, belle epee,
bon tarquais, ils proposerent au mamelouck, ainsi que lui-meme me l'avoua
par la suite lorsque nous nous separames, de se defaire de moi, vu que
j'etois chretien et indigne d'etre dans leur compagnie. II repondit que,
puisque j'avois mange avec eux le pain et le sel, ce seroit un crime; que
leur loi le leur defendoit, et qu'apres tout Dieu faisoit les chretiens
comme les Sarrasins.

Neanmoins ils persisterent dans leur projet; et comme je temoignois le
desir de voir Halep, la ville la plus considerable de Syrie apres Damas,
ils me presserent de me joindre a eux. Moi qui ne savois rien de leur
dessein, j'acceptai; et je suis convaincu, aujourd'hui qu'ils ne vouloient
que me couper la gorge. Mais le mamelouck leur defendit de venir davantage
avec nous, et par-la il me sauva la vie.

Nous etions partis de Balbec deux heures avant le jour, et notre caravane
etoit compsee de quatre a cinq cents personnes, et de six ou sept cents
chameaux et mulets, parce qu'elle portoit beaucoup d'epices. Voici leur
maniere de se mettre en marche.

Il y a dans la troupe une tres-grande nacquaire (tres grosse timbale). Au
moment ou le chef veut qu'on parte, il fait frapper trois coups. Aussitot
tout le monde s'apprete, et a mesure que chacun est pret, il se met a la
file sans dire un seul mot: Et feront plus de bruit dix d'entre nous que
mil de ceux-la. On marche ainsi en silence, a moins que ce ne soit la nuit,
et que quelqu'un ne veuille chanter une chanson de gestes.[Footnote: On
appeloit en France chansons de gestes celles qui celebroient les gestes et
belles actions des anciens heros.] Au point du jour, deux ou trois d'entre
eux, fort eloignes les uns des autres, crient et se repondent, comme on le
fait sur les mosquees aux heures d'usage. Enfin, peu apres, et avant le
lever du soleil, les gens devots font leurs prieres et ablutions
ordinaires.

Pour ces ablutions, s'ils sont aupres d'un ruisseau, ils descendent de
cheval, se mettent les pieds nus, et se lavant les mains, les pieds, le
visage et tous les conduits du corps. S'ils n'ont pas de ruisseau, ils
passent la main sur ces parties. Le dernier d'entre eux se lave la bouche
et l'ouverture opposee, apres quoi il se tourne vers le midi. Tous alors
levent deux doigts en l'air; ils se prosternent et baisent la terre trois
fois, puis ils se relevent et font leurs prieres. Ces ablutions leur ont
ete ordonnees en lieu de confession. Les gens de distinction, pour n'y
point manquer, portent toujours en voyage des bouteilles de cuir pleines
d'eau: on les attache sous le ventre des chameaux et des chevaux, et
ordinairement elles sont tres-belles.

Ces peuples s'accroupissent, pour uriner, comme les femmes; apres quoi ils
se frottent le canal contre une pierre, contre un mur ou quelque autre
chose. Quant a l'autre besoin, jamais apres l'avoir satisfait ils ne
s'essuient.

Hamos (Hems), bonne ville, bien fermee de murailles avec des fosses glaces
(en glacis), est situee dans une plaine sur une petite riviere. La vient
aboutir la plaine de Noe, qui s'etend, dit-on, jusqu'en Berse. C'est par
elle que deboucha ce Tamerlan qui prit et detruisit tant de villes. A
l'extremite de la ville est un beau chateau, construit sur une hauteur, et
tout en glacis jusqu'au pied du mur.

De Hamos nous vinmes a Hamant (Hama). Le pays est beau; mais je n'y vis que
peu d'habitans, excepte les Arabes qui rebatissoient quelques-uns des
villages detruits. Je trouvai dans Hamant un marchand de Venise nomme
Laurent Souranze. Il m'accueillit, me logea chez lui, et me fit voir la
ville et le chateau. Elle est garnie de bonnes tours, close de fortes et
epaisses murailles, et construite, comme le chateau de Provins, sur une
roche, dans laquelle on a creuse au ciseau des fosses fort profonds. A
l'une des extremites se voit le chateau, beau et fort, tout en glacis
jusqu'au pied du mur, et construit sur une elevation. Il est entoure d'une
citadelle qu'il domine, et baigne par une riviere qu'on dit etre l'une des
quatre qui sortent du paradis terrestre. Si le fait est vrai, je l'ignore.
Tout ce que je sais, c'est qu'elle descend entre le levant et le midi, plus
pres du premier que du second, (est-sud-est), et qu'elle va se perdre a
Antioche.

La est la roue la plus haute et la plus grande que j'aie vue de ma vie.
Elle est mise en mouvement par la riviere, et fournit a la consommation des
habitans, quoique leur nombre soit considerable, la quantite d'eau qui leur
est necessaire. Cette eau tombe en une auge creusee dans la roche du
chateau; de la elle se porte vers la ville et en parcourt les rues dans un
canal forme par de grands piliers carres qui ont douze pieds de haut sur
deux de large.

Il me manquoit encore differentes choses pour etre, en tout comme mes
compagnons de voyage. Le namelouck m'en avoit averti, et mon hote Laurent
me mena lui-meme au bazar pour en faire l'acquisition. C'etoient de petites
coiffes de soie a la mode des Turcomans, un bonnet pour mettre sous la
coiffe, des cuilleres Turques, des couteaux avec leur fusil, un peigne avec
son etui, et un gobelet de cuir. Tout celle s'attache et se suspend a
l'epee.

J'achetai aussi des poucons [Footnote: Sorte de doigtier qu'on mettoit au
pouce, afin de le garantir et de le defendra de l'impression de la corde.]
pour tirer de l'arc, un tarquais nouveau tout garni, pour epargner le mien,
qui etoit tres-beau, et que je voulois conserver; enfin un capinat: c'est
une robe de feutre, blanche, tres-fine, et impenetrable a la pluie.

En route je m'etois lie avec quelques-uns de mes compagnons de caravane.
Ceux ci, quand ils surent que j'etois loge chez un Franc, vinrent me
trouver pour me demander de leur procurer du vin. Le vin leur est defendu
par leur loi, et ils n'auroient ose en boire devant les leurs; mais ils
esperoient le faire sans risque chez un Franc, et cependant ils revenoient
de la Mecque. J'en parlai a mon hote Laurent, qui me dit qu'il ne
l'oseroit, parce que, si la chose etoit sue, il courroit les plus grands
dangers. J'allai leur rendre cette reponse; mais ils en avoient deja
cherche ailleurs, et venoient d'en trouver chez un Grec. Ils me proposerent
donc, soit par pure amitie, soit pour etre autorise, aupres du Grec a
boire, d'aller avec eux chez lui, et je les y accompagnai.

Cet homme nous conduisit dans une petite galerie, ou nous nous assimes par
terre, en cercle, tous les six. Il posa d'abord au milieu de nous un grand
et beau plat de terre, qui eut pu contenir au moins huit lots (seize
pintes); ensuite il apporta pour chacun de nous un pot plein de vin, le
versa dans le vase, et y mit deux ecuelles de terre qui devoient nous
servir de gobelets.

Un de la troupe commenca la premier, et il but a son compagnon, selon
l'usage du pays. Celui-ci en fit de meme pour son suivant, et ainsi des
autres. Nous bumes de cette maniere, et sans manger, pendant fort
long-temps. Enfin, quand je m'apercus que je ne pouvois pas continuer
davantage sans m'incommoder, je les suppliai a mains jointes de m'en
dispenser; mais ils se facherent beaucoup, et se plaignirent, comme si
j'avois resolu d'interrempre leurs plaisirs et de leur faire tort.

Heureusement il yen avoit un parmi eux qui etoit plus lie avec moi, et qui
m'aimoit tant qu'il m'appeloit kardays, c'est-a-dire frere. Celui-ci
s'offrit a prendre ma place, et a boire pour moi quand ce seroit mon tour.
Cette offre les satisfit; ils l'accepterent, et la partie continua jusqu'au
soir, ou-il nous fallut retourner au kan.

Le chef etoit en ce moment assis sur un siege de pierre, et il avoit devant
lui un fallot allume. Il ne lui fut pas difficile de diviner d'ou nous
venions: aussi y eut-il quatre de mes camarades qui s'esquiverent; il n'en
resta qu'un avec moi. Je dis tout ceci, afin de prevenir les personnes qui,
demain ou un jour quelconque, voyageroient, ainsi que moi, dans leur pays,
qu'elles se gardent bien de boire avec eux, a moins qu'elles ne veuillent
etre obligees d'en prendre jusqu'a ce qu'elles tombent a terre.

Le mamelouck ne savoit rien de ma debauche. Pendant ce temps il avoit
achete une oie pour nous deux. Il venoit de la faire bouillir, et, au
defaut de verjus, il l'avoit accommodee avec des feuilles vertes de
porreaux. J'en mangeai avec lui, et elle nous dura trois jours.

J'aurois bien desire voir Alep; mais la caravane n'y allant point et se
rendant directement a Antioche, il fallut y renoncer. Cependant, comme elle
ne devoit se mettre en marche que deux jours apres, le mamelouck fut d'avis
que nous prissions tous deux les devants, afin de trouver plus aisement a
nous loger. Quatre autres camarades, marchands Turcs, demanderent a etre
des notres, et nous partimes tous six ensemble.

A une demi-lieue de Hama, nous trouvames la riviere et nous la passames sur
un pont. Elle etoit debordee, quoiqu'il n'eut point plu. Mois, je voulus y
faire boire mon cheval; mais la rive etoit escarpee et l'eau profonde, et
infailliblement je m'y serois noye si le mamelouck n'etoit venu a mon
secours.

Au dela du fleuve est une longue et vaste plaine qui dure toute une
journee. Nous y rencontrames six a huit Turcomans accompagnes d'une femme.
Elle portoit la tarquais ainsi qu'eux; et, a ce sujet, on me dit que celles
de cette nation sont braves et qu'en guerre elles combattent comme les
hommes. On ajouta meme, et ceci m'etonna bien davantage, qu'il y en a
environ trente mille qui portent ainsi le tarquais, et qui sont soumises a
un seigneur nomme Turcgadiroly, lequel habite les montagnes d'Armenie, sur
les frontieres de la Perse.

La seconde journee fut a travers un pays de montagnes. Il est assez beau
quoique peu arrose; mais par tout on ne voyoit que des habitations
detruites. Tout en le traversant, mon mamelouck m'apprit a tirer de l'arc,
et il me fit acheter des poucons et des anneaux pour tirer. Enfin nous
arrivames a un village riche en bois, en vignobles, en terres a ble, mais
qui n'avoit d'autres eaux que celles de citernes. Ce canton paroissoit
avoir ete habite autrefois par des chretiens, et j'avoue qu'on me fit un
grand plaisir quand on me dit que tout cela avoit ete aux Francs, et qu'on
me montra pour preuve des eglises abattues.

Nous y logeames; et ce fut la premiere fois que je vis des habitations de
Turcomans, et des femmes de cette nation a visage decouvert. Ordinairement
elles le cachent sous un morceau d'etamine noire, et celles qui sont riches
y portent attachees des pieces de monnoie et des pierres precieuses. Les
hommes sont bons archers. J'en vis plusieurs tirer de l'arc. Ils tirent
assis et a but court: ce peu d'espace donne a leurs fleches une grande
rapidite.

Au sortir de la Syrie on entre dans la Turcomanie, que nous appellons
Armenie. La capitale est une tres-grande ville qu'ils nomment Antequaye, et
nous Antioche. Elle fut jadis tres-florissante et a encore de beaux murs
bien entiers, qui renferment un tres-grand espace et meme des montagnes.
Mais on n'y compte point a present plus de trois cents maisons. Au midi
elle est bornee par une montagne, au nord par un grand lac, au-dela duquel
on trouve un beau pays bien ouvert. Le long des murs coule la riviere qui
vient de Hama. Presque tous les habitans sont Turcomans ou Arabes, et leur
etat est d'elever des troupeaux, tels que chameaux, chevres, vaches et
brebis.

Ces chevres, les plus belles que j'aie jamais vues, sont la plupart
blanches; elles n'ont point comme celles de Syrie, les oreilles pendantes,
et portent une laine longue douce et crepue. Les moutons ont de grosses et
larges queues. On y nourrit aussi des anes sauvages qu'on apprivoise et
qui, avec un poil, des oreilles et une tete pareils a ceux de cerf, ont
comme lui la pied fendu. J'ignore s'ils ont son cri, car je ne les ai point
entendus crier. Ils sont beaux, fort grands, et vont avec les autres betes;
mais je n'ai point vu qu'on les montat. [Footnote: Cet animal ne peut etre
un ane, puisqu'il a le pied fendu et que l'ane ne l'a point. C'est
probablement une espece de gazelle, ou plutot un bubale.]

Pour le transport de leurs marchandises, les habitans se servent de boeufs
et de buffles, comme nous nous servons de chevaux.

Ils les emploient aussi en montures; et j'en ai vu des troupes dans
lesquelles les uns etoient charges de marchandises, et les autres etoient
montes.

Le seigneur de ce pays etoit Ramedang, prince riche, brave et puissant.
Pendant longtemps il se rendit si redoutable que le soudan le craignois et
n'osoit l'irriter. Mais le soudan voulut le detruire, et dans ce dessein,
il s'entendit avec le karman, qui pouvoit mieux que personne tromper
Ramedang, puisqu'il lui avoit donne sa soeur en mariage. En effet, un jour
qu'ils mangoient ensemble, il l'arreta et le livra au soudan, qui le fit
mourrir et s'empara de la Turcomanie, dont cependant il donna un portion au
karman.

Au sortir d'Antioche, je repris ma route avec mon mamelouck; et d'abord
nous eumes a passer une montagne nommee Negre, sur laquelle on me montra
trois ou quatre beaux chateaux ruines, qui jadis avoient appartenu a des
chretiens. Le chemin est beau et sans cesse on y est parfume par les
lauriers nombreux qu'elle produit; mais la descente en est une fois plus
rapide que la montee. Elle aboutit au golfe qu'on nomme d'Asacs, et que
nous autres nous appellons Layaste, parce qu'en effet c'est la ville d'Ayas
qui lui donne son nom. Il s'etend entre deux montagnes, et s'avance dans
les terres l'espace d'environ quinze milles. Sa largeur a l'occident m'a
paru etre de douze; mais sur cet article je m'en rapporte a la carte
marine.

Au pied de la montagne, pres du chemin et sur le bord de la mer, sont les
restes d'un chateau fort, qui du cote de la terre etoit defendu par un
marecage; de sorte qu'on ne pouvoit y aborder que par mer, ou par une
chaussee etroite qui traversoit le marais. Il etoit inhabite, mais en avant
s'etoient etablis des Turcomans. Ils occupoient cent vingt pavillons, les
uns de feutre, les autre de coton bleu et blanc, tous tres-beaux, tous
assez grands pour loger a l'aise quinze ou seize personnes. Ce sont leurs
maisons, et, comme nous dans les notres, ils y font tout leur menage, a
l'exception du feu.

Nous nous arretames chez eux. Ils vinrent placer devant nous une de ces
nappes a coulisses dont j'ai parle, et dans laquelle il y avoit encore des
miettes de pain, des fragmens de fromage et des grains de raisin. Apres
quoi ils nous apporterent une douzaine de pains plats avec un grand
quartier de lait caille, qu'ils appellent yogort. Ces pains, larges d'un
pied, sont ronds et plus mince que des oublies. On les plie en cornet,
comme une oublie a pointes, et on les mange avec le caille.

Une lieue au-dela etoit une petit karvassera (caravanserai) ou nous
logeames. Ces etablisemens consistent en maisons, comme les kans de Syrie.

En route, dans le cours de la journee j'avois rencontre un Ermin (Armenien)
qui parloit un peu Italien. S'etant apercu que j'etois chretien, il se lia
de conversation avec moi, et me conta beaucoup de details, tant sur le pays
et les habitans, que sur le soudan et ce Ramedang, seigneur de Turchmanie,
dont je viens de faire mention. Il me dit que ce dernier etoit un homme de
haute taille, tres-brave, et le plus habile de tous les Turcs a manier la
masse et l'epee. Sa mere etoit une chretienne, qui l'avoit fait baptiser a
la loi Gregoise (selon le rit des Grecs) "pour lui oster le flair et la
senteur que ont ceulx qui ne sont point baptisez." [Footnote: Les chretiens
d'Asie croyoient de bonne foi que les infideles avoient une mauvaise odeur
qui leur etoit particuliere, et qu'ils perdoient par le bapteme. Il sera
encore parle plus bas de cette superstition. Ce bapteme etoit, selon la loi
Gregoise, par immersion.]

Mais il n'etoit ni bon chretien ni bon Sarrasin; et quand on lui parloit
des deux prophetes Jesus et Mahomet, il disoit: Moi, je suis pour les
prophetes vivans, il me seront plus utiles que ceux qui sont morts.

Ses Etats touchoient d'un cote a ceux du karman, dont il avoit epouse la
soeur; de l'autre a la Syrie, qui appartenoit au soudan. Toutes les fois
que par son pays passoit un des sujets de celui-ci, il en exigeoit des
peages. Mais enfin le soudan obtint du karman, comme je l'ai dit, qu'il le
lui livreroit; et aujourd'hui il possede toute la Turcomanie jusqu'a Tharse
et meme une journee par-de-la.

Ce jour-la nous logeames de nouveau chez des Turcomans, ou l'on nous
servit, encore du lait; et l'Armenien nous y accompagna. Ce fut la que je
vis faire par des femmes ces pains minces et plats dont j'ai parle. Voici
comment elles s'y prennent. Elles ont une petite table ronde, bien unie, y
jettent un peu de farine qu'elles detrempent avec de l'eau et en font une
pate plus molle que celle du pain. Cette pate, elles la partagent en
plusieurs morceaux ronds, qu'elles aplatissent autant qu'il leur est
possible avec un rouleau en bois, d'un diametre un peu moindre que celui
d'un oeuf, jusqu'a ce qu'ils soient amincis au point que j'ai dit. Pendant
ce temps elles ont une plaque de fer convexe, qui est posee sur un trepied
et echauffee en dessous par un feu doux. Elles y etendent la feuille de
pate et la retournent tout aussitot, de sorte qu'elles ont plus-tot fait
deux de leurs pains qu'un oublieur chez nous n'a fait une oublie.

J'employai deux jours a traverser le pays qui est autour du golfe. Il est
fort beau, et avoit autrefois beaucoup de chateaux qui appartenoient aux
chretiens, et qui maintenant sont detruits. Tel est celui qu'on voit en
avant d'Ayas, vers le levant.

Il n'y a dans la contree que des Turcomans. Ce sont de beaux hommes,
excellens archers et vivant de peu. Leurs habitations sont rondes comme des
pavillons et couvertes de feutre. Ils demeurent toujours en plein champ, et
ont un chef auquel ils obeissent; mais ils changent souvent de place, et
alors ils emportent avec eux leurs maisons. Leur coutume dans ce cas est de
se soumettre au seigneur sur les terres duquel ils s'etablissent, et meme
de le servir de leurs armes s'il a guerre. Mais s'ils quittent ses domaines
et qu'ils passent sur ceux de son ennemi, ils serviront celui-ci a son tour
contre l'autre, et on ne leur en sait pas mauvais gre, parce que telle est
leur coutume et qu'ils sont errans.

Sur ma route je rencontrai un de leurs chefs qui voloit (chassoit au vol)
avec des faucons et prenoit des oies privees. On me dit qu'il pouvoit bien
avoir sous ses ordres dix mille Turcomans. Le pays est favorable pour la
chasse, et coupe par beaucoup de petites rivieres qui descendent des
montagnes et se jettent dans le golfe. On y trouve sur-tout beaucoup de
sangliers.

Vers le milieu du golfe, sur le chemin de terre, est un defile forme par
une roche sur laquelle on passe, et qui se trouve a deux portees d'arc de
la mer. Jadis ce passage etoit defendu par un chateau qui le rendoit
tres-fort. Aujourd'hui il est abandonne.

Au sortir, de cette gorge on entre dans une belle et grande plaine, peuplee
de Turcomans. Mais l'Armenien mon compagnon me montra sur une montagne un
chateau ou il n'y avoit, disoit-il, que des gens de sa nation, et dont les
murs sont arroses par une riviere nommee Jehon. Nous cotoyames la riviere
jusqu'a une ville qu'on nomme Misse-sur-Jehon, parce qu'elle la traverse.

Misse, situee a quatre journees d'Antioche, appartint a des chretiens et
fut une cite importante. On y voit encore plusieurs eglises a moitie
detruites et dont il ne reste plus d'entier que le choeur de la grande,
qu'on a converti en mosquee. Le pont est en bois, parce que le premier a
ete detruit, aussi. Enfin, des deux moities de la ville, l'une est
totalement en ruines; l'autre a conserve ses murs et environ trois cents
maisons qui sont remplies par des Turcomans.

De Misse a Adeve (Adene) le pays continue d'etre uni et beau; et ce sont
encore des Turcomans qui l'habitent. Adene est a deux journees de Misse, et
je me proposois d'y attendre la caravane.

Elle arriva. J'allai avec le mamelouck et quelques autres personnes, dont
plusieurs etoient de gros marchands, loger pres du pont, entre la riviere
et les murs; et ce fut la que je vis comment les Turcs font leurs prieres
et leurs sacrifices; car non seulement ils ne se cachoient point de moi,
mais ils paroissoient meme contens quand "je disois mes patrenostre, qui
leur sambloit merveilles. Je leur ouys dire acunes fois leus heures en
chantant, a l'entree de la nuit, et se assieent a la reonde (en rond) et
branlent le corps et la teste, et chantent bien sauvaigement."

Un jour ils me menerent avec eux aux etuves et aux bains de la ville; et
comme je refusai de me baigner, parce qu'il eut fallu me deshabiller et que
je craignois de montrer mon argent, ils me donnerent leurs robes a garder.
Depuis ce moment nous fumes tres-lies ensemble.

La maison du bain est fort elevee et se termine par un dome, dans lequel a
ete pratiquee une ouverture circulaire qui eclaire tout l'interieur. Les
etuves et les bains sont beaux et tres-propres. Quand ceux qui se baignent
sortent de l'eau, ils viennent s'asseoir sur de petites claies d'osier fin,
ou ils s'essuient et peignent leur barbe.

C'est dans Adene que je vis pour la premiere fois les deux jeunes gens qui
a la Mecque s'etoient fait crever les yeux apres avoir vu la sepulture de
Mahomet.

Les Turcs sont gens de fatigue, d'une vie dure, et a qui il ne coute rien,
ainsi que je l'ai vu tout le long de la route, de dormir sur la terre
commes les animaux. Mais ils sont d'humeur gaie et joyeuse, et chantent
volontiers chansons de gestes. Aussi quelqu'un qui veut vivre avec eux ne
doit etre ni triste ni reveur, mais avoir toujours le visage riant. Du
reste, ils sont gens de bonne foi et charitables les uns envers les autres.
"J'ay veu bien souvent, quant nous mengions, que s'il passoit ung povre
homme aupres d'eulx, faisoient venir mengier avec nous: ce que nous, ne
fesiesmes point."

Dans beaucoup d'endroits j'ai trouve qu'ils ne cuisent point leur pain la
moitie de ce que l'est le notre. Il est mou, et a moins d'y etre accoutume,
on a bien de la peine a le macher. Pour leur viande, ils la mangent crue,
sechee au soleil. Cependant quand une de leurs betes, cheval ou chameau,
est en danger de mort ou sans espoir, ils l'egorgent et la mangent non
crue, un peu cuite. Ils sont tres-propres dans l'appret de leurs viandes;
mais ils mangent tres-salement. Ils tiennent de meme fort, proprement leur
barbe; mais jamais ils ne se lavent les mains que quand ils se baignent,
qu'ils veulent faire leur priere, ou qu'ils se lavent la barbe ou le
derriere.

Adene est une assez bonne ville marchande, bien fermee de murailles, situee
en bon pays et assez voisine de la mer. Sur ses murs passe une grosse
riviere qui vient des hautes montagnes d'Armenie et qu'on nomme Adena. Elle
a un pont fort long et le plus large que j'aie jamais vu. Ses habitans et
son amiral (son seigneur, son prince) sont Turcomans: cet amiral est le
frere de ce brave Ramedang que le soudan fit mourir ainsi que je l'a
raconte. On m'a dit meme que le soudan a entre les mains son fils, et qu'il
n'ose le laisser retourner en Turcomanie.

D'Adene j'allai a Therso que nous appellons Tharse. Le pays, fort beau
encore, quoique voisin des montagnes, est habite par des Turcomans, dont
les uns logent dans des villages et les autres sous des pavillons. Le
canton ou est batie Tharse abonde en ble, vins, bois et eaux. Elle fut une
ville fameuse, et l'on y voit encore de tres-anciens edifices. Je crois que
c'est celle qu'assiegea Baudoin, frere de Godefroi de Bouillon. Aujourd'hui
elle a un amiral nomme par le soudan, et il y demeure plusieurs Maures.
Elle est defendue par un chateau, par des fosses a glacis et par une double
enceinte de murailles, qui en certains endroits est triple. Une petite
riviere la traverse, et a peu de distance il en coule une autre.

J'y trouvai un marchand de Cypre, nomme Antoine, qui depuis long-temps
demeuroit dans le pays et en savoit bien la languei. Il m'en parla
pertinemment; mais il me fit un autre plaisir, celui de me donner de bon
vin, car depuis plusieurs jours je n'en avois point bu.

Tharse n'est qu'a soixante milles du Korkene (Curco), chateau construit sur
la mer, et qui appartient au roi de Cypre.

Dans tout ce pays on parle Turc, et on commence meme a le parler des
Antioche, qui est, comme je l'ai dit, la capitale de Turcomanie. "C'est un
tres-beau langaige, et brief, et bien aisie pour aprendre."

Comme nous avions a traverser les hautes montagnes d'Armenie, Hoyarbarach,
le chef de notre caravane, voulut qu'elle fut toute reunie; et dans ce
dessein il attendit quelques jours. Enfin nous partimes la veille de la
Toussaint. Le mamelouck m'avoit conseille de m'approvisioner pour quatre
journees. En consequence j'achetai pour moi une provision de pain et de
fromage, et pour mon cheval une autre d'orge et de paille.

Au sortir de Tharse je fis encore trois lieues Francaises a travers un beau
pays de plaines, peuple de Turcomans; mais enfin j'entrai dans les
montagnes, montagnes les plus hautes que j'aie encore vues. Elles
enveloppent par trois cotes tout le pays que j'avois parcouru depuis
Antioche. L'autre partie est fermee au midi par la mer.

D'abord on a des bois a traverser. Ce chemin dure tout un jour, et il n'est
pas malaise. Nous logeames le soir dans un passage etroit ou il me parut
que jadis il y avoit eu un chateau. La seconde journee n'eut point de
mauvaise route encore, et nous vinmes passer la nuit dans un caravanserai.
La troisieme, nous cotoyames constamment une petite riviere, et vimes dans
les montagnes une multitude immense de perdrix griaches. Notre halte du
soir fut dans une plaine d'environ une lieue de longueur sur un quart de
large.

La se rencontrent quatre grandes combes (vallees). L'une est celle par
laquelle nous etions venus; l'autre, qui perce au nord, tire vers le pays
du seigneur, qu'on appelle Turcgadirony, et vers la Perse; la troisieme
s'etend au Levant, et j'ignore si elle conduit de meme a la Perse; la
derniere enfin est au couchant, et c'est celle que j'ai prise, et qui m'a
conduit au pays du karman. Chacune des quatre a une riviere, et les quatre
rivieres se rendent dans ce dernier pays.

Il neigea beaucoup pendant la nuit. Pour garantir mon cheval, je le couvris
avec mon capinat, cette robe de feutre qui me servoit de manteau. Mais moi
j'eus froid, et il me prit une maladie qui est malhonnete (le devoiement):
j'eusse meme ete en danger, sans mon mamelouck, qui me secourut et qui me
fit sortir bien vite de ce lieu.

Nous partimes donc de grand matin tous deux, et entrames dans les hautes
montagnes. Il y a la un chateau nomme Cublech, le plus eleve que je
connoisse. On le voit a une distance de deux journees. Quelquefois
cependant on lui tourne le dos, a cause des detours qu'occasionnent les
montagnes; quelquefois aussi on cesse de le voir, parce qu'il est cache par
des hauteurs: mais on ne peut penetrer au pays du karman qu'en passant au
pied de celle ou il est bati. Le passage est etroit. Il a fallu meme en
quelques parties l'ouvrir au ciseau; mais par-tout il est domine par le
Cublech. Ce chateau, le dernier [Footnote: Ce mot dernier signifie
probablement ici le plus recule, le plus eloigne a la frontiere.] de ceux
qu'ont perdus les Armeniens, appartient aujourd'hui au karman, qui l'a eu
en partage a la mort de Ramedang.

Ces montagnes sont couvertes de neige en tout temps, et il n'y a qu'un
passage pour les chevaux, quoiqu'on y trouve de temps en temps de jolies
petites plaines. Elles sont dangereuses, par les Turcomans qui y sont
repandus; mais pendant les quatre jours de marche que j'y ai faite, je n'y
ai pas vu une seule habitation.

Quand on quitte les montagnes d'Armenie pour entrer dans le pays du karman,
on en trouve d'autres qu'il faut traverser encore. Sur l'une de celles-ci
est une gorge avec un chateau nomme Leve, ou l'on paie au karman un droit
de passage. Ce peage etoit afferme a un Grec, qui, en me voyant, me
reconnut a mes traits pour chretien, et m'arreta. Si j'avois ete oblige de
retourner, j'etois un homme mort, et on me l'a dit depuis: avant d'avoir
fait une demi lieue j'eusse ete egorge; car la caravane etpit encore fort
loin. Heureusement mon mamelouk gagna le Grec, et, moyennant deux ducats
que je lui donnai, il me livra passage.

Plus loin est le chateau d'Asers, et par-de-la le chateau une ville nommee
Araclie (Eregli).

En debouchant des montagnes on entre dans un pays aussi uni que la mer;
cependant on y voit encore vers la tremontane (le nord) quelques hauteurs
qui, semees d'espace en espace, semblent des iles au milieu des flots.
C'est dans cette plaine qu'est Eregli, ville autrefois fermee, et
aujourd'hui dans un grand delabrement. J'y trouvai au moins des vivres;
car, dans mes quatre jours de marche depuis Tharse, la route ne m'avoit
offert que de l'eau. Les environs de la ville sont couverts de villages
habites en tres-grande partie par des Turcomans.

Au sortir d'Eregli nous trouvames deux gentilshommes du pays qui
paroissoient gens de distinction; ils firent beaucoup d'amitie au
mamelouck, et le menerent, pour le regaler a un village voisin dont les
habitations son toutes creusees dans le roc. Nous y passames la nuit; mais
moi je fus oblige de passer dans une caverne le reste du jour, pour y
garder nos chevaux. Quand le mamelouck revint, il me dit que ces deux
hommes lui avoient demande qui j'etois, et qu'il leur avoit repondu, en
leur donnant le change, que j'etois un Circassien qui ne savoit point
parler Arabe.

D'Eregli a Larande, ou nous allames, il y a deux journees. Cette ville-ci,
quoique non close, est grande, marchande et bien situee. Il y avoit
autrefois au centre un grand et fort chateau dont on voit encore les
portes, qui sont en fer et tres-belles; mais les murs sont abbatus. D'une
ville a l'autre on a, comme je l'ai dit, un beau pays plat; et depuis Leve
je n'ai pas vu un seul arbre qui fut en rase campagne.

Il y avoit a Larande deux gentilshommes de Cypre, dont l'un s'appelloit
Lyachin Castrico; l'autre, Leon Maschero, et qui tous deux parloient assez
bien Francais. [Footnote: Les Lusignan, devenus rois de Cypre sur la fin du
douzieme siecle, avoient introduit dans cette ile la langue Francaise.
C'est en Cypre, au passage de saint Louis pour sa croisade d'Egypte que fut
fait et publie ce code qu'on appela Assises de Jerusalem, et qui devint le
code des Cypriots. La langue Francaise continua d'etre celle de la cour et
des gens bien eleves.] Ils me demanderent quelle etoit ma patrie, et
comment je me trouvais la. Je leur repondis que j'etois serviteur de
monseigneur de Bourgogne, que je venois de Jerusalem et de Damas, et que
j'avois suivi la caravane. Ils me parurent tres-emerveilles de ce que
j'avois pu passer; mais quand ils m'eurent demande ou j'allois, et que
j'ajoutai que je retournois par terre en France vers mondit seigneur, ils
me dirent que c'etoit chose impossible, et que, quand j'aurois mille vies,
je les perdrois toutes. En consequence ils me proposerent de retourner en
Cypre avec eux. Il y avoit dans l'ile deux galeres qui etoient venues y
chercher la soeur de roi, accorde en mariage au fils de monseigneur de
Savoie, [Footnote: Louis, fils d'Amedee VIII. duc de Savoie. Il epousa en
1432 Anne de Lusignan fille de Jean II, roi de Cypre, mort au mois de Juin,
et soeur de Jean III, qui alors etoit sur le trone.] et ils ne doutoient
point que le roi, par amour et honneur pour monseigneur de Bourgogne, ne
m'y accordat passage. Je leur repondis que puisque Dieu m'avoit fait la
grace d'arriver a Larande, il me feroit probablement celle d'aller plus
loin, et qu'au reste j'etois resolu d'achever mon voyage ou d'y mourir.

A mon tour je leur demandai ou ils alloient. Ils me dirent que leur roi
venoit de mourir; que pendant sa vie il avoit toujours entretenu treve avec
le grand karman, et que le jeune roi et son conseil les envoyoit vers lui
pour renouveller l'alliance. Moi, qui etois curieux de connoitre ce grand
prince que sa nation considere comme nous notre roi, je les priai de
permettre que je les accompagnasse; et ils y consentirent.

Je trouvai a Larande un autre Cypriot. Celui-ci, nomme Perrin Passerot, et
marchand, demeuroit depuis quelque temps dans le pays. Il etoit de
Famagouste, et en avoit ete banni, parce qu'avec un de ses freres il avoit
tente de remettre dans les mains du roi cette ville, qui etoit dans celles
des Genois.

Mon mamelouck venoit de recontrer aussi cinq ou six de ses compatriotes.
C'etoient de jeunes esclaves Circassiens que l'on conduisoit au soudan. Il
voulut a leur passage les regaler; et comme il avoit appris qu'il se
trouvoit a Larande des chretiens, et qu'il soupconnoit qu'ils auroient du
vin, il me pria de lui en procurer. Je cherchai tant que, moyennant la
moitie d'un ducat, je trouvai a en acheter demi-peau de chevre (une
demi-outre), et je la lui donnai.

Il montra en la recevant une joie extreme, et alla aussitot trouver ses
camarades, avec lesquelles il passa la nuit tout entiere a boire. Pour lui,
il en prit tant que le lendemain, dans la route, il manqua d'en mourir;
mais il se guerit par une methode qui leur est propre: dans ces cas-la, ils
ont une tres-grande bouteille pleine d'eau, et a mesure que leur estomac se
vide et se debarrasse, ils boivent de l'eau tant qu'ils peuvent en avaler,
comme s'ils vouloient rincer une bouteille, puis ils la rendent et en
avalent d'autre. Il employa ainsi a se laver tout le temps de la route
jusqu'a midi, et il fut gueri entierement.

De Larande nous allames a Qulongue, appelee par les Grecs Quhonguopoly.
[Footnote: Plus bas le copiste a ecrit Quohongue et Quhongue. J'ecrirai
desormais Couhongue.] Il y a d'un lien a l'autre deux journees. Le pays est
beau et bien garni de villages; mais il manque d'eau, et n'a, ni d'autres
arbres que ceux qu'on a plantes pres des habitations pour avoir du fruit,
ni d'autre riviere que celle qui coule pres de la ville.

Cette ville, grande, marchande, defendue par des fosses en glacis et par de
bonnes murailles garnies de tours, est la meilleure qu'ait le karman. Il
lui reste un petit chateau. Jadis elle en avoit un tres-fort, qui etoit
construit au centre. On l'a jete bas pour y batir le palais du roi.
[Footnote: L'auteur, d'apres ses prejuges Europeens, emploie ici le mot roi
pour designer le prince, le souverain du pays.]

Je restai la quatre jours, afin de donner le temps a l'ambassadeur de
Cypre, et a la caravane d'arriver. Il arriva, ainsi qu'elle. Alors j'allai
demander a l'ambassadeur que, quand il iroit saluer le karman, il me permit
de me joindre a sa suite, et il me promit. Cependant il avoit parmi ses
esclaves quatre Grecs de Cypre renegats, dont l'un etoit son huissier
d'armes, et qui tous quatre firent aupres de lui des efforts pour l'en
detourner; mais il leur repondit qu'il n'y voyoit point d'inconvenient:
d'ailleurs j'en avois temoigne tant d'envie qu'il se fit un plaisir de
m'obliger.

On vint le prevenir de l'heure a laquelle il pourroit faire sa reverence au
roi, lui exposer le sujet de son ambassade, et offrir ses presens; car
c'est une coutume au-dela des mers qu'on ne paroit jamais devant un prince
sans en apporter quelques-uns. Les siens etoient six pieces de camelot de
Cypre, je ne sais combien d'aunes d'ecarlate, une quarantaine de pains de
sucre, un faucon pelerin et deux arbaletes, avec une douzaine de vires.
[Footnote: Vives, grosses fleches qu se lancoient avec l'arbalete.]

On envoya chez lui des genets pour apporter les presens; et, pour sa
monture ainsi que pour sa suite, les chevaux qu'avoient laisses a la porte
du palais ceux des grands qui etoient venus faire cortege au roi pendant la
ceremonie.

Il en monta un, et mit pied a terre a l'entree du palais; apres quoi, nous
entrames dans une tres-grande salle ou il pouvoit y avoir environ trois
cents personnes. Le roi occupoit la chambre suivante, autour de laquelle
etoient ranges trente esclaves, tous debout. Pour lui, il etoit dans un
coin, assis sur un tapis par terre, selon la coutume du pays, vetu de drap
d'or cramoisi, et le coude appuye sur un carreau d'une autre sorte de drap
d'or. Pres de lui etoit son epee; en avant, son chancelier debout, et
autour, a peu de distance, trois hommes assis.

D'abord on fit passer sous ses yeux les presens, qu'il parut a peine
regarder; puis l'ambassadeur entra accompagne d'un trucheman, parce qu'il
ne savoit point la langue Turque. Quand il eut fait sa reverence, le
chancelier lui demanda la lettre dont il etoit porteur, et la lut tout
haut. L'ambassadeur alors dit au roi, par son trucheman, que le roi de
Cypre envoyoit le saluer, et qu'il le prioit de recevoir avec amitie les
presens qu'il lui envoyoit.

Le roi ne lui repondit pas un mot. On le fit asseoir par terre, a leur
maniere, mais audessous des trois personnes assises, et assez loin du
prince. Alors celui-ci demanda comment se portoit son frere le roi de
Cypre, et il lui fut repondu qu'il avoit perdu son pere, qu'il envoyoit
renouveler l'alliance qui du vivant du mort, avoit subsiste entre les deux
pays, et que pour lui il la desiroit fort. Je la souhaite egalement, dit le
roi.

Celui-ci demanda encore a l'ambassadeur quand etoit mort le defunt, quel
age avoit son successeur, s'il etoit sage, si son pays lui obeissoit bien;
et comme a ces deux dernieres questions la reponse fut un oui, il temoigna
en etre bien-aise.

Apres ces paroles on dit a l'ambassadeur de se lever. Il obeit, et prit
conge du roi, qui ne se remua pas plus a son depart qu'il ne l'avoit fait a
son arrivee. En sortant il trouva devant le palais les chevaux qui
l'avoient amene. On lui en fit de nouveau monter un pour le reconduire a sa
demeure; mais a peine y fut-il arrive que les huissiers d'armes se
presenterent a lui. En pareilles ceremonies, c'est la coutume qu'on leur
distribue de l'argent, et il en donna.

Il alla ensuite saluer le fils aine du roi, et lui presenter ses presens et
ses lettres. Ce prince etoit, comme son pere, entoure de trois personnes
assises. Mais quand l'ambassadeur lui fit la reverence, il se leva, se
rassit, le fit asseoir a son tour au-dessus des trois personnages. Pour
nous autres qui l'accompagnions, on nous placa bien en arriere. Moi j'avois
appercu a l'ecart un banc, sur lequel j'allai me mettre sans facon; mais on
vint m'en tirer, et il me fallut plier le jarret et m'accroupir a terre
avec les autres. De retour a l'hotel, nous vimes arriver un huissier
d'armes du fils, comme nous avions vu du pere. On lui donna aussi de
l'argent, et au reste ces gens-la se contentent de peu.

A leur tour, le roi et son fils en'envoyerent a l'ambassadeur pour sa
depense; et c'est encore la une coutume. Le premier lui fit passer
cinquante aspres, le second trente. L'aspre est la monnoie du pays: il en
faut cinquante pour un ducat de Venise.

Je vis le roi traverser la ville en cavalcade. C'etoit un Vendredi jour de
fete pour eux, et il alloit faire sa priere. Sa garde etoit composee d'une
cinquantaine de cavaliers, la plupart ses esclaves, et d'environ trente
archers a pied qui l'entouroient. Il portoit une epee a sa ceinture et un
tabolcan a l'arcon de sa selle, selon l'usage du pays. Lui et son fils ont
ete baptises a la Grecque, pour oter le flair (la mauvaise odeur), et l'on
m'a dit meme que la mere de son fils etoit chretienne. Il en est ainsi de
tous les grands, ils se font baptiser afin qu'ils ne puent point.

Ses etats sont considerables; ils commencent a une journee en-de-ca de
Tarse; et vont jusqu'au pays d'Amurat-Bey, cet autre karman dont j'ai
parle, et que nous appelons le grand-Turc. Dans ce sens, leur largeur est,
dit-on, de vingt lieues au plus; mais ils ont seize journees de long, et je
le sais, moi qui les ai traversees. Au nord est, ils s'etendent, m'a-t-on
dit, jusqu'aux frontieres de Perse.

Le karman possede aussi une cote maritime qu'on nomme les Farsats. Elle se
prolonge depuis Tharse jusqu'a Courco, qui est au roi de Cypre, et a un
port nomme Zabari. Ce canton produit les meilleurs marins que l'on
connaisse; mais ils se sont revoltes contre lui.

Le karman est un beau prince, age de trente-deux ans, et qui a epouse la
soeur d'Amurat-Bey. Il est fort obei dans ses etats; cependant j'ai entendu
des gens qui disent de lui qu'il est tres-cruel, et qu'il passe peu de
jours sans faire couper des nes, des pieds, des mains, ou mourir quelqu'un.
Un homme est-il riche, il le condamne a mort pour s'emparer de ses biens;
et j'ai oui dire qu'il s'etoit ainsi defait des plus grands de son pays.
Huit jours avant mon arrivee il en avoit fait etrangler un par des chiens.
Deux jours apres cette execution il avoit fait mourir une de ses femmes, la
mere meme de son fils aine, qui, quand je le vis, ne savoit rien encore de
ce meurtre.

Les habitans de ce pays sont de mauvaises gens, voleurs, subtils et grands
assassins. Ils se tuent les uns les autres, et la justice qu'il en fait ne
les arrete point.

Je trouvai dans Cohongue Antoine Passerot, frere de ce Perrin Passerot que
j'avois vu a Larande, qui tous deux accuses d'avoir voulu remettre
Famagouste sous la puissance du roi de Cypre, en avoient ete bannis, ainsi
que je l'ai dit; et ils s'etoient retires dans le pays du karman, l'un a
Larande, l'autre a Couhongue. Mais Antoine venoit d'avoir une mauvaise
aventure. Quelquefois peche aveugle les gens: on l'avoit trouve avec une
femme de la loi Mahometane; et sur l'ordre du roi, il avoit ete oblige,
pour echapper a la mort, de renier la foi catholique, quoiqu'il m'ait paru
encore bon chretien.

Dans nos conversations, il me conta beaucoup de particularites sur le pays,
sur le caractere et le gouvernement du seigneur, et principalement sur la
maniere dont il avoit pris et livre Ramedang.

Le karman, me dit-il, avoit un frere qu'il chassa du pays, et qui alla se
refugier et chercher asile pres du soudan. Le soudan n'osoit lui declarer
la guerre; mais il le fit prevenir que s'il ne lui livroit Ramedang, il
enverroit son frere avec des troupes la lui faire. Le karman n'hesita
point, et plutot que d'avoir son frere a combattre, il fit envers son
beau-frere une grande trahison. Antoine me dit aussi qu'il etoit lache et
sans courage, quoique son peuple soit le plus vaillant de la Turquie. Son
vrai nom est Imbreymbas; mais on l'appelle karman, a cause qu'il est
seigneur de ce pays.

Quoiqu'il soit allie au grand-Turc, puisqu'il a epouse sa soeur, il le hait
fort, parce que celui-ci lui a pris une partie du Karman. Cependant il
n'ose l'attaquer, vu que l'autre est trop fort; mais je suis persuade que
s'il le voyoit entrepris avec succes de notre cote, lui, du sien, ne le
laisseroit pas en paix.

En traversant ses etats j'ai cotoye une autre contree qu'on nomme Gaserie.
Celle-ci confine, d'une part au Karman, et de l'autre a la Turcomanie, par
les hautes montagnes qui sont vers Tharse et vers la Perse. Son seigneur
est un vaillant guerrier appele Gadiroly, lequel a sous ces ordres trente
mille hommes d'armes Turcomans, et environ cent mille femmes, aussi braves
et aussi bonnes pour le combat que les hommes.

Il y a la quatre seigneurs qui se font continuellement la guerre; c'est
Gadiroly, Quharaynich, Quaraychust et le fils de Tamerlan, qui, m'a-t-on
dit, gouverne la Perse.

Antoine m'apprit qu'en debouchant des montagnes d'Armenie par de-la Eregli,
j'avois passe a demi-journee d'une ville celebre ou repose le corps de
saint Basile; il m'en parla meme de maniere a me donner envie de la voir.
Mais on me representa si bien ce que je perdois d'advantages en me separant
de la caravane, et ce que j'allois courir de risques en m'exposant seul,
que j'y renoncat.

Pour lui, il m'avoua que son dessein etoit de se rendre avec moi aupres de
monseigneur le duc; qu'il ne se sentoit nulle envie d'etre Sarrasin, et que
s'il avoit pris quelque engagement a ce sujet, c'etoit uniquement pour
eviter la mort. On vouloit le circoncire; il s'y attendoit chaque jour, et
le craignoit fort. C'est un fort bel homme, age de trente six ans.

Il me dit encore que les habitans font, dans leurs mosquees, des prieres
publiques, comme nous, dans les paroisses, nous en faisons tous les
dimanches pour les princes chretiens et pour autres objets dont nous
demandons a Dieu l'accomplissement. Or une des choses qu'ils lui demandent,
c'est de les preserver de la venue d'un homme tel que Godefroi de Bouillon.

Le chef de la caravane s'appretoit a repartir, et j'allai en consequence
prendre conge des ambassadeurs du roi de Cypre. Ils s'etoient flattes de
m'emmener avec eux, et ils renouvelerent leurs instances en m'assurant que
jamais je n'acheverois mon voyage; mais je persistai. Ce fut a Couhongue
que quitterent la caravane ceux qui la composoient. Hoyarbarach n'amenoit
avec lui que ses gens, sa femme, deux de ses enfans qu'il avoit conduits a
la Mecque, une ou deux femmes etrangeres, et moi.

Je dis adieu a mon mamelouck. Ce brave homme, qu'on appeloit Mahomet,
m'avoit rendu des services sans nombre. Il etoit tres-charitable, et
faisoit toujours l'aumone quand on la lui demandoit au nom de Dieu. C'etoit
par un motif de charite qu'il m'obligeoit, et j'avoue que sans lui je
n'eusse pu achever mon voyage qu'avec de tres-grandes peines, que souvent
j'aurois ete expose au froid et a la faim, et fort embarrasse pour mon
cheval.

En le quittant je cherchai a lui temoigner ma reconnoissance; mais il ne
voulut rien accepter qu'un couvre-chef de nos toiles fines d'Europe, et cet
objet parut lui faire grand plaisir. Il me raconta toutes les occasions
venues a sa connoissance, ou sans lui, j'aurois couru risque d'etre
assassine, et me prevint d'etre bien circonspect dans les liaisons que je
ferois avec les Sarrasins, parce qu'il s'en trouvoit parmi eux d'aussi
mauvais que les Francs. J'ecris ceci pour rappeler que celui qui, par amour
de Dieu, m'a fait tant de bien, etoit "ung homme hors de nostre foy."

Le pays que nous eumes a parcourir apres etre sortis de Couhongue est fort
beau, et il a d'assez bons villages; mais les habitans sont mauvais: le
chef me defendit meme, dans un des villages ou nous nous arretames, de
sortir de mon logement, de peur d'etre assassine. Il y a pres de ce lieu un
bain renomme, ou plusieurs malades accourent pour chercher guerison. On y
voit des maisons qui jadis appartinrent aux hospitaliers de Jerusalem, et
la croix de Jerusalem s'y trouve encore.

Apres trois jours de marche nous arrivames a une petite ville nomme
Achsaray, situee au pied d'une haute montagne, qui la garantit du midi. Le
pays est uni, mais mal-peuple, et les habitans passent pour mechans: aussi
me fut-il encore defendu de sortir la nuit hors de la maison.

Je voyageai la journee suivante entre deux montagnes dont les cimes sont
couronnees d'un peu de bois. Le canton, assez bien peuple, l'est un partie
par des Turcomans; mais il y a beaucoup d'herbages et de marais.

La je traversai une petite riviere qui separe ce pays de Karman d'avec
l'autre Karman que possede Amurat-Bey, nomme par nous le Grand-Turc. Cette
portion ressemble a la premiere; elle offre comme elle un pays plat,
parseme ca et la de montagnes.

Sur notre route nous cotoyames une ville a chateau, qu'on nomme Achanay.
Plus loin est un beau caravanserai ou nous comptions passer la nuit; mais
il y avoit vingt-cinq anes. Notre chef ne voulut pas y entrer, et il
prefera retourner une lieue on arriere sur ses pas, jusqu'a un gros village
ou nous logeames, et ou nous trouvames du pain, du fromage et du lait.

De ce lieu je vins a Karassar en deux jours. Carassar, en langue Turque,
signifie pierre noire. C'est la capitale de ce pays, dont s'est empare de
force Amurat-Bey. Quoiqu'elle ne soit point fermee, elle est marchande, et
a un des plus beaux chateaux que j'aie vus, quoiqu'il n'ait que de l'eau de
citerne. Il occupe la cime d'une haute roche, si bien arrondie qu'on la
croiroit taillee au ciseau. Au bas est la ville, qui l'entoure de trois
cotes; mais elle est a son tour enveloppee, ainsi que lui, par une montagne
en croissant, depuis grec jusqu'a mestre (depuis le nord-est jusqu'au
nord-ouest). Dans le reste de la circonference s'ouvre une plaine que
traverse une riviere. Il y avoit peu de temps que les Grecs s'etoient
empares de ce lieu; mais ils l'avoient perdu par leur lachete.

On y apprete les pieds de mouton avec une perfection et une proprete que je
n'ai vues nulle part. Je m'en regalai d'autant plus volontiers que depuis
Couhongue je n'avois pas mange de viande cuite. On y fait aussi, avec des
noix vertes, un mets particulier. Pour cela on les pele, on les coupe en
deux, on les enfile avec une ficelle, et on les arrose de vin cuit, qui se
prend tout autour et y forme une gelee comme de la colle. C'est une
nourriture assez agreable, sur-tout quand on a faim. Nous fumes obliges d'y
faire une provision de pain et de fromage pour deux jours; et je conviens
que j'etois degoute de chair crue.

Ces deux jours furent employes a venir de Carassar a Cotthay. Le pays est
beau, bien arrose et garni de montagnes peu elevees. Nous traversames un
bout de foret qui me parut remarquable en ce qu'elle est composee
entierement de chenes, et que ces arbres y sont plus gros, plus droits et
plus hauts que ceux que j'avois ete a portee de voir jusque-la. D'ailleurs
ils n'ont, comme les sapins, de branches qu'a leurs cimes.

Nous vinmes loger dans un caravanserai qui etoit eloigne de toute
habitation. Nous y trouvames de l'orge et de la paille, et il eut ete
d'autant plus aise de nous en approvisionner, qu'il n'y avoit d'autre
gardien qu'un seul valet. Mais on n'a rien de semblable a craindre dans ces
lieux-la, et il n'est point d'homme assez hardi pour oser y prendre une
poignee de marchandise sans payer.

Sur la route est une petite riviere renommee pour son eau Hoyarbarch alla
en boire avec ses femmes; il voulut que j'en busse aussi, et lui-meme m'en
presenta dans son gobelet de cuir. C'etoit la premiere fois de toute la
route qu'il me faisoit cette faveur.

Cotthay, quoique assez considerable, n'a point de murs; mais elle a un beau
et grand chateau compose de trois forteresses placees l'une au-dessus de
l'autre sur le penchant d'une montagne, lequel a une double enceinte. C'est
dans cette place qu'etoit le fils aine du grand-Turc.

La ville possede un caravanserai ou nous allames loger. Deja il y avoit des
Turcs, et nous fumes obliges d'y mettre tous nos chevaux pele-mele, selon
l'usage; mais le lendemain matin, au moment ou j'appretois le mien pour
partir, je m'apercus qu'on m'avoit pris l'une des courroies qui me servoit
a attacher derriere ma selle le tapis et autres objets que je portois en
trousse.

D'abord je criai et me fachai beaucoup. Mais il y avoit la un esclave Turc,
l'un de ceux du fils aine, homme de poids et d'environ cinquante ans, qui,
m'entendant et voyant que je ne parlois pas bien la langue, me prit par la
main et me conduisit a la porte du caravanserai. La il me demanda en
Italien qui j'etois. Je fus stupefait d'entendre ce langage dans sa bouche.
Je repondis que j'etois Franc. "D'ou venez-vous? ajouta-t-il.--De Damas,
dans la compagnie d'Hoyarbarach, et je vais a Bourse retrouver un de mes
freres.--Eh bien, vous etes un espion, et vous venez chercher ici des
renseignemens sur le pays. Si vous ne l'etiez pas, n'auriez-vous pas du
prendre la mer pou; retourner chez vous?"

Cette inculpation a laquelle je ne m'attendois pas m'interdit; je repondis
cependant que les Venitiens et les Genois se faisoient sur mer une guerre
si acharnee que je n'osois m'y risquer. Il me demanda d'ou j'etois. Du
royaume de France, repartis-je. Etes-vous des environs de Paris? reprit il.
Je dis que non, et je lui demandai a mon tour s'il connoissoit Paris. Il me
repondit qu'il y avoit ete autrefois avec un capitaine nomme Bernabo.
"Croyez-moi, ajouta-t-il, allez dans le caravanserai chercher votre cheval,
et amenez-le moi ici; car il y a la des esclaves Albaniens qui acheveroient
de vous prendre ce qu'il porte encore. Tandis que je le garderai, vous irez
dejeuner, et vous ferez pour vous et pour lui une provision de cinq jours,
parce que vous serez cinq journees sans rien trouver."

Je profitai du conseil; j'allai m'approvisionner, et je dejeunai avec
d'autant plus de plaisir que depuis deux jours je n'avois goute viande, et
que je courois risque de n'en point tater encore pendant cinq jours.

Sorti du caravanserai, je pris le chemin de Bourse, et laissai a gauche,
entre l'occident et le midi, celui de Troie-la-Grant. [Footnote: L'auteur,
en donnant ici a la fameuse Troie la denomination de grande, ne fait que
suivre l'usage de son siecle. La historiens et les romanciers du temps la
designoient toujours ainsi, "histoire de Troye-la-Grant," "destruction de
Troie-la-Grant," etc.] Il y a d'assez hautes montagnes, et j'en eus
plusieurs a passer. J'eus aussi deux journees de forets, apres quoi je
traversai une belle plaine dans laquelle il y a quelques villages assez
bons pour le pays. A demi-journee de Bourse il en est un ou nous trouvames
de la viande et du raisin; ce raisin etoit aussi frais qu'au temps des
vendanges: ils savent le garder ainsi toute l'annee; c'est un secret qu'ils
ont. Les Turcs m'y regalerent de roti; mais il n'etoit pas cuit a moitie. A
mesure que la viande se rotissoit, nous la coupions a la broche par
tranches. Nous eumes aussi du kaymac; c'est de la creme de buffle. Elle
etoit si bonne et si douce, et j'en mangeai tant que je manquai d'en
crever.

Ayant d'entrer dans le village nous vimes venir a nous un Turc de Bourse
qui etoit envoye a l'epouse de Hoyarbarach pour lui annoncer la mort de son
pere. Elle temoigna une grande douleur, et ce fut a cette occasion que
s'etant decouvert le visage, j'eus le plaisir de la voir; ce qui ne m'etoit
pas encore arrive de toute-la route. C'etoit une fort belle femme.

Il y avoit dans le lieu un esclave Bulgare renegat, qui, par affectation de
zele et pour se montrer bon Sarrasin, reprocha aux Turcs de la caravane de
me laisser aller dans leur compagnie, et dit que c'etoit un peche a eux qui
revenoient du saint pelerinage de la Mecque: en consequence ils me
notifierent qu'il falloit nous separer, et je fus oblige de me rendre a
Bourse.

Je partis donc le lendemain, une heure avant le jour, avec l'aide de Dieu
qui jusque-la m'avoit conduit; il me guida encore si bien que dans la route
je ne demandai mon chemin qu'une seule fois.

En entrant dans la ville je vis beaucoup de gens qui en sortoient pour
aller au-devant de la caravane. Tel est l'usage; les plus notables s'en
font un devoir; c'est une fete. Il y en eut meme plusieurs qui, me croyant
un des pelerins, me baiserent les mains et la robe.

En y entrant je me vis embarrasse, parce que d'abord on trouve une place
qui s'ouvre par quatre rues, et que je ne savois laquelle prendre. Dieu me
fir encore choisir la bonne, laquelle me conduisit au bazar, ou sont les
marchandises et les marchands. Je m'adressai au premier chretien que j'y
vis, et ce chretien se trouva heureusement un des espinolis de Genes,
celui-la meme pour qui Parvesin de Baruth m'avoit donne des lettres. Il fut
fort etonne de me voir, et me conduisit chez un Florentin ou je logeai avec
mon chevall. J'y restai dix jours, temps que j'employai a parcourir la
ville, conduit par les marchands, qui se firent un plaisir de me mener
par-tout eux-memes.

De toutes celles que possede le Turc, c'est la plus considerable; elle est
grande, marchande, et situee au pied et au nord du mont Olimpoa (Olympe),
d'ou descend une riviere qui la traverse et qui, se divisant en plusieurs
bras, forme comme un amas de petites villes, et contribue a la faire
paroitre plus grande encore.

C'est a Burse que sont inhumees les seigneurs de Turquie (les sultans). On
y voit de beaux edifices, et surtout un grand nombre d'hopitaux, parmi
lesquels il y en a quatre ou l'on distribue souvent du pain, du vin et de
la viande aux pauvres, qui veulent les prendre pour Dieu. A l'une des
extremites de la ville, vers le ponent, est un beau et vaste chateau bati
sur une hauteur, et qui peut bien renfermer mille maisons. La est aussi le
palais du seigneur, palais qu'on m'a dit etre interieurement un lieu
tres-agreable, et qui a un jardin avec un joli etang. Le prince avoit alors
cinquante femmes, et souvent, dit-on, il va sur l'etang s'amuser en bateau
avec quelqu'une d'elles.

Burse etoit aussi le sejour de Camusat Bayschat (pacha), seigneur, ou,
comme nous autres nous dirions, gouverneur et lieutenant de la Turquie.
C'est un tres-vaillant homme, le plus entreprenant qu'ait le Turc, et le
plus habile a conduire sagement une enterprise. Aussi sont-ce
principalement ces qualites qui lui ont fait donner ce gouvernement.

Je demandai s'il tenoit bien le pays et s'il savoit se faire obeir. On me
dit qu'il etoit obei et respecte comme Amurat lui-meme, qu'il avoit pour
appointemens cinquante mille ducats par an, et que, quand le Turc entroit
en guerre, il lui menoit a ses depens vingt mille hommes; mais que lui, de
son cote, il avoit egalement ses pensionnaires qui, dans ce cas, etoient
tenus de lui fournir a leurs frais, l'un mille hommes, l'autre deux mille,
l'autre trois, et ainsi des autres.

Il y a dans Burse deux bazars; l'un ou l'on vend des etoffes de soie de
toute espece, de riches et belles pierreries, grande quantite de perles, et
a bon marche, des toiles de coton, ainsi qu'une infinite d'autres
marchandises dont l'enumeration seroit trop longue; l'autre ou l'on achete
du coton et du savon blanc, qui fait la un gros objet de commerce.

Je vis aussi dans une halle un spectacle lamentable: c'etoient des
chretiens, hommes et femmes, que l'on vendoit. L'usage est de les faire
asseoir sur les bancs. Celui qui veut les acheter ne voit d'eux que le
visage et les mains, et un peu le bras des femmes. A Damas j'avois vu
vendre une fille noire, de quinze a seize ans; on la menoit au long des
rues toute nue, "fors que le ventre et le derriere, et ung pou au-desoubs."

C'est a Burse que, pour la premiere fois, je mangeai du caviare [Footnote:
Caviaire, caviar, cavial, caviat, sorte de ragout ou de mets compose
d'oeufs d'esturgeons qu'on a saupoudres de sel et seches au soleil. Les
Grecs en font une grande consommation dans leurs differens caremes.] a
l'huile d'olive. Cette nouriture n'est guere bonne que pour des Grecs, ou
quand on n'a rien de mieux.

Quelques jours apres qu'Hoyarbarach fut arrive j'allai prendre conge de lui
et le remercier des moyens qu'il m'avoit procures, de faire mon voyage. Je
le trouvai au bazar, assis sur un haut siege de pierre avec plusieurs des
plus notables de la ville. Les marchands s'etoient joints a moi dans cette
visite.

Quelques-uns d'entre eux, Florentins de nation, s'interessoient a un
Espagnol qui, apres avoir ete esclave du Soudan, avoit trouve le moyen de
s'echapper d'Egypte et d'arriver jusqu'a Burse. Ils me prierent de
l'emmener, avec moi. Je le conduisis a mes frais jusqu'a Constantinople, ou
je le laissai; mais je suis persuade que c'etoit un renegat. Je n'en ai
point eu de nouvelles depuis.

Trois Genois avoient achete des epices aux gens de la caravane, et ils se
proposoient d'aller les vendre a Pere (Pera), pres de Constantinople,
par-dela le detroit que nous appelons le Bras-de-Saint-George. Moi qui
voulais profiter par leur compagnie, j'attendis leur depart, et c'est la
raison qui me fit rester dans Burse; car, a moins d'etre connu, l'on
n'obtient point de passer le detroit. Dans cette vue ils me procurerent une
lettre du gouverneur. Je l'emportai avec moi; mais elle ne me servit point,
parce que je trouvai moyen de passer avec eux. Nous partimes ensemble.
Cependant ils m'avoient fait acheter pour ma surete un chapeau rouge fort
eleve, avec une huvette [Footnote: Huvette, sorte d'ornement qu'on mettoit
au chapeau.] en fil d'archal, que je portai jusqu'a Constantinople.

Au sortir de Burse nous traversames vers le nord une plaine qu'arrose une
riviere profonde qui va se jetter, quatre lieues environ plus bas, dans le
golfe, entre Constantinople et Galipoly. Nous eumes une journee de
montagnes, que des bois et un terrain argileux rendirent tres-penible. La
est un petit arbre qui porte un fruit un peu plus gros que nos plus fortes
cerises, et qui a la forme et le gout de nos fraises, quoiqu'un peu
aigrelet. Il est fort agreable a manger; mais si on en mange une certaine
quantite, il porte a la tete et enivre. On le trouve en Novembre et
Decembre. [Footnote: La description de l'auteur annonce qu'il s'agit ici de
l'arbousier.]

Du haut de la montagne on voit le golfe de Galipoly. Quand on l'a descendu
on entre dans une vallee terminee par un tres-grand lac, autour duquel sont
construites beaucoup de maisons. C'est la que j'ai vu pour la premiere fois
faire des tapis de Turquie. Je passai la nuit dans la vallee. Elle produit
beaucoup de riz.

Au-dela on trouve, tantot un pays de montagnes et de vallees, tantot un
pays d'herbages, puis une haute foret qu'il seroit impossible de traverser
sans guide, et ou les chevaux enfoncent si fort qu'ils ont grande peine a
s'en tirer. Pour moi je crois que c'est celle dont il est parle dans
l'histoire de Godefroi de Bouillon, et qu'il eut tant de difficulte a
traverser.

Je passai la nuit par-dela, dans un village qui est a quatre lieues en-deca
de Nichomede (Nichomedie). Nichomedie est une grande ville avec havre. Ce
havre, appele le Lenguo, part du golfe de Constantinople et s'etend jusqu'a
la ville, ou il a de largeur un trait d'arc. Tout ce pays est d'un passage
tres-difficultueux.

Par-dela Nicomedie, en tirant vers Constantinople, il devient tres-beau et
assez bon. La on trouve plus de Grecs que de Turcs; mais ces Grecs ont pour
les chretiens (pour les Latins) plus d'aversion encore que les Turcs
eux-memes.

Je cotoyai le golfe de Constantinople, et laissant le chemin de Nique
(Nicee), ville situee au nord, pres de la mer Noire, je vins loger
successivement dans un village en ruine, et qui n'a pour habitans que des
Grecs; puis dans un autre pres de Scutari; enfin a Scutari meme, sur le
detroit, vis-a-vis de Pera.

La sont des Turcs auxquels il faut payer un droit, et qui gardent le
passage. Il y a des roches qui le rendroient tres-aise a defendre si on
vouloit le fortifier. Hommes et chevaux peuvent s'y embarquer et debarquer
aisement. Nous passames, mes compagnons et moi, sur deux vaisseaux Grecs.

Ceux a qui appartenoit celui que je montois me prirent pour Turc, et me
rendirent de grands honneurs. Mais quand ils m'eurent descendu a terre, et
qu'ils me virent, en entrant dans Pera, laisser a la porte mon cheval en
garde, et demander un marchand Genois nomme Christophe Parvesin, pour qui
j'avois des lettres, ils se douterent que j'etois chretien. Deux d'entre
eux alors m'attendirent a la porte, et quand je vins y reprendre mon cheval
ils me demanderent plus que ce que j'etois convenu de leur donner pour mon
passage, et voulurent me ranconner. Je crois meme qu'ils m'auroient battu
s'ils l'avoient ose; mais j'avois mon epee et mon bon tarquais: d'ailleurs
un cordonnier Genois qui demeuroit pres de la vint a mon aide, et ils
furent obliges de se retirer.

J'ecris ceci pour servir d'avertissement aux voyageurs qui, comme moi,
auroient affaire a des Grecs. Tous ceux avec qui j'ai eu a traiter ne m'ont
laisse que de la defiance. J'ai trouve plus de loyaute en Turquie. Ce
peuple n'aime point les chretiens qui obeissent a l'eglise de Rome; la
soumission qu'il a faite depuis a cette eglise etoit plus interessee que
sincere. [Footnote: En 1438, Jean Paleologue II vint en Italie pour reunir
l'eglise Grecque avec la Latine, et la reunion eut lieu l'annee suivante au
concile de Florence. Mais cette demarche n'etoit de la part de l'empereur,
ainsi que le remarque la Brocquiere, qu'une operation politique dictee par
l'interet, et qui n'eut aucune suite. Ses etats se trouvoient dans une
situation si deplorable, et il etoit tellement presse par les Turcs, qu'il
cherchoit a se procurer le secours des Latins; et c'est dans cet espoir
qu'il etoit venu leurrer le pape. Cette epoque de 1438 est remarquable pour
notre voyage. Elle prouve que la Brocquiere, puisqu'il la cite, le publia
posterieurement a cette annee-la.] Aussi m'a-t-on dit que, peu avant mon
passage, le pape, dans un concile general, les avoit declares schismatiques
et maudits, en les devouant a etre esclaves de ceux qui etoient esclaves.
[Footnote: Fait faux. Le concile general qui eut lieu peu avant le passage
de l'auteur par Constantinople est celui de Bale en 1431. Or, loin d'y
maudire et anathematiser les Grecs, on s'y occupa de leur reunion. Cette
pretendue malediction etoit sans doute un bruit que faisoient courir dans
Constantinople ceux qui ne vouloient pas de rapprochement, et le voyageur
le fait entendre par cette expression, l'on m'a dit.]

Pera est une grande ville habitee par des Grecs, par des Juifs et par des
Genois. Ceux-ci en sont les maitres sous le duc de Milan, qui s'en dit le
seigneur; ils y ont un podestat et d'autres officiers qui la gouvernent a
leur maniere. On y fait un grand commerce avec les Turcs; mais les Turcs y
jouissent d'un droit de franchise singulier: c'est que si un de leurs
esclaves s'echappe et vient y chercher un asile, on est oblige de le leur
rendre. Le port est le plus beau de tous ceux que j'ai vus, et meme de tous
ceux, je crois, que possedent les chretiens, puisque les plus grosses
caraques Genoises peuvent venir y mettre echelle a terre. Mais comme tout
le monde sait cela, je m'abstiens d'en parler. Cependant il m'a semble que
du cote de la terre, vers l'eglise qui est dans le voisinage de la porte, a
l'extremite du havre, il y a un endroit foible.

Je trouvai a Pera un ambassadeur du duc de Milan, qu'on appeloit messire
Benedicto de Fourlino. Le duc, qui avoit besoin de l'appui de l'empereur
Sigismond contre les Venitiens, et qui voyoit Sigismond embarrasse a
defendre des Turcs son royaume de Hongrie, envoyoit vers Amurat une
ambassade pour negocier un accommodement entre les deux princes.

Messire Benedicto me fit, en l'honneur de monseigneur de Bourgogne,
beaucoup d'accueil; il me conta meme que, pour porter dommage aux
Venitiens, il avoit contribue a leur faire perdre Salonique, prise sur eux
par les Turcs; et certes en cela il fit d'autant plus mal que depuis j'ai
vu des habitans de cette ville renier Jesus-Christ pour embrasser la loi de
Mahomet.

Il y avoit aussi a Pera un Napolitain nomme Pietre de Naples avec qui je me
liai. Celui-ci se disoit marie dans la terre du pretre Jean, et il fit des
efforts pour m'y emmener avec lui. Au reste, comme je le questionnai
beaucoup sur ce pays, il m'en conta bien des choses que je vais ecrire.
J'ignore s'il me dit verite ou non, mais je ne garantis rien.

Nota. La maniere dont notre voyageur annonce ici la relation du Napolitain,
annonce combien peu il y croyoit; et en cela le bon sens qu'il a montre
jusqu'a present ne se dement pas. Ce recit n'est en effet qu'un amas de
fables absurdes et de merveilles revoltantes qui ne meritent pas d'etre
citees, quoiqu'on les trouve egalement dans certains auteurs du temps.
Laissons l'auteur reprendre son discours.

Deux jours apres mon arrivee a Pera je traversai le havre pour aller a
Constantinople et visiter cette ville.

C'est une grande et spacieuse cite, qui a la forme d'un triangle. L'un des
cotes regarde le detroit que nous appelons le Bras-de-Saint-George; l'autre
a au midi un gouffre (golfe) assez large, qui se prolonge jusqu'a Galipoly.
Au nord est le port.

Il existe sur la terre, dit-on, trois grandes villes dont chacune renferme
sept montagnes; c'est Rome, Constantinople et Antioche. Selon moi, Rome est
plus grande et plus arrondie que Constantinople. Pour Antioche, comme je ne
l'ai vue qu'en passant, je ne puis rien dire sur sa grandeur; cependant ses
montagnes m'ont paru plus hautes que celles des deux autres.

On donne a Constantinople, dans son triangle, dix-huit milles de tour, dont
un tiers est situe du cote de terre, vers le couchant. Elle a une bonne
enceinte de murailles, et surtout dans la partie qui regarde la terre.
Cette portion, qu'on dit avoir six milles d'une pointe a l'autre, a en
outre un fosse profond qui est en glacis, excepte dans un espace de deux
cents pas, a l'une de ses extremites, pres du palais appele la Blaquerne;
on assure meme que les Turcs ont failli prendre la ville par cet endroit
foible Quinze ou vingt pieds en avant du fosse est une fausse braie d'un
bon et haut mur.

Aux deux extremites de ce cote il y avoit autrefois deux beaux palais qui,
si l'on en juge par les ruines et les restes qui en subsistent encore,
etoient tres-forts. On m'a conte qu'ils ont ete abattus par un empereur
dans une circonstance ou, prisonnier du Turc, il courut risque de la vie.
Celui-ci exigeoit qu'il lui livrat Constantinople, et, en cas de refus, il
menacoit de le faire mourir. L'autre repondit qu'il preferoit la mort a la
honte d'affliger la chretiente par un si grand malheur, et qu'apres tout sa
perte ne seroit rien en comparaison de celle de la ville. Quand le Turc vit
qu'il n'avanceroit rien par cette voie, il lui proposa la liberte, a
condition que la place qui est devant Sainte-Sophie seroit abattue, ainsi
que les deux palais. Son projet etoit d'affoiblir ainsi la ville, afin
d'avoir moins de peine a la prendre. L'empereur consentit a la proposition,
et la preuve en existe encore aujourd'hui.

Constantinople est formee de diverses parties separees: de sorte qu'il y a
plus de vide que de plein. Les plus grosses caraques peuvent venir mouiller
sous ses murs, comme a Pera; elle a en outre dans son interieur un petit
havre qui peut contenir trois ou quatre galeres. Il est au midi, pres d'une
porte ou l'on voit une butte composee d'os de chretiens qui, apres la
conquete de Jerusalem et d'Acre, par Godefroi de Bouillion, revenoient par
le detroit. A mesure que les Grecs les passoient, ils les conduisoient dans
cette place, qui est eloignee et cachee, et les y egorgeoient. Tous
quoiqu'en tres-grand nombre, auroient peri ainsi, sans un page qui, ayant
trouve moyen de repasser en Asie, les avertit du danger qui les menacoit:
ils se repandirent le long de la mer Noire, et c'est d'eux, a ce qu'on
pretend, que descendent ces peuples gros chretiens (d'un christianisme
grossier) qui habitent la: Circassiens, Migrelins, (Mingreliens), Ziques,
Gothlans et Anangats. Au reste, comme ce fait est ancien, je n'en sais rien
que par oui-dire.

Quoique la ville ait beaucoup de belles eglises, la plus remarquable, ainsi
que la principale, est celle de Sainte-Sophie, ou le patriarche se tient,
et autres gens comme chanonnes (chanoines). Elle est de forme ronde, situee
pres de la pointe orientale, et formee de trois parties diverses; l'une
souterraine, l'autre hors de terre, la troisieme superieure a celle-ci.
Jadis elle etoit entouree de cloitres, et avoit, dit-on, trois milles de
circuit; aujourd'hui elle est moins etendue, et n'a plus que trois
cloitres, qui tous trois sont paves et revetus en larges carreaux de marbre
blanc, et ornes de grosses colonnes de diverses couleurs. [Footnote: Deux
de ces galeries ou portiques, que l'auteur appelle cloitres, subsistent
encore aujourd'hui, ainsi que les colonnes. Celles-ci sont de matieres
differentes, porphyre, marbre, granit, etc.; et voila pourquoi le voyageur,
qui n'etoit pas naturaliste, les represente comme etant de couleurs
diverses.] Les portes, remarquables par leur largeur et leur hauteur, sont
d'airain.

Cette eglise possede, dit on, l'une des robes de Notre-Seigneur, le fer de
la lance qui le perca, l'eponge dont il fut abreuve, et le roseau qu'on lui
mit en main. Moi je dirai que derriere le choeur on m'a montre les grandes
bandes du gril ou fut roti Saint-Laurent, et une large pierre en forme de
lavoir, sur laquelle Abraham fit manger, dit-on, les trois anges qui
alloient detruire Sodome et Gomorre.

J'etois curieux de savoir comment les Grecs celebroient le service divin,
et en consequence je me rendis a Sainte-Sophie un jour ou le patriarche
officoit. L'empereur y assistoit avec sa femme, sa mere et son frere,
despote de Moree. [Footnote: Cet empereur etoit Jean Paleologue II; son
frere, Demetrius, despote ou prince du Peloponnese; sa mere, Irene, fille
de Constantin Dragases, souverain d'une petite contree de la Macedoine; sa
femme, Marie Comnene, fille d'Alexis, empereur de Trebisonde.] On y
representa un mystere, dont le sujet etoit les trois enfans que
Nabuchodonosor fit jeter dans la fournaise. [Footnote: Ces farces devotes
etoient d'usage alors dans l'eglise Grecque, ainsi que dans la Latine. En
France on les appeloit mysteres, et c'est le nom que le voyageur donne a
celle qu'il vit dans Sainte-Sophie.]

L'imperatrice, fille de l'empereur de Traseonde (Trebisonde), me parut une
fort belle personne. Cependant, comme je ne pouvois la voir que de loin, je
voulus la considerer de plus pres: d'ailleurs j'etois curieux de savoir
comment elle montoit a cheval; car elle etoit venue ainsi a l'eglise,
accompagnee seulement de deux dames, de trois vieillards, ministres d'etat,
et de trois de ces hommes a qui les Turcs confient la garde de leurs femmes
(trois eunuques). Au sortir de Sainte-Sophie elle entra dans un hotel
voisin pour y diner; ce qui m'obligea d'attendre la qu'elle sortit, et par
consequent de passer toute la journee sans boire ni manger.

Elle parut enfin. On lui apporta un banc sur lequel elle monta. On fit
approcher du banc son cheval, qui etoit superbe et couvert d'une selle
magnifique. Alors un des veillards prit le long manteau qu'elle portoit, et
passa de l'autre cote du cheval, en le tenant etendu sur ses mains aussi
haut qu'il pouvoit. Pendent ce temps elle mit le pied sur l'etrier, elle
enfourcha le cheval comme le font les hommes, et des qu'elle fut en selle
le vieillard lui jeta le manteau sur les epaules; apres quoi il lui donna
un de ces chapeaux longs, a pointe, usites en Grece, et vers l'extremite
duquel etoient trois plumes d'or qui lui seyoient tres-bien.

J'etois si pres d'elle qu'on me dit de m'eloigner: ainsi je pus la voir
parfaitement. Elle avoit aux oreilles un fermail (anneau) large et plat,
orne de plusieurs pierres precieuses, et particulierement de rubis. Elle me
parut jeune, blanche, et plus belle encore que dans l'eglise; en un mot, je
n'y eusse trouve rien a redire si son visage n'avoit ete peint, et
assurement elle n'en avoit pas besoin.

Les deux dames monterent a cheval en meme temps qu'elle; elles etoient
belles aussi, et portoient comme elle manteau et chapeau. La troupe
retourna au palais de la Blaquerne.

Au devant de Sainte Sophie est une belle et immense place, entouree de murs
comme un palais, et ou jadis on faisoit des jeux. [Footnote: L'hippodrome
Grec, aujourd'hui l'atmeidan des Turcs.] J'y vis le frere de l'empereur,
despote de Moree, s'exercer avec une vingtaine d'autres cavaliers. Chacun
d'eux avoit un arc: ils couroient a cheval le long de l'enceinte, jetoient
leurs chapeaux en avant; puis, quand ils l'avoient depasse, ils tiroient
par derriere, comme pour le percer, et celui d'entre eux dont la fleche
atteignoit le chapeau de plus pres etoit repute le plus habile. C'est-la un
exercice qu'ils ont adopte des Turcs, et c'est un de ceux auxquels ils
cherchent a se rendre habiles.

De ce cote, pres de la pointe de l'angle, est la belle eglise de
Saint-George, qui a, en face de la Turquie, [Footnote: Il s'agit ici de la
Turquie d'Asie. On n'avoit point encore donne ce nom aux provinces que les
Turcs possedoient en Europe.] une tour a l'endroit ou le passage est le
plus etroit.

De l'autre cote, a l'occident, se voit une tres-haute colonne carree
portant des caracteres traces, et sur laquelle est une statue de
Constantin, en bronze. Il tient un sceptre de la main gauche, et a le bras
droit et la main etendus vers la Turquie et le chemin de Jerusalem, comme
pour marquer que tout ce pays etoit sous sa loi.

Pres de cette colonne il y en a trois autres, placees sur une meme ligne,
et d'un seul morceau chacun. Celles-ci portoient trois chevaux dores qui
sont maintenant a Venise. [Footnote: Ils sont maintenant a Paris, et il y
en a quatre.]

Dans la jolie eglise de Pantheacrator, occupee par des religieux caloyers,
qui sont ce que nous appellerions en France moines de l'Observance, on
montre une pierre ou table de diverses couleurs que Nicodeme avott fait
tailler pour placer sur son tombeau, et qui lui servit a poser le corps de
Notre-Seigneur quand il le descendit de la croix. Pendant ce temps la
Vierge pleuroit sur le corps; mais ses larmes, au lieu d'y rester,
tomberent toutes sur la pierre, et on les y voit toutes encore. D'abord je
crus que c'etoient des gouttes de cire, et j'y portai la main pour les
tater; je me baissai ensuite, afin de la regarder horizontalement et a
contre jour, et me sembla que c'estoient gouttes d'eau engellees. C'est la
une chose que plusieurs personnes ont pu voir comme moi.

Dans la meme eglise sont les tombeaux de Constantin et de sainte Helene sa
mere, places chacun a la hauteur d'environ huit pieds, sur une colonne qui
se termine comme un diamant pointu a quatre faces. On dit que les
Venitiens, pendant qu'ils eurent a Constantinople une grande puissance,
tirerent du tombeau de sainte Helene son corps, qu'ils emporterent a
Venise, ou il est encore tout entier. Ils tenterent, dit-on, la meme chose
pour celui de Constantin, mais ils ne purent en venir a bout; et le fait
est assez vraisemblable, puisqu'on y voit encore deux gros morceaux brises
a l'endroit qu'on vouloit rompre. Les deux tombeaux sont couleur de jaspre
sur le vermeil, comme une brique (de jaspe rouge).

On montre dans l'eglise de Sainte-Apostole un troncon de la colonne a
laquelle fut attache Notre-Seigneur pour etre battu de verges chez Pilate.
Ce morceau, plus grand que la hauteur d'un homme, est de la meme pierre que
deux autres que j'ai vus, l'une a Rome, l'autre a Jerusalem; mais ce
dernier excede en grandeur les deux autres ensemble.

Il y a encore dans la meme eglise, et dans des cercueils de bois, plusieurs
corps saints qui sont entiers: les voit qui veut. L'un d'eux avoit eu la
tete coupee; on lui en a mis une d'un autre saint Au reste les Grecs ne
portent point a ces reliques le meme respect que nous. Il en est de meme
pour la pierre de Nichodeme et la colonne de Notre-Seigneur: celle-ci est
seulement couverte d'une enveloppe en planches, et posee debout pres d'un
pilier, a main droite quand on entre dans l'eglise par la porte de devant.

Parmi les belles eglises je citerai encore comme une des plus remarquables
celle qu'on nomme la Blaquerne, parce-qu'elle est pres du palais imperial,
et qui, quoique petite et mal couverte, a des peintures avec pave et
revetemens en marbre. Je ne doute pas qu'il n'y en ait plusieurs autres
egalement dignes d'etre vantees; mais je n'ai pu les visiter toutes. Les
marchands (marchands Latins) en ont une ou tous les jours on dit la messe a
la romaine. Celle-ci est vis-a-vis le passage de Pera.

La ville a des marchands de plusieurs nations; mais aucune n'y est aussi
puissante que les Venitiens. Ils y ont un baille (baile) qui connoit seul
de toutes leurs affaires, et ne depend ni de l'empereur ni de ses
officiers. C'est-la un privilege qu'ils possedent depuis longtemps:
[Footnote: Depuis la conquete de l'empire d'Orient par les Latins, en 1204,
conquete a laquelle les Venitiens avoient contribue en grande partie.] on
dit meme que par deux fois ils ont, avec leurs galeres, sauve des Turcs la
ville; pour moi je croy que Dieu l'a plus gardee pour les saintes reliques
qui sont dedans que pour autre chose.

Le Turc y entretient aussi un officier pour le commerce qu'y font ses
sujets, et cet officier est, de meme que le baile, independant de
l'empereur; ils y ont meme le droit, quand un de leurs esclaves s'echappe
et s'y refugie, de le redemander, et l'empereur est oblige de le leur
rendre.

Ce prince est dans une grande sujetion du Turc, puisque annuellement il lui
paie, m'a-t-on dit, un tribut de dix mille ducats; et cette somme est
uniquement pour Constantinople: car au-dela de cette ville il ne possede
rien qu'un chateau situe a trois lieues vers le nord, et en Grece une
petite cite nommee Salubrie.

J'etois loge chez un marchand Catalan. Cet homme ayant dit a l'un des gens
du palais que j'etois a monseigneur de Bourgogne, l'empereur me fit
demander s'il etoit vrai que le duc eut pris la pucelle, ce que les Grecs
ne pouvoient croire. [Footnote: La pucelle d'Orleans, apres avoir combattu
avec gloire les Anglais et le duc de Bourgogne ligues contre la France,
avoit ete faite prisonniere en 1430, par un officier de Jean de Luxembourg,
general des troupes du duc, puis vendue par Jean aux Anglais, qui la firent
bruler vive l'annee suivante. Cette vengeance atroce avoit retenti dans
toute l'Europe. A Constantinople le bruit public l'attribuoit au duc; mais
les Grecs ne pouvoient croire qu'un prince chretien eut ete capable d'un
pareille horreur, et leur sembloit, dit l'auteur, que c'estoit une chose
impossible.] Je leur en dys la verite tout ainsi que la chose avoit este;
de quoy ils furent bien esmerveillies.

Le jour de la Chandeleur, les marchands me previnrent que, l'apres-dinee,
il devoit y avoir au palais un office solennel pareil a celui que nous
faisons ce jour-la; et ils m'y conduisirent. L'emperenr etoit a l'extremite
d'une salle, assis sur une couche (un coussin): l'imperatrice vit la
ceremonie d'une piece superieure; et sont les chappellains qui chantent
l'office, estrangnement vestus et habillies, et chantent par cuer, selon
leurs dois.

Quelques jours apres, on me mena voir egalement une fete qui avoit lieu
pour le mariage d'un des parens de l'empereur. Il y eut une joute a la
maniere du pays, et cette joute me parut bien etrange. La voici:

Au milieu d'une place on avoit plante, en guise de quintaine, un grand pieu
auquel etoit attachee une planche large de trois pieds, sur cinq de long.
Une quarantaine de cavaliers arriverent sur le lieu sans aucune piece
quelconque d'armure, et sans autre arme qu'un petit baton.

D'abord ils s'amuserent a courir les uns apres les autres, et cette
manoeuvre dura environ une demi-heure. On apporta ensuite soixante a
quatre-vingts perches d'aune, telles et plus longues encore que celles dont
nous nous servons pour les couvertures de nos toits en chaume. Le marie en
prit une le premier, et il courut ventre a terre vers la planche, pour l'y
briser. Elle plioit et branloit dans sa main; aussi la rompit-il sans
effort. Alors s'eleverent des cris de joie, et les instrumens de musique,
qui etoient des nacaires, comme chez les Turcs, se firent entendre. Chacun
des autres cavaliers vint de meme prendre sa perche et la rompre. Enfin le
marie en fit lier ensemble deux, qui a la verite n'etoient pas trop fortes,
et il les brisa encore sans se blesser. [Footnote: La Brocquiere devoit
trouver ces joutes ridicules, parce qu'il etoit accoutume aux tournois de
France, ou des chevaliers tout couverts de fer se battoient avec des epees,
des lances, des massues, et ou tres-frequemment il y avoit des hommes tues,
blesses ou ecrases sous les pieds des chevaux. C'est ce qui lui fait dire
par deux fois que dans la joute des perches il n'y eut personne de blesse.]
Ainsi finit la fete, et chacun retourna chez soi sain et sauf. L'empereur
et son epouse etoient a une fenetre pour la voir.

Je m'etois propose de partir avec ce messire Benedict de Fourlino, qui,
comme je l'ai dit, etoit envoye en ambassade vers le Turc par le duc de
Milan. Il avoit avec lui un gentilhomme du duc, nomme Jean Visconti, sept
autres personnes, et dix chevaux de suite, parce que, quand on voyage en
Grece, il faut porter sans exception tout ce dont on peut avoir besoin.

Je sortis de Constantinople le 23 Janvier 1433, et traversai d'abord
Rigory, passage jadis assez fort, et forme par une vallee dans laquelle
s'avance un bras de mer qui peut bien avoir vingt milles de longueur. Il y
avoit une tour que les Turcs ont abattue. Il y reste un pont, une chaussee
et un village de Grecs. Pour arriver a Constantinople par terre on n'a que
ce passage, et un autre un peu plus bas que celui-ci, plus fort encore, et
sur une riviere qui vient la se jeter dans la mer.

De Rigory j'allai a Thiras, habite pareillement par des Grecs, jadis bonne
ville, et passage aussi fort que le precedent, parce qu'il est forme de
meme par la mer. A chaque bout du pont etoit une grosse tour. La tour et la
ville, tout a ete detruit par les Turcs.

De Thiras je me rendis a Salubrie. Cette ville, situee a deux journees de
Constantinople, a un petit port sur le golfe, qui s'etend depuis ce dernier
lieu jusqu'a Galipoly. Les Turcs n'ont pu la prendre, quoique du cote de la
mer elle ne soit pas forte. Elle appartient a l'empereur, ainsi que le pays
jusque-la; mais ce pays, tout ruine, n'a que des villages pauvres.

De la je vins a Chourleu, jadis considerable, detruit par les Turcs et
peuple de Turcs et de Grecs;

De Chourleu a Misterio, petite place fermee: il n'y a que des Grecs, avec
un seul Turc a qui son prince l'a donnee;

De Misterio a Pirgasy, ou il ne demeure que des Turcs, et dont les murs
sont abattus;

De Pirgasy a Zambry, egalement detruite;

De Zambry a Andrenopoly (Andrinople), grande ville marchande, bien peuplee,
et situee sur une tres-grosse riviere qu'on nomme la Marisce, a six
journees de Constantinople. C'est la plus forte de toutes celles que le
Turc possede dans la Grece, et c'est celle qu'il habite le plus volontiers.
Le seigneur ou lieutenant de Grece (le gouverneur) y fait aussi son sejour,
et l'on y trouve plusieurs marchands Venitiens, Catalans, Genois et
Florentins. Depuis Constantinople jusque la, le pays est bon, bien arrose,
mais mal peuple; il a des vallees fertiles, et produit de tout, excepte du
bois.

Le Turc etoit a Lessere, grosse ville en Pyrrhe, pres du lieu de Thessalie
ou se livra la bataille entre Cesar et Pompee, et messire Benedicto prit
cette route pour se rendre aupres de lui. Nous passames la Marisce en
bateaux, et rencontrames, a peu de distance, cinquante de ses femmes,
accompagnees d'environ seize eunuques, qui nous apprirent qu'ils les
conduisoient a Andrinople, ou lui-meme se proposoit de venir bientot.

J'allaia Dymodique, bonne ville, fermee d'une double enceinte de murailles.
Elle est fortifiee d'un cote par une riviere, et de l'autre par un grand et
fort chateau construit sur une hauteur presque ronde, et qui, dans son
circuit, peut bien renfermer trois cents maisons. Le chateau a un donjon ou
le Turc, m'a-t-on dit, tient son tresor.

De Dymodique je me rendis a Ypsala, assez grande ville, mais totalement
detruite, et ou je passai la Marisce une seconde fois. [Footnote: Ici le
copiste ecrit la Maresce, plus haut il avoit mis Maresche, et plus haut
encore Marisce. Ces variations d'orthographe sont infiniment communes dans
nos manuscrits, et souvent d'une phrase a l'autre. J'en ai fait la remarque
dans mon discours preliminaire.] Elle est a deux journees d'Andrinople. Le
pays, dans tout cet espace, est marecageux et difficile pour les chevaux.

Ayne, au-dela d'Ypsala, est sur la mer, a l'embouchure de la Marisce, qui a
bien en cet endroit deux milles de large. Au temps de Troye-la-Grant, ce
fut une puissante cite, qui avoit son roi: maintenant elle a pour seigneur
le frere du seigneur de Matelin, qui est tributaire du Turc.

Sur une butte ronde on y voit un tombeau qu'on dit etre celui de Polydore,
le plus jeune des fils de Priam. Le pere, pendant le siege de Troie, avoit
envoye son fils au roi d'Ayne, avec de grands tresors; mais, apres la
destruction de la ville, le roi, tant par crainte des Grecs que par
convoitise des tresors, fit mourir le jeune prince.

A Ayne je passai la Marisce sur un gros batiment, et me rendis a Macry,
autre ville maritime a l'occident de la premiere, et habitee de Turcs et de
Grecs. Elle est pres de l'ile de Samandra, qui appartient au seigneur
d'Ayne, et elle paroit avoir ete autrefois tres-considerable; maintenant
tout y est en ruines, a l'exception d'une partie du chateau.

Caumissin, qu'on trouve ensuite apres avoir traverse une montagne, a de
bons murs, qui la rendent assez forte, quoique petite. Elle est sur un
ruisseau, en beau et plat pays, ferme par d'autres montagnes a l'occident,
et ce pays s'etend, dans un espace de cinq a six journees, jusqu'a Lessere.

Missy fut egalement et forte et bien close: mais une partie de ses murs
sont abattus; tout y a ete detruit, et elle n'a point d'habitans.

Peritoq, ville ancienne et autrefois considerable, est sur un golfe qui
s'avance dans les terres d'environ quarante milles, et qui part de
Monte-Santo, ou sont tant de caloyers. Elle a des Grecs pour habitans, et
pour defense de bonnes murailles, qui cependant sont entamees par de
grandes breches. De la, pour aller a Lessere, le chemin est une grande
plaine. C'est pres de Lessere, dit-on, que se livra la grande bataille de
Thessale (de Pharsale).

Je n'allai point jusqu'a cette derniere ville. Instruits que le Turc etoit
en route, nous l'attendimes a Yamgbatsar, village construit par ses sujets.
Il n'arriva que le troisieme jour. Son escorte, quand il marchoit, etoit de
quatre a cinq cents chevaux; mais comme il aimoit passionnement la chasse
au vol, la plus grande partie de cette troupe etoit composee de fauconniers
et d'ostriciers (autoursiers), gens dont il faisoit un grand cas, et dont
il entretenoit, me dit-on, plus de deux mille. Avec ce gout il ne faisoit
que de petites journees, et ses marches n'etoient pour lui qu'un objet
d'amusement et de plaisir.

Il entra dans Yamgbatsar avec de la pluie, n'ayant pour cortege qu'une
cinquantaine de cavaliers avec douze archers, ses esclaves, qui marchoient
a pied devant lui. Son habillement etoit une robe de velours cramoisi,
fourree de martre zibeline, et sur la tete il portoit, comme les Turcs, un
chapeau rouge; mais, pour se garantir de la pluie, par-dessus sa robe il en
avoit mis une autre de velours, en guise de manteau, selon la mode du pays.

Il campa sous un pavillon qu'on avoit apporte; car nulle part on ne trouve
a loger, nulle part on ne trouve de vivres que dans les grandes villes, et,
en voyage, chacun est oblige de porter tout ce qui lui est necessaire. Pour
lui, il avoit un grand train de chameaux et d'autres betes de somme.

L'apres-dinee il sortit pour aller prendre un bain, et je le vis a mon
aise. Il etoit a cheval, avec son meme chapeau et sa robe cramoisie,
accompagne de six personnes a pied; je l'entendis meme parler a ses gens,
et il me parut avoir la parole lourde. C'est un prince de vingt-huit a
trente ans, qui deja devient tres-gras.

L'ambassadeur lui fit demander par un des siens s'il pourroit avoir de lui
une audience et lui offrir les presens qu'il apportoit. Il fit reponse
qu'allant a ses plaisirs il ne vouloit point entedre parler d'affaires; que
d'ailleurs ses bayschas (bachas) etoient absens, et que l'ambassadeur
n'avoit qu'a les attendre ou aller l'attendre lui-meme dans Andrinople.

Messire Benedict prit ce dernier parti. En consequence nous retournames a
Caumissin, et de la, apres avoir repasse la montagne dont j'ai parle, nous
vinmes gagner un passage forme par deux hautes roches entre lesquelles
coule une riviere. Pour le garder on avoit construit sur l'une des roches
un fort chateau nomme Coulony, qui maintenant est detruit presque en
entier. La montagne est en partie couverte de bois, et habite par des
hommes mechans et assassins.

J'arrivai ainsi a Trajanopoly, ville batie par un empereur nomme Trajan,
lequel fit beaucoup de choses dignes de memoire. Il etoit fits de celui qui
fonda Andrenopoly. Les Sarrasins disent qu'il avoit une oreille de mouton.
[Footnote: Trajanopoly ne fut point nommee ainsi pour avoir ete construite,
par Trajan, mais parce qu'il y mourut. Elle existoit avant lui, et se
nommoit Selinunte.

Adrien ne fut pas le pere de Trajan, mais au contraire son fils adoptif, et
c'est par-la qu'il devint son successeur.

Andrinople n'a pas plus ete fondee par Adrien que Trajanopoly par Trajan.
Un tremblement de terre l'avoit ruinee; il la fit rebatir et lui donna son
nom. On doit excuser ces erreurs dans un auteur du quinzieme siecle. Quant
a l'oreille de mouton, il en parle comme d'une fable de Sarrasins.]

Sa ville, qui etoit tres-grande, est dans le voisinage de la mer et de la
Marisce. On n'y voit plus que des ruines, avec quelques habitans. Elle a
une montagne au levant et la mer au midi. L'un des ses bains porte le nom
d'eau sainte.

Plus loin est Vyra, ancien chateau qu'on a demoli en plusieurs endroits. Un
Grec m'a dit que l'eglise avoit trois cents chanoines. Le choeur en
subsiste encore, et les Turcs en ont fait une mosquee. Ils ont aussi
construit autour du chateau une grande ville, peuplee maintenant par eux et
par des Grecs. Elle est sur une montagne pres de la Marisce.

Au sortir de Vyra nous recontrames le seigneur (gouverneur) de la Grece,
qui, mande par le Turc, se rendoit appres de lui avec une troupe de cent
vingt chevaux. C'est un bel homme, natif de Bulgarie, et qui a ete esclave
de son maitre; mais comme il a le talent de bien boire, le dit maitre lui a
donne le gouvernement de Grece, avec cinquante mille ducats de revenu.

Dymodique, ou je revins, me parut plus belle et plus grande encore qu'a mon
premier passage; et s'il est vrai que le Turc y a depose son tresor,
assurement il a raison.

Nous fumes obliges de l'attendre onze jours dans Adrinople. Enfin il arriva
le premier de careme. Le grand calife (le muphti), qui est chez eux ce
qu'est le pape chez nous, alla au-devant de lui avec tous les notables de
la ville: ce qui formoit une troupe tres-nombreuse. Il en etoit deja assez
pres lorsqu'ils le rencontrerent, et neanmoins il s'arreta pour boire et
manger, envoya en avant une partie de ces gens, et n'y entra qu'a la nuit.

J'ai eu occasion de me lier, pendant mon sejour a Andrinople, avec
plusieurs personnes qui avoient vecu a sa cour, et qui, a portee de le bien
connoitre, m'ont donne sur lui quelques details; et d'abord, moi qui l'ai
vu plusieurs fois, je dirai que c'est un petit homme, gros et trapu, a
physionomie Tartare, visage large et brun, joues elevees, barbe ronde, nez
grand et courbe, petits yeux; mais il est, m'a-t-on dit, doux, bon,
liberal, distribuant volontiers seigneuries et argent.

Ses revenus sont de deux millions et demi de ducats, y compris vingt-cinq
mille qu'il percoit en tributs. [Footnote: Il y a ici erreur de copiste sur
ces vingt-cinq mille ducats de tributs; la somme est trop foible. On verra
plus bas que le despote de Servie en payoit annuellement cinquante mille a
lui seul.] D'ailleurs, quand il leve une armee, non seulement elle ne lui
coute rien; mais il y gagne encore, parce que les troupes qu'on lui amene
de Turquie en Grece [Footnote: J'ai deja remarque que l'auteur appelle
Turquie les etats que possedoient en Asie les Turcs, et qu'il designe sous
le nom de Grece ceux qu'ils avoient en-deca du detroit, et que nous nommons
aujourd'hui Turquie d'Europe.] paient a Gallipoly le comarch, qui est de
trois aspres par homme et de cinq par cheval. Il en est de meme au passage
de la Dunoe (du Danube). D'ailleurs, quand ses soldats vont en course et
qu'ils font des esclaves, il a le droit d'en prendre un sur cinq, a son
choix.

Cependant il passe pour ne point aimer la guerre, et cette inculpation me
paroit assez fondee. En effet il a jusqu'a present eprouve de la part de la
chretiente si peu de resistance que s'il vouloit employer contre elle la
puissance et les revenus dont il jouit, ce lui seroit chose facile d'en
conquerir une tres grande partie. [Footnote: Le Sultan dont la Brocquiere
fait ici mention, et qu'il a designe ci-devant sous le non d'Amourat-Bay,
est Amurat II, l'un des princes Ottomans les plus celebres. L'histoire cite
de lui plusieurs conquetes qui a la verite sont la plupart posterieures au
temps dont parle ici la relation. S'il n'en a point fait davantage, c'est
qu'il eut en tete Huniade et Scanderberg. D'ailleurs sa gloire fut eclipsee
par celle de son fils, le fameux Mahomet II, la terreur des chretiens,
surnomme le grand par sa nation, et qui, vingt ans apres, en 1453, prit
Constantinople, et detruisit le peau qui subsistoit encore de l'empire
Grec.]

Un de ses gouts favoris est la chasse aux chiens et aux oiseaux. Il a,
dit-on, plus de mille chiens et plus de deux mille oiseaux dresses, et de
diverses especes; j'en ai vu moi-meme une tres-grande partie.

Il aime beaucoup a boire, et aime ceux qui boivent bien. Pour lui, il va
sans peine jusqu'a dix ou douze grondils de vin: ce qui fait six ou sept
quartes. [Footnote: La quarte s'appeloit ainsi, parce qu'elle etoit le
quart du chenet, qui contenoit quatre pots et une pinte. Le pot etoit de
deux pintes, et par consequent la quarte faisoit deux bouteilles, plus un
demi-setier; et douze grondils, vingt-trois bouteilles.] C'est quand il a
bien bu qu'il devient liberal et qu'il distribue ses grands dons: aussi ses
gens sont-ils tres-aises de le voir demander du vin. L'annee derniere il y
eut un Maure qui s'avisa de venir le precher sur cet objet, et qui lui
representa que cette liqueur etant defendue par le prophete, ceux qui en
buvoient n'etoient pas de bons Sarrasins: pour toute reponse il le fit
mettre en prison, puis chasser de ses etats, avec defense d'y jamais
remettre les pieds.

Au gout pour les femmes il joint celui des jeunes garcons. Il a trois cents
des premieres et une trentaine des autres; mais il se plait devantage avec
ceux-ci. Quand ils sont grands il les recompense par de riches dons et des
seigneuries: il y en a un auquel il a donne en mariage l'une de ses soeurs,
avec vingt-cinq mille ducats de revenu.

Certains personnes font monter son tresor a un demi-million de ducats,
d'autres a un million. Il en a en outre un second, qui consiste en
esclaves, en vaisselle, et principalement en joyaux pour ses femmes. Ce
dernier article est estime seul un million d'or. Moi, je suis convaincu que
s'il tenoit sa main fermee pendant un an, et qu'il s'abstint de donner
ainsi a l'aveugle, il epargneroit un million de ducats sans faire tort a
personne.

De temps en temps il fait de grands exemples de justice bien remarquables;
ce qui lui procure d'etre parfaitement obei tant dans son interieur
qu'au-dehors. D'ailleurs il sait maintenir son pays dans un excellent etat
de defense, et il n'emploie vis-a-vis de ses sujets Turcs ni taille ni
aucun genre d'extorsion. [Footnote: Ceci est une satire indirecte des
gouvernemens d'Europe, ou chaque jour les rois, et meme les seigneurs
particuliers, vexoient ce qu'ils appeloient leurs hommes ou leurs sujets
par des tailles arbitraires et des milliers d'impots dont les noms etoient
aussi bizarres que l'assiette et la perception en etoient abusives.]

Sa maison est composee de cinq mille personnes tant a pied qu'a cheval;
mais a l'armee il n'augmente en rien leurs gages: de sorte qu'en guerre il
ne depense pas plus qu'en paix.

Ses principaux officiers sont trois baschas ou visiers-bachas
(visirs-bachas.) Le visir est un conseiller; le bacha, une sorte de chef ou
ordonnateur. Ces trois personnages sont charges de tout ce qui concerne sa
personne ou sa maison, et on ne peut lui parler que par leur entremise.
Quand il est en Grece, c'est le seigneur de Grece (le gouverneur) qui a
l'inspection sur les gens de guerre; quand il est en Turquie, c'est le
seigneur de Turquie.

Il a donne de grandes seigneuries; mais il peut les retirer a son gre.
D'ailleurs ceux auxquels il les accorde sont tenus de le servir en guerre
avec un certain nombre de troupes a leurs frais. C'est ainsi que, tous les
ans, ceux de Grece lui fournissent trente mille hommes qu'il peut employer
et conduire par-tout ou bon lui semble; et ceux de Turquie dix mille,
auxquels il n'a que des vivres a fournir. Veut-il former une armee plus
considerable, la Grece seule, m'a-t-on dit, peut alors lui donner cent
vingt mille hommes; mais ceux-ci, il est oblige de les soudoyer. La paie
est de cinq aspers pour un fantassin, de huit pour un cavalier.

Cependant j'ai entendu dire que sur ces cent vingt mille hommes il n'y en
avoit que la moitie, c'est-a-dire les gens de cheval, qui fussent en bon
etat, bien armes de tarquais et d'epee; le reste est compose de gens de
pied mal equippes. Celui d'entre eux qui a une epee n'a point d'arc, celui
qui a un arc n'a ni epee ni arme quelconque, beaucoup meme n'ont qu'un
baton. Et il en est ainsi des pietons que fournit la Turquie: la moitie
n'est armee que de batons; cependant ces pietons Turcs sont plus estimes
que les Grecs, et meilleurs soldats.

D'autres personnes dont je regarde le temoignage comme veritable m'ont dit
depuis que les troupes qu'annuellement la Turquie est obligee de fournir
quand le seigneur veut former son armee, montent a trente mille hommes, et
celles de Grece a vingt mille, sans compter deux ou trois mille esclaves
qui sont a lui, et qu'il arme bien.

Parmi ces esclaves il y a beaucoup de chretiens. Il y en a aussi beaucoup
dans les troupes Grecques: les uns Albaniens, les autres Bulgares ou
d'autres contrees. C'est ainsi que dans la derniere armee de Grece il se
trouva trois mille chevaux de Servie, que le despote de cette province
envoya sous le commandement d'un de ses fils. C'est bien a regret que tous
ces gens-la viennent le servir; mais ils n'oseroient refuser.

Les bachas arriverent a Andrinople trois jours apres leur seigneur, et ils
y amenoient avec eux une partie de ses gens et de son bagage. Ce bagage
consiste en une centaine de chameaux et deux cent cinquante, tant mulets
que sommiers, parce que la nation ne fait point usage de chariots.

Messire Benedict, qui desiroit avoir de lui une audience, fit demander aux
bachas s'il pouvoit les-voir, et ils repondirent que non. La raison de ce
refus etoit qu'ils avoient bu avec leur seigneur, et qu'ils etoient ivres
ainsi que lui. Cependant ils envoyerent le lendemain chez l'ambassadeur
pour le prevenir qu'ils etoient visibles, et il se rendit aussitot chez
chacun d'eux avec des presens: telle est la coutume; on ne peut leur parler
sans apporter quelque chose, et il en est de meme pour les esclaves qui
gardent leurs portes. Je l'accompagnai dans cette visite.

Le jour suivant, dans l'apres-dinee, ils lui firent dire qu'il pouvoit
venir au palais. Il monta aussitot a cheval pour s'y rendre avec sa suite,
et je me joignis a elle: mais nous etions tous a pied; lui seul avoit un
cheval.

Devant la cour nous trouvames une grande quantite d'hommes et de chevaux.
La porte etoit gardee par une trentaine d'esclaves sous le gouvernement
d'un chef, et armes de batons. Si quelqu'un se presente pour entrer sans
permission, ils lui disent de se retirer; s'il insiste, ils le chassent a
coups de baton.

Ce que nous appelons la cour du roi, les Turcs l'appellent porte du
seigneur. Toutes les fois que le seigneur recoit un message ou ambassade,
ce qui lui arrive presque tous les jours, il fait porte. Faire porte est
pour lui ce qu'est pour nos rois de France tenir etat royal et cour
ouverte, quoique cependant il y ait entre les deux ceremonies beaucoup de
difference, comme je le dirai tout-a-l'heure.

Quand l'ambassadeur fut entre on le fit asseoir pres de la porte avec
beaucoup d'autres personnes qui attendoient que le maitre sortit de sa
chambre pour faire porte. D'abord les trois bachas entrerent avec le
gouverneur de Grece et autres qu'ils appellent seigneurs. Sa chambre
donnoit sur une tres-grande cour. Le gouverneur alla l'y attendre. Il
parut.

Son vetement etoit, selon l'usage, une robe de satin cramoisi, par-dessus
laquelle il en avoit, comme manteau, une autre de satin vert a figures,
fourree de martre zibeline. Ses jeunes garcons l'accompagnoient; mais ils
ne le suivirent que jusqu'a l'entree de la piece, et rentrerent. Il ne
resta pres de lui qu'un petit nain et deux jeunes gens qui faisoient les
fous. [Footnote: L'usage l'avoir des nains et des fous etoit tres ancien
dans les cours d'Orient. Il avoit passe avec les croisades dans celles des
princes chretiens d'Europe, et dura en France, pour les fous, jusqu'a Louis
XIV.]

Il traversa l'angle de la cour, et vint dans une galerie ou l'on avoit
prepare un siege pour lui. C'etoit une sorte de couche couverte en velours
(un sopha), ou il avoit quatre ou cinq degres a monter. Il alla s'y asseoir
a la maniere Turque, comme nos tailleurs quand ils travaillent, et aussitot
les trois bachas vinrent prendre place a peu de distance de lui. Les autres
officiers qui dans ces jours-la font partie de son cortege entrerent
egalement dans la galerie, et ils allerent se ranger le long des murs,
aussi loin de lui qu'ils le purent. En dehors, mais en face, etoient assis
vingt gentilshommes Valaques, detenus a sa suite comme otages du pays. Dans
l'interieur de la salle on avoit place une centaine de grands plats
d'etain, qui chacun contenoient une piece de mouton et du riz.

Quand tout le monde fut place on fit entrer un seigneur du royaume de
Bossene (Bosnie), lequel pretendoit que la couronne de ce pays lui
apparteroit: en consequence il etoit venu en faire hommage au Turc et lui
demander du secours contre le roi. On le mena prendre place aupres des
bachas; on introduisit ses gens, et l'on fit venir l'ambassadeur du duc de
Milan.

Il partit suivi de ses presens, qu'on alla placer pres des plats d'etain.
La, des gens preposes pour les recevoir, les purent et les leverent
au-dessus de leurs tetes aussi haut qu'ils le purent, afin que le seigneur
et sa cour pussent les voir. Pendant ce temps, messire Benedict avancoit
lentement vers la galerie. Un homme de distinction vint au-devant de lui
pour l'y introduire. En entrant il fit une reverence sans oter l'aumusse
qu'il avoit sur la tete; arrive pres des degres, il en fit une autre
tres-profonde.

Alors le seigneur se leva: il descendit deux marches pour s'approcher de
l'ambassadeur et le prit par la main. Celui-ci voulut lui baiser la sienne;
mais il s'y refusa, et demanda par la voie d'un interprete Juif qui savoit
le Turc et l'Italien, comment se portoit son bon frere et voisin le duc de
Milan. L'ambassadeur repondit a cette question; apres quoi on le mena
prendre place pres du Bosnien, mais a reculons, selon l'usage, et toujours
le visage tourne vers le prince.

Le seigneur attendit, pour se rasseoir, qu'il fut assis. Alors les diverses
personnes de service qui etoient dans la salle se mirent par terre, et
l'introducteur qui l'avoit fait entrer alla nous chercher, nous autres qui
formions sa suite, et il nous placa pres des Bosniens.

Pendant ce temps on attachoit au seigneur une serviette en soie; on placoit
devant lui une piece de cuir rouge, ronde et mince, parce que leur coutume
est de ne manger que sur des nappes de cuir; puis on lui apporta de la
viande cuite, sur deux plats dores. Lorsqu'il fut servi, les gens de
service allerent prendre les plats d'etain dont j'ai parle, et ils les
distribuerent par la salle aux personnes qui s'y trouvoient: un plat pour
quatre. Il y avoit dans chacun un morceau de mouton et du riz clair, mais
point de pain et rien a boire. Cependant j'apercus dans un coin de la cour
un haut buffet a gradins qui portoit un peu de vaisselle, et au pied duquel
etoit un grand vase d'argent en forme de calice. Je vis plusieurs gens y
boire; mais j'ignore si c'etoit de l'eau ou du vin.

Quant a la viande des plats, quelques-uns y gouterent; d'autres, non: mais,
avant qu'ils fussent tous servis, il fallut desservir, parce que le maitre
n'avoit point voulu manger. Jamais il ne prend rien en public, et il y a
tres-peu de personnes qui puissent se vanter de l'avoir entendu parler, ou
vu manger ou boire.

Il sortit, et alors se firent entendre des menestrels (musiciens) qui
etoient dans la cour, pres du buffet. Ils toucherent des instrumens et
chanterent des chansons de gestes, dans lesquelles ils celebroient les
grandes actions des guerriers Turcs. A mesure que ceux de la galerie
entendoient quelque chose qui leur plaisoit, ils poussoient a leur maniere
des cris epouvantables. J'ignorois quels etoient les instrumens dont on
jouoit: j'allai dans la cour, et je vis qu'ils etoient a cordes et fort
grands, Les menestrels vinrent dans la salle, ou ils mangerent ce qui s'y
trouvoit. Enfin on desservit: chacun se leva, et l'ambassadeur se retira
sans avoir dit un mot de son ambassade: ce qui, pour la premiere audience,
est de coutume.

Une autre coutume encore est que quand un ambassadeur a ete presente au
seigneur, celui-ci, jusqu'a ce qu'il ait fait sa reponse, lui envoie de
quoi fournir a sa depense; et cette somme est de deux cents aspers. Le
lendemain donc un des gens du tresorier, celui-la meme qui etoit venu
prendre messire Benedict pour le conduire a la cour, vint lui apporter la
somme: mais peu apres les esclaves qui gardent la porte vinrent chercher ce
qu'en pareil cas il est d'usage de leur donner, et au reste ils se
contentent de peu.

Le troisieme jour, les bachas lui firent savoir qu'ils etoient prets a
apprendre de lui le sujet qui l'amenoit. Il se rendit aussitot a la cour,
et je l'y accompagnai. Deja le maitre avoit tenu son audience; il venoit de
se retirer, et les bachas seuls etoient restes avec le beguelar ou seigneur
de Grece. Quand nous eumes passe la porte nous les trouvames tous quatre
assis en dehors de la galerie, sur un piece de bois qui se trouvoit la. Ils
envoyerent dire a l'ambassadeur d'approcher. On mit par terre, devant eux,
un tapis, et ils l'y firent asseoir comme un criminel qui est devant son
juge. Cependant il y avoit dans le lieu une assez grande quantite de monde.

Il leur exposa le sujet de sa mission, qui consistoit, m'a-t-on dit, a
prier leur maitre, de la part du duc de Milan, de vouloir bien abandonner a
l'empereur Romain Sigismond la Hongrie, la Valaquie, toute la Bulgarie
jusqu'a Sophie, le royaume de Bosnie, et la partie qu'il possedoit
d'Albanie dependante d'Esclavonie. Ils repondirent qu'ils ne pouvoient pour
le moment en instruire leur seigneur, parce qu'il etoit occupe; mais que
dans dix jours ils feroient connoitre sa reponse, s'il la leur avoit
donnee. C'est encore la une chose d'usage, que des le moment ou un
ambassadeur est annonce tel, il ne peut plus parler au prince; et ce
reglement a lieu depuis que le grand-pere de celui-ci a peri de la main
d'un ambassadeur de Servie. L'envoye etoit venu solliciter aupres de lui
quelque adoucissement en faveur de ses compatriotes, que le prince vouloit
reduire en servitude. Desespere de ne pouvoir rien obtenir, il le tua, et
fut lui-meme massacre a l'instant. [Footnote: Le grand-pere d'Amurath II
est Bajazet I'er, qui mourut prisonnier de Tamerlan, soit qu'il ait ete
traite avec egards par son vainqueur, comme le veulent certains ecrivains,
soit qu'il ait peri dans une cage de fer, comme le pretendent d'autres:
ainsi l'historiette de l'ambassadeur de Servie ne peut le regarder. Mais on
lit dans la vie d'Amurath I'er, pere de Bajazet, et par consequent bisaleul
d'Amurath II, un fait qui a pu donner lieu a la fable de l'assassinat. Ce
prince, en 1389, venoit de remporter sur le despote de Servie une victoire
signalee dans laquelle il l'avoit fait prisonnier, et il parcouroit le
champ de bataille quand, passant aupres d'un soldat Treballien blesse a
mort, celui-ci le reconnoit, ranime ses forces et le poignarde.

Selon d'autres auteurs, le despote, qui se nommoit Lazare ou Eleazar
Bulcowitz, se voit attaque par une puissante armee d'Amurath. Hors d'etat
de resister, il emploie la trahison: il gagne un des grands seigneurs de sa
cour, qui feint de passer dans le parti du sultan, et l'assassine.
(Ducange, Familiae Bisant p. 334.)

Enfin, selon une autre relation, Amurath fut tue dans le combat; mais
Lazare, fait prisonnier par les Turcs, est par eux coupe en morceaux sur le
cadavre sanglant de leur maitre.

Il paroit, d'apres le recit de la Brocquiere, que la version de
l'assassinat du sultan par le Servien est la veritable. C'est au moins ce
que paroissent prouver les precautions prises a la cour Ottomane contre les
ambassadeurs etrangers. Aujourd'hui encore, quand ils paroissent devant le
souverain, on les tient par la manche.]

Le dixieme jour, nous allames a la cour chercher reponse. Le seigneur
etoit, comme la premiere fois, sur son siege; mais il n'y avoit avec lui
dans la galerie que ceux de ses gens qui lui servoient a manger. Je n'y vis
ni buffet, ni menestrels, ni le seigneur de Bosnie, ni les Valaques; mais
seulement Magnoly, frere du duc de Chifalonie (Cephalonie), qui se conduit
envers le prince comme un serviteur bien respectueux. Les bachas eux-meme
etoient en dehors, debout et fort loin, ainsi que la plupart des personnes
que j'avois vues autrefois dans l'interieur; encore leur nombre etoit-il
beaucoup moindre.

On nous fit attendre en dehors. Pendant ce temps, le grand cadi, avec ses
autres associes, rendoit justice a la porte exterieure de la cour, et j'y
vis venir devant lui des chretiens etrangers pour plaider leur cause. Mais
quand le seigneur se leva, les juges leverent aussi leur seance, et se
retirerent chez eux.

Pour lui, je le vis passer avec tout son cortege dans la grande cour; ce
que je n'avois pu voir la premiere fois. Il portait une robe de drap d'or,
verte et peu riche, et il me parut avoir la demarche vive.

Des qu'il fut rentre dans sa chambre, les bachas, assis, comme la fois
precedente, sur la piece de bois, firent venir l'ambassadeur. Leur reponse
fut que leur maitre le chargeoit de saluer pour lui son frere le duc de
Milan; qu'il desireroit faire beaucoup en sa faveur, mais que sa demande en
ce moment n'etoit point raisonnable; que, par egard pour lui, leur dit
seigneur s'etoit souvent abstenu de faire dans le royaume de Hongrie de
grandes conquetes, qui d'ailleurs lui eussent peu coute, et que ce
sacrifice devoit suffire; que ce seroit pour lui chose fort dure de rendre
ce qu'il avoit gagne par l'epee; que, dans les circonstances presentes, lui
et ses soldats n'avoient, pour occuper leur courage, que les possessions de
l'empereur, et qu'ils y renoncoient d'autant moins que jusqu'alors ils ne
s'etoient jamais trouves en presence sans l'avoir battu ou vu fuir, comme
tout le monde le savoit.

En effet, l'ambassadeur etoit instruit de ces details. A la derniere
defaite qu'eprouva Sigismond devant Couloubath, il avoit ete temoin de son
desastre; il avoit meme, la veille de la bataille, quitte son camp pour se
rendre aupres du Turc. Dans nos entretiens il me conta sur tout cela
beaucoup de particularites. Je vis egalement deux arbaletriers Genois qui
s'etoient trouves a ce combat, et qui me raconterent comment l'empereur et
son armee repasserent le Danube sur ces galeres.

Apres avoir recu la reponse des bachas, l'ambassadeur revint chez lui; mais
a peine y etoit-il arrive qu'il recut, de la part du seigneur, cinq mille
aspres avec une robe de camocas cramoisi, doublee de boccassin jaune.
Trente-six aspres valent un ducat de Venise; mais sur les cinq mille le
tresorier qui les delivra en retint dix par cent pour droits de sa charge.

Je vis aussi pendant mon sejour a Andrinople un present d'un autre genre,
fait egalement par le seigneur a une mariee, le jour de ses noces. Cette
mariee etoit la fille du beguelarbay, gouverneur de la Grece, et c'etoit la
fille d'un des bachas qui, accompagnee de trente et quelques autres femmes,
avoit ete chargee de le presenter. Son vetement etoit un tissu d'or
cramoisi, et elle avoit le visage couvert, selon l'usage de la nation, d'un
voile tres-riche et ornee de pierreries. Les dames portoient de meme de
magnifiques voiles, et pour habillement les unes avoient des robes de
velours cramoisi, les autres des robes de drap d'or sans fourrures. Toutes
etoient a cheval, jambe de-ca, jambe de la, comme des hommes, et plusieurs
avoient de superbes selles.

En ayant et a la tete de la troupe marchoient treize ou quatorze cavaliers
et deux menestrels, egalement a cheval, ainsi que quelques autres musiciens
qui portoient une trompette, un tres-grand tambour et environ huit paires
de timbales. Tout cela faisoit un bruit affreux. Apres les musiciens venoit
le present, et apres le present, les dames.

Ce present consistoit en soixante-dix grands plateaux d'etain charges de
differentes sortes de confitures et de compotes, et vingt-huit autres dont
chacun portoit un mouton ecorche. Les moutons etoient peints en blanc et en
rouge, et tous avoient un anneau d'argent suspendu au nez et deux autres
aux oreilles.

J'eus occasian de voir aussi dans Andrinople des chaines de chretiens qu'on
amenoit vendre. Ils demandoient l'aumone dans les rues. Mais le coeur
saigne quand on songe a tout ce qu'ils souffrent de maux.

Nous quittames la ville le 12 de Mars, sous la conduite d'un esclave que le
seigneur avoit donne a l'ambassadeur pour l'accompagner. Cet homme nous fut
en route d'une grande utilite, surtout pour les logemens; car par-tout ou
il demandoit quelque chose pour nous, a l'instant on s'empressoit de nous
l'accorder.

Notre premiere journee fut a travers un beau pays, en remontant le long de
la Marisce, que nous passames a un bac. La seconde, quoiqu'avec bons
chemins, fut employee a traverser des bois. Enfin nous entrames dans le
pays de Macedoine. La je trouvai une grande plaine entre deux montagnes,
laquelle peut bien avoir quarante milles de large, et qui est arrosee par
la Marisce. J'y rencontrai quinze hommes et dix femmes enchaines par le
cou. C'etoient des habitans du royaume de Bosnie que des Turcs venoient
d'enlever dans une course qu'ils avoient faite. Deux d'entre eux les
menoient vendre dans Andrinople.

Peu apres j'arrivai a Pheropoly, [Footnote: C'est une erreur de copiste:
lui-meme, quelques lignes plus bas, a ecrit l'helippopoly, et en effet
c'est de Philippopoli qu'il est mention.] capitale de la Macedoine, et
batie par le roi Philippe. Elle est sur la Marisce, dans une grande plaine
et un excellent pays, ou l'on trouve toutes sortes de vivres et a bon
compte. Ce fut jadis une ville considerable, et elle l'est encore. Elle
renferme trois montagnes, dont deux sont a une extremite vers le midi, et
l'autre au centre. Sur celle-ci etoit construit un grand chateau en forme
de croissant allonge; mais il a ete detruit. On me montra l'emplacement du
palais du roi Philippe, qu'on a de meme demoli, et dont les murs subsistent
encore. Philippopoli est peuplee en grande partie de Bulgares qui tiennent
la loi Gregoise (qui suivent la religion Grecque).

Pour en sortir je passai la Marisce sur un pont, et chevauchai pendant une
journee toute entiere a travers cette plaine dont j'ai parle; elle aboutit
a une montagne longue de seize a vingt milles, et couverte de bois. Ce lieu
etoit autrefois infeste de voleurs, et tres-dangereux a passer. Le Turc a
ordonne que quiconque y habiteroit fut Franc, et en consequence il s'y est
eleve deux villages peuples de Bulgares, et dont l'un est sur les confins
de Bulgarie et de Macedoine. Je passai la nuit dans le premier.

Apres avoir traverse la montagne, on trouve une plaine de six milles de
long sur deux de large; puis une foret qui peut bien en avoir seize de
longueur; puis une autre grande plaine totalement close de montagnes, bien
peuplee de Bulgares, et ou l'on a une riviere a traverser. Enfin j'arrivai
en trois jours a une ville nommee Sophie, qui fut autrefois
tres-considerable, ainsi qu'on le voit par les debris de ses murs rases
jusqu'a terre, et qui aujourd'hui encore est la meilleure de la Bulgarie.
Elle a un petit chateau, et se trouve assez pres d'une montagne au midi,
mais situee au commencement d'une grande plaine d'environ soixante milles
de long sur dix de large. Ses habitans sont pour la plupart des Bulgares,
et il en est de meme des villages. Les Turcs n'y forment que le tres-petit
nombre; ce qui donne aux autres un grand desir de se tirer de servitude,
s'ils pouvoient trouver qui les aidat.

J'y vis arriver des Turcs qui venoient de faire une course en Hongrie. Un
Genois qui se trouvoit dans la ville, et qu'on nomme Nicolas Ciba, me
raconta qu'il avoit vu revenir egalement ceux qui repasserent le Danube, et
que sur dix il n'y en avoit pas un qui eut a la fois un arc et une epee.
Pour moi, je dirai que parmi ceux-ci j'en trouvai beaucoup plus n'ayant ou
qu'un arc ou qu'une epee seulement, que de ceux qui eussent les deux armes
ensemble. Les mieux fournis portoient une petite targe (bouclier) en bois.
En verite, c'est pour la chretiente une grande honte, il faut en convenir,
qu'elle se laisse subjuguer par de telles gens. Ils sont bien au-dessous de
ce qu'on les croit.

En sortant de Sophie je traversai pendant cinquante milles cette plaine
dont j'ai fait mention. Le pays est bien peuple, et les habitans sont des
Bulgares de religion Grecque. J'eus ensuite un pays de montagnes, qui
cependant est assez bon pour le cheval; puis je trouvai en plaine une
tres-petite ville nommee Pirotte, situee sur la Nissave. Elle n'est point
fermee; mais elle a un petit chateau qui, d'une part est defendu par la
riviere, et de l'autre par un marais. Au nord est une montagne. Il n'y a
d'habitans que quelques Turcs.

Au-dela de Pirotte on retrouve un pays montagneux; apres quoi l'on revient
sur ses pas pour se rapprocher de la Nissave, qui traverse une belle vallee
entre deux assez hautes montagnes. Au pied d'une des deux etoit la ville
d'Ysvouriere, aujourd'hui totalement detruite, ainsi que ses murs. On
cotoie ensuite la riviere, en suivant la vallee; on trouve une autre
montagne dont le passage est difficile, quoiqu'il y passe chars et
charrettes. Enfin on arrive dans une vallee agreable qu'arrose encore la
Nissave; et apres avoir traverse la riviere sur un pont, on entre dans
Nisce (Nissa).

Cette ville, qui avoit un beau chateau, appertenoit au despote de Servie.
Le Turc l'a prise de force il y a cinq ans, et il l'a entierement detruite;
elle est dans un canton charmant qui produit beaucoup de riz. Je continuai
par-dela Nissa de cotoyer la riviere; et le pays, toujours egalement beau,
est bien garni de villages. Enfin je la passai a un bac, ou je
l'abandonnai. Alors commencerent des montagnes. J'eus a traverser une
longue foret fangeuse, et, apres dix journees de marche depuis Andrinople,
j'arrivai a Corsebech, petite ville a un mille de la Morane (Morave.)

La Morave est une grosse riviere qui vient de Bosnie. Elle, separe la
Bulgarie d'avec la Rascie ou Servie, province qui porte egalement ces deux
noms, et que le Turc a conquise depuis six ans.

Pour Corsebech, il avoit un petit chateau qu'on a detruit. Il a encore une
double enceinte de murs; mais on en a demoli la partie superieure
jusqu'au-dessous des creneaux.

J'y trouvai Cenamin-Bay, capitaine (commandant) de ce vaste pays frontiere,
qui s'etend depuis la Valaquie jusqu'en Esclavonie. Il passe dans la ville
une partie de l'annee. On m'a dit qu'il etoit ne Grec, qu'il ne boit point
de vin, comme les autres Turcs, et que c'est un homme sage et vaillant, qui
s'est fait craindre et obeir. Le Turc lui a confie le commandement de cette
contree, et il en possede en seigneurie la plus grande partie. Il ne laisse
passer la riviere qu'a ceux qu'il connoit, a moins qu'ils ne soient
porteurs d'une lettre du maitre, ou, en son absence, du seigneur de la
Grece.

Nous vimes la une belle personne, genti-femme du royaume de Hongrie, dont
la situation nous inspira bien de la pitie. Un renegat Hongrois, homme du
plus bas etat, l'avoit enlevee dans une course, et il en usoit comme de sa
femme. Quand elle nous apercut elle fondit en larmes; car elle n'avoit pas
encore renonce a sa religion.

Au sortir de Corsebech, je traversai la Morave a un bac, et j'entrai sur
les terres du despote de Rassie ou de Servie, pays beau et peuple. Ce qui
est en-deca de la riviere lui appartient, ce qui se trouve au-dela est au
Turc; mais le despote lui paie annuellement cinquante mille ducats de
tribut.

Celui-ci possede sur la riviere et aux confins communs de Bulgarie,
d'Esclavonie, d'Albanie et de Bosnie, une ville nommee Nyeuberge, qui a une
mine portant or et argent tout a la fois. Chaque annee elle lui donne plus
de deux cent mille ducats, m'ont dit gens qui sont bien instruits: sans
cela il ne seroit pas longtemps a etre chasse de son pays.

Sur ma route je passai pres du chateau d'Escalache, qui lui appartenoit.
C'etoit une forte place, sur la pointe d'une montagne au pied de laquelle
la Nissane se jette dans la Morave. On y voit encore une partie des murs
avec une tour en forme de donjon; mais c'est tout ce qui en reste.

A cette embouchure des deux rivieres le Turc tient habituellement
quatre-vingts ou cent fustes, galiottes et gripperies, pour passer, en
temps de guerre, sa cavalerie et son armee. Je n'ai pu les voir, parce
qu'on ne permet point aux chretiens d'en approcher; mais un homme digne de
foi m'a dit qu'il y a toujours, pour les garder, un corps de trois cents
hommes, et que ce corps est renouvele de deux en deux mois.

D'Escalache au Danube il y a bien cent milles, et neanmoins, dans toute la
longueur de cet espace, il n'existe d'autre forteresse ou lieu de quelque
defense qu'un village et une maison que Cenaym-Bay a fait construire sur le
penchant d'une montagne, avec une mosquee.

Je suivis le cours de la Morave; et, a l'exception d'un passage tres-boueux
qui dure pres d'un mille, et que forme le resserrement de la riviere par
une montagne, j'eus beau chemin et pays agreable et bien peuple. Il n'en
fut pas de meme a la seconde journee: j'eus des bois, des montagnes,
beaucoup de fange; neanmoins le pays continua d'etre aussi beau que peut
l'etre un pays de montagnes. Il est bien garni de villages, et par tout on
y trouve tout ce dont on a besoin.

Depuis que nous avions mis le pied en Macedoine, en Bulgarie et en Rassie,
sans cesse sur notre passage j'avois trouve que le Turc faisoit crier son
ost, c'est-a-dire qu'il faisoit annoncer que quiconque est tenu de se
rendre a l'armee, se tint pret a marcher. On nous dit que ceux qui, pour
satisfaire a ce devoir, nourrissent un cheval sont exempts du comarch; que
ceux des chretiens qui veulent etre dispenses de service paient cinquante
aspres par tete, et que d'autres y marchent forces; mais qu'on les prend
pour augmenter le nombre.

L'on me dit aussi, a la cour du despote, que le Turc a partage entre trois
capitaines la garde et defense de ces provinces frontieres. L'un, nomme
Dysem-Bay, a depuis les confins de la Valaquie jusqu'a la mer Noire;
Cenaym-Bay, depuis la Valaquie jusqu'aux confins de Bosnie; et Ysaac-Bay,
depuis ces confins jusqu'a l'Esclavonie, c'est-a-dire tout ce qui est par
dela la Morave.

Pour reprendre le recit de ma route, je dirai que je vins a une ville, ou
plutot a une maison de campagne nommee Nichodem. C'est la que le despote, a
fixe son sejour, parce que le terroir en est bon, et qu'il y trouve bois,
rivieres et tout ce qu'il lui faut pour les plaisirs de la chasse et du
vol, qu'il aime beaucoup.

Il etoit aux champs et alloit voler sur la riviere, accompagne d'une
cinquantaine de chevaux, de trois de ses enfans et d'un Turc qui, de la
part du maitre, etoit venu le sommer d'envoyer a l'armee un de ses fils
avec son contingent. Independamment du tribut qu'il paie, c'est-la une des
conditions qui lui sont imposees. Toutes les fois que le seigneur lui fait
passer ses ordres, il est oblige de lui envoyer mille ou huit cents chevaux
sous le commandement de son second fils.

Il a donne a ce maitre une de ses filles en mariage, et cependant il n'y a
point de jour qu'il ne craigne de se voir enlever par lui ses Etats; j'ai
meme entendu dire qu'on en avoit voulu inspirer de l'envie a celui-ci, et
qu'il avoit repondu: "J'en tire plus que si je les possedois. Dans ce cas
je serois oblige de les donner a l'un de mes esclaves, et je n'en aurois
rien."

Les troupes qu'il levoit etoient destinees contre l'Albanie, disoit-on.
Deja il en avoit fait passer dans ce pays dix mille; et voila pourquoi il
avoit pres de lui si peu de monde a Lessere quand je l'y vis: mais cette
premiere armee avoit ete detruite. [Footnote: C'est en effet dans cette
meme annee 1433 que le celebre Scanderberg, apres etre rentre par ruse en
possession de l'Albanie, dont ses ancetres etoient souverains, commenca
contre Amurath cette guerre savante qui le couvrit de gloire et qui ternit
les dernieres annees du sultan.]

Le seigneur despote est un grand et bel homme de cinquante-huit a soixante
ans; il a cinq enfans, trois garcons et deux filles. Des garcons, l'un a
vingt ans, l'autre quatorze, et tous trois sont, comme leurs pere, d'un
exterieur tres-agreable. Quant aux filles, l'une est mariee au Turc,
l'autre au comte de Seil; mais je ne les ai point vues, et ne puis rien en
dire. [Footnote: Le despote dont il s'agit se nommoit George Brancovitz ou
Wikovitz. On trouve dans Ducange (Familiae Bisant p. 336) quelques details
sur lui et sa famille.]

Lorsque nous le rencontrames aux champs, ainsi que je l'ai dit,
l'ambassadeur et moi nous lui primes la main et je la lui baisai, parce que
tel est l'usage. Le lendemain nous allames le saluer chez lui. Sa cour,
assez nombreuse, etoit composee de tres-beaux hommes qui portent longs
cheveux et longue barbe, vu qu'ils sont de la religion Grecque. Il y avoit
dans la ville un eveque et un maitre (docteur) en theologie, qui se
rendoient a Constantinople, et qui etoient envoyes en ambassade vers
l'empereur par le saint concile de Bale. [Footnote: Ce saint concile, qui
finit par citer a son tribunal et deposer le pape, tandis que le pape lui
ordonnit de se dissoudre et en convoquoit un autre a Ferrare, puis a
Florence, avoit entrepris de reunir l'eglise Grecque a la Latine; et c'est
dans ce dessein qu'il deputoit vers l'empereur. Celui-ci se rendit
effectivement en Italie, et il signa dans Florence cette reunion politique
et simulee dont il a ete parle plus haut.]

De Coursebech j'avois mis deux jours pour venir a Nicodem; de Nicodem a
Belgrado j'en mis un demi. Ce ne sont jusqu'a cette derniere ville que
grands bois, montagnes et vallees; mais ces valees foisonnent de villages
dans lesquels on trouve beaucoup de vivres, et specialement de bons vins.

Belgrade est en Rascie, et elle appartenoit au despote, mais depuis quatre
ans il l'a cedee au roi de Hongrie, parce qu'on a craint qu'il ne la
laissat prendre au Turc, comme il a laisse prendre Coulumbach. Cette perte
fut un grand malheur pour la chretiente. L'autre en seroit un plus grand
encore, parce que la place est plus forte, et qu'elle peut loger jusqu'a
cinq a six mille chevaux. [Footnote: On sera etonne de voir l'auteur, en
parlant de la garnison d'une place de guerre, ne faire mention que de
chevaux. Ci-dessus, lorsqu'il a specifie le contingent que le despote etoit
oblige de fournir a l'armee Turque, il n'a parle que de chevaux. Sans cesse
il parle de chevaux. C'est qu'alors en Europe on ne faisoit cas que de la
gendarmerie, et que l'infanterie ou pietaille, presque toujours mal
composee et mal armee, etoit comptee pour tres-peu.]

Le long de ses murs, d'un cote, coule une grosse riviere qui vient de
Bosnie, et qu'on nomme la Sanne; de l'autre elle a un chateau pres ququel
[sic--KTH] passe le Danube, et la, dans ce Danube; se jette la Sanne. C'est
sur la pointe formee par les deux rivieres qu'est batie la ville.

Dans le pourtour de son enceinte son terrain a une certaine hauteur,
excepte du cote de terre, ou il est tellement uni qu'on peut par la venir
de plain pied jusqu'au bord du fosse. De ce cote encore, il y a un village
qui, s'etendant depuis la Sanne jusqu'au Danube, enveloppe la ville a la
distance, d'un trait d'arc.

Ce village est habite par des Rasciens. Le jour de Paques, j'y entendis la
messe en langue Sclavonne. Il est dans l'obedience de l'eglise Romaine, et
leurs ceremonies ne different en rien des notres.

La place, forte par sa situation et par ses fosses, tous en glacis, a une
enceinte de doubles murs bien entretenus, et qui suivent tres-exactement
les contours du terrain. Elle est composee de cinq forteresses, dont trois
sur le terrain eleve dont je viens de parler, et deux sur la riviere. De
ces deux-ci, l'une est fortifiee contre l'autre; mais toutes deux sont
commandees par les trois premieres.

Il y a aussi un petit port qui peut contenir quinze a vingt galeres, et qui
est defendu par une tour construite a chacune de ses extremites. On le
ferme avec une chaine qui va d'une tour a l'autre. Au moins c'est ce qu'on
m'a dit; car les deux rives sont si eloignees que moi je n'ai pu la voir.

Je vis sur la Sanne six galeres et cinq galiottes. Elles etoient pres l'une
des cinq forteresses, la moins forte de toutes. Dans cette forteresse sont
beaucoup de Rasciens; mais on ne leur permet point d'entrer dans les quatre
autres.

Toutes cinq sont bien garnies d'artillerie. J'y ai remarque sur-tout trois
bombardes de metail (canons de bronze) dont deux etoient de deux pieces,
[Footnote: La remarque que l'auteur fait ici sur ces trois canons
sembleroit annoncer que ceux de bronze etoient rares encore, et qu'on les
regardoit comme une sorte de merveille. Louis XI en fit fondre une
douzaine, auxquels il donna le nom des douze pairs. (Daniel, Mil. Franc, t.
I, p. 825.)] et l'une d'une telle grosseur que jamais je n'en ai vu de
pareille: elle avoit quarante-deux pouces de large dedans ou la pierre
entre (sa bouche avoit quarante-deux pouces de diametre); mais elle me
parut courte pour sa grosseur. [Footnote: La mode alors etoit de faire des
pieces d'artillerie d'une grosseur enorme. Peu de temps apres l'epoque ou
ecrivoit notre auteur, Mahomet II, assiegeant Constantinople, en employa
qui avoient ete fondues sur les lieux, et qui portoient, dit on, deux cents
livres de balle. La Chronique Scandaleuse et Monstrelet parlent d'une sorte
d'obus que Louis XI fit fondre a Tours, puis conduire a Paris, et qui
portoit des balles de cinq cents livres. En 1717, le prince Eugene, apres
sa victoire sur les Turcs, trouva dans Belgrade un canon long de pres de
vingt-cinq pieds, qui tiroit des boulets de cent dix livres, et dont la
charge etoit de cinquante-deux livres de poudre (Ibid p. 323.) C'etoit
encore un usage ordinaire de faire les boulets en gres ou en pierre,
arrondis et tailles de calibre pour la piece. Et voila pourquoi la
Brocquiere, parlant de l'embouchure du canon, emploie cette expression,
"dedens ou LA PIERRE entre."]

Le capitaine (commandant) de la place etoit messire Mathico, chevalier de
Aragouse (d'Arragon), et il avoit pour lieutenant un sien frere, qu'on
appeloit le seigneur frere.

Sur le Danube, deux journees au-dessous de Belgrade, le Turc possede ce
chateau de Coulombach, qu'il a pris au despote. C'est encore une forte
place, dit-on, quoique cependant il soit aise de l'attaquer avec de
l'artillerie et de lui fermer tout secours; ce-qui est un grand
desavantage. Il y entretient cent fustes pour passer en Hongrie quand il
lui plait. Le capitaine du lieu est ce Ceynam-Bay dont j'ai parle
ci-devant.

Sur le Danube encore, mais a l'opposite de Belgrade, et dans la Hongrie, le
despote possede egalement une ville avec chateau. Elle lui a ete donnee par
l'empereur, [Footnote: Sigismond, roi de Boheme et de Hongrie. On pretend
que Sigismond ne les donna qu'en echange de Belgrade.] avec plusieurs
autres, qui lui font un revenu de cinquante mille ducats, et c'etoit a
condition qu'il deviendroit son homme [Footnote: Deviendroit son homme.
Cette expression de la feodalite du temps indique l'obligation du service
militaire et de la fidelite que le vassel devoit a son suzerain.] mais il
obeit plus au Turc qu'a l'empereur.

Deux jours apres mon arrivee dans Belgrade j'y vis entrer vingt-cinq hommes
armes a la maniere du pays, que le gouverneur comte Mathico y faisoit venir
pour demeurer en garnison. On me dit que c'etoient des Allemands pour
garder la place, tandis qu'on avoit si pres des Hongrois, et des Serviens.
On me repondit que les Serviens, etant sujets et tributaires du Turc, on se
garderoit bien de la leur confier; et que quant aux Hongrois, ils le
redoutoient tant que s'il paroissoit, ils n'oseroient la defendre contre
lui, quelque forte qu'elle fut. Il falloit donc y appeler des etrangers; et
cette mesure devenoit d'autant plus necessaire que c'etoit la seule place
que l'empereur possedat pour passer sur l'autre rive du Danube, ou pour le
repasser en cas de besoin.

Ce discours m'etonna beaucoup; il me fit faire des reflexions sur l'etrange
sujettion ou le Turc tient la Macedoine et la Bulgarie, l'empereur de
Constantinople et les Grecs, le despote de Rascie et ses sujets. Cette
dependance me parut chose lamentable pour la chretiente. Et comme j'ai vecu
avec les Turcs, que je connois leur maniere de vivre et de combattre, que
j'ai hante des gens notables qui les ont vus de pres dans leurs grandes
entreprises, je me suis enhardi a ecrire, selon mes lumieres, quelque chose
sur eux, et a montrer, sauf correction de la part de ceux qui sont plus
instruits que moi, comment il est possible de reprendre les etats dont ils
se sont empares, et de les battre sur un champ de bataille.

Et d'abord, pour commencer par leur personnel, je dirai que ce sont d'assez
beaux hommes, portant tous de longues barbes, mais de moyenne taille et de
force mediocre. Je sais bien que, dans le langage ordinaire, on dit fort
comme un Turc; cependant j'ai vu une infinite de chretiens qui, dans les
choses ou il faut de la force, l'emportoient sur eux; et moi-meme, qui ne
suis pas des plus robustes, j'en ai trouve, lorsque les circonstances
exigeoient quelque travail, de plus foibles que moi encore.

Ils sont gens diligens, se levent matin volontiers, et vivent de peu en
compagne; se contentant de pain mal cuit, de chair crue sechee au soleil,
de lait soit caille soit non caille, de miel, fromage, raisins, fruits,
herbages, et meme d'une poignee de farine avec laquelle ils feront un
brouet qui leur suffira pour un jour a six ou huit. Ont-ils un cheval ou un
chameau malade sans espoir de guerison, ils lui coupent la gorge et le
mangent. J'en ai ete temoin maintes fois. Pour dormir ils ne sont point
embarasses, et couchent par terre.

Leur habillement consiste en deux ou trois robes de coton l'une sur
l'autre, et qui descendent jusqu'aux pieds. Par-dessus celles-la ils en
portent, en guise de manteau, une autre de feutre qu'on nomme capinat. Le
capinat, quoique leger, resiste a la pluie, et il y en a de tres-beaux et
de tres-fins. Ils ont des bottes qui montent jusqu'aux genoux, et de
grandes braies (calecons), qui pour les uns sont de velours cramoisi, pour
d'autres de soie, de futaine, d'etoffes communes. En guerre ou en route,
pour n'etre point embarrasses de leurs robes, ils les relevent et les
enferment dans leurs calecons; ce qui leur permet d'agir librement.

Leurs chevaux sont bons, coutent peu a nourir, courent bien et longtemps;
mais ils les tiennent tres-maigres et ne les laissent manger que la nuit,
encore ne leur donnent-ils alors que cinq ou six jointees d'orge et le
double de paille picade (hachee): le tout mis dans une besace qu'ils leur
pendent aux oreilles. Au point du jour, ils les brident, les nettoient, les
etrillent; mais ils ne les font boire qu'a midi, puis l'apres-diner, toutes
les fois qu'ils trouvent de l'eau, et le soir quand ils logent ou campent;
car ils campent toujours de bonne heure, et pres d'une riviere, s'ils le
peuvent. Dans cette derniere circonstance ils les laissent brides encore
pendant une heure, comme les mules. Enfin vient un moment ou chacun fait
manger le sien.

Pendant la nuit ils les couvrent de feutre ou d'autres etoffes, et j'ai vu
de ces couvertures qui etoient tres-belles; ils en ont meme pour leurs
levriers, [Footnote: Le mot levrier n'avoit pas alors l'acception exclusive
qu'il a aujourd'hui; il se prenoit pour le chien de chase ordinaire.]
espece dont ils sont tres-curieux, et qui chez eux est belle et forte,
quoiqu'elle ait de longues oreilles pendantes et de longues queues
feuillees (touffues), que cependant elle porte bien.

Tous leurs chevaux sont Hongres: ils n'en gardent d'entiers que
quelques-uns pour servir d'etalons, mais en si petit nombre que je n'en ai
pas vu un seul. Du reste ils les sellent et brident a la jennette.
[Footnote: Les mors et les selles a la genette avoient ete adoptes en
France, et jusqu'au dernier siecle ils furent d'usage dans nos maneges. On
disoit monter a la genette quand les jambes etoient si courtes que l'eperon
portoit vis-a-vis les flancs du cheval. Le mors a la genette etoit celui
qui avoit sa gourmette d'une seule piece et de la forme d'un grand anneau,
mis et arrete au haut de la liberte de la langue.] Leurs selles,
ordinairement fort riches, sont tres-creuses. Elles n'ont qu'un arcon
devant, un autre derriere, avec de courtes etrivieres et de larges etriers.

Quant a leurs habillemens de guerre, j'ai ete deux fois dans le cas de les
voir, a l'occasion des Grecs renegats qui renoncoient a leur religion pour
embrasser le Mahometisme: alors les Turcs font une grande fete; ils
prennent leurs plus belles armes et parcourent la ville en cavalcade aussi
nombreuse qu'il leur est possible. Or dans ces circonstances, je les ai vus
porter d'assez belles brigandines (cottes d'armes) pareilles aux notres, a
l'exception que les ecailles en etoient plus petites. Leur garde-bras
(brassarts) etoient de meme. En un mot ils ressemblent a ces peintures ou
l'on nous represente les temps de Jules Cesar. La brigandine descend
presqu'a mi-cuisse; mais a son extremite est attachee circulairement une
etoffe de soie qui vient jusqu'a mi-jambe.

Sur la tete ils portent un harnois blanc qui est rond comme elle, et qui,
haut de plus d'un demi-pied, se termine en pointe. [Footnote: Harnois, dans
la langue du temps, etoit un terme general qui signifioit a la fois
habillement et armure; ici il designe une sorte de bonnet devenu arme
defensive.] On le garnit de quatre clinques (lames), l'une devant, l'autre
derriere, les deux autres sur les cotes, afin de garantir du coup d'epee la
face, le cou et les joues. Elles sont pareilles a celles qu'ont en France
nos salades. [Footnote: Salades, sorte de casque leger alors en usage, et
qui, n'ayant ni visiere ni gorgerin, avoit besoin de cette bande de fer en
saillie pour defendre le visage.]

Outre cette garniture de tete ils en ont assez communement une autre qu'ils
mettent par-dessus leurs chapeaux ou leurs toques: c'est une coiffe de fil
d'archal. Il y a de ces coiffes qui sont si riches et si belles qu'elles
coutent jusqu'a quarante et cinquante ducats, tandis que d'autres n'en
coutent qu'un ou deux. Quoique celles-ci soient moins fortes que les
autres, elles peuvent resister au coup de taille d'une epee.

J'ai parle de leurs selles: ils y sont assis comme dans un fauteuil, bien
enfonces, les genoux fort haut et les etriers courts; position dans
laquelle ils ne pourroient pas supporter le moindre coup de lance sans etre
jetes bas.

L'arme de ceux qui ont quelque fortune est un arc, un tarquais, une epee et
une forte masse a manche court, dont le gros bout est taille a plusieurs
carnes. Ce baton a du danger quand on l'assene sur des epaules ou des bras
degarnis. Je suis meme convaincu qu'un coup bien appuye sur une tete armee
de salade etourdiroit l'homme.

Plusieurs portent de petits pavois (boucliers) en bois, et ils savent
tres-bien s'en couvrir a cheval quand ils tirent de l'arc. C'est ce que
m'ont assure gens qui les ont long-temps pratiques, et ce que j'ai vu par
moi-meme.

Leur obeissance aux ordres de leur seigneur est sans bornes. Pas un seul
n'oseroit les transgresser quand il s'agiroit de la vie, et c'est
principalement a cette soumission constante qu'il doit les grandes choses
qu'il a executees et ces vastes conquetes qui l'ont rendu maitre d'une
etendue de pays beaucoup plus considerable que n'est la France.

On m'a certifie que quand les puissances chretiennes ont pris les armes
contre eux, ils ont toujours ete avertis a temps. Dans ce cas, le seigneur
fait epier leur marche par des hommes qui sont propres a cette fonction, et
il va les attendre avec son armee a deux ou trois journees du lieu ou il se
propose de les combattre. Croit-il l'occasion favorable, il fond sur eux
tout-a-coup, et ils ont pour ces circonstances une sorte de marche qui leur
est propre. Le signal est donne par un gros tambour. Alors ceux qui doivent
etre en tete partent les premiers et sans bruit; les autres suivent de meme
en silence, sans que la file soit jamais interrompue, parce que les chevaux
et les hommes sont dresses a cet exercice. Dix mille Turcs, en pareil cas,
font moins de tapage que ne feroient cent hommes d'armes chretiens. Dans
leurs marches ordinaires, ils ne vont jamais qu'au pas; mais dans celles-ci
ils emploient le galop, et comme d'ailleurs ils sont armes legerement, ils
font du soir au matin autant de chemin qu'en trois de leurs journees
communes; et voila pourquoi ils ne pourroient porter d'armures completes,
ainsi que les Francais et les Italiens: aussi ne veulent-ils en chevaux que
ceux qui ont un grand pas ou qui galopent long-temps, tandis que nous il
nous les faut trottant bien et aises.

C'est par ces marches forcees qu'ils ont reussi, dans leurs differentes
guerres, a surprendre les chretiens et a les battre si completement; c'est
ainsi qu'ils ont vaincu le duc Jean, a qui Dieu veuille pardonner,
[Footnote: Jean, comte de Nevers, surnomme Sans-peur et fils de Philippe le
Hardi, duc de Bourgogne. Sigismond ayant forme une ligue pour arreter les
conquetes de Bajazet, notre roi Charles VI lui envoya un corps de troupes
dans lequel il y avoit deux mille gentilshommes, et qui etoit conduit par
le comte Jean. L'armee chretienne fut defaite a Nicopolis en 1396, et nos
Francais tues ou faits prisonniers. On sait qu'avant la bataille, pour se
debarrasser de captifs Turcs qu'ils avoient recus a rancon, ils eurent
l'indignite de les egorger, et qu'apres la victoire le sultan n'ayant
accorde la vie qu'aux principaux d'entre eux, il fit par represailles
massacrer devant eux leurs camarades. Jean, devenu duc de Bourgogne, fit
lachement assassiner dans Paris le duc d'Orleans, frere du roi. Il fut tue
a son tour par Tannegui du Chatel, ancien officier du duc. On voit par ces
faits que la Brocquiere avoit grande raison, en parlant de Jean, de
demander que Dieu lui pardonnat.] et l'empereur Sigismond, et tout
recemment encore cet empereur devant Coulumbach, ou perit messire Advis,
chevalier de Poulaine (Pologne).

Leur maniere de combattre varie selon les circonstances. Voient-ils un lieu
et une occasion favorables pour attaquer, ils se divisent en plusieurs
pelotons, selon la force de leur troupe, et viennent ainsi assailir par
differens cotes. Ce moyen est surtout celui qu'ils emploient en pays de
bois et de montagnes, parce qu'ils ont l'art de se reunir sans peine.

D'autres fois ils se mettent en embuscade et envoient a la decouverte
quelques gens bien montes. Si le rapport est que l'ennemi n'est point sur
ses gardes, ils savent prendre leur parti sur-le-champ et tirer avantage
des circonstances. Le trouvent-ils en bonne ordonnance, ils voltigent
autour de l'armee a la portee du trait, caracollent ainsi en tirant sans
cesse aux hommes et aux chevaux, et le font si long-temps qu'enfin ils la
mettent en desordre. Si l'on veut les poursuivre et les chasser, il fuient,
et se dispersent chacun de leur cote, quand meme on ne leur opposeroit que
le quart de ce qu'ils sont; mais c'est dans leur fuite qu'ils sont
redoutables, et c'est presque toujours ainsi qu'ils ont deconfi les
chretiens. Tout en fuyant ils ont l'art de tirer de l'arc si adroitement
qu'ils ne manquent jamais d'atteindre le cavalier ou le cheval.

D'ailleurs chacun d'eux porte attache a l'arcon de sa selle un tabolcan. Si
le chef ou quelqu'un des officiers s'apercoit que l'ennemi qui poursuit est
en desordre, il frappe trois coups sur son instrument; chacun de son cote
et de loin en loin en fait autant: en un instant tous se rassemblent autour
du chef, "comme pourceaux au cry l'un de l'autre," et, selon les
circonstances, ils recoivent en bon ordre les assaillans ou fondent sur eux
par pelotons, on les attaquant de toutes parts.

Dans les batailles rangees ils emploient quelquefois une autre sorte de
stratageme, qui consiste a jeter des feux a travers les chevaux de la
cavalerie pour les epouvanter; souvent encore ils mettent en tete de leur
ligne un grand nombre de chameaux ou de dromadaires forts et hardis; ils
les chassent en avant sur les chevaux, et y jettent le desordre.

Telles sont les manieres de combattre que les Turcs ont jusqu'a present
mises en usage vis-a-vis des chretiens. Assurement je ne veux point en dire
du mal ni les deprecier; j'avouerai au contraire que, dans le commerce de
la vie, je les ai trouves francs et loyaux, et que dans les occasions ou il
falloit du courage ils se sont bien montres: mais cependant je n'en suis
pas moins convaincu que, pour des troupes bien montees et bien commandees,
ce seroit chose peu difficile de les battre; et quant a moi je declare
qu'avec moitie moins de monde qu'eux je n'hesiterois pas a les attaquer.

Leurs armees, je le sais, sont ordinairement de cent a deux cent mille
hommes; mais la plupart sont a pied, et la plupart manquent, comme je l'ai
dit, de tarquais, de coiffe, de masse ou d'epee; fort peu ont une armure
complete.

D'ailleurs ils ont parmi eux un tres-grand nombre de chretiens qui servent
forcement: Grecs, Bulgares, Macedoniens, Albanois, Esclavons, Valaques,
Rasciens et autres sujets du despote de Rascie. Tous ces gens-la detestent
le Turc, parce qu'il les tient dans une dure servitude; et s'ils voyoient
marcher en forces contre lui les chretiens, et sur-tout les Francais, je ne
doute nullement qu'ils ne lui tournassent le dos et ne le grevassent
beaucoup.

Les Turcs ne sont donc ni aussi terribles, ni aussi formidables que je l'ai
entendu dire. J'avoue pourtant qu'il faudroit contre eux un general bien
obei, et qui voulut specialement prendre et suivre les avis de ceux qui
connoissent leur maniere de faire la guerre. C'est la faute que fit a
Coulumbach, m'a-t-on-dit, l'empereur Sigismond lorsqu'il fut battu par eux.
S'il avoit voulu ecouter les conseils qu'on lui donna, il n'eut point ete
oblige de lever honteusement le siege, puisqu'il y avoit vingt-cinq a
trente mille Hongrois. Ne vit-on pas deux cents arbaletriers Lombards et
Genois arreter seuls l'effort des ennemis, les contenir, et favoriser sa
retraite pendant qu'il s'embarquoit dans les galeres qu'il avoit sur le
Danube; tandis que six mille Valaques, qui, avec le chevalier Polonois dont
j'ai parle ci-dessus, s'etoient mis a l'ecart sur une petite hauteur,
furent tous tailles en pieces?

Je ne dis rien sur tout ceci que je n'aie vu ou entendu. Ainsi donc, dans
le cas ou quelque prince ou general chretien voudroit entreprendre la
conquete de la Grece ou meme penetrer plus avant, je crois que je puis lui
donner des renseignemens utiles. Au reste je vais parler selon mes
facultes; et s'il m'echappoit chose qui deplut a quelqu'un, je prie qu'on
m'excuse et qu'on la regarde comme nulle.

Le souverain qui formeroit un pareil projet devroit d'abord se proposer
pour but, non la gloire et la renommee, mais Dieu, la religion, et le salut
de tant d'ames qui sont dans la voie de perdition. Il faudroit qu'il fut
bien assure d'avance du paiement de ses troupes, et qu'il n'eut que des
corps bien fames, de bonne volonte, et sur-tout point pillards. Quant aux
moyens de solde, ce seroit, je crois, a notre saint-pere le pape qu'il
conviendroit de les assurer; mais jusqu'au moment ou l'on entreroit sur les
terres des Turcs on devroit se fair une loi de ne rien prendre sans payer.
Personne n'aime a se voir derober ce qui lui appartient, et j'ai entendu
dire que ceux qui l'ont fait s'en sont souvent mal trouves. Au reste je
m'en rapporte sur tous ces details aux princes et a messeigneurs de leur
conseil; moi je ne m'arrete qu'a l'espece de troupes qui me paroit la plus
propre a l'enterprise, et avec laquelle je desirerois etre, si j'avois a
choisir.

Je voudrois donc, 1 deg.. de France, gens d'armes, gens de trait, archers et
arbaletriers, en aussi grand nombre qu'il seroit possible, et composes
comme je l'ai dit ci dessus; 2 deg.. d'Angleterre, mille hommes d'Armes et dix
mille archers; 3 deg.. d'Allemagne, le plus qu'on pourroit de gentilshommes et
de leurs crennequiniers a pied et a cheval. [Footnote: Cranquiniers,
c'etoit le nom qu'en Autriche et dans une partie de l'Allemagne on donnoit
aux archers.] Assemblez en gens de trait, archers et crennequiniers quinze
a vingt mille hommes de ces trois nations, bien unis; joignez-y deux a
trois cents ribaudequins, [Footnote: Ribaudequins, sortes de troupes
legeres qui servoient aux escarmouches et representoient nos tirailleurs
d'aujourd'hui.] et je demanderai a Dieu la grace de marcher avec eux et je
reponds bien qu'on pourra les mener sans peine de Belgrade a
Constantinople.

Il leur suffiroit, ainsi que je l'ai remarque, d'une armure legere, attendu
que le trait Turc n'a point de force. De pres, leurs archers tirent juste
et vite; mais ils ne tirent point a beaucoup pres aussi loin que les
notres. Leurs arcs sont gros, mais courts, et leurs traits courts et
minces. Le fer y est enfonce dans le bois, et ne peut ni supporter un grand
coup, ni faire plaie que quand il trouve une partie decouverte. D'apres
ceci, on voit qu'il suffiroit a nos troupes d'avoir une armure legere,
c'est-a-dire un leger harnois de jambes, [Footnote: Harnois de jambes,
sorte d'armure defensive en fer qui emboitoit la jambe, et qu'on nommoit
jambards ou greves.] une legere brigandine ou blanc-harnois, et une salade
avec baviere et visiere un peu large. [Footnote: J'ai deja dit que la
salade etoit un casque beaucoup moins lourd que le heaume. Il y en avoit
qui laissoient le visage totalement decouvert; d'autres qui, pour le
garantir, portoient en avant une lame de fer; d'autres qui, comme le
heaume, le couvroient en entier, haut et bas: ce qu'on appeloit visiere et
baviere.] Le trait d'un arc Turc pourrait fausser un haubergon; [Footnote:
Haubergeon, cotte de mailles plus legere que le haubert. Etant en mailles,
elle pouvoit etre faussee plus aisement que la brigandine, qui etoit de fer
plein ou en ecailles de fer.] mais il semoussera contre une brigandine ou
blanc-harnois.

J'ajouterai qu'en cas de besoin nos archers pourroient se servir des traits
des Turcs, et que les leurs ne pourroient se servir des notres, parce que
la coche n'est pas assez large, et que les cordes de leurs arcs etant de
nerfs, sont beaucoup trop grosses.

Selon moi, ceux de nos gens d'armes qui voudroient etre a cheval devroient
avoir une lance legere a fer tranchant, avec une forte epee bien affilee.
Peut-etre aussi leur seroit-il avantageux d'avoir une petite hache a main.
Ceux d'entre eux qui seroient a pied porteroient guisarme, [Footnote:
Guisarme, hache a deux tetes.] ou bon epieu tranchant [Footnote: Epieu,
lance beaucoup plus forte que la lance ordinaire.]; mais les uns et les
autres auroient les mains armees de gantelets. Quant a ces gantelets,
j'avoue que pour moi j'en connois en Allemagne qui sont de cuir bouilli,
dont je ferais autant de cas que de ceux qui sont en fer.

Lorsqu'on trouvera une plaine rase et un lieu pour combattre avec avantage
on en profitera; mais alors on ne fera qu'un seul corps de bataille.
L'avant garde et l'arriere-garde seront employees a former les deux ailes.
On entremelera par-ci par-la tout ce qu'on aura de gens d'armes, a moins
qu'on ne preferat de les placer en dehors pour escarmoucher; mais on se
gardera bien de placer ainsi les hommes d'armes. En avant de l'armee et sur
ses ailes seront epars et semes ca et la les ribaudequins; mais il sera
defendu a qui que ce soit, sous peine de la vie, de poursuivre les fuyards.

Les Turcs ont la politique d'avoir toujours des armees deux fois plus
nombreuses que celles des chretiens. Cette superiorite de nombre augmente
leur courage, et elle leur permet en meme temps de former differens corps
pour attaquer par divers cotes a la fois. S'ils parviennent a percer, ils
se precipitent en foule innombrable par l'ouverture, et alors c'est un
grand miracle si tout n'est pas perdu.

Pour empecher ce malheur on placera la plus grande quantite de ribaudequins
vers les angles du corps de bataille, et l'on tachera de se tenir serre de
maniere a ne point se laisser entamer. Au reste, cette ordonnance me paroit
d'autant plus facile a garder qu'ils ne sont point assez bien armes pour
former une colonne capable par son poids d'une forte impulsion. Leurs
lances ne valent rien. Ce qu'ils ont de mieux ce sont leurs archers, et ces
archers ne tirent ni aussi loin ni aussi fort que les notres.

Ils ont aussi une cavalerie beaucoup plus nombreuse; et leurs chevaux,
quoique inferieurs en force aux notres, quoique moins capables de porter de
lourds fardeaux, courent mieux, escarmouchent plus long-temps et ont plus
d'haleine. C'est une raison de plus pour se tenir toujours bien serre,
toujours bien en ordre.

Si l'on suit constamment cette methode ils seront forces, ou de combattre
avec desavantage, et par consequent de tout risquer, ou de faire retraite
devant l'armee. Dans le cas ou ils prendroient ce dernier parti, on mettra
de la cavalerie a leurs trousses; mais il faudra qu'elle ne marche jamais
qu'en bonne ordonnance, et toujours prete a combattre et a les bien
recevoir s'ils reviennent sur leurs pas. Avec cette conduite il n'est point
douteux qu'on ne les batte toujours. En suivant le contraire, ce seront eux
qui nous battront, comme il est toujours arrive.

On me dira peut-etre que rester ainsi en presence et sur la defensive
vis-a-vis d'eux, seroit une honte pour nous. On me dira que, vivant de peu
et de tout ce qu'ils trouvent, ils nous affameroient bientot si nous ne
sortoins de notre fort pour aller les combattre.

Je repondrai que leur coutume n'est point de rester en place;
qu'aujourd'hui dans un endroit, demain eloignes d'une journee et demie, ils
reparoissent tout-a-coup aussi vite qu'ils ont disparu, et que, si l'on
n'est point continuellement sur ses gardes, on court de gros risques.
L'important est donc, du moment ou on les a vus, d'etre toujours en
defiance, toujours pret a monter a cheval et a se battre.

Si l'on a quelque mauvais pas a passer, on ne manquera pas d'y envoyer des
gens d'armes et des gens de trait autant que le lieu permettra d'en
recevoir pour combattre, et l'on aura grand soin qu'ils soient constamment
en bon ordre de bataille.

Jamais n'envoyez au fourrage, ce seroit autant d'hommes perdus; d'ailleurs
vous ne trouveriez plus rien aux champs. En temps de guerre les Turcs font
tout transporter dans les villes.

Avec toutes ces precautions, la conquete de la Grece [Footnote: On a deja
vu plus haut que par le mot Grece l'auteur entend les etats que les Turcs
possedoient en Europe.] ne sera pas une entreprise extremement difficile,
pourvu, je le repete, que l'armee fasse toujours corps, qu'elle ne se
divise jamais, et ne veuille point envoyer de pelotons a la poursuite de
l'ennemi. Si l'on me demande comment on aura des vivres, je dirai que la
Grece et la Rassie ont des rivieres navigables, et que la Bulgarie, la
Macedoine et les provinces Grecques sont fertiles.

En avancant ainsi toujours en masse, on forcera les Turcs a reculer, et il
faudra qu'ils choisissent entre deux extremites, comme je l'ai deja dit, ou
de repasser en Asie et d'abandonner leurs biens, leurs femmes et leurs
enfans, puisque le pays n'est point de defense, ainsi qu'on l'a pu voir par
la description que j'en ai donnee, ou de risquer une bataille, comme ils
l'ont fait toutes les fois qu'ils ont passe le Danube.

Je conclus qu'avec de bonnes troupes composees des trois nations que j'ai
nommees, Francais, Anglais et Allemands, on sera sur du succes, et que si
elles sont en nombre suffisant, bien unies et bien commandees, elles iront
par terre jusqu'a Jerusalem. Mais je reprends mon recit.

Je traversai le Danube a Belgrade. Il etoit en ce moment extraordinairement
gonfle, et pouvoit bien avoir douze milles de large. Jamais, de memoire
d'homme, on ne lui avoit vu une crue pareille. Ne pouvant me rendre a Boude
(Bude) par le droit chemin, j'allai a une ville champetre (un village)
nommee Pensey. De Pensey j'arrivai par la plaine la plus unie que je
connoisse, et apres avoir traverse en bac une riviere a Beurquerel, ville
qui appartient au despote de Rassie, et ou je passai deux autres rivieres
sur un pont. De Beurquerel je vins a Verchet, qui est egalement au despote,
et la je passai la Tiste (la Teisse), riviere large et profonde. Enfin je
me rendis a Segading (Segedin) sur la Tiste.

Dans toute la longueur de cette route, a l'exception de deux petits bois
qui etoient enclos d'un ruisseau, je n'ai pas vu un seul arbre. Les
habitans n'y brulent que de la paille ou des roseaux qu'ils ramassent le
long des rivieres ou dans leurs nombreux marecages. Ils mangent, au lieu de
pain, des gateaux tendres; mais ils n'en ont pas beaucoup a manger.

Segedin est une grande ville champetre, composee d'une seule rue qui m'a
paru avoir une lieue de longueur environ. Elle est dans un terroir fertile,
abondant en toutes sortes de denrees. On y prend beaucoup de grues et de
bistardes (outardes), et j'en vis un grand marche tout rempli; mais on les
y apprete fort malproprement, et on les mange de meme. La Teisse fournit
aussi quantite de poissons, et nulle part je n'ai vu riviere en donner
d'aussi gros.

On y trouxe egalement une grande quantite de chevaux sauvages a vendre;
mais on sait les domter et les apprivoiser, et c'est une chose curieuse a
voir. On m'a meme assure que qui en voudroit trois ou quatre mille, les
trouveroit dans la ville. Ils sont a si bon marche que pour dix florins de
Hongrie on auroit un tres-beau roussin (cheval de voyage).

L'empereur, m'a-t-on dit, avoit donne Segedin a un eveque. J'y vis ce
prelat, et me sembla homme de grosse conscience. Les cordeliers ont dans la
ville une assez belle eglise. J'y entendis le service. Ils le font un peu a
la Hongroise.

De Segedin je vins a Paele (Pest), assez bonne ville champetre sur le
Danube, vis-a-vis Bude. D'une ville a l'autre le pays continue d'etre, bon
et uni. On y trouve une quantite immense de haras de jumens, qui vivent
abandonnees a elles-memes en pleine campagne, comme les animaux sauvages;
et telle est la raison qui fait qu'on en voit tant au marche de Segedin.

A Pest je traversai le Danube et entrai dans Bude sept jours apres mon
depart de Belgrade.

Bude, la principale ville de Hongrie, est sur une hauteur beaucoup plus
longue que large. Au levant elle a le Danube, au couchant un vallon, et au
midi un palais qui commande la porte de la ville, palais qu'a commence
l'empereur, et qui, quand on l'aura fini, sera grand et fort. De ce cote,
mais hors des murs, sont de tres beaux bains chauds. Il y en a encore au
levant, le long du Danube, mais qui ne valent pas les autres.

La ville est gouvernee par des Allemands, tant pour les objets de justice
et de commerce que pour ce qui regarde les differentes professions. On y
voit beaucoup de Juifs qui parlent bien Francais, et dont plusieurs sont de
ceux qu'on a chasses de France. J'y trouvai aussi un marchand d'Arras
appele Clays Davion; il faisoit partie d'un certain nombre de gens de
metier que l'empereur Sigismond avoit amenes de France. Clays travailloit
en haute-lice. [Footnote: Sigismond, dans son voyage en France, avoit ete a
portee d'y voir nos manufactures, et specialement celles de Flandre,
renommees des-lors par leurs tapisseries. Il avoit voulu en etablir de
pareilles dans sa capitale de Hongrie, et avoit engage des ouvriers de
differentes professions a l'y suivre.]

Les environs de Bude sont agreables, et le terroir est fertile en toutes
sortes de denrees, et specialement en vins blancs qui ont un peu d'ardeur:
ce qu'on attribue aux bains chauds du canton et au soufre sur lequel les
eaux coulent. A une lieue de la ville se trouve le corps de saint Paul,
hermite, qui s'est conserve tout entier.

Je retournai a Pest, ou je trouvai egalement six a huit familles Francaises
que l'empereur y avoit envoyees pour construire sur le Danube, et vis-a-vis
de son palais une grande tour. Son dessein etoit d'y mettre une chaine avec
laquelle il put fermer la riviere. On seroit tente de croire qu'il a voulu
en cela imiter la tour de Bourgogne qui est devant le chateau de l'Ecluse;
mais ici je ne crois pas que le projet soit executable: la riviere est trop
large. J'eus la curiosite d'aller visiter la tour. Elle avoit deja une
hauteur d'environ trois lances, et l'on voyoit a l'entour une grande
quantite de pierres taillees; mais tout etoit reste la, parce que les
premiers macons qui avoient commence l'ouvrage etoient morts, disoit-on, et
que ceux qui avoient survecu n'en savoient pas assez pour le continuer.

Pest a beaucoup de marchands de chevaux, et qui leur en demanderoit deux
mille bons les y trouveroit. Ils les vendent par ecurie composee de dix
chevaux, et chaque ecurie est de deux cents florins. J'en ai vu plusieurs
dont deux ou trois chevaux seuls valoient ce prix. Ils viennent la plupart
des montagnes de Transylvanie, qui bornent la Hongrie au levant. J'en
achetai un qui etoit grand coureur: ils le sont presque tous. Le pays leur
est bon par la quantite d'herbages qu'il produit; mais ils ont le defaut
d'etre un peu quinteux, et specialement mal aises a ferrer. J'en ai meme vu
qu'on etoit alors oblige d'abattre.

Les montagnes dont je viens de parler ont des mines d'or et de sel qui tous
les ans rapportent au roi chacune cent mille florins de Hongrie. Il avoit
abandonne celle d'or au seigneur de Prusse et au comte Mathico, a condition
que le premier garderoit la frontiere contre le Turc, et le second
Belgrade. La reine s'etoit reserve le revenu de celle du sel.

Ce sel est beau. Il se tire d'une roche et se taille en forme de pierre,
par morceaux d'un pied de long environ, carres, mais un peu convexes en
dessus. Qui les verroit dans un chariot les prendroit pour des pierres. On
le broie dans un mortier, et il en sort passablement blanc, mais plus fin
et meilleur que tous ceux que j'ai goutes ailleurs.

En traversant la Hongrie j'ai souvent rencontre des chariots qui portoient
six, sept ou huit personnes, et ou il n'y avoit qu'un cheval d'attele; car
leur coutume, quand ils veulent faire de grandes journees, est de n'en
mettre qu'un. Tous ont les roues de derriere beaucoup plus hautes que
celles de devant. Il en est de couverts a la maniere du pays, qui sont
tres-beaux et si legers qu'y compris les roues un homme, ce me semble, les
porteroit sons peine suspendus a son cou. Comme le pays est plat et
tres-uni, rien n'empeche le cheval de trotter toujours. C'est a raison de
cette egalite de terrain que, quand on y laboure, on fait des sillons d'une
telle longueur que c'est une merveille a voir.

Jusqu'a Pest je n'avois point eu de domestique; la je m'en donnai un, et
pris a mon service un de ces compagnons maccons [sic--KTH] Francais qui s'y
trouvoient. Il etoit de Brai-sur-Somme.

De retour a Bude j'allai, avec l'ambassadeur de Milan, saluer le grand
comte de Hongrie, titre qui repond a celui de lieutenant de l'empereur. Le
grand comte m'accueillit d'abord avec beaucoup de distinction, parce qu'a
mon habit il me prit pour Turc; mais quand il sut que j'etois chretien il
se refroidit un peu. On me dit que c'etoit un homme peu sur dans ses
paroles, et aux promesses duquel il ne falloit pas trop se fier. C'est un
peu la en general ce qu'on reproche aux Hongrois; et, quant a moi, j'avoue
que, d'apres l'idee que m'ont donnee d'eux ceux que j'ai hantes, je me
fierois moins a un Hongrois qu'a un Turc.

Le grand comte est un homme age. C'est lui, m'a-t-on dit, qui autrefois
arreta Sigismond, roi de Behaigne (Boheme) et de Hongrie, et depuis
empereur; c'est lui qui le mit en prison, et qui depuis l'en tira par
accommodement.

Son fils venoit d'epouser une belle dame Hongroise. Je le vis dans une
joute qui, a la maniere du pays, eut lieu sur de petits chevaux et avec des
selles basses. Les jouteurs etoient galamment habilles, et ils portoient
des lances fortes et courtes. Ce spectacle est tres-agreable. Quand les
deux champions se touchent il faut que tous deux, ou au moins l'un des deux
necessairement, tombent a terre. C'est la que l'on connoit surement ceux
qui savent se bien tenir en selle. [Footnote: En France, pour les tournois
et les joutes, ainsi que pour les batailles, les chevaliers montoient de
ces grands et fort chevaux qu'on appeloit palefrois. Leurs selles avoient
par-devant et par-derriere de hauts arcons qui, par les points d'appui
qu'ils leur fournissoient, leur donnoient bien plus de moyens de resister
au coup de lance que les petits chevaux et les selles basses des Hongrois;
et voila pourquoi notre auteur dit que c'est dans les joutes Hongroises
qu'on peut reconnoitre le cavalier qui sait bien se tenir en selle.]

Quand ils joutent a l'estrivee pour des verges d'or, tous les chevaux sont
de meme hauteur; toutes les selles sont pareilles et tirees au sort, et
l'on joute par couples toujours paires, un contre un. Si l'un des deux
adversaires tombe, le vainqueur est oblige de se retirer, et il ne joute
plus.

Jusqu'a Bude j'avois toujours accompagne l'ambassadeur de Milan; mais,
avant de quitter la ville, il me prevint qu'en route il se separeroit de
moi pour se rendre aupres du duc. D'apres cette annonce j'allai trouver mon
Artesien Clays Davion, qui me donna, pour Vienne en Autriche, une lettre de
recommendation adressee a un marchand de sa connoissance. Comme je m'etois
ouvert a lui, et que je n'avois cru devoir lui cacher ni mon etat et mon
nom, ni le pays d'ou je venois, et l'honneur que j'avois d'appartenir a
monseigneur le duc (duc de Bourgogne), il mit tout cela dans la lettre a
son ami, et je m'en trouvai bien.

De Bude je vins a Thiate, ville champetre ou le roi se tient volontiers, me
dit-on; puis, a Janiz, en Allemand Jane, ville sur le Danube. Je passai
ensuite devant une autre qui est formee par une ile du fleuve, et qui avoit
ete donnee par l'empereur a l'un des gens de monseigneur de Bourgogne, que
je crois etre messire Renier Pot. Je passai par celle de Brut, situee sur
une riviere qui separe le royaume de Hongrie d'avec le duche d'Autriche. La
riviere coule a travers un marais ou l'on a construit une chaussee longue
et etroite. Ce lieu est un passage d'une grande importance; je suis meme
persuade qu'avec peu de monde on pourroit le defendre et le fermer du cote
de l'Autriche.

Deux lieues par-dela Brut l'ambassadeur de Milan se separa de moi: il se
rendit vers le duc son maitre, et moi a Vienne en Autriche, ou j'arrivai
apres cinq jours de marche.

Entre dans la ville, je ne trouvai d'abord personne qui voulut me loger,
parce qu'on me prenoit pour un Turc. Enfin quelqu'un, par aventure,
m'enseigna une hotellerie ou l'on consentit a me recevoir. Heureusement
pour moi le domestique que j'avois pris a Pest savoit le Hongrois et le
haut Allemand, et il demanda qu'on fit venir le marchand pour qui j'avois
une lettre. On alla le chercher. Il vint, et non seulement il m'offrit tous
ces services, mais il alla instruire monseigneur le duc Aubert, [Footnote:
Albert II, duc d'Autriche, depuis empereur, a la mort de Sigismond.]
cousin-germain de mondit seigneur qui aussitot depecha vers moi un
poursuivant, [Footnote: Poursuivant d'armes, sorte de heraut en usage dans
les cours des princes.] et peu apres messire Albrech de Potardof.

II n'y avoit pas encore deux heures que j'etois arrive quand je vis messire
Albrech descendre de cheval a la porte de mon logis, et me demander. Je me
crus perdu. Peu avant mon depart pour les saints lieux, moi et quelques
autres nous l'avions arrete entre Flandres et Brabant, parce que nous
l'avions cru sujet de Phederich d'Autriche, [Sidenote: Frederic, duc
d'Autriche, empereur apres Albert II.] qui avoit defie mondit seigneur; et
je ne doutai pas qu'il ne vint m'arreter a mon tour, et peut-etre faire pis
encore.

Il me dit que mondit seigneur d'Autriche, instruit que j'etois serviteur de
mondit seigneur le duc, l'envoyoit vers moi pour m'offrir tout ce qui
dependoit de lui; qu'il m'invitoit a le demander aussi hardiment que je le
ferois envers mondit seigneur, et qu'il vouloit traiter ses serviteurs
comme il feroit les siens meme. Messire Albrech parla ensuite en son nom:
il me presenta de l'argent, m'offrit des chevaux et autres objets; en un
mot il me rendit le bien pour le mal, quoiqu'apres tout cependant je
n'eusse fait envers lui que ce que l'honneur me permettoit et m'ordonnoit
meme de faire.

Deux jours apres, mondit seigneur d'Autriche m'envoya dire qu'il vouloit me
parler; et ce fut encore messire Albrech qui vint me prendre pour lui faire
la reverence. Je me presentai a lui au moment ou il sortoit de la messe,
accompagne de huit ou dix vieux chevaliers notables. A peine l'eus-je salue
qu'il me prit la main sans vouloir permetter que je lui parlasse a genoux.
Il me fit beaucoup de questions, et particulierement sur mondit seigneur;
ce qui me donna lieu de presumer qu'il l'aimoit tendrement.

C'etoit un homme d'assez grande taille et brun; mais doux et affable,
vaillant et liberal, et qui passoit pour avoir toutes sortes de bonnes
qualites. Parmi les personnes qui l'accompagnoient etoient quelques
seigneurs de Boheme que les Houls en avoient chasses parce qu'ils ne
vouloient pas etre de leur religion. [Footnote: Houls, Hussites, disciples
de Jean Hus (qu'on prononcoit Hous), sectaires fanatiques qui dans ce
siecle inonderent la Boheme de sang, et se rendirent redoutables par leurs
armes.]

Il se presenta egalement a lui un grand baron de ce pays, appele Paanepot,
qui, avec quelques autres personnes, venoit, au nom des Hussites, traiter
avec lui et demander la paix. Ceux-ci se proposoient d'aller au secours du
roi de Pologne contre les seigneurs de Prusse, et ils lui faisoient de
grandes offres, m'a-t-on dit, s'il vouloit les seconder; mais il repondit,
m'a-t-on encore ajoute, que s'ils ne se soumettoient a la loi de
Jesus-Christ, jamais, tant qu'il seroit en vie, il ne feroit avec eux ni
paix ni treve.

En effet, au temps ou il leur parloit les avoit deja battus deux fois. Il
avoit repris sur eux toute la Morane (Moravie), et, par sa conduite et sa
vaillance, s'etoit agrandi a leurs depens.

Au sortir de son audience je fus conduite a celle de la duchesse, grande et
belle femme, fille de l'empereur, et par lui heritiere du royaume de
Hongrie et de Boheme, et des autres seigneuries qui en dependent. Elle
venoit tout recemment d'accoucher d'une fille; ce qui avoit occasionne des
fetes et des joutes d'autant plus courues, que jusque-la elle n'avoit point
eu d'enfans.

Le lendemain mondit seigneur d'Autriche m'envoya inviter a diner par
messire Albrech, et il me fit manger a sa table avec un seigneur Hongrois
et un autre Autrichien. Tous ses gens sont a gages, et personne ne mange
avec lui que quand on est en prevenu par son maitre d'hotel.

La table etoit carree. La coutume est qu'on n'y apporte qu'un plat a la
fois, et que celui qui s'en trouve le plus voisin en goute le premier. Cet
usage tient lieu d'essai. [Footnote: Chez les souverains on faisoit l'essai
des viandes a mesure qu'on les leur servoit, et il y avoit un officier
charge de cette fonction qui, dans l'origine, avoit ete une precaution
prise contre le poison.] On servit chair et poisson, et sur-tout beaucoup
de differentes viandes fort epicees, mais toujours plat a plat.

Apres le diner on me mena voir les danses chez madame la duchesse. Elle me
donna un chapeau de fil d'or et de soie, un anneau et un diamant pour
mettre sur ma tete, selon la coutume du pays. Il y avoit la beaucoup de
noblesse en hommes et en femmes; j'y vis des gens tres-aimables, et les
plus beaux cheveux qu'on puisse porter.

Quand j'eus ete la quelque temps, un gentilhomme nomme Payser, qui, bien
qu'il ne fut qu'ecuyer, [Footnote: Qui n'etoit pas encore chevalier.] etoit
chambellan et garde des joyaux de mondit seigneur d'Autriche, vint de sa
part me prendre pour me les montrer. Il me fit voir la couronne de Boheme,
qui a d'assez belles pierreries, et entr'autres un rubis, le plus
considerable que j'aie vu. Il m'a paru plus gros qu'une grosse datte; mais
il n'est point net, et offre quelques cavites dans le fond desquelles on
apercoit des taches noires.

De la ledit garde me mena voir les waguebonnes, [Footnote: Waguebonne,
sorte de chariot ou de tour ambulante pour les combats.] que mondit
seigneur avoit fait construire pour combattre les Bohemiens. Je n'en vis
aucun qui put contenir plus de vingt hommes; mais on me dit qu'il y en
avoit un qui en porteroit trois cents, et auquel il ne falloit pour le
trainer que dix-huit chevaux.

Je trouvai a la cour monseigneur de Valse, gentil chevalier, et le plus
grand seigneur de l'Autriche apres le duc; j'y vis messire Jacques
Trousset, joli chevalier de Zoave (Souabe): mais il y en avoit un autre,
nomme le Chant, echanson ne de l'Empire, qui, ayant perdu a la bataille de
Bar un sien frere et plusieurs de ses amis, et sachant que j'etois a
monseigneur le duc, me fit epier pour savoir le jour de mon depart et me
saisir en Baviere lorsque j'y passerois. Heureusement pour moi monseigneur
d'Autriche fut instruit de son projet. Il le congedia, et me fit rester a
Vienne plus que je ne comptois, pour attendre le depart de monseigneur de
Valse et de messire Jacques, avec lesquels je partis.

Pendant mon sejour j'y vis trois de ces joutes dont j'ai parle, a petits
chevaux et a selles basses. L'une eut lieu a la cour, et les deux autres
dans les rues; mais a celles-ci, plusieurs de ceux qui furent renverses
tomberent si lourdement qu'ils se blesserent avec danger.

Mondit seigneur d'Autriche me fit offrir en secret de l'argent. Je recus
les meme offres de messire Albert et de messire Robert Daurestof, grand
seigneur du pays, lequel, l'annee d'auparavant, etoit alle en Flandre
deguise, et y avoit vu mondit seigneur le duc, dont il disoit beaucoup de
bien. Enfin j'en recus de tresvives d'un poursuivant Breton-bretonnant
(Bas-Breton) nomme Toutseul, qui, apres avoir ete au service de l'amiral
d'Espagne, etoit a celui de mondit seigneur d'Autriche. Ce Breton venoit
tous les jours me chercher pour aller a la messe, et il m'accompagnoit
par-tout ou je voulois aller. Persuade que j'avois du depenser en route
tout ce que j'avois d'argent, il vint, peu avant mon depart, m'en presenter
cinquante marcs qu'il avoit en emaux. Il insista beaucoup pour que je les
vendisse a mon profit; et comme je refusois egalement de recevoir et
d'emprunter, il me protesta que jamais personne n'en sauroit rien.

Vienne est une ville assez grande, bien fermee de bons fosses et de hauts
murs, et ou l'on trouve de riches marchands et des ouvriers de toute
profession. Au nord elle a le Danube qui baigne ses murs. Le pays aux
environs est agreable et bon, et c'est un lieu de plaisirs et d'amusemens.
Les habitans y sont mieux habilles qu'en Hongrie, quoiqu'ils portent tous
de gros pourpoints bien epais et bien larges.

En guerre, ils mettent par-dessus le pourpoint un bon haubergeon, un
glacon, [Footnote: Glacon ou glachon, sorte d'armure defensive. Les Suisses
estoient assez communement habillez de jacques, de pans, de haubergerie, de
glachons et de chapeaux de fer a la facon d'Allemagne. (Mat. de Coucy, p.
536.)

En Francais on appeloit glacon une sorte de toile fine qui sans doute etoit
glacee. Je soupconne que le glacon Allemand etoit une espece de cotte
d'armes faite de plusieurs doubles de toile piquee, comme nos gambisons.
Peut-etre aussi n'etoit-ce qu'une cuirasse.] un grand chapeau de fer et
d'autres harnois a la mode du pays.

Ils ont beaucoup de crennequiniers. C'est ainsi qu'en Autriche et en Boheme
on nomme ceux qu'en Hongrie on appelle archers. Leurs arcs sont semblables
a ceux des Turcs, quoiqu'ils ne soient ni si bons ni si forts; mais ils ne
les manient point aussi bien qu'eux. Les Hongrois tirent avec trois doigts,
et les Turcs avec le pouce et l'anneau.

Quand j'allai prendre conge de mondit seigneur d'Autriche et de madame, il
me recommanda lui-meme a mes deux compagnons de voyage, messire Jacques
Trousset et mondit seigneur de Walsce, qui alloit se rendre sur la
frontiere de Boheme ou il commandoit. Il me fit demander de nouveau si
j'avois besoin d'argent. Je lui repondis, comme je l'avois deja fait a ceux
qui m'en avoient offert, qu'a mon depart mondit seigneur le duc m'en avoit
si bien pourvu qu'il m'en restoit encore pour revenir aupres de lui; mais
je lui demandai un saufconduit, et il me l'accorda.

Le Danube, depuis Vienne jusqu'a trois journees pardela, a son cours dirige
vers le levant; depuis Bude et meme au-dessus, jusqu'a la pointe de
Belgrade, il coule au midi. La, entre la Hongrie et la Bulgarie, il reprend
sa direction au levant, et va, dit-on, se jeter dans la mer Noire a
Mont-Castre.

Je partis de Vienne dans la compagnie de mondit seigneur de Valse et de
messire Jacques Trousset. Le premier se rendit a Lints, aupres de son
epouse; la second dans sa terre.

Apres deux journees de marche nous arrivames a Saint-Polquin (Saint
Pelten), ou se font les meilleurs couteaux du pays. De la nous vinmes a
Melich (Maeleh) sur le Danube, ville ou l'on fabrique les meilleures
arbaletes, et qui a un tres-beau monastere de chartreux; puis a Valse, qui
appartient audit seigneur, et dont le chateau, construit sur une roche
elevee, domine le Danube. Lui-meme me montra les ornemens d'autel qu'a le
lieu. Jamais je n'en ai vu d'aussi riches en broderie et en perles. J'y vis
aussi des bateaux qui remontoient le Danube, tires par des chevaux.

Le lendemain de notre arrivee, un gentilhomme de Baviere vint saluer mondit
seigneur de Valse. Messire Jacques Trousset, averti de sa venue, annonca
qu'il alloit le faire pendre a une aubepine qui etoit dans le jardin.
Mondit seigneur accourut aussitot, et le pria de ne point lui faire chez
lui un pareil affront. S'il vient jusqu'a moi, repondit messire, il ne peut
l'echapper, et sera pendu. Ledit seigneur courut donc au devant du
gentilhomme; il lui fit un signe, et celui-ci se retira. La raison de cette
colere est que messire Jacques, ainsi que la plupart des gens qu'il avoit
avec lui, etoit de la secrete compagnie, et que le gentilhomme, qui en
etoit aussi, avoit meuse. [Footnote: Probablement il s'agit ici de
franc-maconnerie, et le Bavarois que Trousset vouloit faire pendre etoit un
faux frere qui avoit revele les mysteres de la compagnie secrete.]

De Valse nous allames a Oens (Ens), sur la riviere de ce nom; a Evresperch,
qui est sur le meme riviere, et du domaine de l'eveque de Passot (Passau);
puis a Lins (Lintz), tres-bonne ville, qui a un chateau sur le Danube, et
qui n'est pas eloignee de la frontiere de Boheme. Elle appartient a
monseigneur d'Autriche, et a pour gouverneur ledit seigneur de Valse.

J'y vis madame de Valse, tres-belle femme, du pays de Boheme, laquelle me
fit beaucoup d'accueil. Elle me donna un roussin d'un excellent trot, un
diamant pour mettre sur mes cheveux, a la mode d'Autriche, et un chapeau de
perles orne d'un anneau et d'un rubis. [Footnote: Ces chapeaux, qu'il ne
faut pas confondre avec les notres, n'etoient que des cercles, des
couronnes en cerceau.]

Mondit seigneur de Valse restant a Lintz avec son epouse, je partis dans la
compagnie de messire Jacques Trousset, et vins a Erfort, qui appartient au
comte de Chambourg. La finit l'Autriche, et depuis Vienne jusque-la nous
avions mis six journees. D'Erfort nous allames a Riet, ville de Baviere, et
qui est au duc Henri; a Prenne, sur la riviere de Sceine; a Bourchaze,
ville avec chateau sur la meme riviere, ou nous trouvames le duc; a
Mouldrouf, ou nous passames le Taing. Enfin, apres avoir traverse le pays
du duc Louis de Baviere, sans etre entres dans aucune de ses ville, nous
arrivames a Muneque (Munich), la plus jolie petite ville que j'aie jamais
vue, et qui appartient au duc Guillaume de Baviere.

A Lanchperch je quittai la Baviere pour entrer en Souabe, et passai par
Meindelahan (Mindelheim), qui est au duc; par Mamines (Memingen), ville
d'Empire, et de la a Walpourch, l'un des chateaux de messire Jacques. Il ne
s'y rendit que trois jours apres moi, parce qu'il vouloit aller visiter
dans le voisinage quelques-uns de ses amis; mais il donna ordre a ses gens
de me traiter comme ils le traiteroient lui-meme.

Quand il fut revenu nous partimes pour Ravespourch (Rawensburg), ville
d'Empire; de la a Martorf, a Mersporch (Mersbourg), ville de l'eveque de
Constance, sur le lac de ce nom. Le lac en cet endroit peut bien avoir en
largeur trois milles d'Italie. Je le traversai et vins a Constance, ou je
passai le Rhin, qui commence a prendre la son nom en sortant du lac.

C'est dans cette ville que se separa de moi messire Jacques Trousset. Ce
chevalier, l'un des plus aimable et des plus vaillans de l'Allemagne,
m'avoit fait l'honneur et le plaisir de m'accompagner jusque-la pour egard
pour mondit seigneur le duc; il m'eut meme escorte plus loin, sans un fait
d'armes auquel il s'etoit engage: mais il me donna pour le suppleer un
poursuivant, qu'il chargea de me conduire aussi loin que je l'exigerois.

Ce fait d'armes etoit une enterprise formee avec le seigneur de Valse. Tous
deux s'aiment comme freres, et il devoient jouter a fer de lance, avec
targe et chapeau de fer, selon l'usage du pays, treize contre treize, tous
amis et parens. Il est parfaitement muni d'armes pour joutes et batailles.
Lui-meme me les avoit montrees dans son chateau de Walporch. Je pris conge
de lui, et le quittai avec bien du regret.

De Constance je vins a Etran (Stein), ou je passai le Rhin; a Chaufouze
(Schaffouse), ville de l'empereur; a Vualscot (Waldshutt); a Laufemberg
(Lauffembourg); a Rinbel (Rhinfeld), toutes trois au duc Frederic
d'Autriche, et a Bale, autre ville de l'Empereur ou il avoir envoye comme
son lieutenant le duc Guillaume de Baviere, parce que le saint concile y
etoit assemble.

Le duc voulut me voir, ainsi que madame la duchesse son epouse. J'assistai
a une session du concile ou furent presens monseigneur le cardinal de
Saint-Ange, legat de notre saint pere la pape Eugene; sept autres
cardinaux, plusieurs patriarches, archeveques et eveques. J'y vis des gens
de mondit seigneur le duc, messire Guillebert de Lannoy, seigneur de
Villerval, son ambassadeur; maitre Jean Germain, et l'eveque de Chalons.
J'eus un entretien avec ledit legat, qui me fit beaucoup de questions sur
les pays que j'avois vus, et particulierement sur la Grece; il me parut
avoir fort a coeur la conquete de ce pays, et me recommanda de repeter a
mondit seigneur, touchant cette conquete, certaines choses que je lui avois
racontees.

A Bale je quittai mon poursuivant, qui retourna en Autriche; et moi, apres
avoir traverse la comte de Ferette, qui est au duc Frederic d'Autriche, et
passe par Montbeliart, qui est a la comtesse de ce nom, j'entrai dans la
comte de Bourgogne (la Franche-comte), qui appartient a monseigneur le duc,
et vins a Besancon.

Je le croyois en Flandre, et en consequence, voulant me rendre pres de lui
par les marches (frontieres) de Bar et de Lorraine, je pris la route de
Vesou; mais a Villeneuve j'appris qu'il etoit a l'entree de Bourgogne, et
qu'il avoit fait assieger Mussi-l'Eveque. Je me rendis donc par Aussonne a
Dijon, ou je trouvai monseigneur le chancelier de Bourgogne, avec qui
j'allai me presenter devant lui. Ses gens etoient au siege, et lui dans
l'abbaye de Poitiers.

Je parus en sa presence avec les memes habillemens que j'avois au sortir de
Damas, et j'y fis conduire le cheval que j'avois achete dans cette ville,
et qui venoit de m'amener en France. Mondit seigneur me recut avec beaucoup
de bonte. Je lui presentai mon cheval, mes habits, avec le koran et la vie
de Mahomet en Latin, que m'avoit donnes a Damas, le chapelain du consul de
Venise. Il les fit livrer a maitre Jean Germain pour les examiner; mais onc
depuis je n'en ai entendu parler. Ce maitre Jean etoit docteur en
theologie: il a ete eveque de Chalons-sur-Saone et chevalier de la toison.
[Footnote: Jean Germain, ne a Cluni, et par consequent sujet du duc de
Bourgogne, avoit plu, etant enfant, a la duchesse, qui l'envoya etudier
dans l'Universite de Paris, ou il se distingua. Le duc, dont il sut gagner
la faveur par la suite, le fit, en 1431, chancelier de son ordre de la
toison d'or (et non chevalier, comme le dit la Brocquiere). L'annee
suivante il le nomme a l'eveche de Nevers; l'envoya, l'an 1432, ambassadeur
a Rome, puis au concile de Bale, comme l'un de ses representans. En 1436 il
le transfera de l'eveche de Nevers a celui de Chalons-sur-Saone.

Ce que la Brocquiere dit de cet eveque annonce de l'humeur, et l'on concoit
que n'entendant point parler des deux manuscrits interessans qu'il avoit
apportes d'Asie, il devoit en avoir. Cependant Germain s'en occupa; mais ce
ne fut que pour travailler a les refuter. A sa mort, arrivee en 1461, il
laissa en manuscrit deux ouvrages dont on trouve des copies dans quelques
bibliotheques, l'un intitule, De conceptione beatae Mariae virginis, adversus
mahometanos et infideles, libri duo; l'autre, Adversus Alcoranum, libri
quinque.]

Je me suis peu etendu sur la description du pays depuis Vienne jusqu'ici,
parce qu'il est connu; quant aux autres que j'ai parcourus dans mon voyage,
si j'en publie la relation j'avertis ceux qui la liront que je l'ai
entreprise, non par ostentation et vanite, mais pour instruire et guider
les personnes qu'un meme desir conduiroit dans ces contrees, et pour obeir
a mon tres-redoute seigneur monseigneur le duc, qui me l'a ordonne. J'avois
rapporte un petit livret ou en route j'ecrivois toutes mes aventures quand
j'en avois le temps, et c'est d'apres ce memorial que je l'ai redigee. Si
elle n'est pas composee aussi bien que d'autres pourroient le faire, je
prie qu'on m'excuse.

       *       *       *       *       *

The description of a voyage made by certaine ships of Holland into the East
  Indies, with their aduentures and successe; together with the description
  of the countries, townes, and inhabitantes of the same: who set forth on
  the second of Aprill, 1595, and returned on the 14 of August, 1597.
  Translated out of Dutch into English, by W. P. [Footnote: London,
  imprinted by iohn wolfe, 1598.]

To the right worshipfull Sir Iames Scudamore, Knight.

Right worshipfull, this small treatie (written in Dutch, shewing a late
voyage performed by certain Hollanders to the islandes of Iaua, part of the
East Indies) falling into my handes, and in my iudgement deserving no lesse
commendation then those of our Countreymen, (as Captaine Raimonde in the
Penelope, Maister Foxcroft in the Marchant Royall, and M. Iames Lancaster
in the Edward Bonauenture, vnto the said East Indies, by the Cape de Bona
Sperance, in Anno 1591, as also M. Iohn Newbery, and Raphael Fich ouer land
through Siria from Aleppo vnto Ormus and Goa, and by the said Raphael Fitch
himselfe to Bengala, Malocca, Pegu, and other places in Anno 1583. as at
large appeareth in a booke written by M. RICHARD HACLUTE a Gentleman very
studious therein, and entituled the English voyages, I thought it not
vnconuenient to translate the same into our mother tongue, thereby to
procure more light and encouragement to such as are desirous to trauell
those Countries, for the common wealth and commoditie of this Realme and
themselues. And knowing that all men are not like affected, I was so bold
to shrowd it vnder your worships protection, as being assured of your good
disposition to the fauoring of trauell and trauellers, and whereby it hath
pleased God to aduance you to that honourable title, which at this present
you beare, and so not fitter for the protection of any then your selfe: and
as a poore friend wishing all happines and prosperity in all your valiant
actions. Which if it please your worshippe to like and accept, it may
procure the proceeding in a more large and ample discourse of an East
Indian voyage, lately performed and set forth by one Iohn Hughen of
Linschoten, to your further delight. Wherewith crauing your fauor, and
beseeching God to blesse your worship, with my good Ladie your wife, I most
humbly take my leaue:

This 16. of Ianuarie.

1597.

Your Worships to commaunde.

W. PHILLIP.


To the Bayliefes, Burghemaisters, and Counsell of the town of Middelborgh
  in Zeelande.

It may well bee thought (Right-worshipfull) as many learned men are of
opinion, that the actions and aduentures of the ancients long since done,
and performed, haue beene set forth with more show of wonder and
strangenesse then they in truth deserued: the reason as I think was,
because that in those daies there were many learned and wise men, who in
their writings sought by all meanes they could to excell each other,
touching the description of Countries and nations: And againe to the
contrarie, for want of good Historiographers and writers, many famous actes
and trauels of diuers nations and Countries lie hidden, and in a manner
buried vnder ground, as wholly forgotten and vnknowne, vnlesse it were such
as the Grecians and Romanes for their owne glories and aduantages thought
good to declare. But to come to the matter of voyages by sea, it is euident
to all the world, what voyage Iason with certaine yong Grecian Princes made
to Colchos in the Oriental Countries to winne the golden Fleece, as also
the trauels by Hercules performed into Libia in the West partes, to winne
the Aurea Mala, or golden apples of Hesperides, which notwithstanding
neither for length, daunger, nor profite, are any thing comparable to the
nauigations and voyages, that of late within the space of one hundreth
years haue been performed and made into the East and West Indies, whereby
in a manner there is not one hauen on the sea coast, nor any point of land
in the whole world, but hath in time beene sought and founde out. I will
not at this present dispute or make an argument, whether the Countries and
nations of late yeares found out and discouered, were knowne to the
auncients, but this is most certaine, that not any strange worke or
aduenture was, or euer shall be performed, but by the speciall grace,
fauour and mightie hand of God, and that such are worthy perpetual memory,
as with noble minds haue sought to effect, and be the first enterprisers
thereof, and with most valiant courages and wisedomes, haue performed such
long and dangerous voyages into the East and West Indies, as also such
Kinges and Princes, as with their Princely liberalities haue imployed their
treasures, shippes, men and munitions to the furtherance and performance of
so worthy actes, which notwithstanding in the end turned to their great
aduancementes and inriching with great treasures, which by those meanes
they haue drawn, and caused in great aboundance to be brought from thence,
in such manner, that the King of Spaine nowe liuing, (hauing both the
Indies in his possession, and reaping the abundant treasures which yearly
are brought out of those countries) hath not only (although couertly)
sought all the means he could to bring all Christendome vnder his dominion,
but also (that which no King or country whatsoeuer although of greater
might then he hath euer done) hee is not ashamed to vse this posie, Nec
spe, nec metu. And although the first founders and discouerers of those
Countries haue alwayes sought to hinder and intercept other nations from
hauing any part of their glorie, yet hereby all nations, and indifferent
persons may well know and perceiue the speciall policie, and valour of
these vnited Prouinces, in trauelling into both the Indies, in the faces,
and to the great grief of their many and mightie enemies. Whereby it is to
be hoped, that if they continue in their enterprises begun, they will not
onely draw the most part of the Indian treasures into these Countries, but
thereby disinherite and spoyle the Countrie of Spayne of her principall
reuenues, and treasures of marchandises and traffiques, which she
continually vseth and receyueth out of these countries, and out of Spayne
are sent into the Indies, and so put the King of Spaine himselfe in minde
of his foolish deuise which he vseth for a posie touching the new world,
which is, Non sufficit orbis, like a second Alexander magnus, desiring to
rule ouer all the world, as it is manifestly knowne. And because this
description is fallen into my handes, wherein is contayned the first voyage
of the Low-countrymen into the East Indies, with the aduentures happened
vnto them, set downe and iustified by such as were present in the voyage, I
thought it good to put it in print, with many pictures and cardes, whereby
the reader may the easilier perceyue and discerne, the natures, apparels,
and fashions of those Countries and people, as also the manner of their
shippes, together with the fruitfulnesse and great aboundance of the same,
hoping that this my labour will not onely be acceptable vnto all Marchants
and Saylers, which hereafter meane to traffique into those Countries, but
also pleasant and profitable to all such as are desirous to looke into so
newe and strange things, which neuer heretofore were knowne vnto our
nation. And againe for that all histories haue their particular commoditie,
(specially such as are collected and gathered together) not by common
report, from the first, seconde, or thirde man, but by such as haue seene
and beene present in the actions, and that are liuing to iustifie and
verifie the same: And although eloquence and words well placed in shewing a
history, are great ornamentes and beautifyinges to the same, yet such
reports and declarations are much more worthy credite, and commendabler for
the benefit of the commonwealth, which are not set down or disciphered by
subtill eloquence, but showne and performed by simple plaine men, such as
by copiousnesse of wordes, or subtiltie do not alter or chaunge the matter
from the truth thereof, which at this day is a common and notorious fault
in many Historiographers: And thinking with myselfe to whome I were best to
dedicate the same, I found it not fitter for any then for the right
worshipfull Gouernours of this famous Towne of Middelborgh, wherein for the
space of 19 yeares I haue peaceably continued, specially because your
worships do not onely deale with great store of shipping, and matter
belonging to nauigation, but are also well pleased to heare, and great
furtherers to aduance both shipping and traffiques, wherein consisteth not
onely the welfare of all marchants, inhabitants, and cittizens of this
famous City, but also of all the commonwealth of the vnited Prouinces,
hoping your worships wil not onely accept this my labour, but protect and
warrantise the same against all men: Wherewith I beseech God to blesse you
with wisedome, and godly policie, to gouerne the Commonwealth: Middleborgh
this 19 of October 1597.

Your worships seruant to command

BERNARDT LANGHENEZ.


A briefe description of a voyage performed by certaine Hollanders, to and
  from the East Indies, with their aduentures and successe.

The ancient Historiographers and describers of the world haue much
commended, and at large with great prayse set downe the diuers and seuerall
voyages of many noble and valiant Captains (as of Alexander Magnus,
Seleucus, Antiochus, Patrocles, Onesecritus) into the East Indies, which
notwithstanding haue not set downe a great part of those coontries
[sic--KTH], as not being as then discouered, whereby it is thought and
iudged by some men, that India is the full third part of all the world,
because of the great Prouinces, mighty citties and famous Islands (full of
costly marchandises, and treasures from thence brought into all partes of
the worlde) that are therein: Wherein the auncient writers were very
curious, and yet not so much as men in our age: They had some knowledge
thereof, but altogether vncertaine, but we at this day are fully certified
therein, both touching the countreys, townes, streames and hauens, with the
trafiques therein vsed and frequented, whereby all the world, so farre
distant and seperated from those strange nations, are by trade of
marchandises vnited therevnto, and therby commonly knowne vnto them: The
Portingalles first began to enterprise the voyage, who by art of nauigation
(in our time much more experienced and greater then in times past, and
therefore easilier performed) discouered those wild Countries of India,
therein procuring great honour to their King, making his name famous and
bringing a speciall and great profite of all kindes of spices into their
Countrie, which thereby is spread throughout all the worlde, yet that
sufficed not, for that the Englishmen (not inferiour to any nation in the
world for arte of nauigation) haue likewise vndertaken the Indian voyage,
and by their said voyages into those Countries, made the same commonly
knowne vnto their Country, wherein Sir Frances Drake, and M. Candish are
chiefly to bee commended, who not onely sayled into the East Indies, but
also rounde about the world, with most prosperous voyages, by which their
voyages, ours haue beene furthered and set forwarde, for that the condition
of the Indies is, that the more it is sayled into, the more it is
discovered, by such as sayle the same, so strange a Countrey it is: So that
besides the famous voyages of the Countries aforesaid, in the ende certain
people came into Holland (a nation wel known) certifying them, that they
might easily prepare certaine shippes to sayle into the East Indies, there
to traffique and buy spyces etc. By sayling straight from Hollande, and
also from other countries bordering about it, with desire to see strange
and rich wares of other Countries, and that should not be brought vnto them
by strangers, but by their owne countrey men, which some men would esteeme
to be impossible, considering the long voyage and the daungers thereof,
together with the vnaccustomed saylinges and little knowledge thereof by
such as neuer sayled that way, and rather esteeme it madnesse, then any
point of wisedome, and folly rather then good consideration. But
notwithstanding wee haue seene foure ships make that voyage, who after many
dangers hauing performed their voyage, returned againe and haue brought
with them those wares, that would neuer haue beene thought coulde haue
beene brought into these countries by any Holland ships; but what shoulde I
herein most commende eyther the willingnesse and good performance of the
parties, or the happinesse of their voyage? whereof that I may giue the
reader some knowledge, I will shew what I haue hearde and beene informed
of, concerning the description of the Countries, customes, and manners of
the nations, by them in this voyage seene and discouered, which is as
followeth.

In the yeere of our Lord 1595. vpon the 10. day of the month of March,
there departed from Amsterdam three ships and a Pinnace to sayle into the
East Indies, set forth by diuers rich Marchantes: The first called
Mauritius, of the burthen of 400. tunnes, hauing in her sixe demie canon,
fourteene Culuerins, and other peeces, and 4. peeces to shoot stones, and
84. men: the Mayster Iohn Moleuate, the Factor Cornelius Houtman: The
second named Hollandia, of the burthen of 400. tunnes, having 85. men,
seuen brasse peeces, twelue peeces for stones, and 13. iron peeces, the
Mayster Iohn Dignums, the Factor Gerrit van Buiningen, the thirde called
Amsterdam, of the burthen of 200. tuns, wherein were 59. men, sixe brasse
peeces, ten iron peeces, and sixe peeces for stones, the Mayster Iohn
Iacobson Schellinger, the Factor Reginer van Hel: The fourth being a
Pinnace called the Doue, of the burthen of 50. tunnes, with twenty men, the
Mayster Simon Lambertson: [Sidenote: When and how the ships set saile.]
Which 4. ships vpon the 21. of the same moneth came vnto the Tassel, where
they stayed for the space of 12. daies to take in their lading, and the
seconde of Aprill following, they set saile with a North east winde and
following on their course the fourth of the same moneth they ['the' in
source text--KTH] passed the heades; The sixt they saw Heyssant, the 10. of
April they passed by the Barles of Lisbon: With an East and North East
wind, the 17. of Aprill they discouered two of the Islands of Canaries: The
19. Palm, and Pic, Los Romeros, and Fero: The 25. of Aprill they saw Bona
visita, the 16. they ankered vnder Isole de May: The 27. they set sayle
againe and held their course South Southeast. The 4. of May, we espied two
of the King of Spaines ships, that came from Lisbone, and went for the East
Indies, about 1000. or 1200. tunnes each ship, with whom we spake, and told
them that we were bound for the straights of Magellanes, but being better
of sayle then they wee got presently out of their sight. The 12. of May
being vnder fiue degrees on this side the Equinoctiall line, we espyed fiue
ships laden with Sugar, comming from the Island of S. Thomas, and sayled
for Lisbone, to whome we gaue certaine letters, which were safely deliuered
in Holland. [Sidenote: Their victuailes stunke and spoyled.] Departing from
them and keeping on our course, vpon the fourth of Iune we passed the
Equinoctial line, where the extreame heat of the ayre spoyled all our
victuailes: Our flesh and fishe stunke, our Bisket molded, our Beere
sowred, our water stunke, and our Butter became as thinne as Oyle, whereby
diuers of our men fell sicke, and many of them dyed; but after that we
learned what meat and drinke we should carrie with vs that would keepe
good. [Sidenote: They passed the sandes of Brasilia.] The 28 of Iune we
passed the sandes of Brasill, by the Portingalles called Abrolhos, which
are certaine places which men must looke warely vnto, otherwise they are
very dangerous.

These sandes lie vnder 18. degrees, and you must passe betweene the coast
of Guine and the sandes aforesaid, not going too neer eyther of them,
otherwise close by the Coast there are great calmes, thunders, raines and
lightnings, with great stormes, harde by the sands men are in daunger to be
cast away: and so sayling on their course, first East South East, then East
and East and by North. Vpon the seconde of Iuly wee passed Tropicus Cancri,
vnder 23. degrees, and 1/2. The 13. of the same Month, we espied many
blacke birdes. [Sidenote: Tokens of the Cape de bona Sperance.] The 19.
great numbers of white birdes, and the 20. a bird as bigge as a Swan,
whereof foure or fiue together is a good signe of being neere the Cape de
bona Sperance. These birdes are alwaies about the said Cape, and are good
signes of being before it.

The second of August we saw the land of the Cape de bona Sperance, and the
fourth of the same Month we entered into a hauen called Agne Sambras, where
wee ankered, and found good depth at 8. or 9. fadome water, sandy ground.

The 5. day we went on shore to gather fruite, therewith to refresh our
sicke men, that were thirty to 33 in one shippe. In this bay lyeth a smal
Islande, wherern are many birdes called Pyncuius and sea Wolues that are
taken with mens handes: we went into the countrey and spake with the
inhabitants, who brought diuers fresh victuailes aborde our shippes, for a
knife or small peece of Iron, etc. giuing vs an Oxe, or a sheepe etc. The
sheepe in those Countries haue great tayles, and are fat and delicate.
Their ozen [sic--KTH] are indifferent good, hauing lumps of flesh vpon
their backes, and are as fat as any of our good brisket beefe: the
inhabitantes are of small stature, well ioynted and boned, they goe naked,
couering their members with Foxes and other beastes tayles: they seeme
cruell, yet with vs they vsed all kind of friendship, but are very beastly
and stinking, in such sort, that you may smell them in the wind at the
least of a fadome from you: They are apparelled with beastes skinnes made
fast about their neckes: some of them, being of the better sort, had their
mantles cut and raysed checkerwise, which is a great ornament with them:
They eate raw flesh, as it is new killed, and the entrailes of beastes
without washing or making cleane, gnawing it like dogs, vnder their feet
they tye peeces of beastes skinnes, in steed of shooes, that they trauel in
the hard wayes: We could not see their habitations, for wee saw no houses
they had, neither could wee vnderstande them, for they speake very
strangely, much like the children in our Countrey with their pipes, and
clocking like Turkey Cockes: At the first wee saw about thirtie of them,
with weapons like pikes, with broade heades of Iron, about their armes they
ware ringes of Elpen bones: There wee coulde finde neyther Oringes nor
Lemons, which we purposely sought for.

[Sidenote: With what wind they sailed to S. Laurence.] The 11. of August we
hoysed anker, sayling towards the Island of S. Laurence, and the 22. of the
same month we had a contrary wind that blew North East: the 25. a West
winde, and so held our course East North East: The 28. there blew a South
East wind, and the 30. a South West winde, and our course lay North North
East to sayle to the Isle of S. Laurence. The first of September wee
discouered the point of the Islande of S. Laurence, vnder 16 degrees, and
the third day we saw the Island being very desirous to go on land, for that
many of our men were sicke, whereby wee coulde hardly rule our shippes, or
bring them farther without healing or refreshing of our men. [Sidenote:
They had great store of fish for 2 or 3 kniues.] The 9. of September Iohn
Schellinger sent out his boate to rowe to lande, where they founde three
Fishermen, of whome for two or three kniues they had great store of fishes.
The 13. we entered into a small Bay, but because wee founde no good anker
ground, as also being very foule we sayled out againe. The 14. we sayled
vnder a small Island about a mile or 2. great, by the Hollanders called
their Church yarde, or the dead Island, because many saylers dying in that
place, were buried in the African earth, and the 29. of the same Month died
Iohn Dignumsz Mayster of the Lyon of Holland, and was buried the next day
after.

There Iohn Peters of Delft Sayler of the Hollandia, and Koelken van
Maidenblick of the Amsterdam were set on shore vpon the Island of S.
Laurence, where they were left because they had committed certaine
notorious crimes.

Meane time the Pinnace was sent out to looke for fresh water, which hauing
found, the boat returned to bring vs newes, and therewith the fleete sayled
thither, and the 10. of October the shippes ankered before the Riuer, and
went on shore, where we found good prouision of all necessaries, the
inhabitants being very willing thereunto, bringing vs of al things that we
needed, where for a Pewter Spoone wee had an Oxe, or three sheepe.
[Sidenote: How the wilde men assailed them, and forced them to insconce
themselues.] The 11. of October we went on shore with a boat full of sicke
men and the next day we were assayled by a company of wild men, against
whom our weapons little preuayled, for they hurt one of our men and tooke
all that we had from vs, whereby vpon the thirteenth of the same Month, wee
were forced to insconse our selues with pieces of wood and braunches of
trees, making Cabins within our Sconse, for that the 15. of October they
came againe, but then we tooke one, and slew another of them. The 19. of
Nouember our Pilot Claes Ianson was intrapped and murthered by the wild
people, although we vsed all the means we could to helpe him, but they
feared no weapons, about ten or twelue dayes after we tooke one of them
that paide for his death. [Sidenote: The maner and custome of the wild
people.] The first of December our men hauing for the most part recouered
their healthes, were all carryed aborde the ships: in that parte of
Madagascar the people are of good condition, and goe naked, onely with a
Cotton cloth before their priuie members, and some from their breasts
downward: Their ornaments are Copper ringes about their armes, but Tin
rings are more esteemed with them, and therefore tinne with them is good
marchaundise. Their Oxen haue great lumpes of fat vpon their backes: Their
sheepes tayles way at the least twelue pound, being of an elle long, and
two and twentie inches thick. They gaue vs six of those sheepe for a tinne
Spoone: They dwel in cottages and liue very poorely: they feare the noyse
of a peece, for with one Caliuer you shall make an hundred of them runne
away: Wee coulde not perceyue any religion they had, but after wee were
informed that they helde the law of Mahomet, for the two boyes that wee
tooke from of the land, shewed vs their circumcision: There we found no
fruit of Tambaxiumes, but great numbers of Parrats, Medicats, and Turtle
Doues, whereof we killed and eat many. The second of December we burned our
sconse, and fourteene of our men going further into the Islande brought
certaine of the countreymen prisoners, and being abord our ships taught
them what they shoulde doe. The thirteenth of December wee hoysed anker,
minding to holde on our course for the Islands of Iaua, and for that by
reason of the pleasantnesse of the ayre we had in a manner all recouered
our healthes, we set our course East and by North, and East Northeast. The
nineteenth of the same Month wee were separated by foule weather, and the
22. with great ioy we met againe. The tenth of Ianuarie Vechter Willemson
dyed, being a verie honest man, and Pilot in Molenaers shippe, for whome we
were much grieued, and the same day we determined to put backe againe for
the Islande of S. Laurence, for as then wee began againe to haue a great
scouring among our men, and many of them fell sicke: [Sidenote: The wilde
men brought things aborde to comfort them.] But presently therevpon we
espied the Islande of Saint Mary, and the next day being arriued there,
some of the inhabitants came abord our shippes with a basket of Ryce, Sugar
canes, Citrons, Lemons, and Hens, whereof we were very glad, as being
phisicke for vs.

The 13. 14. 15. 16. and 17. dayes we were on land, where we bought Ryce,
Hens, Sugar-canes, Citrons and Lemons in great aboundance, and other kinde
of fruites to vs vnknowne, also good fish, and greene Ginger: There we
tooke a Fish, which thirteen men could hardly pull into our shippe, and
because the Island was little, and we had many men, wee entred into the Bay
of the firme land with our Pinnace, where for a string of Beades of small
value we had a tunne of Ryce: [Sidenote: The description of one of their
kings.] The King came abord our Pinnace to see it, and was as blacke as a
Deuill, with two hornes made fast vpon his heade, and all his body naked
like the rest of the countrey people.

This Island lyeth about a small mile from Madagascar, about 19 degrees
Southward from the Equinoctiall line (Madagascar or S. Laurence is an
Islande belonging to the Countrey of Africa, and lyeth Southwarde vnder 26
degrees, ending Northwarde vnder 11 degrees by the inhabitants it is called
Madagascar, and by the Portingalles the Islande of S. Laurence, because it
was discouered on S. Laurence day: The riches of this Island is great, it
aboundeth in Ryce, Honnie, Waxe, Cotton, Lemons, Cloues, etc. The
inhabitants are blacke and go naked, but the haire vpon their heades is not
so much curled as those of the Mosambique, and they are not ful so blacke.)

The 23. of Ianuary we ankered before a Riuer where likewise we had all kind
of necessaries, and after that we went to lie vnder a small Islande within
the same Bay.

[Sidenote: The wilde people came on borde their ships and seemed very
friendly.] The 25. Ianuarie there came some of the wild people aborde our
ships, making signes to haue vs go on land, which we did, and there we had
good Ryce and other fruits in great abundance. On the left side of the
entry of the Riuer lyeth one of their Townes, and on the right hand two
townes, where we had most of our trafique.

The 26. of Ianuarie wee had interpreters, whom we made to drink wine,
wherewith they were as drunk as beastes.


The manner and condition of the people inhabiting in the great Bay of
  Antogil, on this side the Equinoctiall line vnder 16 degrees, on the
  South side of the Island Madagascar.

It is a very great Bay, about ten mile broade, behind it lyeth a high
Island, and three small Islands: there is good harbour against all windes.
The Island is inhabited, and therein groweth all kindes of fruites, it hath
a great fall of water that commeth down out of the hilles, where we laded
all our water, and halfe a mile from thence within the land, there runneth
a great Riuer, wherein likewise there is much water to be had, when you
enter into the Riuer about a quarter of a mile inward on the left hand,
ther is a smal towne or village, not closed nor fortified, in it there is
about 200. houses, and on the right hand where the Riuer diuideth it selfe,
there is two other such Townes: They were all compassed with palles, and
the houses were placed about two foote aboue the ground, vpon foure or fiue
palles or stakes of wood, and all the vpper partes of reede and strawe.
[Sidenote: Why their houses stand so high aboue the earth.] The cause why
their houses are made so high from the ground is to auoide the danger of
venemous beastes that are there in great aboundance, as Serpents, Snakes,
Camelions, and other kindes of beastes. The people are very blacke, but
their hayre and beardes are not so much curled as the right Mores, nor
their noses nor lippes so great nor flat. They are subtill and strong
people, much addicted to drinking, for they will bee as drunke as Swine,
with a kind of drinke made of Honie and Ryce. [Sidenote: The maner of the
wilde men in that countrey.] They go naked, onely that about their midles
they weare a cloth made of the barke of a tree, drawne in small threedes:
they make and use very fine Mats to sitte vppon: They haue no great store
of weapons, for that halfe of them are vnprouided, and that they vse is a
speare of nine ten foote long with a great wooden Target: They are very
fearefull of our Caliuers, for 5. or sixe men with Caliuers will cause
great numbers of them to flie away: We taught them what our peeces ment for
wee perceyued that they knew them not, before they had proued them: at the
first they thought they coulde carry no further then their owne lengthes,
for they knew not what they were: Their Kinges ornamentes were ten or
twelue Copper Rings about his armes: if we had had such Ringes with vs, wee
might haue sold them at what prices wee woulde. They likewise vse beades of
Glasse, which they weare about their armes and neckes, by them esteemed for
great ornaments: for a boxe of beades of small value, we had an Oxe, or
three or foure Sheepe; rounde about this Bay are townes and villages, where
you may haue of all things to refresh your selues, Lemons and Citrons are
there greater and better then in Portingall: Likewise Oringes, Ryce,
Hennes, Goats, Honie, and many other sortes of fruites, and to conclude it
is the best Bay in all the world to refresh ships. Being on land we were
wel entertayned, and must of force drink with them of their drinke made of
Hony and Ryce: There we trafiqued with them, and had sufficient of euery
thing, but euery night we went aborde our shippes.

The third of February we had so great a storme, that most of our ankers
were lost, and we ran vpon the land in great daunger to cast our ships
away, but God holpe vs, for the storme ceased, and then we went to hoyse vp
our lost ankers, and so againe went to anker vnder the Island, glad that we
had so well escaped that daunger. The fift of February we went to seeke for
our boats, but the wild men had smitten them in peeces, and taken out the
nailes, thinking likewise that our shippes woulde haue beene cast away vpon
the shore, which they still expected: and when we came thither, they stood
vpon the shore with their weapons in hand and threw stones at vs, and we
perceyuing them in that minde, made towardes our shippes, for we desired
not to reuenge our selues, nor once to fight with them without commission
from our Generall, whom we certified thereof. The eyght of February we
rowed into the Riuer to buy cattle, and other things, but they were become
our enemies, threatning and casting stones at vs, wherevpbn we put out two
shalops to run a shore close to the land, and made our Caliuers and other
weapons ready.

Wherewith we shut at them, but they feared not our shot, for they knew not
what they ment, they thought likewise that the peeces coulde carrie no
further then they were long: but when they sawe eight or nine of their
fellowes dead, they fled into the woodes, and wee entering vpon the lande
set fire on their houses, whereof we burnt about twentie or thirtie. The 9.
of Februarie we sailed on the other side to buy cattle, and other
necessaries, but they seemed vnwilling to deale with vs, but we threatning
to burne their houses, they brought vs Cattle and fruites inough, with all
things else to our desires.

The 12. of Februarie wee hoised anker, and set sayle out of the great Bay
of Antongill, being well prouided of all necessaries, we put out with a
North wind, the Bay stretching Northeast and Southwest: The 2. of March we
had a West winde, our course being East and East and by North towards Iaua.
In March and Aprill about the Islande of Brandawe, we found that our
Compasses helde two Strikes to farre Northwarde, and we coulde not perceiue
the sands that are set downe in the Portingalles sea Cards, but we saw many
turnings of streames, and we were much troubled, with calmes, but with the
new Moone we had winde enough out of the West and North West. The 27. of
May we found the water abord our shippes to bee much lessened, and
therefore euery mans portion was but halfe as much as he was wont to haue;
so that each man was allowed but foure draughts euery day, which was but a
small quantitie. Whereby through the extreame heat we endured great thirst,
so that at that time a draught of water abord our ship was worth a Riall of
8. The first of Iuly we saw the Islande of Emgano, whereat we much
reioyced, because of the great thirst wee endured in our shippe, and when
wee made neerer to it, we perceyued it to be an Islande lying before the
straightes of Sonda, vnder 9. degrees on the South side of the line.

The sixt of Iuly we put somewhat nearer to the land, and there we saw sixe
or seuen canoes, lying vnder the shore but farre off, and durst not make
toward vs: in the end we manned out a shalop and rowed to land, but they
made from vs, and when our men were hard by the shore, there we saw about
40. or 50. of them standing vpon the shore with their bowes; wherewith our
men durst not land, for they seemed to be a cruell kind of people, and
altogether wild, for they went all naked, not hauing any thing before their
priuy members. They were of a reddish colour, but when our men saw no
aduantage they turned again vnto their shippes.

The seuenth of Iuly we saw the point of the land of Sumatra, which is a
verie high land descending downewarde with a long end.

The 11. of the same Month we were close vnder the land, where there lay an
Island, and there we ankered.

The 12. of Iuly in the morning we saw certaine ships, whereof one came vnto
vs, wee rowed vnto it with a shalop, and spake with it, but we could not
vnderstand them, but they shewed vs where we should haue water, which made
vs glad, that wee might once againe haue our bellies full of water: it
being almost foure Monthes that wee had not seene any land, nor taken in
any fresh victuailes. We sent our Pinace to the firme land of Sumatra,
there to seeke for some reliefe: for that where we lay there dwelt not any
man. [Sidenote: The maner of the Gouernor of Soumatras comming on bord.]
The 13. of July the Captain or principall ruler of Sumatra came abord our
ships to see them, which was done with great solemnitie, hee being
apparelled after the Turkish manner, with a wreath about his heade, and a
fearefull countenance, small eyes, great eye browes, and little beard, for
a man might tell all the haires vpon his chinne: he brought vs a present of
Betele, which are leaues which they continually chaw, and eat it with
chalke.

This Island of Sumatra or Taprobana (as it is saide) is the greatest of all
the Orientall Islandes, it is diuided from the firme land of Malacca by a
straight and dangerous sea, by reason of many Islandes and cliffes that are
within it: Out of this Island as some men are of opinion, Salomon had his
Gold wherewith he beautified the Temple, and his owne pallace, and then in
the Bible it should be named Orphir, for certainly Sumatra is rich of mynes
of Golde, Siluer, and Mettall, and the inhabitants thereof are very expert
in melting of brasse peeces: Therein is a fountaine of pure Balsame, the
Portingalles haue no fortresse therein, yet they traffique in certaine
hauens, specially in Pedir and Campar: There is also in this Island a place
called Manancabo, where they make poinyardes and daggers, by them calde
cryses, which are much esteemed in those Countries, and those of Malacca
and Iaua, hold them for their best weapons, and with them are very bold.

The same day our Pinnace returned againe vnto vs, bringing vs good news,
that wee were welcome vnto the Countrey people, and brought vs certaine
Indian Nuttes or Cocus, Melons, Cocombers, Onions, Garlicke, and a sample
of Peper and other spices, which liked vs well.

The fourteenth of June we laded in some fresh water.

Right ouer against Sumatra, on the South side of the Equinoctiall lyeth the
Islande of Iaua Maior, or great Iaua, and these two Islandes are deuided by
a straight commonly called the straight of Sunda, which lyeth between these
two Islands, bearing the name of the principall hauen of Iaua called Sunda:
In this channel there runneth a great streame, and course of narrow waters,
through this straight M. Condlish an Englishman passed with his ship,
comming out of the South sea from new Spaine. Iaua beginneth vnder seuen
degrees on the South side, and so stretcheth East and South 150. miles
long, it is very fruitfull, specially of Ryce, Catle Hogges, Sheepe,
Hennes, Onions, Garlike, Indian Nuttes, and all kinde of Spices, as Cloues,
Nutmegges, Mace, etc. Which they carrie to Malacca. The chiefe hauen in the
Islande is Sunda Calapa, there you have much Pepper, better then that of
India, or of Malabar, and there you may yearely lade 4. or 5000. Quintales
of Pepper Portingall waight, there likewise you haue great store of
frankencense, Camphora, and some Diamants: but they haue no other kinde of
money but a certaine peece called Caixa, as bigge as a Hollands Doibt, but
not so thicke, with a hole in the middle to hang it vpon a string, in which
manner they commonly hange hundrethes or thousandes together, and with them
they know how to make their accountes, which is two hundred Caixas make a
Sata, and fiue Satas make a thousand Caixas, which is as much as one
Crusado of Portingall, or three Carolus Gilderns, Flemish money: Pepper is
solde by the sacke, each sacke waying 45. Catten waight of China, each
Catte as much as 20. ounces Portingall waight, and each sacke is worth in
that Country at the least 5000. Caixas, and when it is highest at 6. or
7000. Caixas: Mace, Cloues, Nutmegs, white and blacke Beniamin, Camphora,
are sold by the Bhar, each barre waying 350. Catten of China: Mace that is
faire and good is commonly worth from 100. to 120. thousande Caixas: Good
Cloues accordingly, and foure Cloues called Bastan are worth 70. and 80.
thousand Caixas the Bhar: Nutmegs are alwaies worth 20. and 25 thousand
Caixas the Bhar: White and blacke Beniamin is worth 150. and 180. thousand
Caixas, and sometimes 200. thousand. The wares that are there desired and
exchanged for spices, are diuers sortes and colours of Cotton Linnen, which
come out of seuerall Prouinces; and if our Cambricke or fine Hollande were
carryed thither, it would peraduenture bee more esteemed then the Cotton
linnen of India.

The 15. of Iune there rowed a scute called a Prawen harde vnder the lande
by vs, wee called him, but not against his will, and shewed him siluer, and
other wares that liked him well, he bad vs make towards the strand, and
told vs of Bantam, saying that there we should haue al kinds of
Marchandise. Then we made signs vnto him that if he wold bring vs to
Bantam, we wold pay him for his labor, he asked vs 5. rialles of 8. and a
redcap, which we graunted vnto, and so one of the men in the scute came on
bord the Mauritius, and was our Pilot to Bantam, where we passed by many
Islandes.

The nineteenth of Iuly as wee sailed by a towne, many Portingalles borded
vs, and brought vs certaine Cocus and Hens to sell, which wee bought for
other wares.

The 22. of the same Month wee came before the towne of Bantam, within three
miles of it, and there ankered vnder an Island. The same day about euening
a scute of Portingals borded vs that were sent by the Gouernour to see what
ships we were, and when we shewed them that wee came thither to traficke
with them, they told vs, that there was the right Pepper country, and that
there we might haue our lading, that new Pepper was readie to be gathered,
and would be ripe within two Monthes after, which pleased vs well, for wee
had already beene fifteene Monthes and twelue daies vppon our voyage,
hauing endured great daungers, miseries and thirst, many of our men by
sicknesse being dead.

The 23. of Iune wee hoysed our ankers, and went close to the towne of
Bantam, and ankered harde by 4. small Islands, that lie right North from
the Towne: the same day the Sabander (who is there one of the greatest
officers next the King) came abord our shippes, asking vs what we would
haue, we said we were come to buy Pepper and other spyces, and that wee had
readie money, and certaine wares, whereof we shewed him some parte, which
hee liked well, saying that there wee might haue lading enough, shewing vs
great countenance.

The same day likewise there came a great number of scutes vnto our ships,
bringing all kinds of victuailes to sel, as Hennes, Egges, Cocus, Bonanas,
sugar canes, Cakes of Ryce baked, and many other thinges. The 24. of Iune
there came many men aborde our ships, bringing diuers wares to sell,
shewing vs great friendshippe, and as it seemed were very glad of our
arriuall there, telling vs that there we might haue Pepper enough, and new
Pepper within two Monthes after, and that Pepper was then as good cheap as
it had beene any time within ten yeares before, that wee might buy 5. or 6.
sackes for one Catti, (being about 20. Guilderns) which was ordinarily sold
but one sacke for that price: euery sacke wayeth 54. pounde Hollandes
waight, so that a pounde would be worth about a brasse penie Hollands
money.

The same day about noone the Sabander borded vs once againe, willing
Cornelis Houtman to go on land to speake with the Gouernour, for as then
there was no King, for about a Month before our arriuall there, the King
was gone with a great armie before the towne of Palimbam, which he thought
to take, and had almost gotten it, but there he was stricken with a great
Peece by a Renigado of the Portingalles, and so was slaine. His death was
much lamented by the straungers that dwelt at Bantam, for he was a good
king, being about 25. yeares of age: he left behind him foure wives,
whereof the eldest was not aboue 15. yeares of age, and a yong sonne of
three Monthes olde, that was to succeed him in his Kingdome; and they had
chosen a Protector or Gouernor to rule in his minoritie, whom they call
Kipate, and when the Kipate by the Sabandar sent to our Sargeant Maior to
come vnto him into the towne, he made him answer that he had no such
commission, but he desired the Gouernor first to come abord his ship, and
then he would go on shore, he likewise desired vs to go neerer to the towne
with our shippes.

And therevpon wee sayled somewhat neerer to the Island that lay next vnto
the towne, within halfe a mile from it, and there we ankered at 4 fadome
clay grounde, the towne lying South from vs, where wee had a good roade:
[Sidenote: The Gouernor of Bantam came abord their ships.] The next morning
the Gouernor sent aborde, and the men that came spake not onely good
Portingal, but other languages: he let our Sargeant Maior vnderstand that
he would come aborde, and desired that hee would with a shalop meet him
halfe the way, which was done about noone, and the Gouernour came aborde
with a great company of men, where we shewed him all our wares, which liked
him well, desiring vs to come on land, saying that we should be welcome,
promising vs much fauour, wherewith he returned to the land with certaine
rich presents that we gaue him. The 26. Barent Heijn Factor of the ship
called the Mauritius, died very sodainly.

The 27. and 28. great numbers of people borded our shippes bringing all
sortes of necessaries and victuails to sell.

[Sidenote: The Emperour came aborde and secretly conspired with the
Portingals against them.] The 29. there came an Emperour abord our shippe,
whose father in time past had beene Emperour of all Iaua, and commanded all
the Kings of Iaua, but this man because of his badde life was not much
accounted of: he spake good Portingall, for his mother was a Portingall
woman borne in Malacca: This Emperour had conspired against vs with the
Portingalles, but as then we knew it not.

The 30. of Iune Cornelis Houtman tooke a boate: and went into the towne,
and there spake with the Gouernour about certaine affaires, touching a
contract to bee made with him.

[Sidenote: A contract to buy and sell in the towne.] The first of Iuly
Houtman went again into the towne, and when he returned he brought with him
a certaine contract made and signed by the Gouernor himself, who most
willingly consented therevnto, and saide vnto him, Go now and buy what you
will, you haue free liberty; which done, the said Houtman with his men went
to see the towne, apparelled in the best manner they coulde, in veluet,
Satin, and silkes, with rapiers by their sides: The Captaine had a thing
borne ouer his head to keep him from the Sun, with a Trumpet before him,
which certaine times he caused to bee sounded: There the Emperour bad them
to a banket after the Indian manner: From thence we went to the
Portingalles, that made much account of Houtman, and made him a banket,
saying that they had seene him in Lisbone. The 2. of Iuly many Marchants
came abord, profering vs Pepper verie good cheape, but because we were
vnskilfull in the waight and other thinges wee tooke respite to answere
them.

The 3. of Iuly the Sabander came abord, and he was our great friend, for
that after we found it so, hee tolde vs what waight the sackes of Pepper
were, and what prises they bare, counselling vs to buy.

The 7. of Iuly the Gouernour sent vs a man secretly by night willing vs to
looke vnto our selues, and not to trust the Emperour, with whom all the
Marchantes conspired, and went to inuade our ships, and that hee ment to
rob vs, being very licentious and euill minded.

[Sidenote: The Emperour ment to fall vpon the ships to rob them.] The 8. of
Iuly the Emperour sent vnto our ships, and offered to make them a banket,
bidding all the Captaines, maisters, Pilots, Gentlemen, Officers, Trumpets,
and Gunners to come into the towne to him, and there he woulde make merrie
with them: This was done by the Portingalles aduise, thereby to haue all
the chiefe and principall men out of our ships, but we perceiued their
intent.

The 11. of Iuly the Emperour perceyuing that his deuise would not take
place; hee went from Bantam to Iacatra.

The 12. of Iuly wee had a house offered vs within the towne.

The 13. of the same month Reyner van Hel with eyght Gentlemen went into the
towne, taking certaine wares with him, of euery thing a little, and laid it
in the house appointed for the purpose: there to keep a ware house and to
sel our marchandise, and presently both Gentlemen and Marchants came
thither to buy and to sell vs Pepper.

The 15. and 16. many Gentlemen, Marchants, Chinars, and Arabians came to
out warehouse and into our ships, offering vs Pepper, but our Factor
offered them to little a price.

The 25. of Iuly the Gouernour came againe aborde our shippes, and there
looked vppon certaine of our wares, whereof hee bought some, and counselled
vs to buy Pepper: [Sidenote: The hatred of the Portingalles against them.]
About the same time the Portingalles made great sute vnto the Gouernour,
promising him many giftes to deny vs traffike, and to constraine vs to
depart from thence, saying we were no marchantes, but that we came to spie
the countrie, for they said that they had seene many Fleminges in Lisbone,
but none like vs: Among the Portingalles there was one that was borne in
Malacca, of the Portingalles race, his name was Pedro Truide, a man well
seene in trauayling, and one that had beene in all places of the world: He
was our good friend, and euery day came to talke with our Captaines,
saying, you do not well that you make no more haste to take in your lading,
you shall haue no better cheape wares, and withall shewed vs many other
things: wherevpon the Portingalles hated him, and not long after he was
murthered in his bed.

In August we did little, and tooke no great store of lading in seeking to
haue Pepper better cheape, which the Portingalles liked not well of, and
saide vnto the Gouernour, that we desired not to buy; which the Gouernour
began to hearken vnto, for they offered great summes of money that hee
shoulde not permit vs traffique, so that in the end hee commaunded that no
man shoulde carrie any Ryce aborde our shippes, whereby we were abashed,
and thereupon we sent vnto the Gouernour for our money which hee ought for
the wares hee had bought, which moued him.

The 26. of Iuly hee sent one of our Gentlemen with some of his men and nine
slaues abord our ships.


The situation of the towne of Bantam, the principall towne of traffique in
  the Island of Iaua, their strength and manner of building, with their
  traffique, what people come thither, what wares are there most desired,
  what nations bring them thither, or come to fetch them, together with
  their religion, customes and manner of house keeping.

Bantam lyeth in the Islande of Iaua maior, about 25. miles to sea ward
within the Isle, between Sumatra and Iaua: On both sides of the Towne there
runneth a Riuer, about 3 foot and a half deep, so that no shippes can enter
into them: The towne is compassed about with a Riuer: The towne is almost
as great in compasse as the olde towne of Amsterdam: The wals are made with
flankers: They haue great numbers of Peeces therein, but they knowe not how
to vse them, for they feare them much: all their Peeces are of brasse, and
they haue many brazen bases. Their walles are not aboue two foote thicke
made of brickes: euery flanker hath diuers mastes and peeces of wood, which
they vse when they are besieged by their enemies. The houses are made of
straw and reedes, standing vpon 4. woodden postes. The rich haue their
chambers all hanged with silken Curtins, or els with cotton linnen: Their
houses are most placed vnder Cocus trees, whereof the towne is full:
Without the walles are many houses, wherein strangers for the most part
haue their dwellinges. The towne hath three great market places, wherein
dayly there is markets holden, where you may buy all kindes of wares, and
where there commeth a great number of people, very strange to beholde:
Within the towne there is a great church or muske of wood, wherein they
obserue the law of Mahomet: Gentlemen and men of any qualitie haue their
owne muskes in their houses. The towne is not built with streetes, nor the
houses placed in order, but very foule lying full of filthy water, which
men must passe through, or leape ouer, for they haue no bridges: In the
towne there is great resort of diuers Countries and nations, as of Malacca,
Bengala, Malabar, Guihereters of Pegu, Sani Malicas, Banda, China and of
many Kingdomes that haue great traffique for Pepper, that groweth rounde
about Bantam, which in August and September is ripe, there you haue
nutmegs, out of the Island of Banda, and Cloues from Moluca, which the
Portingalles doe most buy vp: Wee bought Nutmegs there for a blank a pound:
All victuailes and necessaries are there in great aboundance to be had, as
Hennes, Hartes, Fish, and Ryce, and diuers kindes of fruites, as Auanas,
Cocus, Bonanas, Manges, Doroyens, Iacca, Pruna, Grapes, Oranges, Lemons,
Pomegarnets, Cocombers, Melons, Onions, Garlicke: but breade they haue
none, but in steade of it they eate Ryce: Beefe is there the dearest
victuaile, for an Oxe in that place is worth 7. 8. or 9. Rialles of 8. The
Chinars have the greatest and most trafficke in that towne. They come
thither in the Month of Ianuarie, with 8. or 9. great shippes, bringing all
sorts of Porseline, silks, Damaske, gold thread, Iron pannes, and Iauas
money called Caixas, whereof 12000 make a Ryall of eight: They are hanged
vpon stringes by two hundred together, for the which they both buy and sel
al kinds of marchandises, and there they lade Pepper which they carrie into
China: Without the towne they haue a great place wherein they commonly vse
to sell their wares, and there they dwell, and haue greater and better
houses then any are within the towne, all made of reedes, onely that in
euery house they haue a square place made of stone, wherein they put their
wares to keepe them from burning, as some riche men in the towne likewise
haue: The Chinars are very subtill and industrious people, and will refuse
no labour nor paynes to yearne money, there they make much Aqua vitae of
Ryce and Cocus, and trafficke much therewith, which the Iauars by night
come to buy, and drinke it secretly, for by Mahomets law it is forbidden
them. The Chinars liue there with free libertie: When they come to remaine
there for a yeare or more as they thinke good, they buy themselues a wife
or two, or more as they thinke good, and liue together like man and wife,
and when they meane to depart, they sell their wiues again, but if they
haue children they take them with them and so returne to China: They haue
no special religion, but pray vnto the Deuill, that he would not hurt them,
for they know that the Deuill is wicked, and that God is good, and hurteth
no man, therefore they thinke it needlesse to pray to God. They acknowledge
not the resurrection of the deade, but when a man dyeth they thinke he
neuer riseth again: In their houses they have great painted Deuils, before
the which they place wax candles, and sing vnto them, praying them not to
hurt them, and the more monstrous that their shapes be, the more they
honour them. These people liue very hardly and poorely within Bantam, for
there is not any work or labour how filthy soeuer it be, but they will do
it to get money, and when they haue gotten something they returne againe to
China. They are verie like Iewes in our country, for they neuer goe without
a paire of ballances, and all thinges is good wares with them, and are
ready to do any seruice. When we came first, before Bantam, they came euery
day in great companies into our shippes, and there set out their wares to
sel, as silkes, sowing silkes, and porselines, so that our vpper deckes
were full of pedlers, that wee could hardly walke vpon the hatches.


The manner, condition, custome, going, standing, apparell, housekeeping,
  wares, and behauiour of the Iauars in Bantam.

The Iauars and inhabitants of Bantam, are proude and obstinate, with a very
stately pace, they hold the law of Mahomet, which they haue not had aboue
35. yeares, for as yet there are many heathens among them that neuer were
made Mores: it is a very lying and theeuish kind of people, not in any sort
to bee trusted. Their apparell both of rich and poore is a cotton cloth,
and some of silke about their middles, which they tie about them with a
girdle, the vpper parte and from the knees downeward all naked: most of
them goe bareheaded, but the principallest of them haue a wreath or Turkish
roule about their heades, and some little cappes: Their priestes come out
of Meca in Arabia, and are yellowe of colour: [Sidenote: What weapons they
wear.] Their weapon is a poinyard, which they call Crisis: it is made with
hilts, and the handle is a Deuil cut out of wood or bone: the sheathes are
of wood: with them they are very bolde, and it is accounted for a great
shame with them if they haue not such a Dagger, both yong, old, rich and
poore, and yong children of fiue or sixe yeares olde, and when they go to
the warres they haue targets, and some long speares, but most of them such
poinyardes: The vse neyther great shotte nor caliuers when they go against
their enemies: for a small matter one King wil make warre against another.
When we came first before Bantam, we offered to make a contract with the
Gouernour and the counsell of the towns, that they should deliuer vs a
certaine quantitie of Pepper, and wee would goe with our shippes before
Palimbam, and helpe them to reuenge the death of their Kings vppon their
enemies, for (as they said) we might goe within a bowe shot of the towne
with our shippes, and the Towne is but of wood without walles, so that we
would presently haue beaten it downe to the ground. They offered vs some of
their principall Gouernours to be left for pledges in our shippes, and
their men woulde sayle in their fustes, such as shoulde go on land, and we
should doe nothing els but shoote out of our shippes, but our Captaines
would not do it, considering our small number of men. [Sidenote: How many
wiues they haue.] The Iauars take as many wiues as they will and are able
maintaine; but the common people haue but one, and some two married wiues,
and some 10. 20. and 30. concubines: For a small matter they will send
their married wiues home agayne vnto their fathers, when they haue layne
fiue or sixe dayes with them, saying they like them not, and so their
marriage is vndone, when they desire it.


The manner, custome, housholding, childbearing, sporting and cleanlinesse
  of the women in Bantam.

The women of the towne are well kept from such as are circumcised, whereof
the riche men haue many, and from other men or their friendes, for their
owne sonnes may not come into the house where the women are. They lie all
naked and chaw Betelle, and haue a slauish woman that continually
scratcheth their bodies, that is, such as are married women, but such as
are concubines are as waiting Gentlewomen, to the married women, when they
goe out to giue them more maiestie, and those that haue the greatest number
are of most estimation: The Concubines haue but fewe children, for the
married women poyson their children, and these concubines are bought and
solde: by their apparell a man can hardly discerne the riche from the
poore, for they goe all with a Cotton cloth about their bodies vp to their
breastes, and bounde about their middles with an other cloth, bare footed
and their heads vncouered, their hayre bound right vpon the top of their
heads in a heape, but when they are in their pride, they weare crownes vpon
their heads, whereof some of them are of pure golde, and ringes of golde,
and some of siluer about their armes, euery one according to their
abilitie. They are very curious about their bodyes, for they washe
themselues at the least fiue or sixe times euery day: they neuer ease
themselues nor haue the company of their husbandes, but they presently
leape into the water and wash their bodies, and therefore the water that
runneth through Bantam is very vnwholesome; for euery one washeth
themselues in it, as well pockie as other people, whereby wee lost some of
our men that drunke of the water: The women are verie idle, for they do
nothing all the day but lie downe; the poore slaues must doe all the
drudgerie, and the men sit all day vpon a mat, and chaw Betele, hauing ten
or twentie women about them, and when they make water, presenly one of the
women washeth their member, and so they sit playing all the day with their
women: Many of them haue slaues that play vppon instrumentes much like our
Shakebois, [Footnote: Musical instruments mentioned in Nichol's Coronation
of Anne Boleyn, p. 2. Probably Sackbuts.] they haue likewise great basons
whereon they strike, and therewith know how to make good musicke, whereat
the women daunce, not leaping much, but winding and drawing their bodies,
armes and shoulders, which they vse all night long, so that in the night
time they make a great noyse with basons and other instruments, and the man
he sitteth and looketh vpon them, euerie one of the women striuing to doe
her best that she may get her husbands fauour and her secreat pleasure.
[Sidenote: How pepper groweth in that countrey.] The Gentlemen, Citizens,
and marchantes haue their Gardens, and fieldes without the towne, and
slaues for the purpose to labour in them, and bring their maisters all
kindes of fruit, Rice and Hennes in the towne, also the Pepper that groweth
there, which runneth vp by another tree, as Hoppes with vs, and groweth in
long bunches like Grapes, so that there is at the least 200. graines in one
bunch: it is first greene, and after it becommeth blacke, and is there in
great aboundance, so that it is the right Pepper countrey; for when we came
thither they said vnto vs, Aqui ai tanta Pimienta, como terra, that is,
here is as much Pepper as earth, and so we found it, and yet we departed
from thence by our owne follies, without our lading of Pepper: Wee staide
for new Pepper, meane time the Portingalles sent their letters into euery
place seeking to hinder our trade: At the first we might haue sufficient,
for there we founde enough both to buy for money or to barter. We likewise
had money and wares sufficient: we might easily have had sixe or eight
hundred tunnes, as we were aduertised by some of the countrey, that we
should presently buy, for that the Portingalles sought by all the meanes
they could to hinder vs, as after it appeared; and therefore he that
thinketh to come soone enough, commeth oftentimes too late, and we vsed not
our time so well as it fell out.

[Sidenote: A letter sent by our men in the town that were kept prisoners.]
The 29. of August we had a letter sent vs by night from our men that were
in the towne, that lay in a maner as prisoners, to will vs to let our
pledge go a shore, otherwise they feared they shoulde hardly escape with
their liues, and great danger might fall vpon them: this pledge came aborde
with the 9. slaues.

The 30. of August we sent the pledge and the rest of our Iauars to land,
with promise that he would do the best he might to get our men leaue to
come aborde: about euening of the same day wee had newes from our men by
foure of our saylers that as then they were better vsed, saying they
thought they should come aborde when two shippes were gone that ment to
saile for Malacca, being laden with Nutmegs and other things.

The first of September, and the 2. 3. and 4. wee sent many letters to the
Gouernour and hee to vs, and likewise to our men that were in the towne,
being nine in number, all our best marchants and captains, hauing with them
about 6. or 7000. Guildernes in marchandise, and they againe to vs.

[Sidenote: They went nearer to the town.] The 5. of September when wee
perceyued that delayes were dangerous wee went close to the towne with all
our 4. shippes, and so neere that we had but two fadome muddie grounde, and
presently with two of our boates for our securitie wee set vppon three
Iauan shippes, whereof two were laden with fish and Cocus, wherein wee
founde a man of China, being of some account. The third ship was laden with
20. tunnes of Cloues, 6. tunnes of Pepper, and some Benioni, and Piementa
da Rauo, wherein we founde fiue Malabardes slaues to the Portingalles, whom
wee likewise tooke, and they were very willing to goe with vs, thereby to
bee eased of the slauery wherevnto the Portingals put them, and perceyuing
that the Portingalles went often to and from another shippe that lay not
farre from vs, we took our Pinace and made towardes it, and being harde by
it, the Portingals left it and set it on fire: This ship had the richest
wares in it as the Portingalles slaues tolde vs, for it was laden with
fiftie tunnes of Cloues, which were burnt in it.

The sixt and seuenth of September we hearde no newes, so that wee went
close to the Towne agayne, shooting with our great Peeces into it, slaying
diuers of the people (as after we were informed:) They likewise shot with
their Peeces agaynst vs, which the Portingalles did, for that the Iauars
haue little or no skill at all therein, and are very fearefull of them, and
although they had many peeces in the towne, yet they did vs no other hurt
then onely shot one of Molenares halfe masts in peeces.

[Sidenote: A skirmish betweene the Pinace and 24. boats.] The seuenth of
September wee had a skirmish, which was in this manner, we perceyuing a
Iauan ship vnder sayle, sent our Pinace with sixe and twentie men in her to
fetch it in, which the Iauan shippe perceyuing fledde behinde an Islande,
where our Pinace followed him so fast that shee fell a grounde, which the
townes men perceyuing, made them readie with foure and twentie boates full
of men, all armed after their manner, and set forwarde in good order, being
diuided in two companies, seuen on starre bord, and 17. on lardde bord of
the Pinace, in order like a halfe Moone, threatning vs with great speares,
they thought by reason of their great number of men that they had already
taken it, but it fell out otherwise, for they in the Pinace, perceyuing
them comming, shotte among them: and when they were harde by the Pinace,
shee gotte a flote, as they thought to take her, hauing cast out an anker
in good time, and thereby wounde themselues off the grounde, but for haste
they were forced to cutte their Cable, because they had not time enough to
winde it vppe, and with all they shotte one of their boates vnder water.
The Pinace drawing her boate after her, the Iauans presently leapt into it,
and cutte a sunder the roape that helde it, which they immediately stole
from vs, thrusting with their Speares in at the loope holes. Seuen of their
Boates being round about vs were so sharpely paide with the iron peeces,
stone peeces, and Caliuers, that the 17. others durst not come so neere vs:
I thinke there were at the least 100. of them that neuer carryed newes how
they sped in that skirmish, for euery boate had at the least 60. men in it,
and they were so thicke in them, that they could not help themselues, nor
did any thing els but shake their speares, and they shot but one base:
their arrowes hurt vs not, and so the Pinace returned agayne vnto our
shippes, sayling close before the towne, and shooting into it with her
ordinance: They shot out of the towne, but it hit her not, because they
shot with stone pellets, wherewith you cannot shoote so certainly as with
iron bullets.

The 8. 9. and 10. of September we had letters from our men out of Bantam,
by the which they willed vs not to shoot any more, for that the Gouernour
threatned to set them vpon stakes: Houtman wrote they were in good hope
that they shoulde bee put to raunsome, which wee counselled them to doe as
well as they might.

[Sidenote: The contents of the Gouernours letter.] The 11. of September we
had a letter from Houtman, and one from the Gouernour wherein hee wrote
that he would set our men at libertie, so we would be quiet, but if we
desired warre, he would once againe come and visite vs in another sort: wee
aunswered him that there he should find vs, that wordes were but wind, and
that he should set our men at a reasonable ransome, and thereof send us an
answere the next day.

The 12. and 13. of September wee had no answere out of the towne, and we
had want of water, and could get none thereabouts but that which came out
of the towne, for that the Gouernour had taken order that we should get no
water about the towne, so that we hoised ankers to go seeke some.

The 17. of September we came before 3. or 4. Islands which Molenare and
Shellenger sayled betweene, and for that the streame ranne so strong there,
they were forced to goe so nigh the shore, that they might almost leape on
lande, whereby they escaped great danger, but the other shippe and the
Pinace sayled about the Islands, and so met with the other two, and casting
forth their ankers, went on shore, where wee spake with men that saide they
would shew vs where wee shoulde haue water, so we would giue them two
Caliuers.

The 18. 19. 20. 23. and 24. we sayled to lade water, for it was hard to
get, and we were forced to keep good watch, which done hoysing ankers
againe, wee sayled towardes Bantam, holding our course Eastwarde.

The 27. we sayled Northeast towardes the lande of Iaua maior.

The 28. setting sayle agayne, we kept East Northeast along by the coast of
Iaua, and about noone because of the great streame that runneth in the
straight, wee were forced to anker, and the 30. day wee set sayle againe.

The first of October in the euening wee came to a great Islande, being
three miles from the towne, and there we ankered finding good clay ground.

The 2. of October wee had a letter from our men, how they were separated
one from the other, and kept by the Gentlemen of the towne, and their wares
parted among them.

The 3. 4. and 5. when wee were againe before the towne, we had other
letters, that by our comming they were better vsed, and hoped to bee set at
a reasonable ransome, and that they promised that one of our men should
come aborde, so he would returne againe into towne, that shoulde by worde
of mouth certifie vs what hope they were in, and the cause thereof, that we
might the better believe it.

[Sidenote: How the Iauars vsed our men being prisoners.] The 6. of October
in the night, one of our men came aborde, and shewed vs what had past, when
we shotte into the towne, how they were separated and kept close prisoners,
and cruelly threatned by the Iauars, whereby they still expected when they
should bee put to death, and howe they sought all the meanes they coulde to
make them to deny their faith, and become Mores, but they remayned
constant, and saide they woulde rather die, and that they had by force
shauen three of our men after the Morish manner, and how the Portingals had
sought all the meanes they coulde to buy them for slaues, offering money
for them that they might sende them to Malacca, how they were set at
libertie againe, and might goe where they woulde within the towne, and so
they hoped all would be well, and that they shoulde bee set at libertie for
some small ransome, and that the Gouernour asked them 3000. Rialles of 8.
but they hoped to bring him to 2000. whereat we much reioyced.

The 8. 9. and 10. of October we passed ouer to make some agreement with
them that we might be quiet.

[Sidenote: The maner of the ransome.] The 11. of October they agreede vppon
a ransome of 2000. Ryalles of eyght, and were content, that what goodes,
soeuer we had taken from them, wee shoulde keepe as our owne, and for our
goodes that they had stolen, and forcibly taken from our men within the
towne, they would keepe them, and so exchange one for the other, they
likewise were content to quit vs of all our debts, that we ought within the
towne eyther to the Gouernour or to any other man, and that from thence
forwarde we should be free, and traffique in the towne, both to buy and
sell when it pleased vs, and with their good willes as we had done, and
before we paide our money, the towne was to sende two men aborde our ships,
which done we were to pay the halfe of our ransome, which was 1000. Ryalles
of eyght; which being performed, their two men, and their other halfe of
our men were on both sides to bee deliuered and sette free, and without
contradiction it was performed.

The 12. and 13. this agreement being ended, diuers victuailers came aborde
our shippes to sell vs Hennes, Egges, and all other kind of victuailes.

The 14. we gaue certaine presentes in signe of good will, to such as had
shewed vs fauour when we were in contention with them.

The 15. 16. 17 and 18. some of our Factors went into the towne, where they
bought certaine Pepper, and brought it abord our ships.

[Sidenote: Why the Gouernour forbad us trafficke.] The 19. they went again
into the towne, and bought a greater quantitie at 5. sackes for one Catti,
minding in that sorte euery day to take in our lading, but it fell not out
as wee desired, for the Portingalles that coulde not brooke our company,
made such means to the Gouernour, that he gave commandment that we should
buy no more Pepper, before we had paide 1400. Rialles of 8. which he
challenged of vs because we had cast anker within his streame, wherevpon
our Marchantes went and agreed with him, which done wee thinking to buy
Pepper as we did before, the Gouernour againe commanded to the contrarie,
whereby we perceyued their deceipt, in that he wold not hold his word. The
countrymen would gladly haue solde their Pepper, as also the Chinars,
Arabians, Mahometitians, and secretly some Portingalles, but when we saw
wee could not get it out but with great daunger, wee thought it not
conuenient to buy: and when we spake vnto the Gouernour, touching the
holding of his worde, he made vs answere, that he had no bones in his
tongue, and that therefore he coulde not speake that which he ment not to
doe: and to say the truth most part of the Iauars are a kind of deceitfull
people, for whatsoeuer they say and presently performe, that shall you be
sure of and no more.

The 25. of October there came an Ambassador into Bantam sent from Malacca
to the Gouernour with a present of 10000. Rials of 8. desiring him to
forbid vs both his towne and streame, that wee might not traffique there.
Whereof wee were aduertised by the Sabander and other of our friendes
counselling our men to get them out of the towne, and not to returne
againe, otherwise they would be in daunger to be stayed againe, and we
hauing sent a man into the towne to saue him from being holden prisoner,
our host where we lay being on shore was forced to bring him out couered
with certaine mattes; so that vppon the 26. of the same month all our
trafficke and friendship with them ceased: but our hoast being our friende,
came secretly aborde our ships, and shewed vs that he and his company had
two ships lying before the towne, laden with Nutmegges and Mace that came
from Banda, for the which hee agreed with vs at a price, vpon condition
that we should seeme to take them by force; that thereby he might colour
his dealing with vs: [Sidenote: How they tooke two Iauan ships.] wherevpon
the first of Nouember we sailed close to the towne with all our ships, and
set vpon to two Iauan shippes, wherein we found to the number of 30.
slaues, that knew nothing of their maisters bargaine made with vs, so that
they began to resist vs, wherewith we shot among them, and presently slew
4. or 5. of them, the rest leapt ouer borde, and swamme to land, which done
we tooke the two ships, and put their lading into ours; [Sidenote: They
fought with a Portingall shippe.] The Portingalles shippe that brought
their Ambassadour, lay close vnder the shore, wherevnto we sent two of our
boats, but the Portingals that were in her shot so thicke with their peeces
vppon our men, that our boates were forced to leaue them with losse of one
of our men, but our shippes shot in such sorte with their ordinance vppon
the Portingall shippe, that they spoyled and brake it in peeces, wherein
their Captaine was slaine, and the victuailers that stil brought vs
victuailes to sell, told vs that with our peeces we had slain three or
foure men within the towne, and that the townes men began to make an armie
of ships to set vpon vs.

[Sidenote: They fought with a Iauan shippe.] The 2. of Nouember we espyed a
shippe that came towards Bantam, which we ioyned vnto with our boats, and
being neere vnto it, they spread their fights, which were of thicke mattes,
and began to defend themselues; our men shot among them with stone peeces
and Caliuers, and they defended themselues with great courage, hauing halfe
pikes wherewith they thrust at vs, and that serued likewise to blow arrows
out of them, for they were like trunkes, out of the which trunkes they shot
so great numbers of arrowes, that they fell as thick as hayle, and shot so
certaineiy, that therewith they hurt at the least eyght or nine of our men,
but the arrowes are thinne and light, so that their blaste coulde not make
them enter into the flesh aboue the thicknes of two fingers, onely the head
of the arrowe (which is made of reede, and loose stayeth in the flesh) when
we shot with our Caliuers they ranne behind their fightes, but when they
perceiued that their matted fights could not defende them, and that they
were killed through them, they entered into their boate, and by strength of
oares rowed from vs, leauing their shippe, wherein we founde two dead men,
and we slew three more of them as we rowed after their boat, so that in all
they lost fiue men, as we after heard, and that they were to the number of
40. which done, wee brought their shippe to ours, wherein we found good
store of Ryce and dryed fish.

The 6. of Nouember, perceyuing not any hope of more trafficke for vs with
those of Bantam, wee hoised anker and set sayle, setting our course
towardes the straight of Sunda.

[Sidenote: The marchants follow them with wares.] The seuenth of Nouember
wee came and ankered before a Riuer of freshe water, about sixe miles from
Bantam, where wee tooke in our prouision of water: thither certaine
Merchants followed vs with Porseline, telling vs that they were sory for
our departure, and that they longed for our returne againe.

The thirteenth of Nouember we set sayle, and about euening wee came before
Iacatra, in time past called Sunda Calapa, which hath beene a rich Towne of
marchandise, but vppon some occasions and by reason of their hard vsage the
Marchants had withdrauen themselues from thence, therefore at this present
there is little or nothing to doe. Iohn Hughen in his booke saith this to
be the principal towne of trafficke; but that is long sithence, for now
there is not any trade of marchandise.

The fourteenth of Nouember wee sent two of our men into the towne, hauing
some of theirs in pawne, who tolde vs that many of the inhabitants were
gone out of the towne with all their goodes, being in great feare of our
peeces, and there wee had great store of victuailes, and much more then wee
required brought abord our ships.

The 18. wee set saile from Iacatra, and being about two miles from the
towne, our shippe called Amsterdam fell vppon a cliffe, but it got offe
again without any hurt, and therewith wee presently made towardes the
straight.

The 2. of December we passed by 3. townes which we might easily perceiue,
we likewise passed by Tubam, and ankered vnder Sidaya. The 5. of December
there came men out of the towne, and desired vs to stay, saying that there
we might haue Cloues and Nutmegs as many as we woulde, bringing certaine
banketting stuffe (as a present from their king) vnto Schelengers ship,
because it lay nearest to the land, and they came most abord it.

The 4. of December they came again into Schellengers ship, bringing
certaine presentes with them, and among the rest a certayne birde that
coulde swallowe fyer, which is a very strange fowle, and was brought aliue
to Amsterdam, which after was giuen to the states of Hollande lying in the
Hage, and some good fruites, willing vs to sende a man on shore, to see
their spices, whereof they said they had great store: wherevpon we sent a
man out of the Amsterdam, and with him an interpreter, one of the
Portingalles slaues, they leauing three or foure of their men aborde our
shippes, for pawnes till his returne: when our men came to lande hee was
well vsed, and there they shewed him fortie or fiflie bals of Cloues; which
done they brought him before the King, that promised him great fauor, and
told him that the next day he wold himselfe come abord our ships, and deale
with our Captaines, and with that he let our man depart.

[Sidenote: How the Indians betrayed them.] The 5. of December we expected
the Kings comming aborde, putting out all our flagges and streamers, and
about noone there came 8. or 9. indifferent great shippes full of men from
off the shore, wherein wee thought the King to bee, but when they were
almost at vs, they diuided themselues, three of them rowing to Shellengers
ship, and when they borded him, they thinking the King had been there,
Reymer van Hel as Factor and the Maister came forth to receyue him and the
Iauars entering all at once, Reymer van Hel said, What will all these
people do aborde the shippe, for there was at the least two hundred men,
who all at one time drewe out their poinyardes, and stabbed our men that
neuer suspected them, so that presently they had slaine twelue of the
shippe, and two sore wounded, that boldly withstoode them: the rest of our
men being vnder hatches presently tooke their pikes, and thrust so fast out
at the grates, that the Iauars woulde haue forced the middle part of the
ship, wherein was two entries, but our men standing at them with their
swordes in hand draue them out, not ceasing still to thrust vp with their
pikes, meane time they kindled fier, lighted their matches, and shot off
their stone peeces that lay aboue the hatches, wherwith they began
presently to flie, most of them leaping ouer bord, and swam to their two
boates, that lay harde by our shippes, whereof one with a great peece was
presently stricken in peece: The rest of our shipps hearing vs shoote in
that manner, entered into their boats, and made towardes them, rowing harde
to the three Indian fustes, wherein were at the least 100. men, and shotte
among them with their peeces, wherewith they leapt into the water, euery
man swimming to shore, and we with two boates after them, hewing and
killing them as our deadly enemies, who vnder pretence of friendshippe
sought to murther vs, and wee handled them in such sort, that of two
hundred men there got not aboue thirty of them to lande, the rest of their
fustes lay farre off and beheld the fight: Three of their fustes thought to
rowe to the Pinnace to take her, which they might easily haue done, as
hauing not aboue 7. or 8. men in her, being busie to set vp a newe maste,
but when they perceyued their men to bee so handeled in the Amsterdam, and
that they leapt ouer horde, they turned backe againe, and in great haste
rowed to land, so that at that time they got not much by the bargaine, and
no small griefe to vs, for there wee lost 12. men, that were all stabbed
with poinyards, [Sidenote: The names of the men that were stabbed.] their
names were Iohn Iacobson Schellenger, maister of the ship, Reymer Van Hel
Factor, Gielis Gieleson Gentleman, Barent Bonteboter, Arent Cornedrager,
Cornelis van Alcmuer, Simon Ianson, Wiltschut Ioos the Carpenter, Adrian de
Metselar, one of the Portingalles slaues, and two boyes, whereof one was
but twelue yeares olde, whereby wee perceyued them to be a kinde of cruell
people, for they had giuen the little boy and all the rest of our men at
the least 12 stabbes a peece after they were dead.

The same day about euening we hoysed ankers, and set saile, hauing manned
the Amsterdam with men out of our other shippes, and so helde our course
Eastward.

The 6. of December we came to a great Island called Madura, where we
ankered, and in the evening two of their men came aborde our shippes, with
message from their Gouernour, saying that we were welcome, desiring vs to
stay there, for he would trafficke with vs, and sell vs some Pepper, as
they saide, but wee belieued them not.

The 7. of December there came another boat abord, bringing certaine
fruites, saying that the next day their Gouernour would come to see our
shippes.

The 8. there came a great fuste and three smal boats, from off the land all
full of men, saying their Gouernour was among them: we willed them not to
goe to the Amsterdam, but to the Mauritius, but they woulde not, but made
to the Amsterdam, thinking because there had beene so many murthered in
her, there was not many men aborde her at that time, and when they were
within a pykes length of her, (although they were directed to the other
shippes) they remembering their late mischance, shotte off three or foure
stone Peeces full laden, wherewith they slew and hurt many of the Indians,
wherevpon they presently leapt ouer board, and wee with our boates,
followed after and slew diuers of them, taking ten or twelue, thinking by
them to know what their intent was to doe, but they could not certifie vs,
and therefore we let them go againe onely keeping two boyes, who long after
stole out of the shippe, and swamme to lande: They tolde vs that the
Gouernour being a Bishoppe or chiefe instructor of the countrey, was within
the boate and slaine among the rest, hee had therein likewise a little boy
one of his sonnes who wee likewise tooke, and sent to lande: The Bishoppe
was of Meca, and much esteemed of among them, a great Clearke, and
Gouernour ouer all the rest of the Countrey: There was a Iewell found about
him, which as yet is kept.

About euening we hoysed ankers, and set sayle, and the 11. of December we
came to two small Islands, where wee ankered, there wee founde none but
poore people and fishermen, that brought vs fish, Hens, and other fruit to
sell.

[Sidenote: How farre they were from Moluccas.] The 13. wee set sayle, and
the 14. wee had a West winde, which they call the passage winde, that would
haue serued vs well to saile to Moluccas, from whence wee were not distant
aboue two hundred miles, and as then it was a good yeare for Cloues, which
happeneth euery three yeares: It was told vs that we might there haue a
Cabbin laden full of Cloues, wherevpon we determined to sayle thither, but
because wee had already indured a long and troublesome voyage, and but ill
manned, we woulde not, longing to bee at home: This contrary wind holding
vppon the foure and twentie of December wee came to an Islande where we had
beene before.

The 25. of December Iohn Molenaer maister of the Mauritius, dyed sodainely,
for an hower before hee was well, and in good health.

The 28. 29. 30. and 31. of December wee were busied to take all the wares,
sayles, and other things out of the Amsterdam, her victuailes and
furnitures seruing for our voyage homewarde, and lying vnder that Island,
we had victuailes brought vs euery day as much as wee needed, both fish,
Hens, venison and fruit, and at reasonable price, but there we could get no
water.

[Sidenote: The Amsterdam set on fire.] The 11. of Ianuary when we had
vnladen the Amsterdam we set her on fier, letting her burne, taking her men
in our shippes.

The 12. of Ianuarie we set sayle again, some desiring to sayle Eastward,
others Westward, but in fine wee set Westwarde to sayle once againe to
Bantam, wherewith the Mauritius sayled Southeastwarde, to gette about the
Island of Iaua, and we followed her. The 14. of Ianuary we once againe
perceyued the East point of the Island of Madura, and held our course
Southward: on that side of Madura there lyeth many small Islandes, through
which we sayled.

[Sidenote: The Pinace on ground.] The 16. in the morning our Pinace fell on
grounde vpon the coast of Iaua, not far from Pannorocan, where she shotte
off three peeces, at the which warning wee made thither with our boates,
and by the helpe of God got her off againe: There we saw a high hil that
burnt, vnder and aboue the fire hauing a great smoake, most strange to
behold.

The 18. of Ianuary we entered into the straight that runneth betweene Iaua
and Baly, and by reason of the hard and contrary streame that ran therin,
we were forced to anker vpon the coast of Iaua, where wee found good anker
ground.

The 19. wee set sayle, and when wee came neere to the coast of Baly, we
entered into a rough streame, and our shippes draue backeward, as swiftly
as an arrow out of a bow, and there we found no anker ground, nor any anker
could haue holden vs, but Molenaer got the coast of Iaua and ankered, which
in the ende wee likewise did, and ankered at the least three miles from
him, and so much we had driuen backe in the space of halfe an houre.

The 20. of Ianuarie wee went and lay by our other ships.

The 21. of Ianuarie there came two barkes to the Mauritius, wherein there
was one that coulde speake good Portingall, who tolde vs that the towne of
Ballaboam was besieged by a strange King, that had marryed the King of
Ballaboams daughter, and after he had laine with her he caused her to bee
slaine, and then came to besiege her father. This towne of Ballaboam lyeth
on the East end of the Island of Iaua, and is the same towne where M.
Candish was when hee passed that way, and the old King wherof he writeth
was as then yet liuing, being at the least 160. years of age. There we saw
great numbers of Battes, that flew ouer our shippes, and were as bigge as
Crowes, which in that Countrey they vse to eat, as they say: About noone we
came before the towne of Ballaboam, so neare vnto it, that we might easily
see it, and there we lay behind a high point of lande, thinking to take in
water.

The 22. of Ianuarie we tooke our Pinace, and sayled about the shore as
neere the land as possible we might, to seeke for fresh water, but we found
none, for the Riuer that ran through the towne was paled vp (by them that
lay before it) so that no man might passe either out or in, but onely on
the lande side, and that with great daunger: The same day there came 2. or
3. men abord our shippe, that stole out of the towne by night, and came
from the King, to desire our help with our great shot, which wee could not
doe; because that thereabouts it was very shallow, and we might not go
neere it with our shippes; they tolde vs they had great want of victuailes
within the towne, whereby many of them were already deade for hunger, and
much desired our aide, but it was not in vs to doe. Those that besieged the
towne were Mores, but they in the towne were heathens, and as yet had not
receyued Mahomets lawe and that (as wee heard after) was the cause of their
warre: There wee sawe many Storkes flying and sitting in the fielde: with
vs we cannot imagine where the Storkes remaine in winter time, but here wee
sawe them in the winter time.

The 24. of Ianuarie we sayled from thence, perceyuing nothing for vs to
get, and tooke our course right ouer to the Island of Bally.

The 25. we came to Bally, where one of their barks borded vs, telling vs
that there we should find a Riuer of fresh water, and of all thinges els
sufficient to serue our necessities, wherevpon we ankered.

The 26. of Ianuarie our Pinace sent her boat to land, to see the Riuer, and
there one of our men was sent on shore, but when he was on land he found
nothing, but an armie of ten thousand men, that ment to relieue the towne
of Ballaboam, and the Riuer was nothing worth to lade water, wherevpon our
men came on borde againe: Their Generall thought to haue gotten some great
pray out of our shippes.

The 27. of Ianuarie we set sayle to finde a conuenient place to refresh vs
with water and other prouision, for wee were informed by a man of Bengala,
that of his owne will sayled with vs, and that had beene in Bally, that
there wee should finde water and other thinges to serue our necessities, so
that by night wee ankered vnder a high pointe of lande on the South West
ende of Bally.

The 28. of Ianuarie one of their boates borded vs with sixe or seuen men,
saying that their King was desirious to deale with vs for such wares as hee
had, and sent to know from whence we came, and we said wee came out of
Holland.

The 29. and 30. there came more men aborde our shippes, but as wee
suspected that was not the right hauen, for the people came rowing in great
haste a far off, and the man of Bengala could not tell what to say, but the
King was thereabout, and euery day sent vs some fruit.

The first of February wee had two hogges brought aborde our shippes, that
wee bought for two Ryalles of eyght, and we eate them very sauerly.

The 2. of Februarie, we set saile that wee might get aboue the point, where
wee thought to finde a better place for freshe water, but by reason the
winde was contrary, wee could not doe it, but were forced to anker againe.

The 3. of February we set saile againe, and then wee had a storme, so that
our saile blew euery way, and because of the contrarie winde we could not
reach aboue the point, but were constrained to anker, but the Mauritius and
the Pinace got past it, although thereby the Mauritius was in no little
daunger, but because the Pilot had laid a wager of 6. Rialles of 8. that
hee woulde get aboue it, hee would passe, what daunger soeuer it might be,
and sayled close along by the cliffes, whereby wee lay at anker without
companie.

The 4 and 5. we set saile once againe to get aboue the point but could not
reach it.

The 6. we had a letter from Rodenburgh, that certified vs how the Mauritius
lay at anker at the least 7. or 8. miles beyond the point, and he that
brought the letter came with it ouer land; and at the same time there was a
man sent on lande with a small present for the King, that we might winne
his fauour.

The 7. our man came on borde againe, and brought vs newes how Rodenburgh
with one of the Portingalles slaues, being on lande were against their
willes led before the King, but the saylors of the Mauritius had gotten men
for pledges.

The 8. of Ianuarie, the same man went on land out of our shippe with more
presentes of veluet and a caliuer, the better to get the Kinges fauour,
which liked him well, and desired vs to bring the ship nearer to the towne,
saying he would send vs water, and other things sufficient to supply our
wants.

The 9. we sayled into the cheeke with our shippe, and ankered about a small
halfe mile from the land, and being ankered there came at the least 70.
boates of the Countrey to see our ship, and the King sent vs word that hee
was desirous to heare vs shoote off 5. or 6. of our great peeces, and the
King stoode vppon the shore to see them.

The 10. we had a letter from Cornelis Houtman, to wil vs to come to them,
for that there they had founde a good place for water, and all other
necessaries, so that about euening wee set sayle, leauing two of our men
and a Portingall slaue among the Indians, whome the King promised should
come vnto vs ouer land, yet that night wee could not reach aboue the point,
meane time we perceyued our Pinace that came to helpe vs.

The 16. we got by the Mauritius, that had already laden in her water, and
hooped her vessels, wherevpon we began presently to do the like, and to
visite our vessels that were almost spoyled.

The 17. our men whome wee left with the King came ouer land vnto our
shippes, and then we bought great store of cattle and fruit.

The 18. 19. 20. and 21. wee imployed our time to lade water, which wee had
verie easily, and refreshed our selues with Cattle, Hogges, fruit, and
Lemons sufficient. There came one of the Kinges principall officers with
our men ouer land, to pleasure vs in all things we desired, he was very
desirous to haue some present of vs.

[Sidenote: Two of our men stayed with the Indians.] The 24. of Ianuarie two
of our men that sayled in the Mauritius stayed on lande, but wee knewe not
the cause: it should seeme some great promises had beene made vnto them,
for as we vnderstoode the King was very desirous to haue all sortes of
strange nations about him, but our people were therein much ouerseene, for
there they liued among heathens, that neyther knewe God nor his
commandements, it appeared that their youthes and wilde heades did not
remember it, one of their names was Emanuel Rodenburgh of Amsterdam, the
other Iacob Cuyper of Delft: within a day or two they sent vnto vs for
their clothes, but wee sent them not.

The 23. 24. and 25. we made a voyage on land, and fetcht as many Hogges
abord our shippes as we could eate.

The 25. of Februarie we hoysed ankers, minding to set saile and so go
homeward, leauing our two men aforesaid on land, but because it was calme
weather we ankered, and went once againe on lande, and the 26. of the same
Month wee set saile and helde our course West South West, but we had a
calme.


The situation of the Island of Baly

The Island of Baly lying at the East end of Iaua, is a verie fruitfull
Islande of Ryce, Hennes, Hogges, that are very good, and great store of
cattle: but they are very drie and leane beastes. They haue many horses:
the inhabitants are heathens, and haue no religion, for some pray to Kine,
others to the Sunne, and euerie man as hee thinketh good. [Sidenote: How 50
women burnt them selues with one man.] When a man dyeth his wife burneth
her selfe with him: there were some of their men aborde our shippes, that
told vs, that when some man dyeth in that Countrey, that sometimes there
are at the least fifty women that will burne themselues with him, and she
that doth not so is accounted for a dishonest woman: so that it is a common
thing with them: The apparel both of men and women is for the most part
like those of Bantam, nothing but a cloth about their middles: Their
weapons is, each man a poinyarde at their backes, and a trunke with an iron
point like a speare, about a fadom and a halfe long, out of the which they
blowe certaine arrowes, whereof they haue a case full; it is an euil weapon
for naked men: they are enemies to the Mores and Portingalles. This Iland
yeeldeth no spice, nor any other costly ware, onely victuailes and clothes
which they weare about their bodies, and slaues that are there to be solde.
The King went with more state then the King of Bantam: all his garde had
pikes with heades of fine gold, and he sate in a wagon that that was drawen
by two white Buffles.

The first of March we had a calme.

The third we got a good wind, that blew Southeast, holding our course West
South West.

The fourteenth the wind blew stil South East, sometimes more Southwarde,
and sometimes Eastward, being vnder 14. degrees, and a good sharpe gale,
holding our course West Southwest: [Sidenote: The situation of Iaua.] There
we found that Iaua is not so broade, nor stretcheth it selfe not so much
Southwarde, as it is set downe in the Carde: for if it were, we should haue
passed clean through the middle of the land.

The 22. of March the winde helde as it did, being vnder 19. degrees,
holding our course West South West.

The 19. of April our ship had no more bread left, but for our last
partition euery man had seuen pound, both good and badde breade, and from
that time forwarde our meate was Rice sodden in water, and euery man had a
canne of water euery day, with three romers of wine, and weekely each man
three romers or glasses of oyle and that very strong, and nothing els.

The 20. we had a calme, the 21. a calme with a Northerne aire.

The 23. a good wind that blew Southwest.

The 24. we saw the firme lande of AEthiopia, being vnder 33. degrees, and as
wee gessed, wee were then about an hundred miles from the Cape de bona
Sperance, yet we thought we had been at the least three hundred miles from
it, so that wee may say, that God wrought wonderfully for vs: for that if
wee had fallen by night vpon the land, we had surely runne vpon it: wee had
a good winde out of the West, and West Southwest.

The 25. of Aprill in the morning wee had a calme, with a very hollow water,
and at euening we had a good winde, that came North and Northeast, and
although wee had so good a wind yet our shippe bare but little sayle,
although the other two shippes of our company were at the least two mile
before vs, for most part of the night wee sayled with our schouer saile,
holding our course Southwest and by West.

The 26. of Aprill in the morning we coulde not see our shippes, which
pleased not our men, besides that our shippe was very weake, whereby her
ribs shoke, and her ioynts with the force of the water opened and shut, so
that as then our shippe was very leake, hauing the winde Northwest, holding
our course as neere as wee could West Southwest, and then we put out our
maine sayles, at noone the winde came West, with a great storme, so that
most of our sayles blew in peeces, and so wee draue forward with out
sayles.

The 27. of Aprill still driuing without sayle with a West winde, wee were
vnder thirty sixe degrees, so that we found that the streame draue vs South
and South West.

The 28. of Aprill still driuing without sailes, we had the height of 36.
degrees and 20. minutes, and about euening we hoised saile againe, the
winde being West Southwest, and we held our course Northwest with very
hollow water.

The 29. of April we could not as yet see our shippes, the wind being West.

The 30. of Aprill we had fayre weather with a West and West South West
wind, and then we saw many great birdes with white billes, which is a signe
not to bee far from the Cape de bona Sperance, we likewise saw certain
small birdes, speckled on their backes, and white vpon their breastes.

The first of May wee had a South winde with fayre weather hauing 34 degrees
and a halfe, holding our course West Southwest.

The seconde of May wee were vnder 35. degrees, and 1/2. holding our course
West and West and by North.

The fourth of May we found our selues to be vnder 37. degrees South South
East winde, our course being West and by North, and West North West.

The 5. and 6. of May we had all one winde at noone being vnder 35. degrees,
wee thought wee had passed the Cape, and held our course Northwest,
towardes Saint Helena, still without sight of our ships.

The 8. of May with a South wind wee helde North West and by West.

The 9. we had a calme with a gray sky, and were vnder 31. degrees and
twentie minutes, and then our portion of oyle was increased a glasse more
euery weeke, so that euery man had foure glasses.

The 10. we had stil South winds, and were vnder 29 deg.

[Sidenote: Signes of the Cape de bona Speranza.] The 14. of May twice or
thrice we saw reedes, called Trombos driuing on the water, being such as
driue about the the Cape de bona Speranza, which wee thought verie strange,
for that the Portingals write, that they are seen but thirtie myles from
the Cape, and wee gest our selues to be at the least 200. beyond it.

The 15. we still had a South East wind, and helde our course Northwest.

The 16. of May in the morning we saw two ships, whereat we much reioyced,
thinking they had beene our companie, we made to leewarde of them, and the
smallest of them comming somewhat neere vs, about the length of the shotte
of a great peece, shee made presently toward her fellow, whereby we
perceiued them to bee Frenchmen, yet we kept to leeward, thinking they
would haue come and spoken with vs, but it should seeme they feared vs, and
durst not come, but held their course Northeast; at noone we had the height
of 22. degrees, and 50. minutes with a Southeast wind, holding our course
Northwest.

The 17. of May wee were vnder 21. degrees and a halfe: the 18. the wind
being Southerly, we were vnder 19. degrees and a halfe.

The 19. and 20. we had a calme with a Southern aire.

The 21. the ayre comming Southwest, we held our course Northwest: and were
vnder 17. degrees and 2/3 partes: There we found the compasse to decline
three quarters of a strike or line North eastward, after noone we had a
Southeast wind, and our course West Northwest.

The 22. of May we had still a Southeast winde, and were vnder the height of
16. degrees and 40. minutes, holding our course West Northwest.

The 23. of May, by reason of the cloudy sky, about noone we could not take
the height of the Sunne, but as we gest we had the height of the Island of
S. Helena, and held our course West and by South to keepe vnder that
height, for there the compasses decline a whole strike or line: in the
euening we found that we were vnder 16. degrees.

The 24. of May in the morning wee discouered a Portingall ship, that stayed
for vs, and put out a flagge of truce, and because our flagge of truce was
not so readie as theirs, and we hauing the wind of him, therefore he shot
two shootes at vs, and put forth a flagge out of his maine top, and we shot
5 or 6. times at him, and so held on our course without speaking to him,
hauing a South East winde, holding our course West and by South to find the
Island of S. Helena, which the Portugal likewise sought.

The 25. of May we discouered the Island of S. Helena, but we could not see
the Portingal ship, still sayling with a stiffe Southeast wind, and about
euening we were vnder the Island, which is very high lande, and may be
seene at the least 14. or 15. miles off, and as we sayled about the North
point, there lay three other great Portingal ships, we being not aboue half
a mile from them, wherevpon wee helde in the weather and to seawarde
Northeast as much as we might. The Portingalles perceyuing vs, the Admiral
of their fleet shot off a peece to call their men that were on land to come
aborde, [Sidenote: Foure Portingal ships richly laden.] and then wee saw
foure of their shippes together, that were worth a great summe of money, at
the least 300. tunnes of gold, for they were all laden with spices,
precious stones, and other rich wares, and therefore wee durst not anker
vnder the Island, but lay all night Northeastwarde, staying for our
company.

The 26. of May in the morning wee made towardes the Island againe, with a
good Southeast winde, and about noone or somewhat past we discried two
shippes, and about euening as we made towards them, we knew them to be our
company, which made vs to reioyce, for we had been asunder the space of a
whole Month, and so we helde together and sayled homeward, holding our
course Northwest: for as yet our men were well and in good health, and we
found a good Southeast winde, and had water enough for foure or fiue
monthes.

The 27. 28. 29. and 30. of May wee had a Southeast winde, with faire
weather, and the 27. day we were vnder 14. degrees. The first of Iune we
were vnder 6. degrees, with a Southeast wind, holding our course North
West, but by means of the Compasse that yeelded North eastward, we kept
about Northwest and by North. The 6. of Iune wee were vnder one degree on
the South side of the line, there wee founde that the streame draue vs fast
into the West, and therefore wee helde our course more Northernely and
sayled Northwest and by North, with an East and South East wind. [Sidenote:
They passed the Equinoctiall line.] The 7. of Iune wee past the
Equinoctiall line, with an East winde, holding our course North Northwest.

The 10. of Iune in the euening we were vnder 5. degrees and a halfe on the
North side of the line, and then we began again to see the North star,
which for the space of 2. years we had not seene, holding our course North
Northwest, there we began to haue smal blasts, and some times calmes, but
the aire all South and South east.

The 11. of Iune we had a calme, and yet a darke sky, that came
Southeastwarde.

The 12. of Iune wee had a close sky with raine, and the same euening our
fore top maste fell downe.

The 13. we strake all our sailes and mended our ship.

The 14. we had the wind Northward, holding our course West Northwest as
neare as we coulde, but by reason of the thick sky wee could not take
height of the Sun. The 15. of Iune we had the wind North, and North
Northwest.

The 16. of Iune wee had the height of 9. degrees and 10. minutes, the winde
being Northeast and North Northeast. The 17. the winde was Northeast with
fair weather, and we held Northwest, and Northwest and by North till after
noone. [Sidenote: They tooke a great fish.] The 15. we tooke a great fish
called an Aluercour, which served vs all for 3. meals, which wee had not
tasted of long time before.

The 26. we had still a Northeast winde, and sometimes larger, holding our
course North Northwest with large saile, and were vnder 17. degrees and
1/2.

The same day there came much dust flying into our shippe, as if we had past
hard by some sandie towne, and we gest the nearest land to vs might be the
Island of S. Anthony, and wee were as then at the least 40. or 50. miles
from it: The same day likewise there came a flying fish into our shippe,
which we eat.

The 28. of Iune wee had the height of 20. degrees, with a East Northeast
wind and East and by West, with full sayle, there we saw much Sargosse,
driuing on the water. The last of Iune we had the Sun right ouer our
heades, and yet we felt no heat, for that by reason of the cold ayre we had
a fine coole weather. The same day we passed Tropicus Cancri, still hauing
the winde East Northeast, and in the euening we were vnder 24. degr.

The second of Iuly we saw Sargosse driuing vpon the water, and had the wind
somewhat lower North Northeast with a calme. The thirde of Iuly the winde
came againe East Northeast, and wee helde our course North and by West. The
8. of Iuly wee were vnder 33. degrees and 1/2. with an East wind, holding
our course North and by East, and yet we saw much Sargosse driuing, but not
so thicke as it did before.

The 10 of Iuly we had a good wind that blew south and South and by East,
and hoysted vp our maine tops, that for the space of 26. daies were neuer
touched, and held our course North Northeast, there we were in no little
feare to fall among the Spanish fleet, which at that time of the yeare
keepeth about the Flemmish Islands.

The same day one of our boyes fell ouer bord, and was carried away with a
swift streame before the wind, but to his great good fortune, the Pinace
saued him, that was at the least a quarter of a mile from vs: this euening
we found the height of 36. degrees.

The 12. of Iuly we had a Southwest wind, holding our course Northeast and
by North: Our Pilot and the Pilot of the Pinnace differed a degree in the
height of the Sunne, for ours had 38. degrees, and theirs but 37. We gest
to be about the Islands of Corbo and Flores, but the one held more easterly
and the other more Westerly. The 13. of Iuly wee had still a Southwest
winde, and after noone wee thought wee had seene land, but we were not
assured thereof, for it was somewhat close. The 14. of Iuly we had a calme,
and saw no land, and then our men began to be sicke.

The 17. of Iuly wee had a South Southeast winde, with faire weather, and
were vnder 41. degrees, holding our course East Northeast.

The 18. 19. 20. and 21. it was calme. The 22. of Iuly the winde came North,
and wee held our course East Southeast. The 23. of Iuly the wind was North
North East and Northeast, and we held as near as we could East and East
Southeast, the same day our steward found a barrell of stockfish in the
roming, which if we had beene at home we would haue cast it on the dunghil,
it stunke so filthily, and yet we eat it as sauerly as the best meat in the
world.

The 24. we had a West wind, and that with so strong a gale, that wee were
forced to set two men at helme, which pleased vs well.

The 25. of Iuly we had a storme that blew West and West Northwest, so that
we bare but two sailes, holding our course Northeast and by East.

The first of August we were vnder 45. degrees with a North West wind,
holding our course Northeast and by East.

The second of August one of our men called Gerrit Cornelison of Spijckenes
died, being the first man that dyed in our voyage homeward.

The 4. of August we had a Northwest wind.

The 5. of August in the morning the winde came Southwest, and we were vnder
47. degrees, holding our course Northeast and the North Northeast, and wee
gest that wee were not farre from the channell, those dayes aforesaid we
had so great colde in our shippes, as if had beene in the middle of winter:
We could not be warme with all the clothes wee had. The same day we saw
Sargosse driue vpon the water.

[Sidenote: They saw a shippe with the Prince of Oranges flagge.] The 6. of
August we had a West wind, in the morning we cast out our lead and found
grounde at 80. fadome, and about noone we saw a shippe that bare the
Princes flagge, yet durst not come neare vs, although we made signes vnto
him, and after noone wee saw the land of Heissant, whereat we all reioyced.

The 7. of August in the morning we saw the land of Fraunce, and held our
course North Northeast, and likewise we saw a small shippe, but spake not
with it.

The 8. of August in the morning we saw the Kiskas, and had a South wind and
somewhat West, holding our course East Northeast.

[Sidenote: They saw a man of war.] The 9. of August we entered the heades,
and past them with a Southwest wind, sayling Northeast. After noone we past
by a man of warre being a Hollander, that lay at anker, and he hoysed anker
to follow vs, about euening wee spake with him, but because of the wind wee
could hardly heare what hee said, yet hee sailed on with vs.

[Sidenote: The man of war gaue them victuailes.] The 10. of August the man
of warre borded vs with his boat, and brought vs a barrell of beere, some
bread and cheese, shewing vs what news he could touching the state of
Holland, and presently wee sawe the land of Holland, and because it blew
very stiffe and a great storme, after noone wee ankered about Petten to
stay for better weather, and some new Pilots, and that was the first time
we had cast anker for the space of 5. monthes together, about euening it
beganne to blow so stifle, that wee lost both an anker and a cable.

[Sidenote: They cut down their main mast.] The 11. of August we had still a
Southerly winde, and therefore about noone the Mauritius set saile, and wee
thought likewise to saile, but our men were so weake that we could not
hoyse vp our anker, so that we were constrained to lie still till men came
out to helpe vs, about euening the winde came Southwest, and with so great
a storme, that we thought to haue run vpon the strand, and were forced to
cut downe our maine maste.

The 12. and 13. we had a hard South West wind, and sometimes West, so that
no Pilots came abord our ship, but the 13. day about euening it began to be
faire weather.

The 14. of August about breake of day in the morning, there came two boats
with Pilots and men abord our ship, that were sent out by our owners, and
brought vs some fresh victuailes, which done they hoysed vp our ankers, and
about noone we sayled into the Tessel, and ankered in the channell, where
we had fresh victuailes enough, for we were all weake.

This was a great noueltie to all the Marchantes and inhabitantes of
Hollande, for that wee went out from thence the second of April 1595. and
returned home again vpon the 14. of August 1597. there you might haue
bought of the Pepper, Nutmegs, Cloues, and Mace, which wee brought with vs.
Our saylors were most part sicke, being but 80. men in all, two third
partes of their company being dead, and lost by diuers accidentes, and
among those forescore such as were sicke, as soone as they were on land and
at their ease presently recouered their healthes.

The copper money of Iaua commeth also out of China, and is almost as
thicke, great and heauy, as a quarter of a Doller, and somewhat thicker, in
the middle hauing a square hole, 2000. of them are worth a Riall of 8. but
of these there are not ouer many, they vse to hang them vpon stringes, and
pay them without telling, they stand not so narrowly vpon the number, for
if they want but 25. or 50. it is nothing.

The leaden money of Iaua, (being of bad Leade is very rough) hath in the
middle a foure square hole, they are hanged by two hundred vppon a string,
they are commonly 10. 11. and 12. thousand to a Riall of 8. as there
commeth great quantitie out of China, where they are made, and so as there
is plentie or scarcitie they rise and fal.

       *       *       *       *       *

A true report of the gainefull, prosperous, and speedy voiage to Iaua in
  the East Indies, performed by a fleete of 8. ships of Amsterdam: which
  set forth from Texell in Holland the first of Maie 1598. Stilo Nouo.
  Whereof foure returned againe the 19. of Iuly anno 1599. in lesse then
  15. moneths; the other foure went forward from Iaua for the Moluccas.
  [Footnote: At London: printed by P. S. for W. Aspley, and are to be sold
  at the signe of the Tygers Head in Paules Church-yard, (1600).]

Whereas in the yeare of our Lord 1595. a certaine company of substantial
merchants of Amsterdam in Holland did build and set forth for the East
Indies four well appointed shippes, whereof three came home An. 1597. with
small profit (as already in sundry languages is declared) [Footnote: See
above.] Yet neuerthelesse the aforesaid company, in hope of better
successe, made out the last years 1598. for a seconde voiage, a fleete of
eight gallant ships, to wit. The shippe called the Mauritius, lately
returned from that former voyage, being of burden two hundreth and thirty
last, or foure hundreth and sixty tunnes, or thereabouts. This shippe was
Admirall of the fleete. The master whereof was Godevart Iohnson, the
Commissarie or factor Cornelius Heemskerck, and the Pilot Kees Collen.

The second ship called the Amsterdam, was of the burden of four hundreth
and sixty tuns. The Master's name was Claes Iohnson Melcknap; The factor or
commissarie Iacob Heemskerck.

The third was named Hollandia, about the burden of sixe hundreth tuns:
which had likewise been in the former voiage. The Master was Symon
Lambertson or Mawe, the Factor Master Witte Nijn, who died in the voyage
before Bantam, and in his roome succeeded Iohn Iohnson Smith.

The name of the fourth ship was Gelderland, of burden about foure hundreth
tuns. Master wherof was Iohn Browne, factor or commissarie Hans
Hendrickson.

The fift was called Zeelandia, of the burden of three hundreth and sixtie
tuns. The Master was Iohn Cornelison, the Commissary or factor N. Brewer.

The sixt ship named Utrecht of the burden of two hundreth and sixtie tuns.
The Master was Iohn Martsen, the Factor or commissary Adrian Veen.

The seuenth a pinnas called Frisland, of burden about seuenty tuns. The
Master Iacob Cornelison, the Factor Walter Willekens.

The eighth a pinnas that had been in the former voiage called the Pidgeon,
now the Ouerijssel, of the burden of fifty tuns. The Master Symon Iohnson.
The Factor Arent Hermanson.

Of this fleete was General and Admirall Master Iacob Neck, Viceadmirall
Wybrand van Warwick: and Rereadmirall Iacob Heemskerck.

With this fleet of eight ships we made saile from Texell the first of May
1598. Stilo Nouo, being the 21. of Aprill, after the account of England and
sailed with good speed vnto the Cabo de bona Speranza: as further shal
appeare by a Iournal annexed vnto the end of this discourse.

Being past the Cape, the 7. and 8. of August, by a storme of weather fiue
ships were separated from the Admirall, who afterwardes came together
againe before Bantam.

[Sidenote: They meete with a ship of Zealand.] The 26. of August with three
shippes wee came within the view of Madagascar, and the 29. wee met with a
ship of Zeeland, called the Long barke, which had put to sea before vs, and
now kept aloofe from us, supposing we were enemies: but at length
perceiuing by our flagges what we were, they sent their Pinnas aboord vs,
reioycing greatly to haue met with vs, because that diuers of their men
were sicke, and ten were already dead: and they had in all but seuen men
aboord the shippe that were meat-whole, and eleuen mariners to guide the
shippe. Wee agreed to relieue them with some supplie of men: but through
darkenesse and great winde wee lost them againe.

[Sidenote: The Isle of Santa Maria.] After this, we the Admiral Mauritius,
the Hollandia, and the pinnas Ouerijssel keeping together, came to the
Island of Santa Maria, before the great bay of Antogil in Madagascar: where
wee got a small quantity of Rice. We tooke the King prisoner, who paide for
his ransome a Cow and a fat calfe.

In this Island we found no great commodity: for being the month of
September, the season was not for any fruits: the Oranges had but flowers:
Lemons were scant: of Sugarcanes and Hens there was some store, but the
Inhabitants were not very forward in bringing them out.

[Sidenote: Killing of the whale.] Heere we sawe the hunting of the Whale,
(a strange pastime) certaine Indians in a Canoa, or boate following a great
Whale, and with a harping Iron, which they cast forth, piercing the whals
body, which yron was fastned to a long rope made of the barkes of trees,
and so tied fast to their Canoa. All this while pricking and wounding the
whale so much as they could, they made him furiously to striue too and fro,
swiftly swimming in the sea, plucking the canoa after him: sometimes
tossing it vp and downe, as lightly as if it had been a strawe. The Indians
in the meane time being cunning swimmers taking small care though they were
cast ouerboord, tooke fast hold by the boat stil, and so after some
continuance of this sport, the whale wearied and waxing faint, and staining
the sea red with his bloud, they haled him toward the shore, and when they
had gotten him so neare shore on the shallowe that the most part of him
appeared aboue water, they drew him aland and hewed him in pieces, euery
one taking thereof what pleased them, which was to vs a strange sight. It
is reported that the Indians of Terra Florida vse the like fishing for the
Whale. Our men might haue taken some part thereof, but refused it: the
pieces thereof were so like larde or fat bacon.

[Sidenote: The Bay of Antogill.] From thence we made toward the great Bay
of Antogill and ankered vnder the Island, where wee tooke in fresh water.

Our Indians that were brought from thence by them of the former voiage (the
names of whome were Madagascar the one, and the other Laurence) wee offered
to set there on land, but they refused, chusing rather to tarry with vs and
to be apparelled, then to go naked in their owne countrey: working and
moyling for a miserable liuing, opposing their bare skins to the vehemency
of the sunne and weather: and their excuse was, that in that place they
were strangers and had none acquaintance.

[Sidenote: How long their beere continued good.] Our beere continued good
vntill we were passed the Cape de bona speranza: from thence we began to
mingle it with water hauing a portion of wine allowed vs twise a day, and
this allowance continued vntill our returne into Holland.

We went with our boates vp the riuer seeking refreshing: but the
Inhabitants gaue vs to vnderstand by signes that wee might returne, for
there was nothing to be had. Wee rowed into the riuer about three leagues,
and found their report to bee true. The cause was, that the Kings made
warre there one against an other, and so all the victuals were in manner
destroied, insomuch that the Inhabitants themselues many of them perished
for hunger, and in one of these battailes one of their Kings was lately
slaine. Wherfore after fiue daies abode and no longer, we departed, and in
Gods name made to sea again, directing our course the sixteenth of
September for Iaua. [Sidenote: They arriue at Bantam.] About the nineteenth
of Nouember we came within sight of Sumatra, and the 26. of the same moneth
1598. wee in the three shippes aforesaid, to wit, the Mauritius, our
Admirall, the Hollandia, and the Ouerissell, arriued before the citty of
Bantam in Iaua. Presently vpon this our arriuall, our Admirall and Generall
Master Iacob Van Neck, sought with all friendship to traffique with the
people of the saide towne of Bantam, sending Master Cornelis Heemskerck on
land to shew them what we were, for they thought vs to be the very same men
that had been there the yeare before, and al that while guarded the sea
cost, as being assuredly persuaded that we were pirates and sea rouers.
[Sidenote: They present their letters and gifts.] But we, to make them
vnderstand the contrary, sent on lande one Abdoll of China, a captiue of
theirs, whom we brought from them in our first voyage; by whose meanes we
got audience and credite: and so we presented our gifts and presents to the
King, which was but a childe: and the chiefe gouernour called Cephat,
hauing the kingly authority, most thankfully receiued the same in the name
of his King. The said presents were a faire couered cup of siluer and gilt,
certaine veluets and clothes of silke, with very fine drinking glasses and
excellent looking glasses, and such other gifts more. Likewise we presented
our letters sealed very costly with the great seale of the noble and mighty
lords the Estates generall of the united Prouinces, and of Prince Mauritz,
whome they termed their Prince. [Sidenote: Trade licensed.] Which letters
were by them receiued with great reuerence, creeping vpon their knees: and
(the same being well perused, read and examined) they found thereby our
honest intent and determination for traffike: insomuch that a mutuall
league of friendship and alliance was concluded, and we were freely
licensed to trade and traffike in such wise, that euen the fourth day of
our arriuall we began to lade; and within foure or fiue weekes all our
foure ships hauing taken in their full fraight, were ready to depart.

When our three shippes aforesaid had remained there welnigh a moneth, about
Newyears-tide arriued the other fiue shippes of our company before
mentioned in very good manner, and well conditioned. [Sidenote: The whole
fleet meet before Bantam.] And so our whole fleete of eight ships ioyfully
met together, and had none or very fewe sicke persons among them, hauing
lost by death in the whole fleete but 35. men in all, of which number some
perished through their own negligence. Vpon this happy meeting we displaied
our flags, streamers and ensignes after the brauest manner, honouring and
greeting one another with volleis of shot, making good cheere, and (which
was no small matter) growing more deeply in fauour with the townesmen of
Bantam. Vnto vs were daily brought aboord in Prauwes or Indian boats great
quantity of hens, egs, Cocos, bonanos, sugar-canes, cakes, made of rice,
and a certaine kinde of good drinke which is there made by the men of
China. Thus the people daily bartered with vs for pewter and other wares,
giuing so much victuals for a pewter spoone, as might well suffice one man
for an whole weeke. Wee trucked likewise for diuers other things, as for
porcellan dishes and such like. [Sidenote: The price of pepper inhanced.]
Howbeit, that which our Indian Abdoll declared (namely, that more ships
were comming besides the three aforesaid, and that others beside them were
also sent out of Zeland) little tended to our commodity: for thereupon the
Iauans tooke occasion to inhance the price of their pepper, insomuch that
we were forced to pay for 55. pounds of pepper first three, and afterward
four Reals of eight: neither did they demaund or call for any thing so much
as for the said Reals of eight. Mercery or haberdashers wares were in no
such request as money. Also we much marueiled, how the Iauans should tell
vs of more shippes to come, making signes with their foure fingers and
thumb, that foure Lyma (which word in their language signifieth shippes)
were comming.

And here you are to vnderstand, that our Generall Master Van Neck, together
with the commissaries or factors, thought good, besides the three forsaid
ships that came first, to lade one other, to wit, the greater pinnasse
called Frisland, whereof was Master Iacob Cornelison, and factor Walter
Willekens. [Sidenote: Foure ships laden.] These foure ships hauing receiued
their ful freight, and giuen notice on land of their departure (to the end
that none of their creditours might bee vnpaid) and also having well
prouided themselues of rice and water, departed the thirteenth of Ianuary
1599. and sayled to Sumatra, where they tooke in fresh water; for that the
water of Bantam first waxeth white, and afterward crawleth full of magots.

Vpon the land of Sumatra we bartered kniues, spoones, looking-glasses,
bels, needles and such like, for sundry fruits, to wit, melons, cucumbers,
onions, garlike, and pepper though little in quantity, yet exceeding good.

We had to deale with a notable Merchant of Bantam, named Sasemolonke, whose
father was a Castilian, which sold vs not much lesse then an hundreth last
of pepper. He was most desirous to haue traueiled with vs into Holland: but
misdoubting the displeasure and euil will of the king, and fearing least
his goods might haue bin confiscated, he durst not aduenture vpon the
voiage.

[Sidenote: The four other ships sent to Moluccas.] Certaine daies before
our departure from Bantam were the other foure shippes dispatched to go for
the Moluccas, and ouer them was appointed as Admirall and Generall Master
Wybrant van Warwicke in the shippe called Amsterdam, and Iacob Heemskerck
Viceadmirall in the shippe Gelderland, the other two shippes in consort
with them being Zeland and Vtrecht before mentioned.

These foure made saile towards the Moluccas, and parted from vs the 8. of
Ianuary in the night, and in taking of our leaues both of vs together, made
such a terrible thundering noise with our ordinance, that the townsemen
were vp in alarme, vntill they knewe the reason thereof. The people were
glad of their departure, hauing some mistrust of vs, remaining there so
strong with 8. ships. And they asked daily when we should depart, making
great speed to help vs vnto our lading, and shewing themselues most
seruiceable vnto vs.

The 11. of Ianuary 1599. we in the foure shippes laden with pepper departed
from Bantam homeward. The 13. we arriued at Sumatra. The 19. we shaped our
course directly for Holland. The 3. of April we had sight of Capo de buona
esperanza. The 8. of Aprill we doubled the said Cape, proceeding on for the
Isle of Saint Helena, whither we came the twenty sixt of the same month,
and there refreshed our selues for the space of eight daies.

In this Island we found a church with certaine boothes or tents in it, and
the image of Saint Helena, as likewise a holy water fat, and a sprinkle to
cast or sprinkle the holy water: but we left all things in as good order as
we found them.

Moreouer here we left behinde vs some remembrances in writing, in token of
our being there. At this place died of the bloody flixe, the Pilot of our
Admirall Kees Collen of Munickendam, a worthy man, to our great griefe.

This Island (as Iohn Huighen van Linschotten describeth it) is replenished
with manifold commodities, as namely with goates, wilde swine, Turkies,
partridges, pidgeons, &c. But by reason that those which arriue there vse
to discharge their ordinance, and to hunt and pursue the saide beastes and
fowles, they are now growen exceedingly wilde and hard to be come by.
Certaine goates whereat we shotte fled vp to the high cliffes, so that it
was impossible to get them. Likewise fishes wee could not catch so many as
wee needed; but wee tooke in fresh water enough to serue vs till our
arriuall in Holland.

[Sidenote: A man left on land at Saint Helena.] Here we left on land as a
man banished out of our society, one Peter Gisbrecht the masters mate of
the great pinasse, because hee had stroken the Master.

Very penitent hee was, and sorie for his misdemeanour, and all of vs did
our best endeuour to obtain his pardon: but (the orders and ordinances
wherevnto our whole company was sworne being read before vs) we were
constrained to surcease our importunate suit, and he for the example of
others to vndergo the seuere doome that was allotted him.

There was deliuered vnto him a certaine quantity of bread, oile, and rice,
with hookes and instruments to fish withall, as also a hand gun and
gunpowder.

Hereupon we bad him generally farewell, beseeching God to keepe and
preserue him from misfortunes, and hoping that at some one time or other he
should finde deliuerance; for that all shippes sailing to the West Indies
must there of necessity refresh themselues.

Not far from this place we descried a saile which wee iudged to be some
Frenchmen, by whom peraduenture the saide banished party might bee
deliuered.

The fourth of May we set saile from Saint Helena, and the tenth of the same
moneth wee passed by the Isle of Ascension. The 17. day wee passed the
line. The 21. we saw the Polle-starre. The 10. and 11. of Iune we had sight
of the Canaries. About the Azores wee stood in feare to meete with some
Spanish Armada, because our men were growen faint and feeble by reason of
their long voiage. The 27. of Iune we entered the Spanish sea. The 29. we
found our selues to be in fortie foure degrees of northerly latitude. The
6. of Iuly our Admirall the Mauritius had two of his mastes blowne
ouerboord: for which cause we were contrained to towe him along. The 11. of
Iuly we passed the sorlings. The 13. we sayled by Falmouth, Dartmouth, and
the Quasquets. The 17. we passed by Douer. The 19. meeting with some
stormes and rainy weather we arriued at Texell in our owne native countrey,
without any great misfortune, saue that the Mauritius once stroke on
ground.

Thus hauing attained to our wished home, we gaue God thankes for this our
so happy and prosperous voiage: because their neuer arriued in Holland any
shippes so richly laden.

[Sidenote: The particulars of their rich lading.] Of pepper we brought
eight hundreth tunnes, of Cloues two hundreth, besides great quantity of
Mace, Nutmegs, Cinamom, and other principall commodities. To conclude this
voiage was performed in one yeare, two monethes, and nineteene daies.

We were sailing outward from Texell to Bantam seuen moneths, we remained
there sixe weekes to take in our lading, and in six monethes we returned
from Bantam in Iaua to Holland.

The performance of this long and daungerous voiage in so short time we
ascribed to Gods deuine and wonderfull prouidence, hauing sailed at the
least 8000. leagues, that is to say, twenty four thousand English miles.

The ioye of the safe arriuall of these shippes in Holland was exceeding
great: and postes were dispatched to euery principall towne and citty to
publish these acceptable newes.

The merchants that were owners of these ships went straight toward Texell
for the refreshing of their men, and for other necessary considerations.
[Sidenote: Friendly letters and presents from the King of Iaua.] The
Commissary or Factor master Cornelis Heemskerck together with Cornelis
Knick, hied them with all speed towardes the Estates generall and prince
Mauritz his excellency, not onely to carry the saide good newes, but withal
to present the letters of the King of Iaua importing mutuall alliance,
friendship and free intercourse of traffike in consideration of their
honourable, liberal, and iust dealings: They brought gifts also from the
said King of great price and value.

The 27. of Iuly the Mauritius our Admirall together with the Hollandia came
before Amsterdam: where they were ioyfully saluted with the sound of eight
trumpettes, with banqueting, with ringing of bels, and with peales of
ordinance, the Generall and other men of command being honourably receiued
and welcommed by the citty.

The merchants that aduentured in these voyages being in number sixeteene or
seuenteene (notwithstanding the foure shippes gone from Iaua to the
Moluccas, as it is before mentioned) haue sent this last spring 1599.
[Marginal Note: A new supply of foure Hollandish ships sent this last
spring 1599. to the East Indies.] foure ships more to continue this their
traffique so happely begun: intending moreouer the next spring to send a
newe supply of other ships. [Marginal note: An intent of the marchants of
Amsterdam to send more ships the next spring 1600.] And diuers other
Marchants are likewise determined to enter into the same action.

Of them that departed from Zeland these bring no newes, otherwise then is
aforesaide. Neither doe they report any thing of the two fleetes or
companies, that went from Roterdam the last sommer 1598, shaping their
course for the streites of Magellan.

Wee haue before made mention of an Indian called Abdoll, which was brought
from Bantam, in the first voiage, and had continued an whole winter or some
eight months at Amsterdam in Holland.

Where during that space (being a man of good obseruation and experience,
and borne about China) hee was well entreated, cherished, and much made of.

[Sidenote: The relation of Abdull an Indian, concerning the Netherlands.]
This Abdoll vpon his returne to Iaua being demanded concerning the state of
the Netherlands, made vnto the principall men of Bantam a full declaration
thereof, with all the rarities and singularities which he had there seen
and obserued.

Which albeit to the greatest part of readers, who haue trauailed those
countries may seeme nothing strange, and scarce worthy the relation: yet
because the report was made by so meere a stranger, and with the Iauans
that heard it wrought so good effect, I thought it not altogether
impertinent here in this place to make rehearsall thereof.

First therefore he tolde them (to their great admiration in that hoat
climate) That hee had seene aboue a thousand sleds drawen, and great
numbers of horsemen riding vpon the frozen water in winter time, and that
he had beheld more then two hundreth thousand people trauailing on foote
and on horseback vpon the yce, as likewise that the said sleds were by
horses drawen so swiftly, that they made more way in three houres than any
man could go on foote in tenne. And also that himselfe for pleasure had
beene so drawen, the horses being brauely adorned with bels and cymbals.

Howbeit they would hardly be induced to beleeue that those countries should
be so extreamely colde, and the waters so mightely frozen, as to beare such
a hugh waight.

Hee tolde them moreouer, that Holland was a free countrey, and that euery
man there was his owne Master, and that there was not one slaue or captiue
in the whole land.

Moreover, that the houses, in regarde of their beautifull and lofty
building, resembled stately pallaces, their inward rich furniture being
altogether answerable to their outward glorious shew.

Also, that the Churches (which he called Mesquitas), were of such bignesse
and capacity, as they might receiue the people of any prety towne.

He affirmed likewise, that the Hollanders with the assistance of their
confederates and friendes, maintained warres against the King of Spaine,
whose mighty puissance is feared and redoubted of all the potentates of
Europa.

And albeit the said warres had continued aboue thirty yeares, yet that
during all that time the saide Hollanders increased both in might and
wealth.

In like sort he informed them of the strange situation of Holland, as being
a countrey driuing vpon the water, the earth or ground whereof, they vse
instead of fewell, and that he had oft times warmed himselfe, and had seene
meat dressed with fires made of the same earth.

In briefe, that it was a waterish and fenny countrey, and full of riuers,
chanels, and ditches, and that therein was an innumerable multitude of
boates and small shippes, as likewise great store of tall and seruiceable
ships, wherewith they sailed vnto all quarters of the world, etc.

This man Abdoll wee found to bee a captiue or slaue, and sawe there his
wife and children in very poore estate dwelling in a little cottage not so
bigge as an hogsty: but by oure meanes he was made free and well rewarded.

Notwithstanding he did but euil recompence vs: for he was charged to be the
cause why pepper was solde dearer than ordinary vnto vs by a penny in the
pound: for hee tolde them that certaine shippes of Zeland and of other
places were comming thitherwardes.

[Sidenote: The Portugals go about to hinder the trade of the Hollanders.]
And here the reader is to vnderstand, that some foure moneths before the
said three ships arriued at Bantam, the Portugales came with an Armada of
gallies and fustes, being set foorth by the Viceroy of Goa and the
gouernour of Molucca, to intercept the traffique of the Hollanders vnto
those partes, and to made them loose all their expenses, labour, and time
which they had bestowed: and also that their great and rich presentes which
they gaue vnto the Iauans the yeare before, to bring them into vtter
detestation of the Hollanders, might not be altogether in vaine.

The Generall of them that came from Goa was Don Luis, and of those that
came from Molucca Don Emanuell: who brought their Armada before Bantam,
intending to surprize the citty, vnder pretence that the same preparation
was made to resist certaine pirates that came thither out of Holland the
last yeare, and were determined this yeare also to come againe. Vnder these
colours they sought to take the towne and to fortifie the same, and they
built certaine sconces in the countrey, committing great outrages,
rauishing the Women, with many other villanies. [Sidenote: The Portugals
vanquished.] Hereupon the townsemen of Bantam very secretly provided
certaine gallies and fustes in great hast, and sodainly assailed the
Portugales before they were well aware of them: for which cause finding but
small resistance, they tooke 3. Portugale gallies with certaine shippes,
and slewe about 300. of them, taking 150. Portugales prisoners, of which we
daily saw some going vp and downe the streetes of Bantam like slaues and
captiues. Besides these they tooke about 900. gallie slaues prisoners.

Vpon this hard successe the rest of the Portugals betooke themselues to
flight: but whither they bee arriued at Goa or Molucca, or what is become
of them since, we are not able to auouch. The foresaid attempt and
ouerthrowe, bred greater enmity betweene the Portugales and them of Bantam,
and gaue an especiall occasion for the aduancement of our traffique.

The fiue ships (whereof we haue before signified that foure were dispatched
by the whole companie for the Moluccas) being seuered beyonde the Cape of
Buona Speranza [Marginal Note: The course which the fiue ships tooke after
they were separated from their three consorts about the Cape of bouona
esperanza.] from the other three of their company, and hauing quite lost
them, came all of them shortly after vnder an Island called (as it is
thought) by the Portugals Isola de Don Galopes: but they named it the
Island of Mauritius. Here they entered into an hauen, calling the same
Warwicke, after the name of their Viceadmirall, wherin they found very good
harborow in twenty degrees of southerly latitude.

[Sidenote: The Isle of Mauritius described.] This Island being situate to
the East of Madagascar, and containing as much in compasse as all Holland,
is a very high, goodly and pleasant land, full of green and fruitfull
vallies, and replenished with Palmito-trees, from the which droppeth
holesome wine. [Sidenote: Great store of Ebenwood.] Likewise here are very
many trees of right Ebenwood as black as iet, and as smooth and hard as the
very Iuory: and the quantity of this wood is so exceeding, that many ships
may be laden herewith.

For to saile into this hauen you must bring the two highest mountaines one
ouer the other, leauing sixe small Islands on your right hand, and so you
may enter in vpon 30. fadomes of water. Lying within the bay, they had 10.
12. and 14. fadomes. On their left hand was a litle Island which they named
Hemskerk Island, and the bay it selfe they called Warwick bay, as is before
mentioned. Here they taried 12. daies to refresh themselues, finding in
this place great quantity of foules twise as bigge as swans, which they
called Walghstocks or Wallowbirdes being very good meat. But finding also
aboundance of pidgeons and popiniayes, they disdained any more to eat of
those great foules, calling them (as before) Wallowbirds, that is to say,
lothsome or fulsome birdes.

Of the said Pidgeons and Popiniayes they found great plenty being very fat
and good meate, which they could easily take and kil euen with little
stickes: so tame they are by reason that the Isle is not inhabited, neither
be the liuing creatures therein accustomed to the sight of men.

Here they found rauens also, and such abundance of fish, that two men were
able to catch enough for all fiue ships.

Tortoises they found so huge, that tenne men might sit and dine in one of
their shelles, and one of them would creepe away, while two men stood vpon
the backe thereof.

Here was founde waxe also whiter then any of ours, lying about the strande,
bleached (as it is like) by the sunne: and in some of this waxe there were
Arabian letters or characters printed: whereby it is probable, that some
Arabian ship might bee cast away thereabout, out of which the said waxe
might be driuen on land.

They found likewise Corall on this land, and many trees which we call
Palmitos, whereout droppeth wine as out of the Coco-tree: which wine being
kept hath his operation as our new prest wine, but after some time it
commeth vnto the ful vertue and perfection.

The said Palmitos they esteemed to bee a kinde of wilde date-trees.

We sought all the Island ouer for men, but could find none, for that it was
wholly destitute of Inhabitants.

Vpon this Island we built an house with a pulpit therein, and left behind
vs certaine writings as a token and remembrance of our being there, and
vpon the pulpit we left a Bible and a psalter lying.

[Sidenote: A good watering place.] Thus after 12. daies aboad at this
Island, being well refreshed, they tooke in excellent fresh water being
easie to get, and very sweet and sauory to drinke, and then set saile,
meeting the three other ships their consorts at the time and place before
mentioned.

       *       *       *       *       *

A briefe description of the voiage before handled, in manner of a Iournall.

The first of Maie 1598. with the eight shippes before mentioned, we set
saile in the name of God from Texell in Holland.

The third of May we passed along the coast of England, descrying some of
her Maiesties ships, and they vs, whom we honoured with discharge of our
artillery.

The fourteenth we had sight of the Isle of Porto Santo lying in thirty two
degrees.

The sixteenth, wee came within sight of the Canaries.

The twenty two, we first saw flying fishes.

The twenty three, we passed by the Isle Dell Sall.

The thirty one, we had a great storme, so that we lost sight one of
another: but by night we came together againe.

The eighth of Iune wee crossed the Equinoctiall line.

The twenty foure we sayled by the sholdes of Brasile lying vnder eighteene
degrees of Southerly Latitude.

The twenty one of Iuly we got to the height of the Cape of buona esperanza.

From the thirtith of Iuly till the second of August, we continually sayled
in sight of the land of the aforesaid Cape.

The seuenth and eighth of August wee had such foule and stormy weather,
that fiue ships of our company were separated from vs, whom we saw no more
vntill they came to vs before Bantam.

The twenty sixt we descryed the Island of Madagascar.

The twenty nine came by us the ship called the Long barke of Zeland, hauing
in her but nine sound men, tenne dead, and the rest all sicke: but the same
night we lost the sight of her againe.

The seauenth of September, we came before the Island of Santa Maria, and
afterward wee put into the great bay of Antogill.

The sixteenth of September, wee set saile from thence, directing our course
for Iaua.

The first of October, wee got to the heighth of Bantam.

The fifteenth, died the first man in our Admirall.

The nineteenth of November, we came within sight of Sumatra.

The twenty-ninth, we road before the citty of Bantam: And the thirtieth, we
payed our toll to the gouernour.

And vpon Newyeares daie 1599. Stilo Nouo, we began to take in our lading.

Then came vnto vs before Bantam, with great ioie and triumph, our fiue
separated shippes, all the people standing vpon the shore gazing, and
suspecting some harme intended against them.

The eighth of Ianuary, foure of the said 5. newcome shippes (God send them
a prosperous voyage) set saile toward the Moluccas.

Moreouer our foure shippes being well and richly laden at Bantam made saile
homewarde the eleuenth of Ianuary, and the thirteenth, wee were shot as
farre as the Isles of Sumatra.

The nineteenth, we proceeded thence on our voige, and the same day, to the
great griefe of vs all died the Pilot of our Admirall.

The third of Aprill, we descried the land of Capo de buona esperanza.

The eighth, wee doubled the same Cape, thence shaping our course for the
Island of Saint Helena, where the twenty sixt we happily arriued, and
departed from thence vpon the fourth of Maie.

The tenth of Maie, wee sailed by the Isle of Ascension.

The seuenteenth, we passed the Equinoctiall line.

The twenty one, we saw the North starre.

The ninth and tenth of Iune, we had sight of the Canaries.

The twenty seauen, wee sayled vpon the Spanish Sea.

The twenty nine, we were in fortie four degrees.

The fourth of Iuly, we saw behind vs two sailes, one before the other,
which were the first that we had seene for a long time.

The sixt of Iuly our Admirall had both his foremast and mainemast blowne
ouer boord.

The eleuenth, we passed the Sorlings, the thirteenth, Falmouth, Plimmouth
and the Quasquets.

The seauenteenth, we came before Dover.

The nineteenth, wee had foule and stormy weather, at what time by Gods good
blessing wee arriued in our natiue countrey at Texell in Holland, hauing
performed in the short space of one yeare, two moneths and nineteene daies,
almost as long a voiage, as if we should haue compassed the globe of the
earth, and bringing home with vs our full fraight of rich and gainfull
Marchandize.

END OF VOL. X.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Principal Navigations, Voyages,
Traffiques, and Discoveries of The English Nation, Volume 10, by Richard Hakluyt

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PRINCIPAL NAVIGATIONS, V10 ***

***** This file should be named 11948.txt or 11948.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/1/1/9/4/11948/

Produced by Karl Hagen and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team.
This file was produced from images generously made available by the
Canadian Institute for Historical Microreproductions


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook's
eBook number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII,
compressed (zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected EDITIONS of our eBooks replace the old file and take over
the old filename and etext number.  The replaced older file is renamed.
VERSIONS based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

EBooks posted prior to November 2003, with eBook numbers BELOW #10000,
are filed in directories based on their release date.  If you want to
download any of these eBooks directly, rather than using the regular
search system you may utilize the following addresses and just
download by the etext year.

     http://www.gutenberg.net/etext06

    (Or /etext 05, 04, 03, 02, 01, 00, 99,
     98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90)

EBooks posted since November 2003, with etext numbers OVER #10000, are
filed in a different way.  The year of a release date is no longer part
of the directory path.  The path is based on the etext number (which is
identical to the filename).  The path to the file is made up of single
digits corresponding to all but the last digit in the filename.  For
example an eBook of filename 10234 would be found at:

     http://www.gutenberg.net/1/0/2/3/10234

or filename 24689 would be found at:
     http://www.gutenberg.net/2/4/6/8/24689

An alternative method of locating eBooks:
     http://www.gutenberg.net/GUTINDEX.ALL


