The Project Gutenberg EBook of Punch, or the London Charivari, Vol. 146,
January 7, 1914, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Punch, or the London Charivari, Vol. 146, January 7, 1914

Author: Various

Release Date: May 7, 2004 [EBook #12294]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PUNCH, NO. 146 ***




Produced by Malcolm Farmer, Sandra Brown and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team.





PUNCH, OR THE LONDON CHARIVARI.

VOL. 146.



JANUARY 7, 1914.




[Illustration: "THE MONARCH OF THE GLEN:" A NEW _LAND-SEER_.]

       *       *       *       *       *

_AMENDE DESHONORABLE_.

    Heavily dragged the night; the Year
      Was passing, and the clock's slow tick
    Boomed its sad message to my ear
      And made me pretty sick.
   "You have been slack," I told myself, "and weak;
      You have done foolishly, from wilful choice;
      Sloth and procrastination--" Here my voice
        Broke in a squeak.

    And deep repentance welled in me
      As I mused darkly on my sin;
    Yea, Conscience stung me, like a bee
      That gets her barb well in.
   "Next year," I swore, in this compunctious mood,
     "I will be energetic, virtuous, kind;
      Unflinching I will face the awful grind
        Of being good."

    I paused, half troubled by a thought--
      Were my proposals too sublime?
    Vowed I more deeply than I ought?
      I glanced to see the time.
    It was 12.10 A.M. At once a thrill,
      A wave of manful resolution, sped
      Through all my being. "Yes," I bravely said;
        "_Next_ year I will!"

       *       *       *       *       *

A PLAY OF FEATURES.

    [Being Sir GEORGE ALEXANDER'S production of _The Attack_ at
    the St. James's.]

SCENE--Alexandre Merital's _house_.


ACT I.


_Daniel Merital_. My father is a wonderful man. Leader of the Social
Party in the Chamber of Deputies, noted among his colleagues for his
absolute integrity, supported by the millionaire newspaper proprietor,
Frepeau, whose motives, between ourselves, are not altogether above--
Oh, are you there, Father? I didn't see you. I'm just off to play
tennis.                                                     [_Exit_.

_Enter_ Renee de Rould.

_Renee_. Mr. Merital, may I speak to you a moment?

_Georges Alexandre Merital (with, characteristic suavity_). Certainly.

_Renee_, I love you. Will you marry me?

_Merital (surprised_). Well, really--this is--I--you--we--er, he,
she, they--Frankly, you embarrass me. (_Apologetically_) This is my
embarrassed face.

_Renee_. But I thought you loved me. Don't you?

_Merital_. No. That is to say, yes. Or rather--

_Renee (tearfully_). I w-wish you could make it plainer whether you
d-do love me and are pretending you don't, or you d-don't love me and
are pretending you do. It's v-very unsettling for a young girl not to
know.

_Sir GEORGES ALEXANDRE (surprised and a little hurt_). Can't you tell
from my face?

_Miss MARTHA HEDMAN_. This is my first appearance in England, Sir
GEORGES.

_Sir GEORGES_. True. I was forgetting. Well, when you have been with
us a little longer, you will know that this is my face when I adore
anyone very much, but, owing to an unfortunate episode in my past
life, am forced to hide my love.

_Renee (alarmed_). Your past _wife_ isn't alive somewhere?

_Merital_. Oh no, not that sort of thing at all. (_Embracing her
carefully_.) I will marry you, Renee, but run along now because my
friend Frepeau is coming, and he probably wants to talk business.
                                                   [_Exit_ Renee.

_Enter_ Frepeau.

_Frepeau (excitedly_). Merital, you are in danger. A scandalous libel
is being circulated about you.

_Merital (calmly_). Pooh! Faugh!

_Frepeau_. It is said that thirty years ago (Alexandre's _nose
twitches_), when you were in a solicitor's office (Alexandre's _jaw
drops_), you stole ninepence from the stamp drawer (Alexandre's
_eyeballs roll_). Of course it is a lie?

_Merital (with a great effort obtaining command of his features
again_). Of course.

CURTAIN.


ACT II.


_Daniel Merital_. Father's face has been very odd these last few
weeks. Sometimes I wonder whether he didn't steal the money after all.
But we shall know after the libel action this afternoon. It starts
at two. Oh, are you there, Father? I'm just going to see a man about
something.                                                     [_Exit.

Enter_ Frepeau.

_Merital_. Ah, Frepeau, the man I wanted to see. (_Plaintively_)
Frepeau, when you called on me in the First Act, don't you think you
might have given some indication by the play of your features that it
was _you_ who originated this libel against me, and that you are my
deadly enemy? The merest twitch of the ears would have been enough.

_HOLMAN CLARK_. I wanted it to be a surprise for the audience.

_Sir GEORGES_. Yes, but is that art?

_HOLMAN CLARK_. Besides, in real life--

_Sir GEORGES (amazed_). Real life? Good Heavens, HOLMAN, is this
_your_ first appearance in England too?

_HOLMAN CLARK (annoyed_). Let's get on with the play.

_Sir GEORGES_. Certainly. Wait a moment till I've got my
"strong-man-with-his-back-to-the-wall" expression. (_Arranging his
face_.) How's that?

_HOLMAN CLARK_. Begin again.... That's better.

_Merital (sternly_). Now then, Frepeau! I must ask you to give
instructions that the libel is withdrawn in court this afternoon. If
not--

_Frepeau_. Well?

_Merital (softly_). I know somebody else who stole something from the
stamp drawer thirty years ago. (Frepeau's _whiskers tremble_.) Aha, I
thought I'd move you this time.

_Frepeau_. It's a lie! How did you find out?

_Merital (blandly_). I said to myself, "I am the hero of this play and
I've got to get out of this mess somehow. If I could only find some
papers incriminating the villain--that's you all would be well." So
I--er--found them.... It's no good, Frepeau. Unless you let me off,
you're done.

_Frepeau (getting up_). Well, I suppose I must. But personally I'd be
ashamed to escape through such a rotten coincidence as that. (_Making
for the door_.) I'll just go and arrange it. Er, I suppose this is the
end?

_Sir GEORGES_. The end? Good Heavens, man, I've got my big scene to
come. I have to explain _why_ Merital stole the money thirty years
ago!

_HOLMAN CLARK (eagerly_). Let me guess. His wife was starv--

_SIR GEORGES_. No, no, don't spoil it. (_Sternly_) It's a very serious
thing, HOLMAN, to spoil an actor-manager's big scene.

CURTAIN.


ACT III.


_Daniel Merital_. Father has won his case. I _am_ glad. Oh, are you
there, Father? I'm just going downstairs to count the telegrams.
                                                            [_Exit.

Enter_ Renee.

_Renee_. You have won the case? I knew it. I knew you were innocent.

_Merital (nobly_). Renee, I am not innocent. I did steal that
ninepence. I would have confessed it before, but I had to think of my
family. (_Cheers from the gallery_.) Of course it would also have been
unpleasant for _me_ if it had been known, but that did not influence
me. (_More cheers_.) I thought only of my children. Let me tell you
now _why_ I stole it.

_Renee (eagerly_). Let me guess. Your wife was starving--

_Merital (astounded_). Wonderful! How ever did you know?

_Renee_. --and you meant to repay the money.

_Merital_. More and more marvellous. Yes, Renee, that was how it was.
But it hardly does justice to the affair. It is too short. I want to
tell you the story of my _whole_ life and then you will understand.
Watch my face carefully and observe how it works; notice the constant
movement of my hands; listen to the inflections of my voice. This is
going to be the longest speech ever made by an actor-manager, and you
mustn't miss a moment of it. H'r'm! Now then. (_Nobly_) I was born
fifty-three years ago. My father....

_Renee (half-an-hour later_). I still love you.

_Merital (with some truth_). What a love yours is!

_Enter_ Daniel, Julien _and_ Georgette Merital.

_Daniel_. Father, we have a confession to make. For some time we
doubted your innocence. Your face--well, you'd have doubted it
yourself if you'd seen it.

_Merital (taking his hand affectionately_). Ah! Daniel, I see I must
tell you the story of my life. (_Excitement among the audience_.) And
you too, Julien. (_Panic_.) Yes, and--little Georgette!


SAFETY CURTAIN.

A. A. M.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: THE EARTHLY PARADISE.

_Coster_. "SEE THAT, LIZ? THERE'S A COUNTRY FOR YOU!"]

       *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration: PEACEFUL PERSUASION.

(JONES IS NOT NATURALLY A GENEROUS MAN.)]

       *       *       *       *       *

THE ROMANCE OF A BATTLESHIP.

_(From the Navy League Annual of 1916.)_

I have just returned (writes a Naval correspondent) from an
interesting visit to the condemned battleship, _H.M.S. Indefensible_,
which is now anchored off Brightlingsea, in the charge of retired
petty-officer Herbert Tompkins and his wife.

The history of _H.M.S. Indefensible_, as gathered from the lips of her
present curator, is so romantic as to be worthy of permanent record.
In reply to my first question, "Whom did she belong to first of
all?" Mr. Tompkins said, "Well, she was ordered first of all by the
Argentine Republic, but, owing to a change of Government, they sold
her to the Italians. I remember the launch at Barrow quite well," he
said. "It was a mighty fine show, with the Italian Ambassador and his
wife--the _Magnifico Pomposo_, they called her, I think it was--and
there was speechifying and hurraying and enough champagne drunk to
float her. That was just three years ago: a super-Dreadnought, they
called her."

"Then how did the British Government get her?"

"Lor bless you, Sir, that didn't come for a long time yet. Ye see,
Italy shortly afterwards made an alliance with Denmark, and, wishing
to do the Danes a good turn, she arranged to sell them the _Magnifico
Pomposo_ at cost price--about three millions I think it was. But
immediately afterwards the Russo-Chinese war broke out, and the
Chinese offered the Danes four millions for the _Dannebrog_, as they
had called her, so by the time the engines were put into her she had
been rechristened the _Hoang-Ho_. But the war never came off: you
remember that Mr. ROOSEVELT settled it by fighting a single combat
with the Russian champion after he had been appointed President of
China; so the Chinese leased the _Hoang-Ho_ to the King of SIAM for
four years at a million a year."

"Did she get out to Siam, then?"

"Oh no, Sir, no fear. The crew ran her on the Goodwin Sands on her
trial trip, and there she stuck for a year. Before they got her
off the Siamese had been released from their bargain by the Hague
Tribunal, Mr. ROOSEVELT had resigned the Presidency of China for that
of Mexico, and the new President sold the _Chulalongkorn_ back to
Great Britain. Of course by that time she was quite obsolete, so they
called her the _Indefensible_, and put a nucleus crew on board for
a few months. Then when Mr. LLOYD GEORGE became Prime Minister, they
offered her to Canada as a gift; but the Canadians didn't like her
name. And when Mr. WINSTON CHURCHILL came back last month he decided
that she was to be made a target; but last week I heard she was to be
sold for scrap-iron."

"Then whom does she belong to now?"

"Well, Sir, some says she belongs to Canada, and others say she's
British, and others say she belongs to Mr. CHURCHILL, but in a manner
of speaking I think she rightly belongs to Mrs. Tompkins and me."

       *       *       *       *       *

    "On making enquiries at the Hospital this afternoon, we learn
    that the deceased is as well as can be expected."--_Jersey
    Evening Post_.

It would, of course, be foolish to expect much.

       *       *       *       *       *

A NEW BOOK OF BEAUTY.

A hundred years ago they had line, engravings by CHARLES HEATH, and
the long-necked, ringleted ladies looked wistfully or simperingly at
you. I have several examples: _Caskets, Albums, Keepsakes_.

This book is different. The steel engravers have long since all died
of starvation; and here are photographs only, but there are many
more of them, and (strange innovation!) there are more gentlemen than
ladies. For this preponderance there is a good commercial reason, as
any student of the work will quickly discover, for we are now entering
a sphere of life where the beauty of the sterner sex (if so severe a
word can be applied to such sublimation of everything that is soft and
voluptuous and endearing) is more considered than that of the other.
Beautiful ladies are here in some profusion, but the first place is
for beautiful and guinea-earning gentlemen.

In the old Books of Beauty one could make a choice. There was always
one lady supremely longer-necked, more wistful or more simpering than
the others. But in this new Book of Beauty one turns the pages only to
be more perplexed. The embarrassment of riches is too embarrassing. I
have been through the work a score of times and am still wondering on
whom my affections and admiration are most firmly fixed.

This new Book of Beauty has a very different title from the old ones.
It is called _The Pekingese_, and is the revised edition for 1914.

How to play the part of _Paris_ where all the competitors have some
irresistibility, as all have of either sex! Once I thought that Wee Mo
of Westwood was my heart's chiefest delight, "a flame-red little dog
with black mask and ear-fringes, profuse coat and featherings, flat
wide skull, short flat face, short bowed legs and well-shaped
body." But then I turned back to Broadoak Beetle and on to Broadoak
Cirawanzi, and Young Beetle, and Nanking Fo, and Ta Fo of Greystones,
and Petshe Ah Wei, and Hay Ch'ah of Toddington, and that superb
Sultanic creature, King Rudolph of Ruritania, and Champion Howbury
Ming, and Su Eh of Newnham, and King Beetle of Minden, and Champion Hu
Hi, and Mo Sho, and that rich red dog, Buddha of Burford. And having
chosen these I might just as well scratch out their names and write in
others, for every male face in this book is a poem.

The ladies, as I have said, are in the minority, for obvious reasons,
for these little disdainful distinguished gentlemen figure here as
potential fathers, with their fees somewhat indelicately named; for
there's a husbandry on earth as well as in heaven.

Such ladies as are here are here for their beauty alone and are beyond
or below price. Their favours are not to be bought. Among them I note
with especial joy Yiptse of Chinatown, Mandarin Marvel, who "inherits
the beautiful front of her sire, Broadoak Beetle"; Lavender of
Burton-on-Dee, "fawn with black mask"; Chi-Fa of Alderbourne, "a most
charming and devoted little companion"; Yeng Loo of Ipsley; Detlong
Mo-li of Alderburne, one of the "beautiful red daughters of Wong-ti of
Alderburne," Champion Chaou Ching-ur, of whom her owner says that
"in quaintness and individuality and in loving disposition she is
unequalled" and is also "quite a 'woman of the world,' very _blasee_
and also very punctilious in trifles;" Pearl of Cotehele, "bright red
with beautiful back"; E-Wo Tu T'su; Berylune Tzu Hsi Chu; Ko-ki of
Radbourne and Siddington Fi-fi.

Every now and then there is an article in the papers asking and
answering the question, What is the greatest benefit that has come to
mankind in the past half century? The answer is usually the Marconi
system, or the cinema, or the pianola, or the turbine, or the Roentgen
rays, or the telephone or the motor car. Always something utilitarian
or scientific. But why should we not say that it was the introduction
of Pekingese into England from China? According to an historical
sketch at the beginning of this book, the first Pekingese were brought
over in 1860, after the occupation of Pekin by the Allies. The first
black ones came here in 1896, and now in 1914 there are thousands of
these wholly alluring and adorable and masterful little big-hearted
creatures in England, turning staid men and women into ecstatic
worshippers and making children lyrical with cries of appreciation.
The book before me is the finest monument yet raised to this
conquering breed.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: NEW SEASON'S NOVELTIES.

1. THE CAT'S-MEAT HAT-PIN PROTECTOR.

2. THE MUD-SPLASH VEIL.

3. THE THROAT CORSET.]

       *       *       *       *       *

MISUNDERSTOOD.

_(A Story of the Stone Age.)_

Of all the young bachelors in his tribe not one was more highly
esteemed than Ug, the son of Zug. He was one of the nicest young
prehistoric men that ever sprang seven feet into the air to avoid the
impulsive bite of a sabre-tooth tiger, or cheered the hearts of grave
elders searching for inter-tribal talent by his lightning sprints in
front of excitable mammoths. Everybody liked Ug, and it was a matter
of surprise to his friends that he had never married.

One bright day, however, they were interested to observe that he
had begun to exhibit all the symptoms. He brooded apart. Twice in
succession he refused a second help of pterodactyl at the tribal
luncheon table. And there were those who claimed to have come upon him
laboriously writing poetry on the walls of distant caves.

It should be understood that in those days only the most powerful
motive, such as a whole-hearted love, could drive a man to writing
poetry; for it was not the ridiculously simple task which it is
to-day. The alphabet had not yet been invented, and the only method by
which a young man could express himself was by carving or writing on
stone a series of pictures, each of which conveyed the sense of some
word or phrase. Thus, where the modern bard takes but a few seconds to
write, "You made me love you. I didn't want to do it, I didn't want
to do it," Ug, the son of Zug, had to sit up night after night till
he had carved three trees, a plesiosaurus, four kinds of fish, a
star-shaped rock, eleven different varieties of flowering shrub, and
a more or less lifelike representation of a mammoth surprised while
bathing. It is little wonder that the youth of the period, ever
impetuous, looked askance at this method of revealing their passion,
and preferred to give proof of their sincerity and fervour by waiting
for the lady of their affections behind a rock and stunning her with a
club.

But the refined and sensitive nature of Ug, the son of Zug, shrank
from this brusque form of wooing. He was shy with women. To him there
was something a little coarse, almost ungentlemanly, in the orthodox
form of proposal; and he had made up his mind that, if ever he should
happen to fall in love, he would propose by ideograph.

It was shortly after he had come to this decision that, at a
boy-and-girl dance given by a popular local hostess, he met the
divinest creature he had ever seen. Her name was Wug, the daughter of
Glug; and from the moment of their introduction he realised that she
was the one girl in the world for him. It only remained to compose the
ideograph.

Having steadied himself as far as possible by carving a few poems, as
described above, he addressed himself to the really important task of
the proposal.

It was extraordinarily difficult, for Ug had not had a very good
education. All he knew he had picked up in the give and take of tribal
life. For this reason he felt it would be better to keep the thing
short. But it was hard to condense all he felt into a brief note.
For a long time he thought in vain, then one night, as he tossed
sleeplessly on his bed of rocks, he came to a decision. He would
just ideograph, "Dear Wug, I love you. Yours faithfully, Ug. P.S.
R.S.V.P.," and leave it at that. So in the morning he got to work, and
by the end of the week the ideograph was completed. It consisted of
a rising sun, two cave-bears, a walrus, seventeen shin-bones of
the lesser rib-nosed baboon, a brontosaurus, three sand-eels, and
a pterodactyl devouring a mangold-wurzel. It was an uncommonly neat
piece of work, he considered, for one who had never attended an
art-school. He was pleased with it. It would, he flattered himself, be
a queer sort of girl who could stand out against that. For the first
time for weeks he slept soundly and peacefully.

Next day his valet brought him with his morning beverage a piece of
flat rock. On it was carved a simple human thigh-bone. He uttered
a loud cry. She had rejected him. The parcel-post, an hour later,
brought him his own ideograph, returned without a word.

Ug's greatest friend in the tribe was Jug, son of Mug, a youth of
extraordinary tact and intelligence. To him Ug took his trouble.

Jug heard his story, and asked to see exactly what he had ideographed.

"You must have expressed yourself badly," he said.

"On the contrary," replied Ug, with some pique, "my proposal was
brief, but it was a model of what that sort of proposal should be.
Here it is. Read it for yourself."

Jug read it. Then he looked at his friend, concerned.

"But, my dear old man, what on earth did you mean by saying she has
red hair and that you hate the sight of her?"

"What do you mean?"

"Why, this ichthyosaurus."

"That's not an ichthyosaurus. It's a brontosaurus."

"It's not a bit like a brontosaurns. And it _is_ rather like an
ichthyosaurus. Where you went wrong was in not taking a few simple
lessons in this sort of thing first."

"If you ask me," said Ug disgustedly, "this picture-writing is silly
rot. To-morrow I start an Alphabet."
       *       *       *       *       *
But on the morrow he was otherwise employed. He was standing,
concealed behind a rock, at the mouth of the cave of Wug, daughter
of Glug. There was a dreamy look in his eyes, and his fingers
were clasped like steel bands round the handle of one of the most
business-like clubs the Stone Age had ever seen. Orthodoxy had found
another disciple.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: SCENE--_An Army Boxing Competition_.

_Civilian_. "RATHER A FEARFUL MAN, THAT?"

_Soldier_. "WELL, 'E AIN'T REALLY VERY FEARFUL. YOU SEE THE BIG
FELLOW'S 'IS SERGEANT AN' THIS IS THE ONLY CHANCE 'E 'AS OF GETTING A
BIT OF 'IS OWN BACK."]

       *       *       *       *       *

CHARIVARIA.

Sir ERNEST SHACKLETON is to undertake a new expedition to the South
Pole, and across the whole South Polar Continent. It is said that an
offer from Dr. COOK, who happens to be over here, to show Sir ERNEST
how he might save himself much wearisome travelling in achieving his
object, has been rejected.

       ***

Judge PARRY declares, in the current number of _The Cornhill_, that
lost golf balls belong to the KING; and the ballroom at Buckingham
Palace is, we understand, to be enlarged at once.

       ***

Mr. BERNARD SHAW is the latest addition to Madame TUSSAUD'S gallery
of wax-works. But Mr. CHESTERTON must not be jealous. He too, we
understand, will be placed there if room can be found for him.

       ***

From some correspondence in _The Express_ we learn that members of
more than one savage tribe have a habit of standing on one leg. We see
no objection to this at all, but we were bound to protest the other
day, in a crowded train, when we came across a stout gentleman
standing on one foot. The foot, we should mention, was ours.

       ***

Of the late Mr. JOHN WILLIAM WHITE, who was only twenty-one inches in
height, we are told that he was an ardent politician. Could he have
been a Little Englander?

       ***

Straws show which way the wind blows, and the fact that the first
prize in the Christmas Lottery at Madrid has been won in Madrid, and
the second in London, is held by wiseacres to prove that there is a
secret understanding between our country and Spain.

       ***

The fact that France's Colonial Empire, which is already extensive,
has been increased by the birth, during a volcanic eruption, of a
new island in the New Hebrides, has caused some little irritation in
Germany.

       ***

The Lost Property department of Scotland Yard will, it is said, this
year easily beat all previous records in the number of articles lost.
But we English have always had the reputation of being good losers.

       ***

It is announced that Miss PHYLLIS DESMOND, of the Gaiety Theatre, and
Mr. C.R. FINCH NOYES, of the Royal Naval Flying Corps, were married
secretly last June. As proving how difficult it is to keep a secret we
believe that the fact has been known for some time past both to Miss
DESMOND and Mr. NOYES.

       ***

Special cinema productions depicting scenes of a sacred nature were
provided by enterprising managers for the clergy during the holiday
season. When one remembers that there is also _Who's the Lady?_
running under distinguished episcopal patronage, the modern curate
cannot complain that he is not well catered for.

       ***

We congratulate _The Daily Mail_ on finding a peculiarly appropriate
topic for discussion at Christmas time. It was "Too Much Cramming."

       ***

Thieves broke into the vestry during the service and stole the gold
watch and chain which the minister preaching the Christmas sermon at
Marylebone Presbyterian church had left there. The minister must be
sorry now that he did not trust his congregation.

       ***

Mr. GEORGE BAKER, of Brentwood, received a presentation the other day
on completing his fiftieth year as a carol singer. He mentioned that
once, at the beginning of his career, his carol party was broken up by
an angry London householder, who fired a pistol-shot from his bedroom
window. The modern Londoner, we fear, is decadent, and lacks the
necessary spirit.

       ***

Dr. MARY WILLIAMS, medical inspector of schools under the
Worcestershire County Council, has discovered, as a result of
investigations, that there is a higher proportion of nervous,
excitable children among the red-haired ones than among the others.
We have ourselves known more than one such lad lose all self-control
merely upon being addressed as "Carrots."

       ***

Is a motor-car, it is being asked, feminine--like a ship? A
correspondent in _The Times_ refers to her as a lady. Presumably
because she wears a bonnet.

       ***

A correspondent writes to _The Pall Mall Gazette_ asking whether there
is anything in the idea that a large number of used penny postage
stamps will enable a person to be received into a charitable
institution. We have always understood that the collector of one
million of these stamps is admitted into a lunatic asylum without
having to pass the entrance examination.

       ***

A lion from the bush, attracted by the roaring of its caged relatives
in a circus at Wankies, South Africa, suddenly made its way into the
menagerie. The beast was ultimately driven away by attendants armed
with red-hot pokers, but five persons were seriously injured in the
panic. The ticket-collector who let the animal in without payment has
been reprimanded.

       ***

Speaking of MEDWIN'S _Revised Life of Shelley_ a critic says, in a
contemporary: "He puts the well-known boats of Archimedes into blank
verse." These boats were, we presume, fitted with ARCHIMEDES' famous
screw?

       ***

The Hindujah barrage on the Euphrates has now been completed by an
English firm, and will provide water for the Garden of Eden. The
structure, we presume, is a blend of the ADAM style with NOAH'S
architecture.

       ***

"TRAINING SHIP OFF THE EMBANKMENT" is a heading which attracts our
attention. This seems a much better idea than having the vessel _on_
the Embankment, where it would be in everyone's way.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE LAST STRAW.

    ["The way in which individual taste is allowed to assert
    itself lends a curious charm to the present modes."--_Fashion
    Note_.]

  This is the finish, Josephine.
    Through every swift sartorial change
  Constant and true my love has been,
    Nor showed the least desire to range.
  The hobble only brought to me
    These thoughts with consolation laden:--
  "Lo, this is Fashion's fell decree;
  One must not blame the maiden.

  "It is not hers this hideous choice;
    She blindly follows Fashion's lead,
  And deference to a ruling voice
    Proclaims her just the wife I need.
  Nought questioning, she answers to
    That voice, as soldiers to a trumpet;"
  And thus I choked the thought that you
    Were barmy on the crumpet.

  But now unhappy doubts intrude
    To bid my satisfaction shrink;
  For Fashion in a gracious mood
    Allows her devotees to think.
  Since for your present garb, it seems,
    The mode is not to blame _in toto_,
  This is the end of love's young dreams
    (Dear, you may keep my photo).

       *       *       *       *       *

    "Of course, there is a dress parade, with some wonderful
    dresses, but if it had been only a parade it would not have
    been less interesting."--_Daily News._

It would have been more interesting--but we hardly expected _The Daily
News_ to say so.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: THE HOLIDAY ENTERTAINERS.

_Extract from Mr. Herbert Stodge's letter to his sister._ "WE WERE
GLAD TO HAVE OUR NEPHEW AND NIECE WITH US, BUT, FRANKLY, THEY ARE TOO
SOLEMN.

"WE TOOK THEM TO THE PANTOMIME;

THEY CAME OUT GOLFING WITH US;

AND WE ALLOWED THEM TO SIT UP LATE,

BUT THE ONLY TIME THEY SMILED WAS WHEN THEY SAID GOOD-BYE."]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: AT OUR LOCAL FANCY CARNIVAL.

_Individual in Tights_. "I SAY, THIS PLACE IS BEASTLY WARM--I THINK
I'LL CUT OFF HOME."

_The One with the Scythe_. "I THINK I WILL ALSO. I WONDER WHAT THE
TIME IS?"]

       *       *       *       *       *

THE SUBSCRIPTION.

Charles, when our protest was lodged, merely replied that our favour
of the 10th inst. was to hand, and that he really could not see his
way to moving further in the matter. Let me explain the present extent
of Charles's movement.

Miss Donelan, who ought to have known better, had allowed herself to
be saddled with a thing called a Branch subscription list on behalf of
the St. Nicholas New Year Offering.

Having exploited the probables and possibles she finally handed the
document on to me with instructions to tout it round among my friends.
(This is the sort of thing you get nowadays for placing your life at a
young woman's disposal.)

Unfortunately I have no friends just now, except what I want to keep.
While I was thus at a loss, Charles came to stay for a few days three
doors off. He lives a long way away and would have time to forget
before I saw him again. So on the day before his departure I bearded
him like a man.

"Charles," I began, "you are fabulously rich. Your income comes in at
such a pace that you hardly ever know within five shillings how much
you have at the bank."

Charles blinked through the smoke of a violet-tipped cigarette.

"What about it?" he asked.

"This," I said; "I am, very reluctantly, offering you the chance of
doing good. All you have to do is to sign your name here for anything
up to a hundred pounds, and the good does itself. It is the Saint
Nicholas New Year Offering."

"What does it do?" asked Charles uncomfortably.

"Do?" I answered. "Why, I don't think it does exactly _do_. You see
it's a New Year Offering."

"I see," said Charles. "It doesn't do; it offers. Just like a Member
of Parliament."

"I wish," I said, "instead of being funny at other people's expense
you would be serious at your own, and tell me exactly how much I can
put you down for?"

"There you go again," said Charles. "You want me to think of some
definite amount on the spot. You know I hate thinking, and I hate
definite amounts. And I loathe doing anything on the spot."

I looked at the subscription list. The last entry was:--

    Major-General R. Hewland, L5 5s. 0d.

"You needn't do any thinking," I explained patiently. "You need only
stick down exactly the same as the last man. And if you'll promise to
do it I'll leave the list with you, and you can fill it in when you
feel sufficiently off the spot."

"Exactly the same?" asked Charles.

"Exactly," I said, with rising hopes.

"All right," said Charles. "I'll let you have it some time."

Four days later, at Miss Donelan's urgent request, I wrote to Charles
for it. It came in less than forty-eight hours.

Extract from conclusion of subscription list returned by Charles:--

Major-General R. Hewland, L5 5s. 0d.

  "      "    "     "     "  "   "

       *       *       *       *       *

    DINNER-TABLE TOPICS.

    "MR. LLOYD GEORGE
    GOING TO A WARMER CLIMATE."

    _Midland Evening News_.

       *       *       *       *       *

    ANOTHER ACCIDENT TO AN INFINITIVE.

    "It is good news to at last hear that progress is being made
    again towards healing the 'split.'"--_Nottingham Football
    Post_.

So far not much progress is visible.

       *       *       *       *       *

    "Lord and Lady Arthur Hill arrived at Maples yesterday from
    London."--_Observer_.

And Mrs. and Miss Tomkins (in pursuit of bargains) continue to arrive
daily at Peter Snelbody's from Cricklewood.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: THE SPLENDID PAUPERS.

FIRST TURKISH OFFICIAL (_presented with a photograph of the new
Turkish Navy in lieu of six months' deferred pay_). "SO, WE'VE GOT A
_DREADNOUGHT_, HAVE WE?"

SECOND TURKISH OFFICIAL. "I DON'T KNOW WHO GETS THE DREAD, BUT I KNOW
WE'VE GOT THE NOUGHT."]

       *       *       *       *       *

THE SPELL

    _whereby the Good People may be brought back to a house which
    they have deserted_.

  Fairies!--whatsoever sprite
    Near about us dwells--
  You who roam the hills at night,
    You who haunt the dells--
    Where you harbour, hear us!
  By the Lady Hecate's might,
    Hearken and come near us!

  Though we greatly fear, alack!
    Cloddish unbelief
  Angered you and made you pack
    To our present grief,
    Hearts you shall not harden:
  Bathe your hurts and come you back
    Here to house and garden!

  By the oak and ash and thorn,
    By the rowan tree,
  This was done ere we were born:
    Kith nor kin are we
    Of the folk whose blindness
  Shut you out with scathe and scorn,
    Banished with unkindness.

  See, we call you, hands entwined,
    Standing at our door,
  With the glowing hearth behind
    And the wood before.
    Thence, where you are lurking,
  Back we bring you, bring and bind
    With our magic's working.

  Lo, our best we give for cess,
    Having naught above
  Handsel of our happiness,
    Seizin of our love.
    Take it then, O fairies!
  Homely gods that guard and bless,
    Little kindly _Lares_.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: _(5.35 A.M. workman's train.)_

_Bill_. "'ULLO, 'ERB; GOT A JOB, THEN?"

_'Erb._ "I AIN'T GOIN' UP TO LON'ON FOR A TANGO LESSON, I GIVE YOU
_MY_ WORD."]

       *       *       *       *       *

WHAT OUR READERS THINK OF US.

_The Daily Express_ having invited its readers to intimate their
opinion of that journal, _Mr. Punch_ decided also to give the
grumblers a chance of saying what they think of his production, and
he now publishes a typical selection of the letters which have reached
him:--

    Sir,--I gave up your journal many years ago on account of its
    partisanship, and never read it now. Only last week I came
    across a paragraph in my copy which made me throw the paper
    into the waste-paper basket.

    Yours faithfully,

    VERITAS.


    Sir,--Why is it you always favour the Tories?

    Yours faithfully,

    WELSH MEMBER.


    Sir,--If you continue to publish cartoons with a pronounced
    Radical bias I am afraid you will lose at least one.

    OLD SUBSCRIBER.


    Sir,--I object to the advertisements. I think it would be a
    good move if you were to drop these, increase the number of
    pages, and reduce the price to a halfpenny. In taking this
    course you would have the support of several influential
    members of my parish, in addition to myself.

    Yours faithfully,

    A COUNTRY PARSON.


    Sir,--What your paper needs is light relief. Could you not
    give us a little humour now and then?

    Yours faithfully,

    A POPULAR WRITER.

    P.S.--The last MS. you returned to me was very much crumpled.
    Please be more careful in the future.


    Sir,--I think it a pity you publish jokes. In this age, when
    all things--even our dear Bishops--are considered fit subjects
    for jest, we could do with one serious-minded paper. Trusting
    you will think this over,

    Yours faithfully,

    HITCHY KIKUYU.


    Sir,---You should see our American comic papers.

    Yours faithfully,

    WASHINGTON G. BUSTER.


    Sir,--I find the blank pages at the back of the cartoons very
    useful for making notes on. Could you not extend this feature?

    Yours faithfully,

    PROFESSOR.


    Sir,--I think you would do well to cater more for women--who,
    after all, are a rising sex. A page each week devoted to
    modern fashions would not be at all out of place in your
    paper.

    Yours faithfully,

    EVE.


    Sir,--In my opinion your paper is the cleverest in the
    country--nay in the world. Nowhere else is such exquisite
    literary discrimination shown. I enclose a small contribution
    for your consideration, and am,

    Yours faithfully,

    CONSTANT READER.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: "TWELFTH NIGHT" (JAN. 6).

_Mr. Lloyd George (as_ Malvolio). "Fool, there was never man so
notoriously abused."--_Act IV., Scene 2._]

       *       *       *       *       *

THE PAPER-CHASE.

I arrived at home at three o'clock on a frosty afternoon. "Now,"
thought I, "I shall have a quiet time before tea and shall be able to
write a few letters and start my article." It was a dream of usefully
employed leisure, but it didn't last long.

I found the whole family, with the addition of a little boyfriend,
gathered together in a very purposeful and alarming way in the library
There was about them an undefinable air of the chase, for they were
all well-booted and belted, and Peggy had a large clasp-knife dangling
at her waist. "It is for the hare," she said, "when we catch him."

"The hare?" I said. "What hare?"

"You," said the lady of the house cheerfully, "are to be the hare. You
are to run till you are cooked, and then you will be caught."

"What madness is this?" I said.

"It's not madness a bit," said Helen indignantly. "It's a
paper-chase."

"And I," said Rosie, "have torn up all _The Timeses_."

"And I," said John, who is not always sure of his tenses, though he is
very voluble, "have tored up _The Daily Newses_."

"That's capital," I said with enthusiasm. "A paper-chase is the best
fun in the world. I'll see you start and give you a cheer."

"You can't do that," said Helen firmly, "because we've settled that
you're to carry the bag and be the hare."

"Come, come," I said, "this is an unworthy proposal. Would you chase
your more than middle-aged father over the open country? Never. How
could he look the village in the face if he were to be seen scattering
little bits of paper from a linen bag? He would fall in their
estimation and would drag you all with him in his fall. John," I said,
"you would not have your father fall, would you?"

"It would make me laugh," said John, and the rest seemed to think that
this callous remark settled the matter.

"Anyhow," I said, "I must have plenty of law."

"We won't have any law," said Helen, who is an intelligent child;
"it's all quarrellings."

"Law," I said, "is the embodiment of human wisdom. In this case it
means that I'm going to have ten minutes' start. Everyone of you
must pledge his or her honour not to move until I've been gone ten
minutes."

They made no difficulty about this, and, the lady of the house having
appointed herself time-keeper and having promised to have a large
tea ready for us when we returned, I was sent on my way with a bag of
paper and many shrill shouts of encouragement.

Now I ask my colleagues in the parental business to consider my case.
I daresay they fancy themselves as runners on the strength of their
remembered boyish feats and of certain more recent runs when they have
lingered too long over breakfast and have had to catch a train. I warn
them not to build a paper-chase on so slender a foundation. A jog-trot
seems the easiest thing in the world, but after two hundred yards the
temptation to lapse into a walk becomes irresistible. I will dwell no
further on my own experiences, but transfer myself in imagination to
the hounds who were chasing me. Afterwards I heard so much of their
exploits that I almost came to feel I had shared in their daring and
been a party to their final success.

From the garden door the line led across the road and on to a track
skirting the railway. This piece was taken at a brisk pace, the scent
being breast-high. A sheet might have covered the whole pack. Then
came a hairpin turn over the level crossing, a swing to the right and
a steady trudge up the hill. Half-way up there were gates to the right
and the left, and here the blown but wary hare had laid his first
false trail. This unsuspected device roused the utmost indignation,
and doubts were freely expressed as to its being legitimate. John was
sent to the right to investigate; Peggy went off to the left, which
proved to be the true trail, and in a very short time the dauntless
five were once more in full cry. Rosie, who is a reader of books,
afterwards said that no sleuth-hounds could have done the thing
better. So by paths and ploughed fields and over gates and stiles the
dreadful chase continued until there came another check. "These," said
Helen, pointing to some pieces of paper, "are not newspaper. They
are bits of letters." It was too true. _The Timeses_ and _The Daily
Newses_ had given out, and the hare, omitting nothing that might lead
to his destruction, had torn up all his available correspondence. It
threw the pack out for a few minutes, but they rallied. In another
hundred-and-fifty yards they ran into their hare, who, paperless
and letterless, had taken refuge behind a tree and was ignominiously
hauled out.

So ended our great Christmas paper-chase, an event which must remain
justly celebrated both for the ardour with which it was undertaken and
for the endurance with which it was pursued. What a chatter there was
as we returned, what a narration of glorious incidents of pace, of
skill and of cunning defeated by greater cunning. Falls there had been
and shin-scrapes and the tearing of skirts and stockings, and legends
were made up and told again and again. And at home the lady of the
house had to hear it all once more, and the tea she gave us was voted
the best in the world.

       *       *       *       *       *

Copy of letter to Clerk of the Peace in reply to Jury Summons:--

    DEAR SIR, Your to hand re Sumons to Quarter Sessions on
    Jany 9/14

    I beg to be excused from this as I have ann absess forming
    under a bad tooth and at the present time my face is very much
    swollen.

    further that the 9th being a red letter day in my life being
    the day on which my dear wife passed away

    and I have understood that all those over 60 year of age was
    exempt from these things. So I shall be extreemly obligid if
    you could free me this time answer by bearer will oblig
                                            your respectfully

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: AFTER A BAD DAY'S GOLF.

"HERE WE ARE AGAIN."]

       *       *       *       *       *

CONTINENTAL INTELLIGENCE.

An extraordinary domestic tragedy is reported from a remote
province of Poland. A beautiful young woman, named Vera Alexandrina
Polianowski, who had been married only about two years, was expecting
the return home of her husband, a sailor. During his absence of five
months a mournful calamity had befallen her in an affection of the
larynx, which threatened to deprive her temporarily of the power to
articulate. Realising her impending affliction, she had taught a grey
parrot, which her husband had left with her, to exclaim repeatedly
from just inside the door of her cottage, in joyous accents that bore
no inconsiderable resemblance to her own once melodious voice, these
touching words, "Enter, dearest Vladimir, and console me for my
misfortune!"

It chanced, however, that before marrying Vladimir Polianowski, the
sailor, Vera Alexandrina had had a lover in poor circumstances named
Vladimir Crackovitch, whom, with the thoughtlessness of a beautiful
young girl, she had encouraged to get rich as quickly as he could
in America and then return to claim her as his bride. Vladimir
Crackovitch had taken her at her word. With the silent determination
of a great soul, he had amassed about a hundred thousand dollars in
America in less than four years, and only two or three minutes before
Vera Alexandrina's husband was due to arrive he himself stood at the
cottage door with folded arms, asking himself if he should or should
not enter and reproach Vera Alexandrina for her inconstancy.

His hesitation was suddenly overcome by the parrot. "Enter, dearest
Vladimir, and console me for my misfortune!" it cried eagerly from
within, and, not for an instant doubting that it was an invitation
from the woman whom he still loved fondly in spite of her perfidy, and
being unaware of her laryngeal affliction, he bounded into the
house and hurried from room to room until he found Vera Alexandrina
Polianowski.

But Vladimir, the sailor, had already in the meantime, from the top of
an adjacent lane, beheld Vladimir Crackovitch at the door of his home,
and, being a man of the most blindly passionate and jealous impulses,
his next procedure may be imagined.

Several hours later a neighbour called at the cottage and discovered
the three corpses in one sad heap: Vera Alexandrina Polianowski, shot
through the breast; at her side, Vladimir Crackovitch, with a bullet
in each eye; and, still clutching his revolver, Vladimir, the sailor,
seated upon his grim cushion of the dead, his back supported against
the wall under the domestic lamplit icon, with a smile of hellish
satisfaction frozen upon his lips and the remaining three bullets
buried in his heart.

The above is not necessarily a true story. It is a specimen of the
small-print news with which the rather young Assistant Sub-Editor
of _The Dullandshire Chronicle_ (established 1763) is permitted,
occasionally, to divert those of _The Chronicle's_ subscribers who
take an intelligent interest in continental affairs.

       *       *       *       *       *

    "You know the 'Tziganes,' don't you?--those marvellous
    gentlemen in red coats with sleek dark singlets, exotic
    complexions, and bold, rolling black eyes."--_Sunday
    Chronicle_.

Strictly speaking, singlets, of whatever colour, should be worn
_under_ the coat.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE HUNTSMAN'S STORY.

  I heard the huntsman calling as he drew Threeacre Spinney;
    He found a fox and hunted him and handled him ere night,
  And his voice upon the hill-side was as golden as a guinea,
    And I ventured he'd done nicely--most respectful and polite--
    Jig-jogging back to kennels, and the stars were shining bright.

  Old Jezebel and Jealous they were trotting at his stirrup;
    The road was clear, the moon was up, 'twas but a mile or so;
  He got the pack behind him with a chirp and with a chirrup,
    And said he, "I had the secret from my gran'dad long ago,
    And all the old man left me, Sir, if you should want to know.

  "And he was most a gipsy, Sir, and spoke the gipsy lingos,
    But he knew of hounds and horses all as NIMROD might have know'd:
  When we'd ask him how he did it, he would say, 'You little Gringos,
    I learnt it from a lady that I met upon the road;
    In the hills o' Connemara was this wondrous gift bestowed.'

  "Connemara--County Galway--he was there in 1830;
    He was taking hounds to kennel, all alone, he used to say,
  And the hills of Connemara, when the night is falling dirty,
    Is an ill place to be left in when the dusk is turning grey,
    An ill place to be lost in most at any time o' day.

  "Adown the dismal mountains that night it blew tremendous,
    A-sobbing like a giant and a-snorting like a whale,
  When he saw beside the sheep-track ('Holy Saints,' says he, 'defend us!')
    A mighty dainty lady, dressed in green, and sweet and pale,
    And she rode an all-cream pony with an Arab head and tail.

  "Says she to him, 'Young gentleman, to you I'd be beholden
    If you'd ride along to Fairyland this night beside o' me;
  There's a fox that eats our chickens--them that lays the eggs that's golden--
    And our little fairy mouse-dogs, ah, 'tis small account they'll be,
    Sure it wants an advertising pack to gobble such as he!'

  "So gran'dad says, 'Your servant, Miss,' and got his hounds together,
    And the mountain-side flew open and they rode into the hill;
  'Your country's one to cross,' says he, and rights a stirrup-leather,
    And he found in half-a-jiffey, and he finished with a kill;
    And the little fairy lady, she was with 'em with a will.

  "Then 'O,' says she, 'young man,' says she, ''tis lonesome here in Faerie,
    So won't you stay and hunt with us and never more to roam,
  And take a bride'--she looks at him--'whose youth can never vary,
    With hair as black as midnight and a breast as white as foam?'
    And 'Thank you, Miss,' says gran'dad, 'but I've got a wife at home!'

  "Then, 'O, young man,' says she, 'young man, then you shall take a bounty,
    A bounty of my magic that may grant you wishes three;
  Come make yourself the grandest man from out o' Galway County
    To Dublin's famous city all of my good gramarye?'
    And, 'Thank you, Miss,' says gran'dad, 'but such ain't no use to me.'

  "But he said, since she was pressing of her fairy spells and forces,
    He'd take the threefold bounty, lest a gift he'd seem to scorn:
  He'd ask, beyond all other men, the tricks o' hounds and horses,
    And a voice to charm a woodland of a soft December morn,
    And sons to follow after him, all to the business born.

  "And--but here we are at home, Sir. Yes, the old man was a terror
    For his fairies and his nonsense, yet the story's someways right;
  He'd the trick o' hounds and horses to a marvel--and no error;
    And to hear him draw a woodland was a pride and a delight;
    And--_was it luck entirely, Sir, I killed my fox to-night?_"

       *       *       *       *       *

THE LITTLE WONDER.

The crowd had gone, the lights had been extinguished, and the doors
of the music-hall were shut. The Little Wonder was tired after the
performance; his attempt to do the double somersault had strained him,
and his failure had brought a whipping. Although the outhouse in which
he was to lie was cold and damp and smelt horribly, he was glad when
his master thrust him into it, and he was content to lie down in the
straw and forget his misery in sleep.

He dreamt a beautiful dream. He dreamt that he was a master, and
that he was presenting to a crowded audience what he had billed as
"A Marvel of the Twentieth Century"--a performing man. The man was a
creature with a pink face, oily hair, and a black moustache; and the
Little Wonder, in his capacity as master, made the Marvel bark like
a dog, whereat the audience yelped its approval. Then the collar of
a member of the audience was handed on to the stage, while the Marvel
was blindfolded, and, after sniffing the collar, he succeeded in
tracking down its owner--like a dog again. And in whatever trick
the Marvel did, the Little Wonder was close behind him, looking so
friendly and threatening him with low growls at the same time. If the
Marvel happened to remember for a moment his miserable condition and
to look unhappy, his master would look still more kindly and threaten
even more sternly. Then came the moment when the orchestra stopped
suddenly, and the kettledrum rolled, and the eyes of the audience
were fixed upon the Marvel. For this remarkable performing man was
scratching in a tub of earth to find a bone--just like a real dog; and
that was his greatest trick. When he had successfully performed it,
his master (the Little Wonder) presented him with a twopenny cigar
clothed in a flashy cummerbund, to show how generously he rewarded
achievements. Then, as the curtain fell, he retired with many
bows--and in the wings gave the Marvel a hot time for shirking the
biscuit trick.

I question whether the Little Wonder in real life would have so
ill-treated any creature; but things are different in dreams; and, as
he slept, a smile seemed to come into the shaggy face of this little
Irish terrier.

       *       *       *       *       *

    "In a fierce game at Ilfracombe yesterday morning several
    houses were partially unroofed, and an arcade blown
    in."--_Scotsman_.

Where was the referee?

       *       *       *       *       *

RECORD RISKS.

_(A Sequel to "Narrow Escapes.")_

The report that M. PADEREWSKI has been hunted by Nihilists out of
Denver has suggested to the Editor of _The Musical Mirror_ the happy
thought of circularising a number of prominent musicians with a
view to ascertaining the most dangerous experiences they have ever
undergone.

Sir FREDERICK BRIDGE writes to say that the worst quarter of a minute
he ever spent was while tarpon fishing off the coast of Florida, when
a gigantic tarpon, weighing some 400 lbs., leaped into the boat with
its mouth wide open. With great presence of mind the famous organist
thrust into the monster's gaping jaws a full score of STRAUSS'S
_Elektra_, which he was studying between the casts, and the tarpon at
once leaped out of the boat and was never seen or heard of again.

Madame MELBA'S most perilous experience was on a tour in the Far East,
when the liner in which she was travelling was caught by a tidal wave
and hurled with enormous velocity towards the rocky coast of Sumatra.
Noticing that a large whale was following the vessel, and remembering
the peculiar susceptibility of these giant mammals to musical sounds,
Madame MELBA sang the _scena_, "Ocean, thou mighty monster," with such
persuasive force that the whale allowed itself to be made fast with a
hawser and then towed the liner back safely into the open sea.

Mr. Bamborough (formerly M. Bamberger) recounted the episode, already
alluded to in these columns, when he was partially eaten by cannibals
in the Solomon Islands; but the details are too harrowing for
reproduction, even in a condensed form. It is interesting to learn,
however, that a punitive expedition was despatched by the British
Government to avenge the insult, as a result of which Mr. Bamborough
was awarded an indemnity of 1,000 bales of copra, 20 tons of
sandalwood, and L3,000 worth of tortoiseshell.

Sir FREDERICK COWEN, in reply to the circular, states that the closest
call he ever had was when adjudicating at a Welsh Eisteddfod. In
consequence of an unpopular award he was besieged in his hotel by
an infuriated crowd and only escaped by changing clothes with a
policeman.

Professor Quantock de Banville relates how, while obtaining local
colour for his new Choral Symphony, he was attacked by a gorilla in
Central Africa, but tamed the mighty simian by the power of his eye.

In conclusion we may note that the only disappointing answer was
received from Signor Crinuto, the famous pianist, who replied, "I have
never had a close shave, and never intend to have one."

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: THE WEEK-END AND THE EXHAUSTED MIDDLE.

TIME--_Wednesday, 4 P.M._

_Client (to office-boy)._ "CAN I SEE MR. BROWN?"

_Office-Boy._ "AWAY FOR THE WEEK-END, SIR."

_Client_. "WHICH?" _Office-Boy._ "NEXT, SIR."]

       *       *       *       *       *

    "A Christmas Tree Entertainment will be held in Pelican
    Lake schoolhouse on Tuesday, Dec. 23. Everybody welcome, no
    admission."--_Vermilion Standard_ (Alberta. No relation to
    _The Sporting Times_).

You are at perfect liberty to hang about outside.

       *       *       *       *       *

    "No one can deny that it is essential London should have a
    thoroughly equipped shin hospital."--_Advt. in "Sphere."_

No footballer, anyhow.

       *       *       *       *       *

FROM A GENERAL KNOWLEDGE (SIC) EXAMINATION.

The Cat and Mouse Act is an Act by which a cat may not kill a mouse
unless when necessary.

The Apocalypse is an ailment one has apolcalyptic fits.

Sea-legs are when you don't have legs but a tail.

The All Red Route is the human throat or swallow.

Ten instruments for an orchestra are banjo, pianola, concertina,
mandoline, psalteries, shawms, bagpipes, bells to clash with, violins,
and bassinette.

To die in harness means to die married.

       *       *       *       *       *

AT THE PLAY.

"THE POOR LITTLE RICH GIRL."

EMERSON says somewhere that there are great ways of borrowing; that,
if you can contrive to transmute base metal into fine, nobody will
worry as to where you got your base metal from. But, when it is the
other way about, I think you must not be surprised if people ask
you where you lifted your gold. And the answer, in the case of Miss
ELEANOR GATES, is that the nuggets were the property of LEWIS
CARROLL. She has taken the sprightly and fantastic humour of _Alice
in Wonderland,_ passed it through the alembic (if that is the word) of
her American imagination, and the result is something that hardly lets
you smile at all. It is not a typical product of native industry, but
even that does not make it much easier for us to grasp the secret of
its success over there. It would seem that nearly all Transatlantic
humour, indigenous or adoptive, is apt, like certain wines, to suffer
in the process of sea-transit.

Her "Poor Little Rich Girl" is poor because her parents are too
rich. Her father is too busy with finance and her mother with social
climbing to spare time for their daughter's company, so they leave
her to the care of governesses and menials. Her nurse, anxious for
an evening out at a picture-palace, gives the child an overdose of
sleeping-mixture, with the result that she nearly dies of it. In the
course of delirious dreams she finds herself in the "Tell-Tale Forest"
(which threatens to recall _The Palace of Truth_), and here all
the picturesque phrases which she has been in the childish habit of
misinterpreting in their literal sense--"a bee in the bonnet," to
"ride hobbies," "to play ducks and drakes," "to pay the piper," and so
forth--are realised in human or animal form. With these are mixed the
familiar figures of her waking life, all of them exposed in their true
characters so that you can distinguish the devotion of the doctor (who
now appears in pink because he likes riding hobbies) and the affection
of the teddy-bear (now expanded to human proportions) from the
serpentine nature of the governess and the double-faced dealings of
the nurse. Her father, who is a stranger to her, comes on dressed in
banknotes and chained to a safe; her mother, also a stranger, wears
a society bee which buzzes in the place where her bonnet would have
been; and five samples of the fashionable world, where, as you know,
everybody thinks the same thing at the same time, let off recitatives
from time to time in unison. And there was much talk about "Robin
Hood's Barn," a thing I was never told about at an age when I am sure
it would have given me sincere pleasure.

Here and there the symbolism was obvious to the point of crudity;
but you searched in vain for a consistent scheme. The father in his
banknotes lashed to a ponderous safe was an easy personification of
the slavery of wealth, and the pantomime ducks and drakes were simple
to understand as symbolizing the career of a spendthrift (though the
father was never that); but why, you asked, did the double-faced nurse
exhaust all her spare moments and our patience pirouetting about the
stage? Did she represent the levity of the dual life? Not at all;
her actions bore no moral significance: she was just giving a literal
illustration of a phrase--"to dance attendance."

I don't know how the children in the audience appreciated all
this, but I confess that some of it left me wondering whether
my intelligence was too raw or too ripe for the fancies of this
Wonder-Zoo-Land.

The First Act, which showed the child's life at home, had fallen
altogether flat; but the Third, in which she wakes in her pretty
bedroom, restored from the jaws of death to her repentant parents,
put us on better terms with ourselves, for we were not really hard to
please. The sweetness of it was perhaps a little cloying, but it was
all quite nice and sympathetic. Still, I am afraid I agreed more than
I was meant to with the speech of pretty little Miss STEPHANIE BELL,
when she told us before the curtain that they would cable to the
author in America to say how glad we were that it was all over.

Mr. ERNEST HENDRIE, who was translated from an organ-grinder to a
maker of faces, played very soundly, but seemed to me a little too
deliberate and conscious in his speech. I found a more moving appeal
in the slight pathetic sketch of an old faithful butler by Mr. GEORGE
MALLETT. Mr. FEWLASS LLEWELLYN might easily, with a little assistance
from the author, have extracted a lot more fun from his Plumber. Mr.
MALCOLM CHERRY had a simple and popular part as the good Doctor.
Miss HELEN HAYE'S cleverness was wasted on the character of a sinuous
governess. Miss EVELYN WEEDEN did all that was asked of the mother in
both worlds--the world of fancy and the world of fact. But, to speak
truth, there was little attraction in the performance apart from the
personality of Miss STEPHANIE BELL in the title _role_. If the play is
to succeed--and its hope lies in the good temper and high spirits of
holiday time--the author will owe most to the natural charm of this
delightful young lady, who played throughout with a most engaging
sincerity and ease.

O.S.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: WITH THE "TELL-TALE FOREST" HUNT.

_The Hobby Rider_ (Mr. CHERRY) takes the temperature of _The Poor
Little Rich Girl_ (Miss STEPHANIE BELL).

The hound is Mr. ERNEST HENDRIE _(The Man who makes Faces)_,
well-known as _The Dog_ in _The Blue Bird_.]

       *       *       *       *       *

    "After fifty years of good conduct in the Ancona Penitentiary,
    the life sentence of Giacomo Casale has been remitted by King
    Victor Emmanuel. Casale's astonishment at the altered world in
    which he found himself on coming out of prison was unbounded.
    He immediately"--_Daily Express._

Unfortunately our contemporary stops there, and leaves us all in an
agony of doubt. Our own view is that CASALE bought the Mimosa Edition
of a certain rival journal, and that the Editor of _The Express_ only
just censored the paragraph in time.

       *       *       *       *       *

    "The wireless station at Kamina, in Togo, German West Africa,
    has received a number of wireless telegrams from the station
    at Naten, a distance of 3,348 miles. The Kamina station will
    not be able to reply until its new plant, which is being set
    up with the utmost speed, has been completed."--_Reuter_.

Indeed, the opinion is held by some that it would be quicker to reply
by post.

       *       *       *       *       *

    "The prison buildings themselves are separated from this
    wall by a yard measuring twenty-five years across."--_Daily
    Dispatch_.

Of course a yard ought to measure thirty-six inches.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: _English Horse Dealer (to Irish horse dealer from whom
he is buying a horse)._ "HOW'S HE BRED?"

_Irish Dealer_. "WELL, HOW WOULD YE LIKE HIM BRED? IF HE WAS FOR SIR
PATHRICK UP AT THE CASTLE HE'D BE BY RED EAGLE OUT AV AN ASECTIC MARE,
BUT YE CAN SUIT YERSILF."]

       *       *       *       *       *

OUR BOOKING-OFFICE.

_(By Mr. Punch's Staff of Learned Clerks.)_

If for nothing else, Mr. JACK LONDON'S latest story would deserve a
welcome for its topicality. In these days of strikes and industrial
conflict every one might be glad to know what a writer of his
individuality has to say about unions and blacklegs and picketing.
True, this is hardly the kind of thing that one has learnt to
associate with his name; and for that reason perhaps I best liked _The
Valley of the Moon_ (MILLS AND BOON) after its hero and heroine had
shaken the unsavoury dust of the town from their feet and set them
towards the open country. But much had to happen first. The hero was
big _Billy Roberts_, a teamster with the heart of a child and the
strength of a prize-fighter--which was in fact his alternative
profession. He married _Saxon Brown_ ("a scream of a name" her friend
called it when introducing them to each other), and for a time their
life together was as nearly idyllic as newly-wedded housekeeping in a
mean street could permit it to be. Then came the lean years: strikes
and strike-breaking, sabotage and rioting, prison for _Billy_, and
all but starvation for _Saxon_. Perhaps you know already that peculiar
gift of Mr. JACK LONDON'S that makes you not only see physical
hardship but suffer it? I believe that after these chapters the reader
of them will never again be able to regard a newspaper report of
street-fighting with the same detachment as before, so vivid are
they, so haunting. In the end, however, as I say, we find a happier
atmosphere. The adventures of _Billy_ and _Saxon_, tramping it in
search of a home, soon make their urban terrors seem to them and the
reader a kind of nightmare. Here Mr. LONDON is at his delightful
best, and his word-pictures of country scenes are as fresh and fine
as anything he has yet done. _The Valley of the Moon_, in short,
is really two stories--one grim, one pleasant, and both brilliantly
successful.

       *       *       *       *       *

It is perhaps a mistake to read a novel at a sitting, since the
reaction is too sudden and the reader is apt to find the real life and
the real people surrounding him highly unsatisfactory by contrast.
Mr. JAMES PROSPER has reduced me to this state by _The Mountain Apart_
(HEINEMANN), but it is my duty as critic to disregard my personal
feelings and judge impartially between the fictitious and the actual.
Duty, then, compels me to say that the _Mr. Henry Harding_ who at
the last solved all the difficulties of _Rose Hilton_ by the simple
expedient of a romantic proposal is a hollow fraud. The position
was this: _Rose_ was a woman of flesh and blood and all the human
limitations, blessed and cursed with all the intricacies allotted by
Providence to the sex. Her trouble was that she had to face life as it
is, and this she found very trying. She suffered from her marriage
to a man old enough to be her grandfather, and from her abortive
grapplings both with the abstract problems of her soul and the
concrete mischiefs of her female friends. The influence of IBSEN and a
militant Suffragette didn't help her meditations, and when her husband
died she had the mortification to find that the first man of her own
age who professed love to her was no man but a series of artistic
poses. Of her difficulties, real enough up to this point, the solution
was the fraudulent _Henry_, fraudulent because he was just a stage
hero whose actions and conversation resembled nothing on earth.
_Henry_, in fact, is the sort of person that doesn't exist, and, if he
did, would be intolerable to everybody except a novel reader worked up
to a climax. I doubt if even such a reader could stand the fellow on
a longer acquaintance. To this conclusion all must come in their saner
moments, and yet most will, I think, finish the book in one spell and
be under the delusion at the end of it that all their troubles
would be solved at once if only their friends would talk and conduct
themselves more like _Henry_.

       *       *       *       *       *

In _Theodore Roosevelt: an Autobiography_ (MACMILLAN) the ex-President
shows us how it was done: how he started life as a weakly lad and by
perseverance made himself what he is to-day. But what is he? That is
the insoluble problem. No two people, least of all Americans, seem to
agree on the point. I have heard Mr. ROOSEVELT called everything
from a charlatan to the Saviour of his Country. For myself, if I may
intrude my own view, I have always admired the "Bull Moose." But,
since nobody on this earth, in America or out of it, can really
understand American politics, my respect has been for Mr. ROOSEVELT'S
private rather than his public performances. And in the view that
he is, take him all round, a pretty good sort of man, this book has
confirmed me. He has told his story well. Nor is the Power of the
Human "I" too much in evidence. It is just a simple, straightforward
tale of a particularly interesting life. Whatever your views on Mr.
ROOSEVELT may be, the fact remains that he has been a cowboy, a
police commissioner of New York, a soldier on active service, and
the President of God's Country, suh; and a man must have an unusually
negative personality if he cannot make entertainment for us out
of that. Now nobody has ever suspected Mr. ROOSEVELT of a negative
personality; and it is certain that he has told a very entertaining
story. There are in this volume battle, murder, sudden death, outlaws,
cowboys, bears, American politics, and the author's views on the
English blackbird, all handsomely illustrated, and the price is only
what you would (or would not) pay for a stall to see a musical comedy.
It's a bargain.

       *       *       *       *       *

Between the rising of the partisans of the Duchesse DE BERRI and the
dawn of the Tractarian movement there would not seem, at first blush,
to be any very close association apart from the coincidence of their
dates; yet in _The Vision Splendid_ (MURRAY), by D.K. BROSTER and G.W.
TAYLOR, a link is furnished in the person of an English clergyman's
daughter, who marries a Frenchman of the "Legitimist" aristocracy, and
is loved, before and afterwards, by an enthusiastic disciple of the
Oriel Common Room. But the link is too slight to give a proper unity
to the tale; and we have to fall back upon contrasts. Even so, the
two modes of life which made up, between them, the experience of the
_Comtesse de la Roche-Guyon (nee Horatia Grenville_) are too cleanly
severed by the estranging Channel to be brought into sharp antithesis,
except in the heart of the one woman. And, since it is difficult to
understand why anyone so British in her independence and aloofness
should have surrendered her heart to the first good-looking Frenchman
who came her way, we never get to be on very intimate terms with that
organ. The construction of the story tends to break up the action and
make its interest desultory. While we are spending a hundred odd pages
at one time and fifty odd at another in Paris and Brittany we forget,
very contentedly, about Oriel; and while we are in residence at Oxford
we are practically cut off--no doubt, to our spiritual gain--from
the things of France. The authors seem to belong to the solid
old-fashioned school that had the patience to spread itself and leave
as little as might be to the imagination. I suspect one of them
of supplying the foreign information and the other of being the
correspondent on home and clerical affairs. I don't know how many of
them--if any--are women, but I seem to trace a female hand in some of
the domestic details. But the book contains strong matter, too--both
of narrative and characterization; as in the dying of _Armand de la
Roche-Guyon_, and the picture of his lover, _Madame de Vigerie_.
And there is something of the inspiration of the Holy Grail in
that "Vision Splendid" which heartens _Tristram Hungerford_ to make
sacrifice of his passion that he may give his soul unshared to the
service of the Church.

       *       *       *       *       *

Until I had read Mr. A. RADCLYFFE DUGMORE'S book and revelled in his
most wonderful photographs I had never wished to be a caribou; but now
that I have fully digested _The Romance of the Newfoundland Caribou_
(HEINEMANN) there is only one animal whose lot in life I really envy.
This is due not to a natural sympathy with caribous (for, as the
author says, "In England it is quite the exception to find anyone
who knows what the caribou is, unless he happens to have been to
Newfoundland or certain parts of Canada," and I was never one of the
exceptions), but to the extraordinary manner in which Mr. DUGMORE
has imparted the affection that be himself entertains for his chosen
beast. Although he shoots with no more formidable a weapon than a
camera, the dangers and risks that he has run would appal many of
the sportsmen whose aim is to destroy and not to study the lives of
animals. He has, however, no contempt for hunters, provided that they
will play the game and give a fair chance to their quarry. Another
point in his favour, which appeals mightily to me, is that after nine
consecutive seasons in Newfoundland he confesses that his knowledge of
the caribou is still incomplete. This means that, when he does make
an absolute statement, you may be pretty certain that it is true. If
I ever have to argue about the habits of caribous, there is one shot
that will remain in my locker until the very end of the argument, and
it will be, "Well, DUGMORE says so."

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: IMPRESSION OF A FOOTBALL MATCH GATHERED FROM OUR
ILLUSTRATED DAILY PAPERS.]

       *       *       *       *       *






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Punch, or the London Charivari, Vol.
146, January 7, 1914, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PUNCH, NO. 146 ***

***** This file should be named 12294.txt or 12294.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/1/2/2/9/12294/

Produced by Malcolm Farmer, Sandra Brown and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team.


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook's
eBook number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII,
compressed (zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected EDITIONS of our eBooks replace the old file and take over
the old filename and etext number.  The replaced older file is renamed.
VERSIONS based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

EBooks posted prior to November 2003, with eBook numbers BELOW #10000,
are filed in directories based on their release date.  If you want to
download any of these eBooks directly, rather than using the regular
search system you may utilize the following addresses and just
download by the etext year.

     http://www.gutenberg.net/etext06

    (Or /etext 05, 04, 03, 02, 01, 00, 99,
     98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90)

EBooks posted since November 2003, with etext numbers OVER #10000, are
filed in a different way.  The year of a release date is no longer part
of the directory path.  The path is based on the etext number (which is
identical to the filename).  The path to the file is made up of single
digits corresponding to all but the last digit in the filename.  For
example an eBook of filename 10234 would be found at:

     http://www.gutenberg.net/1/0/2/3/10234

or filename 24689 would be found at:
     http://www.gutenberg.net/2/4/6/8/24689

An alternative method of locating eBooks:
     http://www.gutenberg.net/GUTINDEX.ALL


