The Project Gutenberg EBook of Melbourne House, Volume 2, by Susan Warner

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Melbourne House, Volume 2

Author: Susan Warner

Release Date: July 20, 2004 [EBook #12964]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MELBOURNE HOUSE, VOLUME 2 ***




Produced by Karen Lofstrom and PG Distributed Proofreaders




[Transcriber's note: The source text contained no Chapter VIII or
Chapter XVIII.]


[Illustration: SILVER LAKE]


MELBOURNE HOUSE.


BY THE
AUTHOR OF THE WIDE, WIDE WORLD.

    "Even a child is known by his doings, whether his work be pure, and
    whether it be right."--PROV. xx. II.


VOL. II.


       *       *       *       *       *


NEW YORK:
ROBERT CARTER & BROTHERS,
530 BROADWAY.
1865.

Entered, according to Act of Congress, in the year 1864, by
ROBERT CARTER AND BROTHERS,

In the Clerk's Office of the District Court of the United States for the
Southern District of New York.

Stereotyped by SMITH & MCDOUGAL, 82 & 81 Beekman St.
Printer: by E.O. JENKINS, 20 North William St.

       *       *       *       *       *




MELBOURNE HOUSE.

CHAPTER I.


The next day turned out so warm, that the carriage was not brought for
Daisy till late in the afternoon. Then it came, with her father and Dr.
Sandford; and Daisy was lifted in Mr. Randolph's arms and carefully
placed on the front seat of the carriage, which she had all to herself.
Her father and the doctor got in and sat opposite to her; and the
carriage drove away.

The parting with Juanita had been very tenderly affectionate and had
gone very near to Daisy's heart. Not choosing to shew this more than she
could help, as usual, Daisy at first lay still on the cushions with an
exceedingly old-fashioned face; it was as demure and sedate as if the
gravity of forty years had been over it. But presently the carriage
turned the corner into the road to Melbourne; Daisy caught sight for a
second of the houses and church, spires of Crum Elbow, that she had not
seen for so long. A pink flush rose over her face.

"What is it, Daisy?" said Mr. Randolph, who had been watching her.

"Papa--it's so nice to see things again!"

"You had a pretty dull time of it at Mrs. Benoit's?" remarked the
doctor.

"No--O no, I didn't. I did not have it dull at all."

"How did you escape that, Daisy?"

"I do not know, Dr. Sandford. There was no room for dulness."

The gentlemen smiled, but Daisy's father with a not altogether satisfied
expression. He grew satisfied, as he marked the changes in Daisy's face.
The ride was delightful to her. The carriage was easy; she was nicely
placed; and through the open glass before her she could look out quite
uninterruptedly. It was so pleasant, she thought, even to see the road
and the fences again. That little bit of view before Mrs. Benoit's
window she had studied over and over till she knew it by heart. Now
every step brought something new; and the roll of the carriage wheels
was itself enlivening. There was a reaped grain field; there a meadow
with cattle pasturing. Now they passed a farm wagon going home, laden
with sheaves; next came a cottage, well known but not seen for a long
time, with its wonted half door open and the cottager's children playing
about. Then came patches of woodland, with the sun shining through; and
a field of flourishing Indian corn with the sunlight all over it; then
more meadows with cattle.

"Do you ride comfortably, Daisy?" her father asked, bending over to her.

"Yes, papa. It is so nice!"

Mr. Randolph gave up care about Daisy, and the two gentlemen fell into a
conversation which did not regard her, and lasted till the carriage
stopped at the door of Melbourne House. And there was her mother, and
there were Preston and his mother and sister, and Gary McFarlane, who
had been away and come back again, all waiting to welcome her; besides
some other guests who were now at Melbourne.

Mr. Randolph, got out of the carriage first. Dr. Sandford followed him;
but then without giving place to anybody else, he himself took Daisy
carefully off the seat where she lay, lifted her out in his arms, and
carried her into the house. All the others trooped around and after
him, through the hall and into the drawing room, where the doctor laid
his little charge on the sofa and put the pillows behind her so that she
could sit up comfortably. Then he stood back and let the others come to
her. Mrs. Randolph gave her some very contented kisses; so did Mr.
Randolph. Very glad and tender his were, at having his little daughter
back there again.

"We are very much pleased to see you here, Daisy," her aunt said.

"Poor Daisy," said Eloise.

"Glad to come back to life and the world again, Daisy?" said Preston,
standing at the back of her sofa and drumming on it.

"I understand, Daisy," said McFarlane, "that you have been an enchanted
beauty, or a sleeping princess, during these weeks of my absence--under
the guardianship of an old black witch, who drew incantations and water
together from her well every morning."

"I can answer for the incantations," said Preston. "I have heard 'em."

Daisy's face flushed all over. "Preston, you do very wrong," she said,
turning her head round to him. But Preston only burst into a fit of
laughter, which he turned away to hide. Others of the company now came
up to take Daisy's hand and kiss her and say how glad they were to see
her; these people were very much strangers to Daisy and their greeting
was no particular pleasure; but it had to be attended to. Then tea came
in, and Daisy was well petted. It was very pleasant to have it so; after
the silence and quiet of Juanita's little cottage, the lights and
dresses and people and silver urn and tea service and flowers made quite
a picture. Flowers had been in the cottage too, but not such wealth of
them. Just opposite to Daisy in the middle of the floor stood a great
stone basket, or wide vase, on a pedestal; and this vase was a mass of
beautiful flowers. Trailing wreaths of roses and fuchsias and geraniums
even floated down from the edges of the vase and sought the floor; the
pedestal was half draped with them. It was a very lovely sight to
Daisy's eyes. And then her mother ordered a little stand brought to the
sofa's side; and her father placed it; and Gary brought her cup of tea,
and Dr. Sandford spread her slice of toast. Daisy felt as if she loved
everybody, and was very happy. The summer air floated in at the long
windows, just as it used to do. It was _home_. Daisy began to realize
the fact.

Meanwhile attention ceased to be filled with her particular affairs, and
conversation flowed off as usual, away from her. Preston still held his
station at the back of the sofa, where he dipped sponge cake in tea with
a wonderful persistency; in fact the question seemed to be whether he or
the cake basket would give out first; but for a while Daisy eat her
toast in happy quiet; watching everybody and enjoying everything. Till
Gary McFarlane drew near, and took a seat, as if for a regular siege.

"So what about those incantations, Daisy?" he said.

"I do not know what you mean, Mr. McFarlane."

"No? don't you? That's odd. You have been so long in the witch's
precincts. You have heard them, of course?"

"I do not know what you mean, Mr. McFarlane."

"Why you must have been bewitched. I wonder, now, if the witch's house
did not seem to you a palace?"

"It seemed a very nice place."

"And the witch herself a sable princess?"

"I think she is a great deal better than a princess."

"Exactly so," said Gary with a perfectly sober face. "The witch drew
water, didn't she?"

"I don't know what you mean. Mrs. Benoit used to bring pails of water
from her well."

"Very good. And you never heard her incantations, muttering in the
morning before the dew was off the grass, or at night just as the first
beams of the moon, lighted on the topmost boughs of the trees?"

Daisy was confounded. "Mr. McFarlane," she said after a moment's looking
at him--"I hope I do not know what you mean."

At that, Gary McFarlane went off into an ecstacy of laughter, delighted
and amused beyond count. Preston interrupted the sponge cake exercise,
and Daisy felt her sofa shaking with his burden of amusement. What had
she done? Glancing her eye towards Dr. Sandford, who sat near, she saw
that a very decided smile was curling the corners of _his_ mouth. A
flush came up all over Daisy's face; she took some tea, but it did not
taste good any longer.

"What did you think I meant?--come Daisy, tell me," said Gary, returning
to Daisy as soon as he could get over his paroxysm of laughter. "What
did you think I meant? I shouldn't wonder if you had some private
witchcraft of your own. Come! what did you _think_ I meant?"

While he had been laughing, Daisy had been trying to get command of
herself and to get her throat clear for talking; there had been a very
uncomfortable thick feeling in it at first. Now she answered with simple
dignity and soberness,

"I did not know, Mr. McFarlane, but you meant Juanita's prayers."

"Does she pray?" said Gary innocently.

"Yes."

"Long prayers, Daisy?"

"Yes," (unwillingly now.)

"Then that must have been what you heard!" Gary said looking up to
Preston. No answer came from him. Gary was as sober now as seven judges.

"Did she speak her prayers where you could hear her, Daisy?"

"I used to hear her--"

"Mornings and evenings?"

"Yes."

"But you heard her in broad day, Preston?"

"Yes; one afternoon it was. I heard her as soon as I got near the house.
Daisy was asleep, and I went away as wise as I came."

"This grows interesting," said Gary returning to Daisy. "Could you hear
the words that were said?"

"No."

"Only a muttering?"

Daisy was silent. The tears came into her eyes.

"Depend upon it, Daisy, it was incantations you heard. Description
agrees exactly. Confess now, didn't a sort of feeling grow over
you--creep over you--whenever you heard that muttering sound, as if you
would do anything that black woman told you?"

Daisy was silent.

"Don't you know it is not proper to pray so that people can hear you?
'tisn't the way to do. Witches pray that way--not good Christian people.
I regard it as a very fortunate thing, Daisy, that we have got you safe
out of her hands. Don't you think that prayer ought to be private?"

"Yes," said Daisy. She was overwhelmed with the rapidity and liveliness
of Gary's utterances, which he rattled forth as lightly as if they had
been the multiplication table.

"Yes, just so. It is not even a matter to be talked about--too
sacred--so I am offending even against my own laws; but I wanted to know
how far the old witch had got hold of you. Didn't you feel when you
heard her mutterings, as if some sort of a spell was creeping over you?"

Daisy wished some sort of a spell could come over _him_; but she did not
know what to say.

"Didn't you gradually grow into the belief that she was a sort of saint,
Daisy?"

"What is a saint, Mr. McFarlane?"

Gary at that wheeled partly round, and stroked his chin and moustache
with the most comical expression of doubt and confusion.

"I declare I don't know, Daisy! I think it means a person who is too
good for this world, and therefore isn't allowed to live here. They all
go off in flames of some sort--may look like glory, but is very
uncomfortable--and there is a peculiar odour about them. Doctor, what is
that odour called?"

Gary spoke with absurd soberness, but the doctor gave him no attention.

"The odour of sanctity!--that is it!" said Gary. "I had forgot. I don't
know what it is like, myself; but it must be very disagreeable to have
such a peculiarity attached to one."

"How can anybody be too good for this world?" Daisy ventured.

"Too good to live in it! You can't live among people unless you live
like them--so the saints all leave the rest of the world in some way or
other; the children die, and the grown ones go missionaries or become
nuns--they are a sort of human meteor--shine and disappear, but don't
really accomplish much, because no one wants to be meteors. So your old
woman can't be a saint, Daisy, or she would have quitted the world long
ago."

Something called off Gary. Daisy was left feeling very thoroughly
disturbed. That people could talk so--and think so--about what was so
precious to her; talk about being saints, as if it were an undesirable
thing; and as if such were unlovely. Her thought went back to Juanita,
who seemed now half a world's distance away instead of a few miles; her
love and gentleness and truth and wisdom, her prayers and way of living,
did seem to Daisy somewhat unearthly in their beauty, compared with that
which surrounded her now; but so unearthly, that it could not be
understood and must not be talked about. Juanita could not be understood
here; could Daisy? She felt hurt and troubled and sorry; she did not
like to hear such talk, but Gary was about as easy to stop as a
cataract.

Dr. Sandford, lifting his eyes from what had occupied them, though his
ears had not been stopped, saw that the face of his little charge was
flushed with pain and her eyes glistening. He came and took Gary's
place, and silently felt of her hand and looked at her; but he did not
ask Daisy what was the matter, because he pretty well knew. His own
face, as usual, shewed nothing; however, Daisy's came back to its
accustomed expression.

"Dr. Sandford," said she softly, "what is a meteor?"

"Meteors are fiery stones which fall on the earth occasionally."

"Where do they come from?"

"Doctors are divided."

"But where do _you_ think they come from?"

If Dr. Sandford's vanity could be touched by a child, it received a
touch then. It was so plain, that what satisfied him would satisfy her.
He would not give the skeptical answer which rose to his lips. Looking
at the pure, wise little face which watched his, he made answer simply,
not without a smile:

"I am inclined to think they are wandering bodies, that we fall in with
now and then, in our journey round the sun."

"Dr. Sandford, what do they look like?"

"You have seen shooting-stars?"

"Yes--are those meteors?"

"Those are meteors that do not come to the earth. Sometimes they are
nearer, and look like great fire-balls."

"Have you seen them?"

"Yes, a great many."

"And have you seen them after they fell on the ground?"

"Yes."

"What are they like then?"

"A very black stone, on the outside, and made up of various metals and
earths within."

"But then, what makes them look like fire-balls, before they fall?"

"Can't tell, Daisy. As I said, the doctors are divided; and I really
have no opinion that you would understand if I gave it."

Daisy would have liked to hear all the opinions, but she did not ask for
them. Preston was still standing at the back of the sofa, and started a
new subject.

"Dr. Sandford, how soon will Daisy's foot let her go to Silver Lake?"

"In what way do you propose to get there?"

"By boat, sir, across the river; and the rest of the way is walking."

"On plain ground?"

"Not exactly!" said Preston.

"How far do you call it?"

"Three miles."

"Of walking! I think Daisy may walk across this floor by next week; and
in a little while after she may go up and down stairs."

"O doctor!" exclaimed Preston. "Why, at that rate, she cannot go to
Silver Lake at all!"

"Does she want to go very much?" said the doctor. The question was
really put at Daisy's face, and answered by a little flush that was not
a flush of pain this time. He saw what a depth of meaning there was in
it; what a charm, the sound of Silver Lake had for Daisy. No wonder, to
a little girl who had lain for so many weeks looking out of one window,
where there was not much to be seen, either.

"Who is going, Daisy?" said the doctor.

"Mamma means to make up a large party--I do not know exactly who."

"Then I think I can promise that you shall go too. You may count upon me
for that."

Daisy's eyes shone and sparkled, but she said not a word. Preston was
less sagacious.

"Will you do something to make her foot strong, sir?" he asked.

"When you have studied in my profession, you will know more about a
physician's powers,"--was all the answer he got. The doctor turned off
to conversation with other people, and Daisy was left to herself again.
She was very happy; it was very pleasant to lie there comfortably on the
sofa, and feel that her long imprisonment was over; it was amusing to
look at so many people together, after having for days and days looked
at only one; and the old wonted scene, the place and the lights, and the
flowers and the dresses, yes, and the voices, gave her the new sense of
being at home. Nevertheless, Daisy mused a little over some things that
were not altogether pleasant. The faces that she scanned had none of
them the placid nobleness of the face of her black nurse; no voice
within her hearing had such sweet modulation; and Daisy felt a
consciousness that Juanita's little cottage lay within the bounds of a
kingdom which Mrs. Randolph's drawing-room had no knowledge of.
Gradually Daisy's head became full of that thought; along with the
accompanying consciousness, that a subject of that kingdom would be
alone here and find nobody to help her.

"Daisy, what's the matter?" whispered Preston. "You are as sober as a
judge."

"Am I?" said Daisy.

"What's to pay?"

"Nothing. I feel very nicely."

"Why don't you look like other people, then?"

"I suppose," said Daisy slowly, "I do not feel like other people."

"I wish you'd make haste about it, then," said Preston.

"Do be my own dear little old Daisy! Don't be grave and wise."

"Are you going to spend the night here, Daisy?" said Dr. Sandford,
coming up to the sofa.

"No, sir," said Daisy, smiling.

"Where then?"

"I suppose, in my room, sir--up-stairs."

"I must see you there before I go; and it is time now. Shall I carry you
up?"

"If you please, sir."

"Pray do not, Dr. Sandford!" said Mrs. Randolph. "Mr. Randolph will do
it, or one of the servants. There is no occasion for you to trouble
yourself."

"Thank you, ma'am, but I like to see after my patients myself. Unless
Daisy prefers other hands."

Mrs. Randolph protested. The doctor stood quiet and looked at Daisy,
waiting for her to say what she would like. Now Daisy knew, that of all
hands which had touched her, the doctor's and Juanita's were far the
best; and of those two, the doctor's; perhaps because he was the
strongest. Her father was very kind and tender, but he did not
understand the business.

"I should like Dr. Sandford to take me," she said, when she found she
must speak.

"Then I will trouble you, Mrs. Randolph, for somebody to shew me the
way." And the doctor stooped and put his strong arms under Daisy, and
lifted her up.

"Quite a conquest, I declare, you have made, Dr. Sandford!" said Mrs.
Randolph, laughing. "Preston, shew the way, and I'll send June."

So the doctor marched off with Daisy, Preston going before to shew the
way. He carried her without the least jar or awkwardness, through the
company, out into the hall, and up the stairs. There June met him, and
took Preston's office from him. Into Daisy's own room at last they
came, and Dr. Sandford laid his little charge at once on her bed.

"You must not try to move, Daisy, until I see you again. Stay here till
then."

"Yes, sir."

"Good-night."

"Good-night. Thank you, sir, for bringing me up."

Dr. Sandford smiled. "Thank you," said he, and with a wave of his hand,
away he went.

"O June!" said Daisy, "how glad I am to see you."

June had seen Daisy only once during her abode at Mrs. Benoit's cottage;
and now Daisy squeezed her hands and welcomed the sight of her with
great affection; and June on her part, though not given to
demonstrations, smiled till her wrinkles took all sorts of queer shapes,
and even shewed her deep black eyes twinkling with something like
moisture. They certainly were; and putting the smiles and the tears
together, Daisy felt sure that June was as glad to see her as she was to
see June. In truth, Daisy was a sort of household deity to June, and she
welcomed her back accordingly, in her secret heart; but her words on
that subject, as on all others, were few. The business of undressing,
however, went on with great tenderness. When it was finished, Daisy
missed Juanita. For then Juanita had been accustomed to bring her Bible,
and read and pray; and that had been a time Daisy always enjoyed
wonderfully. Now, in bed, at night, she could not see to read for
herself. She dismissed June, and was left alone in her old room, with,
as she justly thought, a great deal to pray for. And praying, little
Daisy went to sleep.




CHAPTER II.


The next day Daisy felt very much at home. Her orders were not to stir
till the doctor came. So after breakfast and after receiving visits from
everybody in the house, she was left to her own devices, for it happened
that everybody had something on hand that morning and nobody staid with
her.

Left with June, Daisy lay for awhile feasting her eyes on all the
pleasant wonted objects around her. She was a particular little body,
and very fond of her room and its furniture and arrangements. Then came
a hankering for the sight of some of her concealed treasures from which
she had been separated so long.

"June, I wish you would open the drawer of my bureau, the second drawer
from the top, and put your hand back at the left side and give me a book
that lies there."

June got the key and rummaged. "Don't feel nothing, Miss Daisy."

"Quite back, June, under everything--"

"Why, Miss Daisy, it's tucked away as though you didn't mean nobody
should never find it!"

Precisely what Daisy did mean. But there it was, safe enough--Mr.
Dinwiddie's Bible. Daisy's hands and eyes welcomed it. She asked for
nothing more in a good while after that; and June curiously watched her,
with immense reverence. The thin pale little face, a little turned from
the light, so that she could see better; the intent eyes; the wise
little mouth, where childish innocence and oldish prudence made a queer
meeting; the slim little fingers that held the book; above all, the
sweet calm of the face. June would not gaze, but she looked and looked,
as she could, by glances; and nearly worshipped her little mistress in
her heart. She thought it almost ominous and awful to see a child read
the Bible so. For Daisy looked at it with loving eyes, as at words that
were a pleasure to her. It was no duty-work, that reading. At last Daisy
shut the book, to June's relief.

"June, I want to see my old things. I would like to have them here on
the bed."

"What things, Miss Daisy?"

"I would like my bird of paradise first. You can put a big book here for
it to stand on, where it will be steady."

The bird of paradise June brought, and placed as ordered. It was a bird
of spun glass only, but a great beauty in Daisy's eyes. Its tail was of
such fine threads of glass that it waved with the least breath.

"How pretty it is! You may take it away, June, for I am afraid it will
get broken; and now bring me my Chinese puzzle, and set my cathedral
here. You can bring it here without hurting it, can't you?"

"Where is your puzzle, Miss Daisy?"

"It is in the upper drawer of my cabinet," (so Daisy called a small
chest of drawers which held her varieties) "and the cathedral stands on
the top, under the glass shade. Be very careful, June."

June accomplished both parts of her business. The "cathedral" was a
beautiful model of a famous one, made in ivory. It was rather more than
a foot long, and high, of course, in proportion. Every window and
doorway and pillar and arcade was there, in its exact place and size,
according to the scale of the model; and a beautiful thing it was to
look upon for any eyes that loved beauty. Daisy's eyes loved it well,
and now for a long time she lay back on her pillow watching and studying
the lights among those arcades, which the rich colour of the ivory,
grown yellow with time, made so very pleasant to see. Daisy studied and
thought. The Chinese puzzle got no attention. At last she cried, "June,
I should like to have my Egyptian spoon."

[Illustration]

"What is that, Miss Daisy?"

"My Egyptian spoon--it is a long, carved, wooden thing, with something
like a spoon at one end; it is quite brown. Look for it in the next
drawer, June, you will find it there. It don't look like a spoon."

"There is nothing like it in this drawer, Miss Daisy."

"Yes, it is. It is wrapped up in paper."

"Nothing here wrapped in paper," said June, rummaging.

"Aren't my chessmen there? and my Indian canoe? and my moccasins?--"

"Yes, Miss Daisy, all them's here."

"Well, the spoon is there too, then; it was with the canoe and the
moccasins."

"It ain't here, Miss Daisy."

"Then look in all the other drawers, June."

June did so; no spoon. Daisy half raised herself up for a frightened
look towards her "cabinet."

"Has anybody done anything to my drawers while I have been away?"

"No, Miss Daisy, not as I know of."

"June, please look in them all--every one."

"'Taint here, Miss Daisy."

Daisy lay down again and lay thinking.

"June, is mamma in her room?"

"Yes, Miss Daisy."

"Ask her--tell her I want to speak to her very much."

Mrs. Randolph came.

"Mamma," said Daisy, "do you know anything about my Egyptian spoon?"

"Do you want it, Daisy?"

"O yes, mamma! I do. June cannot find it. Do you know where it is?"

"Yes--it is not a thing for a child like you, Daisy, and I let your aunt
Gary have it. She wanted it for her collection. I will get you anything
else you like in place of it."

"But mamma, I told aunt Gary she could not have it. She asked me, and I
told her she could not have it."

"I have told her she might, Daisy. Something else will give you more
pleasure. You are not an ungenerous child."

"But, mamma! it was _mine_. It belonged to me."

"Hush, Daisy; that is not a proper way to speak to me. I allow you to do
what you like with your things in general; this was much fitter for your
aunt Gary than for you. It was something beyond your appreciation. Do
not oblige me to remind you that your things are mine."

Mrs. Randolph spoke as if half displeased already, and left the room.
Daisy lay with a great flush upon her face, and in a state of
perturbation.

Her spoon was gone; that was beyond question, and Daisy's little spirit
was in tumultuous disturbance--very uncommon indeed with her. Grief, and
the sense of wrong, and the feeling of anger strove together. Did she
not appreciate her old spoon? when every leaf of the lotus carving and
every marking of the duck's bill had been noted and studied over and
over, with a wondering regard to the dark hands that so many, many years
and ages ago had fashioned it. Would Mrs. Gary love it as well? Daisy
did not believe any such thing. And then it was the gift of Nora and Mr.
Dinwiddie, and precious by association; and it was _gone_. Daisy lay
still on her pillow, with a slow tear now and then gathering in her
eyes, but also with an ominous line on her brow. There was a great sense
of injustice at work--the feeling that she had been robbed; and that she
was powerless to right herself. Her mother had done it; in her secret
thought Daisy knew that, and that she would not have done it to Ransom.
Yet in the deep fixed habit of obedience and awe of her mother, Daisy
sheered off from directly blaming her as much as possible, and let the
burden of her displeasure fall on Mrs. Gary. She was bitterly hurt at
her mother's action, however; doubly hurt, at the loss and at the manner
of it; and the slow tears kept coming and rolling down to wet her
pillow. For a while Daisy pondered the means of getting her treasure
back; by a word to her father, or a representation to Preston, or by
boldly demanding the spoon of Mrs. Gary herself. Daisy felt as if she
must have it back somehow. But any of these ways, even if successful,
would make trouble; a great deal of trouble; and it would be, Daisy had
an inward consciousness all the time, unworthy of a Christian child.
But she felt angry with Mrs. Gary, and as if she could never forgive
her. Daisy, though not passionate, was persistent in her character; her
gentleness covered a not exactly yielding disposition.

In the midst of all this, Dr. Sandford came in, fresh from his morning's
drive, and sat down by the bedside.

"Do you want to go down stairs, Daisy?"

"No, sir; I think not."

"Not? What's the matter? Are you of a misanthropical turn of mind?"

"I do not know. Dr. Sandford; I do not know what that is."

"Well, now you have got back to human society and fellowship, don't you
want to enjoy it?"

"I should not enjoy it to-day."

"If I do not see you down stairs, you will have to stay up till another
day."

"Yes, sir."

"What is the matter, Daisy?" And now the doctor bent over and looked
hard in her face. The wet spot in her pillow no doubt he had seen long
ago. Daisy's eyes drooped.

"Look up here, and give me an answer."

"I can't very well tell you, sir."

"Why do you not want to go down stairs?"

"Because, Dr. Sandford, I am not good."

"Not good!" said he. "I thought you always were good."

Daisy's eye reddened and her lip twitched. He saw that there was some
uncommon disturbance on hand; and there was the wet spot on the pillow.

"Something has troubled you," he said; and with that he laid his
hand--it was a fresh, cool hand, pleasant to feel--upon Daisy's
forehead, and kept it there; sometimes looking at her, and as often
looking somewhere else. It was very agreeable to Daisy; she did not stir
her head from under the hand; and gradually she quieted down, and her
nerves, which were all ruffled, like a bird's feathers, grew smooth.
There were no lines in her forehead when Dr. Sandford took away his hand
again.

"Now tell me," said he smiling, "what was the matter? Shall I take you
down to the library now?"

"O no, sir, if you please. Please do not, Dr. Sandford! I am not ready,
I am not fit."

"Not fit?" said the doctor, eyeing her, and very much at a loss what to
make of this. "Do you mean that you want to be more finely attired
before you make your appearance in company?"

"No, sir," said Daisy. It struck her with a great sorrow, his saying
this. She knew her outward attire was faultless; bright and nice as new
silver was every bit of Daisy's dress, from her smooth hair to her neat
little slippers; it was all white and clean. But the inward adorning
which God looked at--in what a state was that? Daisy felt a double pang;
that Dr. Sandford should so far mistake her as to think her full of
silly vanity, and on the other hand, that he should so much, too well
judge of her as to think her always good. The witnessing tinge came
about Daisy's eyelids again.

"Dr. Sandford, if people tell you their private affairs, of course it is
confidential?"

"Of course," said the doctor, without moving a muscle.

"Then I will tell you what I meant. I am not good. I am dressed well
enough; but I have anger in my heart."

Dr. Sandford did not say how much he was surprised; for Daisy looked as
meek as a lamb. But he was a philosopher, and interested.

"Then I am sure you have had reason, Daisy."

"I think I had," said Daisy, but without looking less sorrowful.

"Do you not consider that one has a right to be angry when one has a
reason?"

"But one shouldn't stay angry," said the child, folding her hands over
her heart.

"How are you going to help it, Daisy?"

"There is a way, Dr. Sandford."

"Is there? But you see I am in the dark now. I am as much abroad about
that, as you were about a journey of three hundred years to the sun.
When I am angry I never find that I can help it. I can maybe help using
my horsewhip; but I cannot manage the anger."

"No--" said Daisy, looking up at him, and thinking how terrible it must
be to have to encounter anger from his blue eye.

"What then, Daisy? how do you make out your position?"

Daisy did not very well like to say. She had a certain consciousness--or
fear--that it would not be understood, and she would be laughed at--not
openly, for Dr. Sandford was never impolite; but yet she shrunk from the
cold glance of unbelief, or of derision, however well and kindly masked.
She was silent.

"Haven't we got into a confidential position yet?" said the doctor.

"Yes, sir, but--"

"Speak on."

"Jesus will help us, Dr. Sandford, if we ask him." And tears, that were
tears of deep penitence now, rushed to Daisy's eyes.

"I do not believe, Daisy, to begin with, that you know what anger
means."

"I have been angry this morning," said Daisy sadly. "I am angry now, I
think."

"How do you feel when you are angry?"

"I feel wrong. I do not want to see the person--I feel she would be
disagreeable to me, and if I spoke to her I should want to say something
disagreeable."

"Very natural," said the doctor.

"But it is wrong."

"If you can help it, Daisy. I always feel disagreeable when I am angry.
I feel a little disagreeable now that you are angry."

Daisy could not help smiling at that.

"Now suppose we go down stairs."

"O no, sir. O no, Dr. Sandford, please! I am not ready--I would rather
not go down stairs to-day. Please don't take me!"

"To-morrow you must, Daisy. I shall not give you any longer than till
then."

Away went Dr. Sandford to the library; kept Daisy's counsel, and told
Mrs. Randolph she was to remain in her room to-day.

"She thinks too much," he said. "There is too much self-introversion."

"I know it! but what can we do?" said Mr. Randolph. "She has been kept
from books as much as possible."

"Amusement and the society of children."

"Ay, but she likes older society better."

"Good morning," said the doctor.

"Stay! Dr. Sandford, I have great confidence in you. I wish you would
take in hand not Daisy's foot merely but the general management of her,
and give us your advice. She has not gained, on the whole, this summer,
and is very delicate."

"Rather--" said the doctor. And away he went.




CHAPTER III.


Meanwhile Daisy turned away from her beautiful little ivory cathedral,
and opened Mr. Dinwiddie's Bible. Her heart was not at all comforted
yet; and indeed her talk with Dr. Sandford had rather roused her to
keener discomfort. She had confessed herself wrong, and had told him the
way to get right; yet she herself, in spite of knowing the way, was not
right, but very far from it. So she felt. Her heart was very sore for
the hurt she had suffered; it gave her a twinge every time she thought
of the lotus carving of her spoon handle, and those odd representations
of fish in the bowl of it. She lay over on her pillow, slowly turning
and turning the pages of her Bible, and tear after tear slowly gathering
one after another, and filling her eyes and rolling down to her pillow
to make another wet spot. There was no harm in that, if that had been
all. Daisy had reason. But what troubled her was, that she was so
strongly displeased with her aunt Gary. She did not want to see her or
hear her, and the thought of a kiss from her was unendurable. Nay, Daisy
felt as if she would like to punish her, if she could; or at least to
repossess herself of her stolen property by fair means or by foul. She
was almost inclined to think that she must have it at all events. And at
the same time, she had told Dr. Sandford that she was not right. So
Daisy lay slowly turning the pages of her Bible, looking for some word
that might catch her eye and be a help to her. There were a good many
marks in the Bible, scattered here and there, made by its former owner.
One of these stopped Daisy's search, and gave her something to think of.
It stood opposite these words:

"I, therefore, the prisoner of the Lord, beseech you that ye walk worthy
of the vocation wherewith ye are called."

Daisy considered that. What "vocation" meant, she did not know, nor who
was "the prisoner of the Lord," nor what that could mean; but yet she
caught at something of the sense. "Walk worthy," she understood that;
and guessed what "vocation" stood for. Ay! that was just it, and that
was just what Daisy was not doing. The next words, too, were plain
enough.

"With all lowliness and meekness, with long-suffering, forbearing one
another in love."

"Forbearing one another"--easy to read, how hard to do! Mrs. Gary's
image was very ugly yet to Daisy. Could she speak pleasantly to her
aunt? could she even look pleasantly at her? could she "forbear" all
unkindness, even in thought? Not yet! Daisy felt very miserable and very
much ashamed of herself, even while her anger was in abiding strength
and vigour.

She went on, reading through the whole chapter; not because she had not
enough already to think about, but because she did not feel that she
could obey it. Some of the chapter she did not quite understand; but she
went on reading, all the same, till she came to the last verse. That
went through and through Daisy's heart, and her eyes filled so full that
by the time she got to the end of it she could not see to read at all.
These were the words:

"And be ye kind one to another, tender-hearted, forgiving one another,
even as God for Christ's sake hath forgiven you."

That quite broke Daisy's heart. She rolled herself over upon her open
Bible, so as to hide her face in her pillow, and there Daisy had a good
cry. _She_ standing out about a little thing, when Jesus was willing to
forgive such loads and loads of naughtiness in her! Daisy would have no
friendship with her resentment any more. She turned her back upon it,
and fled from it, and sought eagerly that help by which, as she had told
Dr. Sandford, it might be overcome. And she had said right. He who is
called Jesus because be saves his people from their sins, will not leave
anybody under their power who heartily trusts in him for deliverance
from them.

Daisy received several visits that day, but they were all flying visits;
everybody was busy. However they put to the proof the state of her
feeling towards several persons. The next day the first person she saw
was the doctor.

"How do you do, Daisy? Ready to go down stairs to-day?"

"Yes, sir."

"Have you got the better of your anger?"

"Yes, sir."

"Pray, at what hour did your indignation take flight?" said the doctor,
looking at the gentle little face before him.

"I think--about three hours after you were here yesterday," said Daisy
soberly. The doctor looked at her, and his gravity gave way, so far at
least as to let the corners of his lips curl away from some very white
teeth. Dr. Sandford rarely laughed. And there was nothing mocking about
his smile now, though I have used the word "curl;" it was merely what
Daisy considered a very intelligent and very benign curve of the mouth.
Indeed she liked it very much.

"Have you seen the offending party since that time, Daisy?"

"Yes, sir."

"And did you feel no return of displeasure?"

"No, sir."

There was something so exceedingly sweet in Daisy's expression of face,
so unruffled in its loving calm and assurance, that Dr Sandford
received quite a new impression in his views of human character.

"I shall have an account to settle with that young Preston one of these
days," he remarked as he took Daisy's little form in his arms.

"O he did nothing!" said Daisy. "It wasn't Preston at all. He had
nothing to do with it!"

"He had not?" said the doctor.

"Not at all; nor any other boy."

"Beyond my management, then!" said the doctor; and he moved off. He had
stood still to say that word or two; Daisy's arm was round his neck to
help support herself; the two looked into each other's faces. Certainly
that had come to pass which at one time she had thought unlikely; Daisy
was very fond of the doctor.

He carried her now down to the library, and laid her on a sofa. Nobody
at all was there. The long windows were standing open; the morning sweet
air blew gently in; the books, and chairs, and tables which made the
room pretty to Daisy's eyes, looked very pleasant after the long weeks
in which she had not seen them. But along with her joy at seeing them
again was mixed a vivid recollection of the terrible scene she had gone
through there, a few days before her accident. However, nothing could
make Daisy anything but happy just now.

"You must remain here until I come again," said the doctor; "and now I
will send some of the rest of the family to you."

The first one that came was her father. He sat down by the sofa, and was
so tenderly glad to have her there again, that Daisy's little heart
leaped for joy. She put her hand in his, and lay looking into his face.

"Papa, it is nice," she said.

"What?"

"O to be here, and with you again."

Mr. Randolph put his lips down to Daisy's, and kissed them a good many
times.

"Do you know we are going to Silver Lake with you as soon as you are
strong enough?"

"O yes, papa! Dr. Sandford says he can manage it. But I don't know
when."

"In a week or two more."

"Papa, who is going?"

"Everybody, I suppose."

"But I mean, is anybody to be invited?"

"I think we must ask Dr. Sandford."

"O yes, papa! I wish he would go. But is anybody else to be asked?"

"I do not know, Daisy. Whom would you like to have invited?"

"Papa, I would like _very_ much to have Nora Dinwiddie. She has come
back."

"Well, tell your mother so."

Daisy was silent a little; then she began on a new theme.

"Papa, what is a 'vocation'?"

"What is _what_, Daisy?"

"Vocation, papa."

"Where did you get that word?"

"I found it in a book."

"It means commonly a person's business or employment."

"Only that, papa?"

"There is another sense in which it is used, but you would hardly
understand it."

"Please tell me, papa."

"Why?"

"Papa, I like to know the meanings of things. Please tell me."

"Daisy, it means a 'calling'--in the idea that some persons are
particularly appointed to a certain place or work in the world."

Daisy looked a little hard at him, and then said, "Thank you, papa."

"Daisy, I hope you do not think _you_ have a 'vocation,'" said Mr.
Randolph, half smiling.

"Papa," said the child, "I cannot help it."

"No, perhaps not," said Mr. Randolph, stooping again to Daisy's lips.
"When you are older and wiser you will know better. At present your
vocation is to be a good little daughter. Now what are you going to do
to-day? Here is Preston--if you want him; or I will do for you what you
please."

"Yes, Daisy, what shall we do?" said Preston.

"O, are you at leisure?"

"All your own, Daisy, for this morning at any rate. What shall we do?"

"O Preston, would you mind getting my tray for me; and let us go on with
the battle of Hastings?"

"With what?" said Mr. Randolph, laughing.

"The battle of Hastings, papa--English history, you know. Captain
Drummond and I got just there and then we stopped. But Harold was
killed--wasn't he, papa?"

"I believe he was, Daisy."

"Good for him, too," said Preston. "He was nothing but a usurper.
William the Conqueror was a great deal more of a man."

"But he was just as much of a usurper, wasn't he?" said Daisy.

"You must mind your ethics, Preston," Mr. Randolph said, laughing.
"Daisy is on the Saxon side."

"Preston, will you get the tray, please? June will give it to you."

Preston did not quite understand the philosophy of the tray; however,
Daisy must be humoured. It was brought. By Daisy's order it had been
carefully protected from dust and danger; and the lineaments of England,
as traced by the captain some time ago, were fresh and in good order.
Daisy hung over the map with great interest, renewing her acquaintance
with various localities, and gradually getting Preston warmed up to the
play. It was quite exciting; for with every movement of William's
victorious footsteps, the course of his progress had to be carefully
studied out on a printed map, and then the towns and villages which
marked his way noted on the clay map, and their places betokened by
wooden pins. Daisy suggested that these pins should have sealing-wax
heads of different colours to distinguish the cities, the villages, and
the forts from each other. Making these, interrupted doubtless the march
of the Conqueror and of history, but in the end much increased Daisy's
satisfaction, and if the truth be told, Preston's too.

"There,--now you can see at a glance where the castles are; don't their
red heads look pretty! And, O Preston! we ought to have some way of
marking the battle-fields; don't you think so?"

"The map of England will be nothing but marks then, by and by," said
Preston.

"Will it? But it would be very curious. Preston, just give me a little
piece of that pink blotting paper from the library table; it is in the
portfolio there. Now I can put a little square bit of this on every
battle-field, and pressing it a little, it will stick, I think.
There!--there is Hastings. Do you see, Preston? That will do nicely."

"England will be all pink blotting paper by and by," said Preston.

"Then it will be very curious," said Daisy. "Were new kings _always_
coming to push out the old ones?"

"Not like William the Conqueror. But yet it was something very like
that, Daisy. When a king died, two of his children would both want the
place; so they would fight."

"But two men fighting would not make a battle-field."

"O Daisy, Daisy!" cried Preston; "do you know no better than that?"

"Well, but who else would fight with them?"

"Why, all the kingdom! Part would fight for the right, you know, as the
Saxons did with Harold; and part would fight to be the best fellows and
to get the fat places."

"Fat places?" said Daisy. At which Preston went off into one of his
laughs. Daisy looked on. How could she be expected to understand him?

"What is the matter, my dear? What are you doing?" Daisy started.

"We are studying English, history, aunt Gary."

"_History_, my dear? And what is all this muss, and these red and black
spots? does your mamma allow this in the library?"

"Just the place to study history, I am sure, mamma," said Preston; "and
you cannot have less muss than this where people are fighting. But I
really don't know what you mean, ma'am; there cannot be a cleaner map,
except for the blood shed on it."

"Blood?" said Mrs. Gary. "My dear"--as Preston burst into another
laugh--"you must not let him tease you."

Daisy's look was so very unruffled and gentle that perhaps it put Mrs.
Gary in mind of another subject.

"Did you know, Daisy, that I had robbed you of your old-fashioned
spoon?"

"I found it was not among my things," said Daisy.

"My dear, your mother thought you would not value it; and it was very
desirable to my collection. I took it with her consent."

"I am willing you should have it, aunt Gary."

"Were you very angry, my dear, when you found where it had gone?"

"I am not angry now, aunt Gary."

Certainly Daisy was not; yet something in the child's look or manner
made the lady willing to drop the subject. Its very calm gentleness did
not testify to anything like unconcern about the matter; and if there
had been concern, Mrs. Gary was not desirous to awaken it again. She
kissed Daisy, said she was a good girl, and walked off. Daisy wondered
if her aunt had a fancy for trilobites.

"What was all that about, Daisy?" Preston asked.

"O never mind--let us go on with William the Conqueror."

"What spoon of yours has she got?"

"My Egyptian spoon."

"That old carved thing with the duck's bill?"

"Yes. Now, Preston, what comes next?"

"Didn't you say she could not have it?"

"No matter what I said, if I say that she can have it now."

"Did you give it to her?"

"Preston, that has nothing to do with William the Conqueror. Please let
us go on."

"Daisy, I want to know. Did you give it to her?"

"I am willing she should have it. Now, Preston, go on?"

"But I say, did you give my mother that spoon?"

"Preston," said Daisy, "do you think it is quite proper to question me
in that manner about what you see I do not wish to have you know?"

Preston laughed, though he looked vexed, and kissed her, nobody being in
the library; he was too big a boy to have done it if anybody had been
looking on. And after that he played the historico-geographical play
with her for a very long time; finding it, with Daisy's eagerness and
freshness, a very good play indeed. Only he would persist in calling
every cause of war, every disputed succession, every rivalry of
candidates, an _Egyptian spoon_. Daisy could not prevent him. She had a
very happy morning; and Dr. Sandford was well satisfied with her bright
face when he came, towards night, and carried, her up stairs again.

But Daisy was getting well now. It was only a few days more, and Dr.
Sandford permitted her to walk a little way herself on her own feet. A
little way at first, across the floor and back; no more that day; but
from that time Daisy felt whole again. Soon she could walk to please
herself, up and down stairs and everywhere; though she was not allowed
to go far enough to tire her foot while it was yet unused to exercise.

Now all her home ways fell again into their accustomed order. Daisy
could get up and be dressed; nobody knows what a luxury that is unless
he has been hindered of it for a good while. She could stand at her
window and look out; and go down on her own feet to join the family at
breakfast. Her father procured her a seat next himself now, which Daisy
did not use to have; and she enjoyed it. She knew he enjoyed it too; and
it made breakfast a very happy time to Daisy. After breakfast she was at
her own disposal, as of old. Nobody wished her to do anything but please
herself.

At this moment nothing pleased Daisy better than to go on with English
history. With Preston, if she could get him; if not, alone, with her
book and her tray map. Poring over it, Daisy would lie on the sofa, or
sit on a little bench with the tray on the floor; planting her towns and
castles, or going hack to those already planted with a fresh interest
from new associations. Certain red-headed and certain black-headed and
certain green-headed pins came to be very well known and familiar in the
course of time. And in course of time, too, the soil of England came to
be very much overspread with little squares of pink blotting-paper. To
Daisy it grew to be a commentary on the wickedness of mankind. Preston
remarked on the multitude there was of Egyptian spoons.

"What do you mean by that, Preston?" said his aunt.

"Causes of quarrel, ma'am."

"Why do you call them Egyptian spoons?"

"Causes of trouble, I should say, ma'am."

"And again I say, why do you call them Egyptian spoons?"

"I beg your pardon, aunt Felicia. Egypt was always a cause of trouble to
the faithful; and I was afraid little Daisy has had just a spoonful of
it lately."

"Daisy, what have you been saying to your cousin?"

"Nothing, mamma, about that; only what Preston asked me."

"I am sure you did not say what I asked of you, Daisy. She told me
nothing at all, aunt Felicia, except by what she did not tell me."

"She behaved very sweetly about it, indeed," said Mrs. Gary. "She made
me feel quite easy about keeping it. I shall have to find out what I can
send, to Daisy that she will like."

"What are you and Preston doing there?" Mrs. Randolph asked with a
cloudy face.

"Studying, mamma; I am. English history."

"That is no way of studying; and that tray--what have you got in it?"

"England, mamma."

Preston laughed. Mrs. Randolph did not join him.

"What have you got in that thing, Daisy? sand?"

"O no, mamma--it's something--it's prepared clay, I believe."

"Prepared!" said Mrs. Randolph. "Prepared for something besides my
library. You are hanging over it all day, Daisy--I do not believe it is
good for you."

"O mamma, it is!"

"I think I shall try whether it is not good for you to be without it."

"O no, mamma." Daisy looked in dismay. "Do ask Dr. Sandford if he thinks
it is not good for me."

"There he is, then," said Mrs. Randolph, "Doctor, I wish you would see
whether Daisy is occupying herself, in your judgment, well, when she is
hanging over that thing half the day."

Dr. Sandford came up. Daisy was not afraid of his decision, for she knew
he was on her side. Mrs. Randolph on the other hand did not wish, to
dispute it, for she was, like most other people, on the doctor's side.
He came up and looked at the tray.

"What is this?"

"The map of England, sir."

"Pray what are you doing with it?"

"Making it, sir, and studying English history."

"What are these pins? armies? or warriors? they are in confusion
enough."

"O there is no confusion," said Daisy. "They are castles and towns."

"For instance?--"

"This is Dover Castle," said Daisy, touching a red-headed pin; "and this
is Caernarvon, and Conway; and these black ones are towns. There is
London--and Liverpool--and York--and Oxford--don't you see?"

"I see, but it would take a witch to remember. What are you doing?"

"Studying English history, sir; and as fast as we come to a great town
or castle we mark it. These bits of paper shew where the great
battle-fields are."

"Original!" said the doctor.

"No sir, it is not," said Daisy. "Captain Drummond taught it to me."

"What, the history?"

"No; but this way of playing."

Preston was laughing and trying to keep quiet. Nothing could be graver
than the doctor.

"Is it interesting, this way of playing?"

"Very!" said Daisy, with a good deal of eagerness, more than she wished
to shew.

"I wish you would forbid it, Dr. Sandford," said Daisy's mother. "I do
not believe in such a method of study, nor wish Daisy to be engrossed
with any study at all. She is not fit for it."

"Whereabouts are you?" said the doctor to Daisy.

"We are just getting through the wars of the Roses."

"Ah! I never can remember how those wars began--can you?"

"They began when the Duke of York tried to get the crown of Henry the
Sixth. But I think he was wrong--don't you?"

"Somebody is always wrong in those affairs," said the doctor. "You are
getting through the wars of the Roses. What do you find was the end of
them?"

"When the Earl of Richmond came. We have just finished the battle of
Bosworth Field. Then he married Elizabeth of York, and so they wore the
two roses together."

"Harmoniously?" said the doctor.

"I don't know, sir. I do not know anything about Henry the Seventh yet."

"What was going on in the rest of the world while the Roses were at war
in England?"

"O I don't know, sir!" said Daisy, looking up with a sudden expression
of humbleness. "I do not know anything about anywhere else."

"You do not know where the Hudson River was then."

"I suppose it was where it is now?"

"Geographically, Daisy; but not politically, socially, or commercially.
Melbourne House was not thinking of building; and the Indians ferried
their canoes over to Silver Lake, where a civilized party are going in a
few days to eat chicken salad under very different auspices."

"Were there no white people here?"

"Columbus had not discovered America, even. He did that just about seven
years after Henry the Seventh was crowned on Bosworth Field."

"I don't know who Columbus was," Daisy said, with a glance so wistful
and profound in its sense of ignorance, that Dr. Sandford smiled.

"You will hear about him soon," he said, turning away to Mrs. Randolph.
That lady did not look by any means well pleased. The doctor stood
before her looking down, with the sort of frank, calm bearing that
characterized him.

"Are you not, in part at least, a Southerner?" was the lady's first
question.

"I am sorry I must lose so much of your good opinion as to confess
myself a Yankee," said the doctor steadily.

"Are you going to give your sanction to Daisy's plunging herself into
study, and books, and all that sort of thing, Dr. Sandford?"

"Not beyond _my_ depth to reach her."

"I do not think it is good for her. She is very fond of it, and she does
a great deal too much of it when she begins; and she wants strengthening
first, in my opinion. You have said enough now to make her crazy after
the history of the whole world."

"Mrs. Randolph, I must remind you that though, you can hinder a tree
from growing, in a particular place, you cannot a fungus; if the
conditions be favourable."

"What do you mean?"

"I think this may be a good alterative."

The lady looked a little hard at the doctor.

"There is one book I wish you could hinder her from reading," she said,
lowering her tone.

"What is that, madam?"

"She is just the child not to bear it; and she is injured by poring over
the Bible."

"Put the Bibles out of her way," suggested the doctor.

"I have, as much as I can; but it is not possible to do it perfectly."

"Then I counsel you to allow her the use of this medicine," said Dr.
Sandford, glancing towards the tray, which no longer held Daisy's
attention. For together with her mother's lowering of voice, the one
word "Bible" had come to her consciousness. Daisy was at no loss to
guess what it meant. The low tones of the speakers gave her sufficient
information.

Thus far; that her Bible was reckoned an undesirable treasure for her by
her mother. Was her own dear little particular Bible in danger? the one
that Mr. Dinwiddie had given her? Daisy was alarmed. She did not enjoy
any more battle-fields, nor enter with good heart into her history work
from that time, until she could get up stairs again and see that it was
safe, and contrive some way or place to keep it safe in time to come.
Where could such a place be? It was a puzzle, because all Daisy's things
were, of course, open to her mother. Perhaps Daisy's fears were
needless; but after the affair of her Egyptian spoon she looked with
jealous eves not only on her Bible, but on her trilobite. She sat down
with a dismayed little face, to think where she could find a
hiding-place. She thought of putting the Bible under her bed or pillow;
but the bed was turned over every morning, and the servants would find
it. None of her bureau drawers or cabinet drawers were secure. Daisy
pondered all manner of impossible places. At last fixed upon a spot of
the floor covered by an ottoman. The ottoman was hollow and not very
heavy, and never moved after the room was put in order every day. Till
the room was put in order Daisy hid her Bible in a drawer; then took it
out and consigned it to the obscurity of the ottoman.

She was greatly afraid, then, of being found reading it. She had not
heard the words which passed between the doctor and her mother; only the
word "Bible;" but the low tones made her well enough aware that the
matter of their talk was somehow adverse; it boded nothing kindly to her
and the Bible. So Daisy was in another perplexity; and resolved that to
be as safe as she could, she would read with locked doors for the
future. And as doors must not be locked at times when her mother might
be coming and going, Daisy chose early morning and late evening for her
Bible-reading. She used to let June undress her, and finish all her
duties of dressing-maid; then she sent her away and locked her doors,
and read in comfort. This lasted a little while; then one unlucky night
Daisy forgot to unlock her doors. The morning came, and June with it;
but June could neither get in nor dare knock loud enough to make Daisy
hear; she was obliged to come round through her mistress's
dressing-room. But Daisy's door on that side was locked too! June was
going softly away.

"What do you want?" said her mistress.

"If you please, ma'am," said June, stopping very unwillingly--"I thought
it was time to wake Miss Daisy."

"Why do you not go in, then?"

"Ma'am--the door is locked," said June, in a scarce audible undertone.

"Locked?--knock."

June went back and knocked.

"Louder," said Mrs. Randolph, who was under her maid's hands; "you would
not waken a cat at that rate. Make yourself heard."

June's taps, however, continued so fearfully gentle, that Mrs. Randolph,
arose and came to the door herself. One or two of the touches of her
imperative fingers brought a little figure in white night-dress and
just-awakened face, to open the door.

"Daisy," said her mother, "what is your door fast for?"

"Mamma--I wanted it fast for a few minutes."

"Did you lock it last night or this morning?"

"Last night--I thought--I meant to have opened it."

"Both your doors?"

"Yes, mamma."

"All night locked! Now, Daisy, I forbid you ever to turn the key in your
door again, night or day."

"O mamma!--I want it shut sometimes."

"Hush. Go and let June dress you."

June was vexed enough with herself to have inflicted some punishment on
her awkward tongue and head, when she saw that Daisy was for some reason
or other deeply grieved. The tears gathered and fell, quietly, all
through the process of dressing; and a sort of sob heaved from the
child's breast now and then, without words and most involuntary.
Juanita's cottage was a palace to Melbourne House, if peace made the
furniture. But June did not know what to say; so she was silent too.

When June was gone Daisy went to her beloved window, and stood there.
She did not like to kneel, because her mother might come in, or even
June, while she was doing so. She stood at the sweet open window, and
prayed that the Lord would take care of her, and help her to pray
however she could. And then the thought of those words came to
Daisy:--"Thou, therefore, endure hardness, as a good soldier of Jesus
Christ." She remembered very well how Captain Drummond had described the
way a good soldier takes things--hard and disagreeable things as well as
others. It is part of his business to endure them; he expects them, and
minds them not at all in comparison with the service in which he is
engaged. And a soldier of Jesus Christ has only to obey him, and take
willingly whatever comes in the line of his service. What matter? The
only thing was to obey orders, and do the work she was set upon.
Hardships did not seem much like hardships when she thought of them in
this way. And then it occurred to Daisy, that if she _could_ not fasten
her doors, she had better just kneel down as usual with them open. She
could not do without praying; and if she must be in traded upon, why it
was a little hardship that she had better not mind. And when she had
thought that, Daisy kneeled down; and she never had any more trouble
about it. She did fancy, even that first morning, that she heard the
lock of her door turn; but she did not move to see, and hearing nothing
more she soon forgot it. Nobody wore such a bright and fresh face at the
breakfast-table as Daisy; such a glad and uncareful face; and Mrs.
Randolph seeing it, was reassured; though she had just seen her little
daughter at her prayers, on her knees, by the window. She looked so
happy now, that the lady was inclined to hope her religion was a
childish folly, which would pass away and be forgotten in time.

But for the present Daisy was a soldier; and meditating much on a
service which she had to perform. That very day, if you had been
there, and worn an invisible cap, you might have gone into her room
and seen what she was about. On the ottoman aforesaid Daisy's
writing-desk was placed; and before it on a cricket sat Daisy, with
a face, O how grave and busy! A very weight of care of some sort
seemed to lie under her childish little brow. She was opening her
desk and looking out paper; some she felt and rejected--it was too
thin or too blue, or something; she tried her pen on another kind;
it did not go well. At last a thick little sheet of note paper was
chosen; and Daisy began to write. Or rather, sat over the paper with
her pen in her fingers, thinking how to write. She looked very
anxious; then took bits of paper and a pencil and tried different
forms of a sentence. At last, with slow care, and fingers that
trembled, a line or two was inscribed on the beautiful thick little
sheet of English note paper.

    "Dear papa, won't you think about being a Christian? Do not be
    displeased with

    "DAISY."

It was written all out, as fair as she could; and then you might have
seen Daisy's little round head go down on her hands on the desk. It did
not move for a good while. When it was lifted up, she sought out an
envelope rather hurriedly, directed it, folded and put in her note, and
sealed it.

Daisy shut her desk then, and with a manner not quite as calm and
careless as usual, went to her father's dressing table and stood
considering where she should put the note. Under the cushion, it might
be seen first by a servant, and then delivered to Mr. Randolph in the
midst of company. Under his dressing-box, the same fate threatened it.
Daisy peered about, and thought, and trembled for several minutes. She
had a fancy that she did not want him to get it before the next morning,
when he would be quietly dressing here alone. He would certainly be
opening his dressing-box before that. The only place Daisy could be sure
would not be invaded before that, was the place she chose; she took off
the cover of his box of shaving soap and with some trouble squeezed the
note in so that it would lie safely hid; then put on the cover and put
the box in its place, and went away with light hands and a heavy heart.
Heavy, that is, with a burden of doubt mingled with fear. Would Mr.
Randolph be angry? Daisy could not feel sure that that would not be the
consequence of her proceeding. Perhaps he would be very much displeased,
and think it very disrespectful and improper that his little daughter
should take so much upon herself. Daisy knew quite well all that. But
who else in the world would take the responsibility if she did not? No
one; and Daisy with all her fear did not once think of going to get her
note away again before it should be read. Her heart yearned towards her
father. He was so very gentle and tender in his manner with her, more
than ever, Daisy thought; she felt that the love between them was
growing strong and deep even beyond what it used to be. And while he
knew nothing of the joy that filled her own heart, and while he refused
obedience to the laws that she knew were binding on him as well as on
her, he must be also, she knew, without the favour and blessing of God.
He had no part in it; nothing to do with it; and Daisy's heart swelled
with childish sorrow and longing. She had thought a great deal about it,
and concluded that she must bear "the message," even plainly in words,
to her father, before she could feel satisfied. Little hands might take
the message, Juanita had said; so humbly Daisy's took it; and then she
prayed that it might not be for nothing. She knew all her hands could do
was not much.

All the remainder of that day, Daisy never forgot her note in the box of
shaving soap. She knew it was extremely unlikely that the box would be
opened sooner than the next morning; nevertheless, whenever Mr. Randolph
came near where she was, Daisy looked up with something like a start.
There was nothing in his face to alarm her; and so night came, and Daisy
kissed him twice for good night, wondering to herself whether he would
feel like kissing her when they met again. Never mind, the message must
be delivered, cost what it might. Yes, this was soldier's service. Daisy
was going into the enemy's country.

Mr. Randolph had felt the lingering touch of Daisy's lips, and the
thought of it came to him more than once in the course of the
evening--"like the wind that breathes upon a bank of violets"--with a
breath of sweetness in the remembrance. Nevertheless he had pretty well
forgotten it, when he pulled off the cover of his box of shaving soap
the next morning. He was belated and in something of a hurry. If ever a
man suddenly forgot his hurry, Mr. Randolph did, that morning. He knew
the unformed, rather irregular and stiff handwriting in a moment; and
concluded that Daisy had some request to make on her own account which
she was too timid to speak out in words. That was what he expected when
he opened the paper; but Eve could not have been much more surprised
when the serpent spoke to her in the garden of Eden, than was Mr.
Randolph at finding that his little lamb of a child had dared to open
her mouth to him in this fashion.

"Mr. Randolph, you will be late," said the lady who owned that name,
coming to his door. And seeing her husband standing still with his elbow
leaning on his dressing-table, she walked in.

"You will assuredly be late! what have you got there?"

The little sheet of English note-paper lay spread out on the
dressing-table. Mr. Randolph was looking at it. He did not answer, and
the lady bent nearer for a moment and then stood upright.

"Daisy!" exclaimed Mrs. Randolph.

Her husband made an inarticulate sort of a noise, as he turned away and
took up his neglected shaving soap.

"What is this?" said the lady in astonishment.

"What you see--" said Mr. Randolph.

"Where did it come from?"

"The signature tells you."

"But where did you get it?"

"Here--this moment."

"The impertinent little minx!"

"Hush. She does not mean to be impertinent, Felicia."

"Do you like misbehaviour that is not meant, Mr. Randolph?"

"Better than that which _is_ meant."

"I told you the child would get ruined in that place," said Mrs.
Randolph, after musing a few minutes over the little sheet of
note-paper.

Mr. Randolph made a lather and applied it. That might be the reason why
he made no answer.

"I call it impertinence," the lady went on, "and very well grown
impertinence too--from a child like that! It is the trick of all
religious people, to think themselves better and wiser than the rest of
the world; but I think Daisy has learnt the lesson early!"

Still silence on Mr. Randolph's part and steady attention to his toilet
duties.

"What notice do you mean to take of this?"

"I think, none at all."

"Mr. Randolph, Daisy is ruined!"

"I do not quite see it yet."

"I wish you would see it. She is full of stupid stiff ways, which will
be habits fixed as iron in a little time if we do not break them up. She
does not act like a child."

"She is very like a child to me," said Mr. Randolph.

"You do not see. Do you observe her way whenever she sits down to table?
She covers her face and remains in silent prayer, I suppose, a minute or
so."

A slight laugh came from Mrs. Randolph with the words. Mr. Randolph
could not well laugh, for he was shaving. He remarked that he had never
seen it.

"I wish you would remember and take notice. She does it regularly. And
she is not a docile child _any_ longer, I give you warning. You will
find it very difficult to do anything with her in the way of breaking up
this religious stiffness of hers."

Mr. Randolph was silent a while, and Mrs. Randolph looked vexed. At
length he remarked that indirect ways were the best.

"It will take both," said his wife; "direct and indirect." And after
that they went down to breakfast.

Mr. Randolph was the last, and he was not early; but this morning Daisy
was later still. Her father watched for her coming, and did not see it
after all; Daisy stole in so quietly, she was in her seat by his side
before he had noticed her. Then perceiving the gentle, sweet, quiet
little face beside him, and recognizing the timid feeling which made
Daisy afraid to meet his eye, he could not refrain; he bent down and
gave her a kiss. He was very much touched by the little fluttering start
and glance which Daisy returned to this salutation, and he saw that a
pink flush of pleasure came into her cheeks. Perhaps all this put the
subject of watching her out of Mr. Randolph's head; he certainly did not
see the minute, a few minutes later, when Daisy's hand stole to her brow
and her eyes were for a short space hidden and her hand moveless. Mrs.
Randolph saw it, and saw that he did not. Daisy had forgotten that
anybody could see her. The thanksgiving of her heart had more burden
to-day than the ordinary gifts of the morning which she was wont to
remember. Her father was not angry with her! It took a load off Daisy's
heart; and she looked so happy all breakfast time that Mr. Randolph was
very much inclined to slight his wife's fears.

Juanita's constant habit of thankfulness and of expressing her
thankfulness, during the weeks Daisy had spent with her had gone down
into the child's heart. With every meal, though taken by herself all
alone, Daisy had seen the old woman acknowledging gratefully from whose
hand she got it. And with other things beside meals; and it had seemed
sweet and pleasant to Daisy to do so. At home, when she was suddenly
transferred to her father's stately board, where every beauty and luxury
were gathered together and an array of friends to help each other enjoy
it; and no one remembered, no one acknowledged that any gratitude was
due to the hand that had supplied the board and given the friends,
Daisy's heart was pained by a great sense of want. Not thank God for all
these things? give no acknowledgement of praise to him? She could not
bear to have it so. She thought nobody would notice her, or know what
she was doing if they did notice her; and she used to put her hand over
her brow and comfort her own heart with giving the thanks she wanted to
express. She soon forgot to be afraid anybody would notice her. But Mrs.
Randolph marked it all, and now never missed the minute when Daisy's
face was shielded.




CHAPTER IV.


The thing on hand now was the expedition to Silver Lake. Daisy's foot
and ankle were getting sufficient strength to bear all the work that
need be asked of them; and it was best to go while the hot weather still
lingered. It was early in September, and the day was fixed. Quite a
party was going. There were no visitors at Melbourne House now except
Mrs. Gary and her children; but that brought the home party up to seven.
Dr. Sandford was going, of course. Then some other neighbours. Mrs.
Stanfield had promised to go, with her little daughter Ella and her
older daughter Theresa. Mrs. Fish was coming from another quarter of the
country, with her children, Alexander and Frederica. Mr. Fish and Mr.
Stanfield were to go too; and Mr. and Mrs. Sandford, the doctor's
brother and sister-in-law. However, though this was to be such a strong
muster, Daisy thought of only two or three of the number that concerned
her personally. Preston and Ransom, of course; Alexander Fish; though
the two latter she thought of as likely to make disturbance more than
anything else; and Daisy liked a most lady-like quietness and propriety
in everything in which she was engaged. But besides these there was only
Ella Stanfield whose age would bring her into contact with Daisy; and
Daisy, very much of late accustomed to being alone or with older people,
looked with some doubtfulness at the prospect of having a young
companion to entertain. With that exception, and it hardly made one,
nothing could look brighter in the distance than Silver Lake.

Several days passed between Daisy's giving the note to her father and
the one fixed on for the expedition. In all that time Daisy was left to
guess whether or not it had been seen and read by him. No sign or token
told her; there was none; and Daisy could only conclude that he _must_
have seen it, because he could not very well help doing so. But she was
not at all discouraged. Rather the contrary; seeing that certainly her
father was not displeased with her.

In all these days too, Mr. Randolph had ample time and chance to observe
Daisy's action which had so disturbed her mother at meal times. Yet
hitherto he had never spoken of it. In fact it was so quietly done that
often the moment escaped him; and at other times, Daisy's manner so
asked for a shield rather than a trumpet, and the little face that
looked up from being covered with her hand was so bright and sweet, that
perhaps his heart shrank from saying anything that would change the
expression. At any rate, Daisy had been safe thus far.

Great preparations were making for the Silver Lake day. Thursday it was
to be. Wednesday evening Dr. Sandford was at Melbourne. Daisy was
considering the arrangements of a little packed basket of her own.

"Are you expecting to have a good time to-morrow, Daisy?" he asked.
Daisy smiled as she said yes.

"But you will have to keep quiet. I shall not let you run about like the
rest."

"I can sit quiet and look at the lake," said Daisy; with so absolutely
contented a face that the doctor smiled.

"But in parties of pleasure, do you know, my friend, it generally
happens that people cannot do what they expected to do?"

"Then I can do something else," said Daisy, looking very fearless of
anything disagreeable.

"Will you let your old friend, Nora Dinwiddie, join the party?"

"Nora! O is Nora coming?" exclaimed Daisy.

"Mrs. Sandford commissioned me to make the enquiry, Mrs. Randolph,
whether one more would be too many? Her little relation, Daisy's friend
I believe, has returned to her for the rest of the season."

"Certainly!" Mrs. Randolph said,--"there was room for everybody." The
lady's manner told nothing; but nevertheless Daisy did not venture to
shew her joy. She did not say another word about Nora. The hour of
meeting was determined, and the doctor withdrew. Daisy looked over the
contents of her basket again with fresh satisfaction, made sure that all
was right and everything there; and went to bed happy.

Thursday morning broke fair as eye could see. The September sun rose in
a haze of warm rays; promising, as Mrs. Randolph said, that the heat
would be stifling by and by. Daisy did not care, for her part. They had
breakfast earlier than usual; for the plan was to get on the other side
of the river before the sun should be too oppressive. They had scarcely
risen from the table when the Sandford party drove up to the door. These
were to go in a boat with the party from Melbourne House. Mr. and Mrs.
Fish, from higher up the river, were to cross in their own boat and join
the rest at the spot appointed on the opposite shore. The Stanfields
were to do the same, starting from a different point; friends having
arrived that would swell their numbers beyond the original four. Of all
this, Daisy cared just for one thing; that Nora was come and was to go
in the boat with her, and no other. The meeting between the two
children, on the steps of Melbourne, was most joyous.

"O Nora! I'm so glad you have come!"--and, "O Daisy! I'm so glad to be
here!"--and a small host of small questions and answers, that indeed
meant a great deal, but would not read for much.

"O Nora, isn't it nice!" said Daisy, as they stood on the steps, while
the carriages waited, below before the door.

"It's grand," said Nora. "Why aunt Frances says we shall be gone all
day."

"To be sure we shall," said Daisy. "Papa is going to fish; and so is
Preston, and Dr. Sandford and other people, I suppose; and some of the
men take their tackle along too. There is nice fish in the Lake."

"What men do you mean?" said Nora.

"O, the men that manage the boat and carry the baskets; there are ever
so many baskets to go, you know; and the men must carry them; because
the path won't let a wagon go."

"Who is going to carry you?" said Dr. Sandford coming out behind them.

"Me?" said Daisy.

"Yes."

"Why I do not want anybody to carry me, Dr. Sandford."

"Don't you? I do. And I shall want two men to do it. Whom will you have?
I have arranged a mountain chair for you, Daisy."

"A chair!" said Daisy. How could that be? And then she saw in Dr.
Sandford's wagon, a chair to be sure; a common, light, cane-bottomed
arm-chair; with poles sticking out before and behind it very oddly. She
looked up at the doctor, and Nora demanded what that was?

"Something like the chairs they use in the mountains of Switzerland, to
carry ladies up and down."

"To carry me?" said Daisy.

"For that purpose. Now see whom you will have to do it."

Daisy and Nora ran away together to consult her father. The matter was
soon arranged. James the footman, and Michael the coachman, were to go
to carry baskets and help manage the boat; James being something of a
sailor. Now Logan and Sam were pressed into the service; the latter to
take James's business, as porter, and leave the latter free to be a
chair-bearer.

"I don't see how the boat is to carry all the people," Nora remarked.

"O yes," said Daisy, "it is a big boat; it will hold everybody, I guess;
and it goes with a sail, Nora. Won't that be nice? Papa knows how to
manage it."

"It will want a very large boat to take us all," Nora persisted. "I went
out with Marmaduke in a sail-boat once--_he_ knows how to manage a
sail-boat too;--and I am sure it wouldn't have held half as many people
as we have got here. No, nor a quarter as many."

"O yes, but our boat is bigger, I suppose," said Daisy. "Don't you like
to go in a boat, Nora?"

"I like it if it don't lean over too far," said Nora. "I thought it was
going to turn over once or twice, when I was out with Marmaduke that
time. I was afraid."

"I am not afraid with papa," said Daisy. "I know he can manage it."

"Why so can Marmaduke manage it," said Nora; "and he said I needn't be
afraid; but I was."

The carriages took the whole party down to the shore in a few minutes.
There lay the sail-boat all ready, her sails shaken out; and James and
Sam, on board already, received basket after basket from the hands of
Logan and the coachman and stowed them away in what seemed to be a place
of ample accommodations. Daisy and Nora, hand in hand, stood on the
shore looking at all that was done, and with eager eyes. The summer
breeze just played lightly and rippled the water, on which the morning
sun made a warm glow, early in the day as it was.

"What _could_ so many baskets be wanted for?" said Nora.

"Why, to carry all the things. You know there will be a great many
people to eat dinner at Silver Lake."

"Dinner?" said Nora; "do people eat dinner when they go to a pic-nic?"

"Why yes. What do you think they do?"

"I thought it was just a pic-nic."

[Illustration]

"What is that?" said Daisy curiously. But just then there was a stir;
the ladies and gentlemen were getting into the boat, and the children
had to be ready for their turn. It came; and Mr. Randolph handed one
after the other safe over the gunwale of the big sail-boat and placed
them happily beside each other in the middle space, where they could
have an excellent time for talking. But they wanted no talking at first.
When all were aboard and ready, the boat was cast loose from the shore
and her sail trimmed to catch the soft northerly air that came blowing
down the river. Slowly the sail caught the breeze--would it be strong
enough to take her? the children thought--slowly, very slowly, the boat
edged its way out from the shore--then the breeze filled the sail full,
took good hold, and began to push the little vessel with a sensible
motion out towards the river channel. Steady and sweet the motion was,
gathering speed. The water presently rippled under the boat's prow, and
she yielded gently a little to the pressure on the sail, tipped herself
gracefully a little over, and began to cleave her way through the
rippling water in good earnest. Then how the waves sparkled! how cheery
the movement was! how delicious the summer air over the water! although,
the sun was throwing down his beams with great power already and the,
day promised to be sultrily hot.

"It is going to be intense," said Mrs. Randolph.

"Melting!"--said Mrs. Gary.

"You will have enough of it before the end of the day--" remarked Mr.
Sandford. Mr. Sandford was a good-humoured looking gentleman, with a
sensible face and black whiskers; but he was a gentleman, and Daisy
approved of him. He was very unlike his brother. His wife was a very
plain person, in feature, and not very talkative; letting her husband do
that for her; but kindly and pleasant nevertheless; and Daisy approved
of her too.

"At what hour do you expect the day _will_ end, practically?" inquired
Mrs. Randolph of her husband. He smiled.

"I should say--judging from present tokens--not till the sun gets well
down on his western way."

"First-rate!" said Preston aside. "We'll have a good time for fishing."

"But that will make it very late crossing the river, Mr. Randolph? will
it not?"

"It may."

"There is a moon," said Mrs. Sandford.

"Moon! I hope we are not to be beholden to the moon's good offices!"
exclaimed the other lady. "It is only ten o'clock now--not that. We
shall be tired to death of the woods before we have done with them."

"You must try fishing, aunt Felicia," said Preston.

"Yes--a good idea," remarked Mr. Sandford. "I do not know how the ladies
can get along without some sport--ha, ha! There is a boat on the
lake--isn't there?"

"They say so," Mr. Randolph returned. "I have not been there for a long
time."

"Then I shall take the charge of your entertainment, Mrs. Randolph," Mr.
Sandford went on. "I shall persuade you to put yourself under my
guidance, and let me initiate you into the mysteries of pickerel
catching."

"I do not think you can persuade me out of the shade--if once I get in
it again--" said the lady.

"Why mamma," said Ransom, "pickerel fishing is splendid!"

Mr. Randolph looked at Daisy. No heat nor shadow too much for her! With
one hand clasped in Nora's, her little face was a pattern of perfect
content; nay, it was full of delighted joy. Mr. Randolph thought he
could endure his portion of the heat.

"Nora," said Daisy, "isn't it nice?"

"It goes nicely now," said Nora.

"But isn't it pleasant?"

"Yes. It is a great deal pleasanter than in a little boat. This one is
good and large."

"Isn't the water pretty?"

"I like the green grass better," said Nora.

"O yes! but then I like this too. I like it very much. Nora, what did
you mean by a pic-nic?"

"A pic-nic?" said Nora.

"Yes; you said you thought people did not eat dinner, but it was a
_pic-nic_."

"Well, I thought they didn't."

"What did you mean by a _pic-nic_?"

"Why I meant just that. You know what a pic-nic is."

"We always have dinner when we go on a pic-nic," said Daisy.

"Then I don't think it is a pic-nic."

"What is it?"

"I don't know. Daisy, are you going to ride in that queer chair?"

"I suppose so. My ankle isn't quite strong yet, you know. Wasn't it nice
of Dr. Sandford to prepare it for me?"

"I don't know, _I_ don't think he is nice," said Nora.

Which expression of opinion was so very startling to Daisy that it took
her some time to recover from it. She sought out the doctor with her eye
where he was sitting forward of the mast, somewhat hid from her by a
piece of the sail; she scanned his countenance, with its calm nobleness
of feature, and steadfast, reserved, beautiful blue eye. Doubtless, he
was not everything Daisy wished him; nevertheless to her he was very
"nice" indeed. Her eye came back satisfied.

At the other end of the boat the party were talkative and gay. Mr.
Randolph held the main sheet in his own hand; Mr. Sandford had the
rudder; neither of them had much to do; for the wind was gentle and
fair, and the boat kept her straight course for the opposite shore. The
river was wide however at this place; the other shore was an object in
view for a good while before they reached it. Slowly and steadily the
little skiff skimmed over; they got to the middle of the river; then the
trees before them on the other side, with the cleared fields in one or
two spots, began to shew in more distinct forms and colours. The sun was
very hot! So hot, that it seemed to kill the breeze. As they drew near
their place of disembarkation, the motion of the vessel grew slack; the
sail fluttered now and then; the propelling force just lasted till they
got to shore, and then nobody said anything more of any air felt to be
stirring.

"I think we had better stay on the water," said Mrs. Gary. "It is
positively stifling here."

"It will be better when we get in the woods," suggested Mr. Sandford.

"No,--begging your pardon," Mr. Randolph answered.

"No?--will it be worse, Mr. Randolph?" said his wife.

"I hope not--for I think you could broil a beefsteak here in another
hour; when the sun gets on the meridian."

"Then do let us move away from here at once! it is oppressive. I do not
know how we are going to walk, but I suppose we shall find out. We may
hope there will be a little freshness by the lake."

Mr. Stanfield's boat however had to be waited for a few minutes. It got
to shore just as Mr. Fish's skiff appeared in sight coasting down on the
same side, from behind a point. The whole party were soon together,
exchanging shakes of the hand and puffs of condolence on the state of
the atmosphere. There was presently a division of forces. All the boys,
Preston, Ransom, and Alexander Fish, compared notes and fishing tackle.
The ladies and gentlemen, with one or two elder girls, Frederica Fish
and Theresa Stanfield and Eloise Gary, congregated into a moving mass of
muslins and parasols. While Daisy and Nora were joined by Ella
Stanfield; and a great constraint fell upon all three. Ella was a
comparative stranger; a nice looking child, thoughtful and old beyond
her years. She looked like gravity; Nora liked gayety; while Daisy was
most like the thing that bears her name. They stood like little pinks of
propriety, without saying anything to each other. This constraint was
soon broken up by the preparations for the march. On enquiry it was
found that there were two or three ways to the lake. One was short and
easy (in comparison) but very narrow; a mere footpath through the woods.
Another had a wider track; but it had also a rough footing of rocks and
stones, and was much longer; taking a circuit to reach the place.
Another still was only used by eager lovers of the picturesque, though
it was said to reward them.

As soon as all this was explained to the understanding of the company,
the larger division set off immediately for the easiest and quickest
road to the lake; no other recommendation was worth a moment's
considering. With quick disappearance one after another muslin dress and
gay parasol was lost within the edge of the woods which their chosen
path immediately entered. They vanished from the shore. Every one of
them was presently out of sight. Mr. Randolph had seen that Dr. Sandford
was putting Daisy into her travelling conveyance; and thinking no
attention of his own could be needful he had gone on in advance of the
party with Mrs. Stanfield. The very last of them, muslins and parasols
and all, was swallowed up in the enclosing woods, almost before Daisy
was established in her chair. Her bearers lifted it then to receive
instructions from Dr. Sandford as to their method of playing their part.
They were Logan and Sam; James was devoted to his own particular charge.

"Why where are Nora and Ella?" Daisy suddenly exclaimed.

"Everybody seems to have gone on," answered the doctor. "Except the
boys. Now Daisy, are you comfortable? is it all right?"

"It is nice, Dr. Sandford!"--But at the same time Daisy wondered much
and grieved not a little that her companions should have left her to go
alone. Was that kindness? or good manners?

"Did they know which way I was going?" she said.

"I fancy so," said the doctor; "they have done as everybody else
does--gone with the crowd. Now, you fellows, you know the way."

"Yes, sir."

"When you come to a house, remember, you must turn sharp to the right.
Boys, you must go with the chair as a body-guard."

"Why must we?" said Ransom.

"You would not have your sister go alone?"

"You are going that way."

"You are mistaken. I am not."

"She has got Logan and Sam to take care of her. Girls always have to be
taken care of!" exclaimed Ransom in disgust.

"I am astonished at your want of gallantry. Preston, I shall depend on
you to see that the chair is properly attended."

"Which way are you going, sir?"

"By myself--to see if I can get a shot at something."

Preston did not look delighted, Daisy saw, though he accepted the charge
the doctor gave him. The doctor himself strode off with his gun,
disappearing in the woods at the nearest point. Daisy was left with her
two bearers and her three attendants.

"Well boys, we may as well get along," said Ransom discontentedly.
"There is no occasion that we should keep poking on behind this
concern."

They passed it and took the lead. Preston as he passed asked Daisy how
it went, and if she were comfortable. It went very nicely, and she was
very comfortable; and receiving this assurance Preston sprang forward to
regain Alexander Fish's company, with whom he was holding an animated
discourse on the making and using of artificial flies. The three boys
trudged along in advance; the motions of their busy heads, and of their
active feet, telling that there was no lack of interest or excitement
_there_. The chair followed steadily with its little burden. It went
nicely; she was very comfortable; it was a new and most pleasant mode of
getting over the ground; and yet--there was something at work in Daisy's
heart that was not pleasure. She was sadly disappointed. She was left
alone. It had tried her a good deal that Nora and Ella should have ran
after the larger party with so cavalier an abandonment of her, when they
knew her chair must go another road. Then she was very sorry that the
doctor had seen good to forsake her; and felt that from the
thoughtfulness or unselfishness of boys she had little to hope for. Look
at them! there they went before her, putting more and more distance
between them and the chair every minute. Perhaps they would entirely
forget their little convoy and be out of sight in a trifle more time.
And in all that big party of pleasure, everybody engaged with somebody
else, she was left with no one to speak to her, and no company at all
but that of Logan and Sam. Daisy two or three times put up her hand
stealthily to her face to get rid of a tear that had found its way
there. Daisy thought at first that she would not have done so to her
friends as they had done to her; but then presently she reflected what
reason she had to know better and to do better, that they had not; and
instead of anything like resentment, a very gentle and tender feeling of
pity and kindness arose in Daisy's mind toward them. Her hurt sense of
unfriendliness quite soothed itself away; and now Daisy began to enjoy
herself and the day and the party of pleasure. Her share of it, at
least. Her chair was under shadow of the tall woods now. It is true, it
was very hot there. No air seemed moving. The chair-bearers often raised
an arm to their brows to wipe away the heated moisture that stood there
and ran down their faces. But Daisy had no exertion to make; and instead
of that, her own motion seemed to give a little life to the lifeless
air. Then she was at leisure to look and enjoy; not having even to take
care of her own footing. The depth of green leafage over her head when
she looked up; the depth of green shade on either hand of her, pierced
by the endless colonnade of the boles of trees; how wildly beautiful it
was! Daisy thought of a good many things she would like to ask Dr.
Sandford--if she had the liberty; but he did not talk about wonderful
things to her now that she was well and had her own means of amusement.
Now and then Daisy had the sight of a red squirrel, running along a
tree bough or scampering over the ground from one rock to another. What
jumps he would make to get out of her way! And birds were singing too,
sometimes; and mosses were spread out in luxuriant patches of wood
carpeting in many places; and rocks were brown and grey, and grown with
other mosses and ferns; and through all this fairy work of beauty
Daisy's chair went at an easy, quiet pace, with a motion that she
thought it very pleasant to feel.

It was a wild old wood, which nobody had ever meddled with. Things were
just as nature's work had made them. The path the little party were
travelling was a wood road merely, where country wagons had made a
track; or more properly, where the country people had made a track for
their wagons. It was but a rough way; stumps of trees that had been cut
down stood right in the middle of it; and rocks and stones were in some
places very thickly strewn over it. After some time of wandering over
level ground, the path took a turn and began to get among the hills. It
wound up and down and was bordered now by steep hillsides and
sharp-rising rocks. It was all the wilder and prettier. The house Dr.
Sandford spoke of had been passed; the turn had been taken; there was
nothing to do now but follow on till they found the lake; but there were
no signs of it yet, nor any sound of voices to be heard in the distance.
Even the boys were gone on out of sight; the stillness of summer noon
was all through the deep woods, for it is a time of day when the birds
do not feel like ringing much. Daisy enjoyed it. She thought no one of
all their company was having a better time probably than she.

Suddenly Sam, who was foremost of the bearers, gave a great shout; and
at the same instant dropped his end of Daisy's chair and sprang to one
side. Then stood still.

"What for air ye playing capers like that?" inquired Logan, with an air
of great disgust and a strong Scotch accent. Sam stood still, drawing
his countenance into all manner of grimaces.

"Speak then, can't ye! What ails ye? Don't stand there like a Merry
Andrew, boy!"

"I've hurted myself!" Sam groaned.

"And how did ye hurt yourself? When ye were walking along, couldn't ye
go for'rard quietly? Where's the hurt?"

"My foot!" said Sam bending down to it. "I can't stir it. Oh!"

"Did ye hurt yourself before or after ye gave such a loup?" Logan
grunted, going over however now to bring his own wisdom to bear on Sam's
causes of trouble. "Whatever possessed ye boy, with the end of the chair
in your hand?"

"I see a sarpent--" said Sam submissively.

"A sarpent!" echoed Logan--"it's not your pairt to be frighted if you
see a sarpent. What hurt would the sight of the brute do ye? There's no
harm come to ye, boy, but the start."

"I can't move it--" repeated Sam under his breath.

"Logan, perhaps he has sprained his ankle," said Daisy from her chair;
where at first she had been pretty well frightened.

"Weel--I don't see it," replied Logan slowly and unbelievingly.

"How does it feel, Sam?" Daisy asked.

"It don't feel without I stir it, Miss Daisy--and then, it's like a
knife."

"He has sprained it, I am afraid, Logan," said Daisy getting out of her
chair and coming to the consultation. "I think it is swelling now."

Sam had bared his unfortunate ankle, Logan looked up from it to the
little speaker whose words were so quietly wise, with unspoken
admiration.

"Can't ye walk then, Sam?" he urged. "Here is Miss Daisy in the middle
of the road and wanting to be at the Lake--and how much farther it may
be to the Lake is a subject unknown to me. Can't ye bear your foot
surely?"

Sam's reply was sorrowful but decided; he could not bear it at all, with
any weight upon it.

"Never mind, Logan," said Daisy; "I can wait. You had better go forward
and see if you can find the boys. They can take care of me."

Logan felt the justness of this proposition, and at once put his long
legs in swift motion to overtake the advance party; exercising a good
strong voice too presently in hallooing to them. Daisy was left with
Sam. The thought crossed her mind that this was getting to be an odd
party of pleasure; but her real concern was for the sprained ankle.
That, she was very sorry for. Her own delay and disappointment she took
patiently.

Logan's halloos brought the boys to a stand. They waited till he came up
to them, not deeming it necessary on their part to go back to see what
was the matter. When they heard his news there was a disagreeable pause.
What was to be done?

"Daisy can walk the rest of the way," was the decision of her brother.

"How far is it?" said Preston.

"I don't know!--it's no great things of a walk anyhow. Girls are always
getting into trouble!"

"But what has got to be done with Sam?" said Preston.

"He can take care of himself," said Sam's young master.

"He can't move, sir, on his own feet," said Logan.

"You'll have to carry him, then. I suppose we cannot leave him in the
woods, for humanity."

"There's Miss Daisy, sir."

"What a plague!" exclaimed Ransom. "Daisy can walk. She must at any
rate; and you can bring her chair along to make firewood. Boys we ought
to be there this minute--at the Lake. We shall be cheated out of all
our fishing before dinner. That's along of mounting guard on a girl!
And after dinner there won't be two inches of time."

"Hush, Ransom!" said Preston.

At this point the consultation was enlarged, and its character somewhat
modified by the coming of Dr. Sandford upon the scene. From a height not
far off, where he was roaming with his gun, he had perceived the group
discerned that something was wrong, and come down with a quick step to
reach them. His eye rather than his voice asked what was the matter. He
was answered in various styles by the different members of the group.

"Here is a muss!" said Ransom.

"Miss Daisy, sir, she is left standing in the middle o' the
forest!"--said Logan.

"Sam has very stupidly sprained his ankle," said Preston, "and cannot
move."

The doctor without a word turned in the direction from which Logan had
come. "Follow me, young gentlemen," said he, looking over his
shoulder,---"I shall need your help." So unwillingly enough, the boys,
fishing tackle and all, turned back upon their steps, and followed. They
soon came to Daisy's emptied chair, where she stood mounting guard over
Sam.

The ankle was badly sprained; there was no doubt of that. Sam not only
could carry nobody; he must himself be carried. The doctor ordered that
Logan should take him on his back and convey him as far as the poor
little house they had passed on the way. A good lift it was, for Sam was
a well grown, stout fellow; but Logan was a long-limbed, sinewy, brawny
Scotchman, and he made no difficulty of the job. The doctor in the first
place deposited his gun against a tree, and did what was needful for the
hurt ankle.

"Now," said he to Daisy, "how are you going to get forward?"

"I can walk the rest of the way," said Daisy.

"Pardon me. Not with my leave. Boys, which, of you will take the honour
of being chair-bearers? I have my gun to care for."

"I will be one," said Preston.

"And Ransom will be the other. Come, sir!"

"Honour!"--said Ransom as he moved sullenly forward. "I think girls
ought to stay at home when there is anything going on. They are plaguily
in one's way!"

"That is a very womanish speech," said the doctor; "in so far as that it
is very unmanly."

Ransom's temper nowise improved by this reply, he took up sulkily his
ends of the chair poles; and once more the party set forward. It was not
quite so pleasant now for Daisy; her chair was no longer carried
smoothly. Preston, who was in advance, did his part perfectly well; but
Ransom, behind her, let the chair go up and go down and sway about very
unsteadily, besides that every step was with a jolting motion. It kept
Daisy in constant uneasiness. Dr. Sandford walked on just before with
his gun; Alexander Fish came after, laughing and jesting with the other
boys.

"How does it go, Daisy?" said the doctor, stopping after a while to
inquire.

"Mayn't I get out and walk, Dr. Sandford?"

"What for?"

"I should like it very much!"

"Do you not ride easily?"

"Not quite," said Daisy. "It throws me about a good deal."

"Ah! Did it do so when Logan and Sam carried you?"

"I did not feel it then," said Daisy unwillingly.

"Your porters are unskilled."

The doctor took his station by Ransom's hand, remarking that he would
see that he did his work well. And he was as good as his word. He kept a
constant eye on the management of the chair: and when Ransom neglected
his duty, gave him a word of admonition or advice, so keen and
contemptuous in its rebuke, though slight and dry, that even Ransom's
thickness of apprehension felt it, and sheered off from meeting it. The
last part of the distance Daisy was thoroughly well cared for, and in
silence; for the doctor's presence had put a stop to all bantering
between the boys. In furious silence on Ransom's part this last portion
of the way was accomplished.

At the lake at last! And in Daisy's breast at least, everything but
pleasure was now forgotten. A very beautiful sheet of water, not very
small either, with broken shores, lay girdled, round with the unbroken
forest. Close to the edge of the lake the great trees rose up and flung
their arms over; the stems and trunks and branches were given back again
in the smooth mirror below. Where the path came out upon the lake, a
spread of greensward extended under the trees for a considerable space;
and this was spotted and variegated now with the scattered members of
the pleasure party. Blue and pink and white and green, the various light
muslins contrasted with the grey or the white dresses of the gentlemen;
while parasols were thrown about, and here and there a red shawl lay
upon the ground, for somebody's reclining carpet. To add to all this,
which made already a very pretty picture under the canopy of the great
trees, a boat lay moored at a little point further on; baskets and
hampers congregated with great promise in another quarter under guard of
James and one or two of his helpers; and upon it all the sunlight just
peeped through the trees, making sunny flecks upon the ground. Nobody
wanted more of it, to tell the truth; everybody's immediate business
upon reaching the place had been to throw himself down and get cool.
Daisy and Dr. Sandford were the two signal exceptions.

Nora and Ella came running up, and there was a storm of questions. "O
Daisy, isn't it beautiful!" "How came you to be so long getting here?"
"Did you have a nice ride?" "O Daisy, what are we going to do, you and
Ella, and I? Everybody else is going to do something."

"What are they going to do?" said Daisy.

"O I don't know! everything. Mr. Randolph is going out in the boat to
fish, and all the ladies are going with him--Mrs. Sandford and Mrs.
Stanfield and your mother; only Mrs. Fish isn't going; but Mr. Sandford
is. And Eloise, your cousin, is going to see about having the dinner
ready; and Theresa Stanfield is in that too; I think they have got the
most fun; but nobody is doing anything yet. It's too hot. Are you hot,
Daisy?"

"Not very."

"O Daisy," said Ella Stanfield, "couldn't _we_ fish?"

"There are so many boys--" said Daisy; "I do not believe there will be
any fishing tackle for us."

"Can you fish, Daisy?" asked the doctor, who stood near, looking after
his gun.

"No, sir. I did catch a fish once--but it was only my line caught it."

"Not your hand at the end of the line?"

"My hand was not there. The line was lying on the bank and my hook in
the water."

"Oh! that was it!"

Away went the doctor with his gun, and the boys sped off with their
fishing rods. The heat was too great for anybody else to move.
Nevertheless, what are parties of pleasure for _but_ pleasure? they must
not let the whole day slip away with nothing done but lying in the shade
of the trees. There was a little island in the lake, well wooded like
its shores. It was proposed that the ladies' fishing party should row
over to the island, and there, under another shady grove, carry on their
designs against the pickerel. Daisy's wish was to go with that party in
the boat and watch their sport; especially as Mr. Randolph was the
leader and manager of it. She was not asked to go; there was no room
for the little people; so they stood on the shore and saw the
setting-off, and watched the bright dimples every stroke of the oars
made in the surface of the lake.

The people were pretty well scattered now. Nobody was left on the ground
but Mrs. Gary and Mrs. Fish, sitting under a tree at some distance,
talking; and Eloise and Theresa, who were charged to superintend the
laying of the cloth. Having nothing particular to do, the three children
became hangers-on, to watch how this business would be conducted; ready
to help if they got a chance.

It was found a difficult business to arrange places for so many people
on the grass; and the girls finally and wisely gave it up. They
determined to set out the eatables only, on a tablecloth spread to
receive them; but to let everybody eat where he felt disposed, or where
he could find the best bit of shade. Shade was the best thing that day,
Theresa Stanfield declared. But the first thing of all was to light a
fire; for coffee must be boiled, and tea made. The fire was not a
troublesome thing to have, for dead wood was in plenty for the
gathering. James and Logan, who had come to the scene of action, soon
had that going; and the children forgot that it was hot, in the beauty
and the novelty of the thing, and laughed at Theresa's red cheeks as she
stooped over the coals with her coffee-pot. About coffee Daisy was
ignorant. But tea had been made in her behalf by Juanita too many times
for her not to have the whole proceeding fixed in her memory.

"O Eloise, you must not make that _tea_ now!" she exclaimed.

"Mustn't I!"

"No. It will be spoiled."

"Some other things have had the same fate," said Eloise.

"It will not be good for anything, Eloise," Daisy persisted gently. "It
should not be made but just before you want it--just a few minutes."

"You are wise, Daisy," returned her cousin. "I do not know so much as
you do, you see."

Daisy fell back a little. Eloise and Theresa went to unpacking the
hampers; and James, acting under their direction, carried and placed the
various articles they took out, placed and replaced; for as new and
unlooked-for additions were made to the stock of viands, the arrangement
of those already on the tablecloth had to be varied. There was a
wonderful supply; for a hamper had come from every house that had sent
members to the party.

"What shall we do with it all?" said Eloise.

"Find out what people like--or are expected to like. Just look at the
cold chickens! and the ham! I am so thankful for that red lobster, to
make a variety. There are three boxes of sardines--and what is that?"

"Anchovy paste."

"Well!--and look at the other things! We want an army to eat them. There
is a dog, to begin with."

Theresa said it with comical coolness; but Eloise screamed, as a little
spaniel was perceived to be snuffing round the tablecloth.

"It's Ransom's dog! Run, Daisy, run, and keep him off. Just stay there
and keep watch of him, or he'll be all over everything. Daisy, run!"

Daisy left the hampers, and walked, or indeed obeyed orders and ran, to
where the little spaniel was threatening a rout among the whole army of
cold chickens. Daisy called him off, and then stood by to take care of
him. It was very amusing to see Eloise and Theresa unpack the hampers;
and Ella and Nora, finding it so, made no move to join Daisy in her
distant watch. The men were busy running to and fro with the unpacked
eatables, and keeping up the fire, and setting piles of plates
everywhere, and laying glasses all round the tablecloth--for they would
not stand up--and putting wine in coolers, that is to say, in pails of
ice water. Daisy felt alone again, left out of the play. She looked at
Nora and Ella in the distance--that is, just far enough away to be out
of her society, eagerly standing over the hampers; and for a moment felt
not very well pleased, either with them or her cousin Eloise. But then
she remembered that she was tired, and sat down with her back against a
tree; resolved to take all things patiently, if she could; and she very
soon found enough to do, and amusing enough, in ordering the arrangement
of the dishes on the tablecloth. Logan was sure to set a thing down in
the wrong place, if he set it anywhere; and even James was confused in
such a very novel state of his department. Daisy found exercise for all
her wisdom, and full content came with full employment, naturally.

You can make pleasure out of almost anything, if you set about it. In
the intervals she rested, and watched the distant figures of the fishing
party on the island; and gladdened herself with the beauty and the sweet
air of the wood, and the flecks of sunshine and moving shadow on the
ground beneath the trees. I am afraid nobody else found the air sweet,
unless it were the doctor. He was hardy, and besides had a philosophical
way of looking at things. Daisy watched for his coming, afraid that he
might wander off beyond luncheon time; but he did not come. The three
boys, however, a less welcome sight, had recollected that there was
something forward besides fishing; and came strolling along through the
trees towards the tablecloth. Preston was stopped to speak to his
mother; the other two approached Daisy.

"Hello!" said Ransom, "here we are! now where's everybody else? I'm
furious as a lion."

"A hungry lion," said Alexander Fish. "I wish we had got some fish for
the people to cook. That's fun. I tell you, Ransom, it's fun to see the
work they make with it."

"Fish is no count, _I_ think," said Ransom. "It's only good to catch. I
can stand a lobster salad, though. But I can't stand long without
something. What's the use of waiting? They aren't coming back yonder
till night. They haven't stirred yet."

Ransom's eyes indicated the party on the island. And acting upon his
announced opinion, Ransom, paid his respects in a practical form, not to
cold chicken and bread, but to a dish of cream cakes which stood
conveniently near. And having eaten one, in three mouthfuls, he
stretched out his hand and took another. Happily then some meringues
attracted his attention; and he stood with a cream cake in one hand and
a meringue in the other, taking them alternately or both together. The
meringues began to disappear fast. Daisy warned him that the only dish
of those delicacies in all the entertainment was the one into which he
was making such inroads. Ransom paid her no heed and helped himself to
another.

"Ransom, that is not fair," said his sister. "There are no more but
those, and you will have them all gone. Just look, now, how the dish
looks!"

"How the dish looks!" said Ransom mockingly. "None of your business."

"It is not right. Don't Ransom!" Daisy said, as his hand was extended
for a fourth meringue.

"Want 'em for yourself?" said Ransom sneeringly. "I say,
Alexander--here's a game! Here's something just fit for a man's luncheon
in a summer day--something nice and light and nourishing. Here's a lark
pie--I know what it is, for I saw Joanna making it. Now we'll have this
and be off."

"You must not, Ransom," Daisy urged anxiously. But Ransom seized the pie
from its place and proceeded to cut into it, seeing that nobody was near
to hinder him.

"Ransom, you ought not to do it," pleaded Daisy. "You ought to wait your
turn. You are worse than Fido."

"Am I?" said Ransom fiercely. "Take that! Mind your own affairs, and
let mine alone. You are not queen here yet, if you think you are."

A tolerably smart box on the ear was the accompaniment to this speech.
Nobody was near. Alexander, after joining his friend in a meringue or
two with a cream cake, not feeling quite comfortable in the connection,
had moved off. So did Ransom now, but he carried his pie with him and
called the other two boys to bear him company in making lunch of it.
Preston was much too gentlemanly a fellow to take part even of a lark
pie in such circumstances; he walked off in disdain, leaving Ransom and
Alexander to do what they liked. And they liked the pie so well that I
am bound to say nothing of it remained very soon excepting the dish.
Even the bones were swallowed by Fido.

Daisy was left alone under the tree with her occupation gone; for Fido
was after the lark bones. Her ear rang a few minutes from the
application of Ransom's hand; but that effect had passed off long before
Daisy's mind was quieted. For gentle as she was, Daisy was a little lady
who had a very deep and particular sense of personal dignity; she felt
wronged as well as hurt. Her father and mother never indulged in that
method of punishment; and if they had, Ransom's hand was certainly not
another one to inflict it.

Daisy was quite as much stung by the insult as by the unkindness; but
she felt both. She felt both so much that she was greatly discomposed.
Her watch over the feast was entirely forgotten; luckily Fido had gone
off with his master, and chickens were no longer in immediate danger.
Daisy rubbed away first one tear and then another, feeling a sort of
bitter fire hot at her heart; and then she began to be dissatisfied at
finding herself so angry. This would not do; anger was something she had
no business with; how could she carry her Lord's message, or do anything
to serve him, in such a temper? It would not do; but there it was,
offended dignity and pride, hot at her heart. Nobody would have thought
perhaps that Daisy was proud; but you never can tell what is in a
person's heart till it is tried; and then the kinds of pride are
various. It does not follow because you have none of one sort that you
have not plenty of another sort. However, finding this fire at her heart
quite too much for her to manage, Daisy went away from her
watching-place; crept away among the trees without any one's observing
her; till she had put some distance between her and the party, and found
a further shelter from them in a big moss-grown rock and large tree.
There was a bed of moss, soft and brown, on the other side of the rock;
and there Daisy fell down on her knees and began to remember--"Thou
therefore endure hardship, as a good soldier of Jesus Christ."




CHAPTER V.


Certainly the sun was very hot that day. The fishers on the island found
it so, notwithstanding that they had sought out every one for himself
the shadiest, freshest nook that could be found. Nothing was fresh; and
if the trees did hinder the sunshine from falling on some parts of the
ground, they kept off none of it from the water; and the glare from that
was said to be unendurable. Even where there was not much glare strictly
speaking; people were not particular in their speech that day. At last
they voted that holding lines in the water was of no use; fish could not
be expected to leave their cool depths below to seek the sunny regions
near the surface of the water; "they would be fools if they did," one of
the ladies remarked. Fish never were supposed to be very wise creatures,
Mr. Sandford informed her; but nevertheless, it was resolved not to
reckon upon their want of wisdom at this time, but to put up and go back
to shore, and try what cold chicken would do. So just about the hour
when the sun's work for the day verges towards the hottest, the little
boat was seen again stealing over the sunny surface of the lake, back to
where the tablecloth lay spread for the tired people.

A little while before it reached that place, Dr. Sandford arrived upon
the scene. He locked a little warm in the face; but his white shooting
coat did not seem less affected by the state of the weather than the
doctor's temper. Mrs. Gary and Mrs. Fish he found sunk in somnolency at
the foot of the tree where they had been talking. The young ladies were
sitting by the emptied hampers, deep in confab. The boys and Fido, over
against the outspread feast, were arranging fishing tackle, and watching
the return of the boat; with eyes of anticipation. To them came the
doctor.

"Where is your sister, Ransom?"

"I don't know." The tone meant, I don't care.

"I do not see her anywhere."

"No more do I," said Ransom, without raising his eyes from his fishing
line.

"Where is she?"

"I told you, I don't know."

"Did she go with the fishing party?"

"No sir; she was here when we came," Alexander Fish spoke up.

"Yes, I remember she was here," said Preston. "I remember seeing her.
She cannot be far off. It's hot enough to keep people from straying
far."

The doctor, being not absolutely satisfied with this reasoning, and
having nothing better to do, occupied himself with a search after the
missing Daisy. It lasted some time, and he was beginning to be not quite
easy in his mind; when, being a sportsman, his eye detected something at
a distance which was not moss nor stone. In two minutes the doctor came
up with it. It was Daisy, fast asleep on her moss bed behind the rock.
Her head lay on her arm which was curled up under it; and profound
slumber had left the little pale face as serene as usual. The doctor was
warm by this time. He sat down on the moss beside her; and putting his
arm under Daisy's shoulders lifted her up, by way of waking her,
speaking to her at the same moment. But to his amusement, Daisy no
sooner got her eyes well open than she shook herself free of him, and
sat as demure as possible opposite to him on the moss.

"Dr. Sandford!--I believe--I got asleep," she said in a bewildered kind
of way.

"How did you get _here_, Daisy?"

"I came here, sir."

"What for did you come here?"

Daisy looked troubled; glanced at the doctors face, and then rested her
head on her hand.

"Who has been vexing you now?" said he at haphazard.

"I am not vexed," said Daisy in the gentlest of all possible tones.

"Tired?"

"I think I am tired."

"Honour bright, Daisy!--has not some one been vexing you?"

"I ought not to have been vexed," said Daisy slowly.

"I will wager that you are wrong there, and that you ought to have been
vexed. Who was it, Daisy?"

"Never mind, please, Dr. Sandford! It is no matter at all now."

She put her little hand confidingly in the doctor's as she spoke and
looked very earnest. He could not resist her.

"I wish I had come sooner," he said. "I shall be suspicious of
everybody, Daisy. Come--you and I must go to dinner, or there will be a
hue and cry after us."

Indeed by this time the whole party were gathered, and in impatient
expectation that the dinner would make up to them in some degree for the
various disappointments of the morning. All were gathered and had
arranged themselves conveniently upon the grass, around the feast which
was spread out upon the tablecloth, before anybody knew that two of
their number were wanting. The cry was just raised, "Where is the
doctor?"--when the doctor hove in sight with Daisy by his side.
Everybody was placed already; and it was very natural that the doctor
keeping hold of Daisy's hand, led her with him to the spot that seemed
to be left for his occupancy, and seated her there beside him. On the
other side of Daisy was Mrs. Stanfield. She was very well satisfied with
this arrangement, seeing that her father was surrounded by people and
busy besides; and that Nora and Ella were with Alexander and Ransom.

What a gay tableful they were! all talking and laughing, though
everybody declared himself exceeded by the heat and bored by the
fishing, and generally tired of everything but eating and drinking. But
iced champagne was now at the parched lips, and boned turkey and jellied
ham were waiting attention, and a good time had come. It was some while,
of course, before Daisy could be served. She waited, feeling very happy
and amused; for a party of people taking a cold dinner out of doors do
not look nor act exactly like the same people taking a hot dinner in the
house. Daisy never dreamed that anybody was noticing _her_. She had a
disagreeable surprise.

"Daisy," said Mrs. Randolph from a little distance, and across several
people,--"Daisy, what did you do that for?"

"Mamma!"--said Daisy. "What, mamma?"

"Have you a headache?"

"O no, mamma."

"What did you put up your hand to your brow for?"

"Mamma?"--said Daisy, very much bewildered. For she knew nothing was the
matter, and she could not guess what her mother was thinking of.
Moreover, somehow, Mrs. Randolph's words or manner had acted to stop the
voices of all the company in her neighbourhood; and everybody was
waiting and looking to see what the subject of interest might be. Mrs.
Randolph's words could come now with their usual calm distinctness; and
Daisy's answers, no matter how softly spoken, could be well heard. In a
good deal of wonder Daisy repeated, "Mamma?"

"You put up your hand and sat with your eyes covered--did you not,
just now?"

"Yes, mamma."--No need to bid anybody look and listen now; the rosy
flush that had spread itself all over Daisy's pale cheeks sufficiently
aroused curiosity.

"I notice that you do so before every meal--is it not the case?"

"Yes, mamma."

Dr. Sandford could hear the caught breath. He did not look, except by a
glance, but he listened.

"What does that mean, Daisy?"

"Mamma?"--said the child in distress.

"I ask you, what that means? what is it for?"

"Mamma--may I come round there and speak to you?"

"Certainly not. Sit still in your place and answer."

But Daisy was silent, very flushed.

"Do you hear, Daisy? what does that action mean? I wish to know."

"Mamma, may I speak to you in private and tell you?"

"Are you ashamed of it? are you ashamed to tell me?"

"No, mamma."

"Then do it at once."

But everybody waited in vain to hear the answer. It did not come.

"I shall not ask you again, Daisy."

"Mamma," said the child low and modestly, but with steadiness,--"I was
praying."

"Praying! were you! Why do you choose that particular time for your
private devotions?"

It was almost too much. The tears started in Daisy's eyes; but presently
she answered,--"Because God is good to us, mamma."

"He is always good," said Mrs. Randolph. "That is a very silly practice
of yours, Daisy, and very unbecoming. There is a proper way of doing
everything."

The lady's manner said that the subject was dismissed, and her guests
returned to their ordinary conversation. Except the doctor and Daisy.
She was overwhelmed, and he was gravely unsocial.

Was it silly?--that bound her heart had made up to the feet of her King?
That joyful thanksgiving, and expression of love, and pledge of
obedience, and prayer for help? It was something better than the meal
often to Daisy; something sweeter and happier. Was it silly? and must
she do so no more except when she was alone?

Daisy had quite forgotten that eating and drinking was part of the
present matter in hand, when Dr. Sandford softly asked her what she
would like to have. Daisy said anything he pleased; not caring herself,
and indeed in too much confusion of mind yet to know or think about the
business. And her appetite was gone. Dr. Sandford provided for her with
kind care, what she liked too; but nothing was good to Daisy. She broke
bread and swallowed milk mechanically; the more substantial food she
refused utterly. Bread and milk and grapes were Daisy's dinner.

"It's good to be somebody's favourite," Ransom said to her after the
meal was over. "Nobody got any grapes but you."

"Nobody? Why Ransom, I thought everybody had them."

"_I_ didn't,--nor Preston, nor Alexander--not a berry; and Nora and Ella
Stanfield didn't. You are the favourite."

"O Nora," said Daisy, "didn't you have any grapes? I'm sorry!"

"I had peaches," said Nora. "I like peaches a great deal the best.
Daisy, what shall we do now?"

"Suppose we sit down and have a talk."

"A talk?" said Nora. "Suppose we have a game of hide and seek? It's such
a good place."

"Or forfeits?" said Ella. "It is too hot to play hide and seek."

"I don't think it is hot," said Nora. "The sun don't shine now."

"Daisy, don't you want to go out with me in the boat?" said Preston
coming up. "We'll get in the shade, and see if you can catch a pickerel
as well as you did a trout."

"O I should like that!" said Daisy eagerly. She saw the kindness of
Preston's meaning. He wanted to make her forget her vexations.

"And may we go too?" Nora asked.

"Certainly; but Daisy and I are going to do the fishing. You must be
content to look on. We will go round to the other side of the island,
Daisy; it is pretty there, I know. And we shall have a better chance for
the pickerel, for the sun is gone under a cloud."

So the sun had; but at that very moment the cloud passed off and the
brilliant hot beams fell with what seemed renewed brilliancy on the
lake, and on all the ground which they could touch.

"It will go under again," said Preston. "We do not mind trifles. Come,
Daisy."

"Daisy, you must not go," said Dr. Sandford looking round. He was just
moving away to see some one else, and was gone in a minute.

"The doctor is all very well when one is sick," said Preston; "but I
never heard he had a right to command people when they are well. Daisy,
we will not mind him."

"I must," said Daisy, meekly. "But you can go without me, if you want
to."

"Nonsense, dear little Daisy! you are not obliged to do what _everybody_
says," her cousin urged. "Dr. Sandford has no more business to say what
you shall do than what I shall do. I will not let him rule you so. Come!
we will go try for the pickerel. Go, Nora and Ella, run away with the
baskets to the boat. Come, Daisy, come!"

"No, Preston, I cannot."

"Because of what that stupid man says? or don't you want to go!"

"I would like to go very much, thank you, Preston."

"Then you shall!"

"No. I cannot."

"Daisy, you might as well obey me as Dr. Sandford."

"I do not think so."

"Nora and Ella are going. You will be left alone."

"I hope you will catch some pickerel," said Daisy steadily.

But Preston was vexed. He did not like it that his word should not have
as much weight with his little cousin as any other person's, after her
father and mother. Like other boys, and men, for the most part, he was
fond of having his own way even in little things; though he sought it in
a polite fashion. And Daisy was very fond of him, and always followed
his lead; but now he could not move her. He went off at a bound, and
soon was out upon the water, with the girls and Alexander and Ransom
also who had joined him.

Daisy would have liked the shelter of her mossy hiding-place again. She
stood in the shade of a tree looking after the boat; feeling very much
left alone and greatly disposed to have a good crying time; but that was
not her way of meeting trouble. What a strange day of pleasure this
Silver Lake business had turned out! Yet Daisy had enjoyed many things
in it; but her mother's attack upon her at luncheon had sobered her
completely. It was such a sign of what she might expect. Daisy presently
fell to considering what she should do; and then remembered her old
refuge, prayer; and then concluded that she was a very happy little girl
after all. And instead of being hurt that Nora had been with her so
little that day, it was very natural, Daisy said to herself. Of course,
Nora wanted to go in the boat with Preston after fish; it was too good
an opportunity to be lost; and of course she had liked to walk in the
morning with the larger and gayer party. It was all right, Daisy
decided, although not what she herself would have done in the
circumstances. Would her note to her father have been reckoned "silly"
too? Very likely. Daisy turned her wistful eyes to where he was; sitting
in a group of ladies and gentlemen, talking. Daisy could not go to him.
Further along, Mrs. Gary was fighting the heat under a tree by herself.
No attraction there. Still further--the doctor was standing talking to
the two young ladies. As Daisy looked, he quitted them and came towards
her.

"Have I spoiled all your pleasure, Daisy?"

"No, sir."

"Are you angry with me?"

The answer this time was given with such an affectionate bright smile
that the doctor must have been hard not to feel it.

"You do not seem to have much pleasure on hand just now," said he;
"would you like to take a little walk with me, and see if we can find
any wonderful things?"

Daisy's face was quite answer enough, it was so full of content. The
doctor had no intention to tire her; be strolled along the borders of
the lake, which was wild and lovely all the more as they got further
away from the pic-nic ground. Firs and oaks stood thick all along, with
many other trees also; the ground was carpeted with layers of moss;
great rocks rose up by the water's edge, grey and brown with lichens. It
was not so hot now. The sun's glare was shielded off. On a mossy carpet
beside the water's edge the doctor and Daisy sat down. Undoubtedly the
doctor had never taken so much trouble with a child before; but Daisy
was a study to him.

"We do not find the wonderful things, Daisy," he remarked, throwing
himself back upon the moss with his hands under his head. His cap fell
off; his blue eyes looked at her with a sort of contented laziness;
never sleepily. Daisy smiled at him.

"I do," she said.

"You do! What have you found!"

"I think everything is wonderful."

"A profound truth," said the doctor; "but you are very young to find it
out. Instance, Daisy."

"But you want to go to sleep, sir."

"How dare you say so? No, I don't. I want to have a talk with you about
something wonderful."

Daisy thought he looked a little sleepy, for his eyelids drooped well
over his eyes; nevertheless the eyes saw keenly enough the start of
pleasure into hers. And they had seen the pale, subdued look of the face
that it had worn before. Nevertheless, in spite of that start, Daisy
remained as quiet as a mouse, looking at him.

"Don't you think I can talk while I am enjoying myself in this fashion?"
said the doctor.

"I think you can talk any way," said Daisy; "but you _look_ a great deal
more like sleeping, sir."

"None of that. Go on, Daisy. Only do not say anything about the sun, now
that it has gone under a cloud. Let us forget it for a little while."

"What shall I take, then?"

"I don't care. Something green and refreshing."

Daisy looked around her. On every side she saw things that she had no
doubt would be very interesting to talk about; she did not know which to
choose. There were the trees; the firs and hemlocks, and the oaks and
maples, growing thick on every hand. No doubt those beautiful structures
had uses and characters of wonder; she had a great mind to ask the
doctor to tell her about them. But the great boulder beside which they
were hid from view, divided her attention; it was very large, and
rounded off on all sides, lying quietly on the ground; and Daisy was
curious to know how it came to be so grown over with green things;
mosses and ferns draped it all over; how could they grow on the bare
rock?

"Well, Daisy?" said her friend, watching how Daisy's countenance woke up
from its subdued expression.

"Dr. Sandford, how could these things grow on the rock? these green
things?"

"What green things?"

"Why, ever so many sorts. Here is moss, a great deal of it, of different
kinds; and there is beautiful brake at the top, like plumes of feathers.
How can they grow there?"

"Why not?"

"I thought everything wanted some earth to grow in."

"Have they none?"

"I don't know. I thought not. They must have very little indeed, Dr.
Sandford."

"Very little will do, I suppose."

"But I do not see how _any_ earth got there," said Daisy. "It was only a
bare rock at first, of course."

"At first," repeated the doctor. "Well, Daisy, I suppose it was no more.
But there is something else growing there, which you have not spoken
of."

"Is there?" said Daisy. "I do not see anything else."

"Pardon me--you do see it."

"Then I do not know what it is," said Daisy laughing. Absolutely, the
sober, sober little face had forgotten its care, and the eyes were
alight with intelligence and curiosity, and the lips were unbent in good
honest laughter. The doctor raised himself up to a sitting posture.

"What do you call those grey and brown patches of colour that hide your
rock all over?"

"Grey and brown?" said Daisy wistfully--"those are just the colours of
the rock, aren't they?"

"No. Look close."

"Why, Dr. Sandford, what is it? It is not the rock--some of it is
not--but here is a spot of yellow that is nothing else, I think."

"You must learn not to trust your eyes, Daisy. That is something that
grows; it is not rock; it is a vegetable. If I had my pocket lens here
I would shew you; but I am afraid--yes, I have left it at home."

"Why it is!" cried Daisy. "I can see now--it is _not_ rock. What is it,
Dr. Sandford?"

"Lichen."

"What is that, sir?"

"It is one of the lowest forms of vegetable life. It is the first dress
the rocks wear, Daisy."

"But what does it live on?"

"Air and water, I suppose."

"I never knew that was a vegetable," said Daisy musingly. "I thought it
was the colour of the rock."

"That goes to prepare soil for the mosses, Daisy."

"O how, Dr. Sandford?"

"In time the surface of the rock is crumbled a little by its action;
then its own decay furnishes a very little addition to that. In
favourable situations a stray oak leaf or two falls and lies there, and
also decays, and by and by there is a little coating of soil or a little
lodgment of it in a crevice or cavity, enough for the flying spores of
some moss to take root and find home."

"And then the moss decays and makes soil for the ferns?"

"I suppose so."

Daisy stood looking with a countenance of delighted intelligence at the
great boulder, which was now to her a representative and witness of
natural processes she had had no knowledge of before. The mosses, the
brakes, the lichen, had all gained new beauty and interest in her eyes.
The doctor watched her and then scrambled up to his feet and came to her
side.

"Look here, Daisy," said he, stooping down at the foot of the rock and
shewing her where tufts of a delicate little green plant clustered,
bearing little umbrella-like heads on tiny shafts of handles.

"What is that Dr. Sandford?"

"Something wonderful."

"Is it? It is pretty. What is it, sir?"

[Illustration]

"It is a plant somewhere between the mosses and the lichens in its
character--it is one of the liverworts, and they are some of the first
plants to go in advance of superior vegetation. This is called
_Marchantia_."

"And is it wonderful, Dr. Sandford?"

"If I could shew it to you, you would think so. Look here, Daisy--on the
surface of this leaf do you see little raised spots here and there?"

"Yes, I see them."

"Those are, when they are finished, little baskets."

"Baskets?" exclaimed Daisy delightedly. "I can't see anything like a
basket now."

"No, it is too small for you to see; you must take it on my word, who
have seen it. They are baskets, and such baskets as you never dreamed
of. The shape is elegant, and round the edge, Daisy, they are cut into a
fringe of teeth, and each tooth is cut again into teeth, making a fringe
around _its_ tiny edge."

"I wish I could see it," said Daisy.

"Now if you were my little sister, and lived with me, I could shew you
these things in the evenings."

Daisy responded to this with a very grateful and somewhat wistful smile,
but immediately went on with the business in hand.

"Do these little baskets hold anything, Dr. Sandford"

"Yes. Baskets are always made to hold something."

"What do they hold?"

"They hold what are called _spores_; that is, little bits of things
which, whenever they get a chance, begin to grow and make new plants."

"Seeds?" said Daisy.

"They answer the purpose of seeds."

"How do they get out of the basket? do the winds blow them out?"

"Or the rain washes them out. If they lie long enough in the basket,
they will take root there, and then there is a new plant seen growing
out of the old one."

"How wonderful it is!" said Daisy.

"There is another wonder about it. It does not matter which way these
little spores lie on the ground or in the basket; but the side that
happens to be exposed to the light, after a time, prepares itself to
expand into the surface of a frond, while the dark side sends down a
tiny root."

"And it does not matter which side lies uppermost?"

"No, not in the beginning."

"What is a _frond_, Dr. Sandford?"

"This sort of seed-bearing leaf is called so."

"How pretty it is!" said Daisy. "What are these little things like
umbrellas?"

"These carry the real seed vessels of the plant."

"Other seeds. Dr. Sandford, is _everything_ wonderful?"

"What do you think about it?"

"I do not know but a very little," said Daisy; "but I never should have
thought this little green moss--or what did you say it was?"

"Liverwort. Its name is Marchantia."

"This liverwort; I never should have supposed it was anything but
pretty, and of course good for something; but now I never heard anything
so wonderful."

"More than the sun?" said Dr. Sandford smiling.

"It is more surprising, I think," said Daisy.

"Pray, what makes you conclude so securely that this little Marchantia
is _good for something_?"

Daisy gave him a quick look of wisdom and suspicion mingled. The doctor
was getting a very good amusement himself, and quite entered into the
matter. He waited for Daisy's answer. It came diplomatically.

"_Isn't_ everything good for something, sir?"

"'Pon my word, I don't know," said the doctor. "My enquiry was for the
grounds of your opinion, Daisy."

"It was not an opinion. I do not think I am old enough to have an
opinion."

"What was it, Daisy?"

The doctor was still crouching down by the side of the rock examining
carelessly whatever he found there. Daisy looked at him and waited, and
felt at last that good manners required her to speak.

"You said, sir, that baskets were made to hold something."

"So your remark was an inference from mine?"

"No, sir."

"Go on, Daisy."

"I only said it, sir, because I knew it was true."

There was an odd contrast between the extreme modesty of Daisy's manner
and the positiveness of her words.

"It is said to be a great philosophical truth, Daisy; but what I want to
know is how you, not being a philosopher, have got such firm hold of
it?"

He faced Daisy now, and she gave way as usual before the searching blue
eyes. One soft look, and her eyes fell away.

"I only thought it. Dr. Sandford, because in the beginning--when God had
made everything--the Bible says he saw that it was all good."

"Daisy, how came you to be such a lover of the Bible?"

Daisy did not speak at once, and when she did it was a departure from
the subject.

"Dr. Sandford, I felt a drop of rain on my face!"

"And here is another," said the doctor getting up. "This is what I have
expected all day. Come, Daisy--you must be off in your chaise-a-porteurs
without delay."

"But Nora, and Ella, and the boys!--they are away off on the lake."

"They will scuttle home now," said the doctor, "but I have nothing to do
with them. You are my business, Daisy."

Accordingly he carried her back to the lunching place, not indeed in his
arms, but with a strong hand that made her progress over the stones and
moss very rapid, and that gave her a great flying leap whenever occasion
was, over any obstacle that happened to be in the way. There was need
enough for haste. The light veil of haze that had seemed to curtain off
the sunlight so happily from the lake and the party, proved now to have
been only the advancing soft border of an immense thick cloud coming up
from the west. No light veil now; a deep, dark covering was over the
face of the sky, without break or fold; the drop or two of rain that had
been felt were merely the outriders of an approaching storm. Low
threatening, distant mutterings of thunder from behind the mountains,
told the party what they might expect before long.

There was sudden confusion. Nobody wanted to be out in the storm, and to
avoid it seemed a difficult problem. Hastily the ladies caught up their
scarfs and bags, and set off upon a scattering flight through the woods
to the shore, those who were nearest or first ready not stopping to wait
for the others. Quickly the luncheon ground was deserted; fast the blue
and white flutter of muslins disappeared in the enveloping woods;
hastily the remainder of the packing went on to get the hampers again in
readiness to move. In the midst of all this, who was to carry Daisy's
chair?

"You say there is a house somewhere on the way," said Mr. Randolph to
the doctor. "If you will go forward with Daisy at once, I will stay to
look after those children in the boat. They are coming now as fast as
they can."

"Can you carry my gun?"

"Certainly. Doctor, I will take that office, if you will stay behind
till the boat gets to land."

"Thank you--it is better arranged the other way. The storm will be upon
us before the ladies get to the shore, I fear."

"Then they had better take the other route."

Mr. Randolph in haste despatched one of the men to recall the fleeing
members of the party, and bring them, round by the other road to the
house. But before that, the doctor had put Daisy in her chair, and with
Logan at the other end of it had set off to reach shelter. It grew very
dark; and it was sultrily still in the woods. Not a leaf trembled on its
stem. The steps of the two chair-bearers sounded ominously in the entire
hush of everything. The gloom still deepened. The doctor and Logan with
swift, steady strides carried the chair along at a goodly rate; not as
it had come in the morning. In the midst of this, and after it had gone
on some time in silence, Daisy twisted herself round to look at the
doctor and give him a smile.

"You do not seem concerned, Daisy, in the view of getting wet?"

"Why no," said Daisy twisting round, again, "it is nice. I am only sorry
for the people who are so frightened."

"What is nice? getting wet?"

"O no," said Daisy. "Maybe I shall not get wet--you go so fast."

But at this moment there came a nearer growl of thunder, and the leaves
in the tops of the trees rustled as if a breath had passed over them.
Then were still.

"Can you mend your pace, Logan?" said the doctor.

"Ay, sir!"--came in the deep, cheery utterance of Logan's Scotch voice.

"Hold fast, Daisy"--said the doctor; and the two chair-bearers changed
their pace for a swinging trot. It was needful to hold on now indeed,
for this gait jolted the chair a good deal; but it got over the ground,
and Daisy found it excessively amusing. They passed the thick-standing
tree stems in quick succession now; the rocks uprising from the side of
the path were left behind one after another; they reached the sharp bend
in the road; and keeping up the swinging trot with a steadiness which
shewed good wind on the part of both the chair-bearers, at last the
little house where Sam had been left hove in view. Time it was; full
time. One and another sough of the wind had bowed the tree-tops with a
token of what was coming; one and another bright flash of lightning had
illumined the woody wilderness; and now just as the chair stopped, drops
began to fall which seemed as large as cherry-stones, mingled with hail
a good deal larger. Their patter sounded on the leaves a minute or two;
then ceased.

"That will do, Logan," said the doctor. "Bring the chair in under
shelter if you can; and come in yourself. This will be a shower." And
he led Daisy into the house.

If ever you saw a dark-looking place, that was the room into which the
house door admitted them. Two little windows seemed at this instant to
let in the darkness rather than the light; they were not very clean,
besides being small. A description which Daisy would have said applied
to the whole room. She stood still in the middle of the floor, not
seeing any place to sit down, that she could make up her mind to take.
The doctor went to the window. Logan took a chair. Sam was sitting
disconsolately in a corner. It was hard to say to what class of people
the house belonged; poor people they were of course; and things looked
as if they were simply living there because too poor to live anywhere
else. A slatternly woman stared at the intruders; a dirty child crawled
over the hearth. Daisy could not endure to touch anything, except with
the soles of her shoes. So she stood upright in the middle of the floor;
till the doctor turned round.

"Daisy!--are you going to stand there till the shower is over?"

"Yes, sir,"--Daisy answered patiently. A smile curled the doctor's lips.
He opened the door and lifted in the chair with its long poles, which
indeed half filled the little room; but Daisy sat down. The woman looked
on in astonishment.

"Be she weakly, like?" she asked at length of the doctor.

"Has been--" he answered.

"And what be that thing for?"

"It is for going up and down mountains."

"Have you come from the mountings!" she asked in great surprise. The
doctor was in for it. He was obliged to explain. Meanwhile the darkness
continued and the rain did not yet fall. A breath of wind now and then
brushed heavily past the house, and sunk into silence. The minutes
passed.

"It will be a happiness if they get here before it begins," said Dr.
Sandford; "it will come when it comes!"

"Be there _more_ comin'?" said the woman.

"A houseful. We are only the beginning."

She moved about now with somewhat of anxiety to get sundry things out of
the way, which yet there seemed no other place for; a frying pan was set
up in a corner; a broom took position by the fire place; a pail of water
was lifted on the table; and divers knives and forks and platters
hustled into a chimney cupboard. Little room enough when all was done.
At last the woman caught up the sprawling baby and sat down with it
opposite the broom, on the other side the fire, in one of the three
chairs the place contained. Sam had another. Logan was on a box. The
woman's eyes said, "Now I am ready to see all that comes."




CHAPTER VI.


It was some time first, and the rain still did not fall. It was very
black, and flashes from distant lightning with mutterings of the thunder
were frequent and threatening; still no rain unless a few ominous drops.
At last voices and fluttering muslins came down the road; the flutter
came near, and in poured a stream of gay people at the door of the poor
little room. Gay as to their dress and attire, that is; for gayety was
not to be found at present in their words and behaviour. The woman in
the chimney corner hugged up closer her dirty baby with the delight of
so unwonted a feast to her eyes.

"Is there nothing better than _this_ to be had?" said Mrs. Fish. And her
tone was indescribable.

"How long have we got to remain here, doctor?" said a more cheery voice.

"Mrs. Stanfield, until the rain has come, and gone."

"It would be better to be out in it," whispered Theresa to her mother.

"My love, there is no other shelter on this side the river."

"There will not be standing room for us all presently--" said Eloise
Gary.

Pretty nearly so; for when the second detachment of the party arrived,
in a minute more, people looked at each other across a throng of heads.
They got in; that was all. To sit down or to move much was out of the
question.

"Daisy, you can't have this big chair of yours in here," said Ransom in
an energetic whisper. "Don't you see there is no room for it?"

Daisy saw there was very little. She got up patiently and stood, though
feeling very tired; while her chair was got out of the door with a good
deal of difficulty.

"Are you tired, my darling?" said her father bending down to the pale
little face.

"A little, papa," said Daisy sighing.

No more words, but Mr. Randolph lifted Daisy in his arms and gave her a
resting place there. Daisy was afraid she was too heavy for him, but it
was very comfortable to sit there, with her arm on his shoulder. Her
face looked its content; the only face in which such an expression could
be seen at present; though the gentlemen took the thing coolly, and Mr.
Randolph and the two Sandfords looked as usual. But now the delayed
storm drew near. The thunder notified with every burst the fact that it
was coming speedily; the lightning became vivid and constant. A
premonitory sweep of the wind--and the clouds gave out their treasures
of rain and hail with tremendous fury. The lightning was terrible now,
and the darkness of the intervals between so great that the company
could scarcely see each other's faces. This was more than some of the
party had bargained for, and there was a degree of confusion. Screams
from a few of the ladies and exclamations of terror from others were
mixed now and then with words that sounded very like an oath to Daisy's
ear, though they were not spoken in levity. She bent her head round to
look in the face of the lady who had last used them, as if to assure
herself what was meant; and then her head went down on Mr. Randolph's
shoulder and her face was hidden.

"Daisy--" whispered her father.

"Yes, papa."

"Are you afraid?"

"No, papa--not for myself."

"What? Look up here, Daisy."

She lifted her face; it was wistful and troubled.

"Are you concerned about the storm, my darling?"

"No, papa; not myself."

"How then, Daisy?"

She shuddered. "Papa, I wish they would not scream so!"

"Why does that trouble _you_?" said Mr. Randolph smiling.

But Daisy's face was unutterably grave, as a new brilliant band of
forked lightning glittered outside the windows, and the burst of the
thunderbolt sounded as if at their very feet, making a renewal of the
same cries and exclamations.

"Why does it trouble you, Daisy?" said Mr. Randolph soothingly, feeling
the quiver of the child's frame.

"Papa," said Daisy with intense expression,--"they do not love
Jesus!"--And her head went down again to be hid on her father's
shoulder.

Mr. Randolph did nothing to bring it up again; and Daisy lay quite
still, while the storm raged in full fury, and the screams and
ejaculations of the ladies were joined now and then by a word of
impatience from one of the gentlemen, or a "Hech, sirs!" in Logan's
smothered Scotch brogue. Once Mr. Randolph felt Daisy's lips pressed
against his face, and then her other arm came round his neck and
nestling there closely she was after that as still as a mouse. The storm
lasted a long time. The lightning and thunder at last removed their
violence some distance off; then the wind and the rain did their part,
which they had not fully done before. And all the while the poor party
of pleasure sat or stood as thick as bees in a hive, in the miserable
shelter of the cottage. Miserable yet welcome. Very tired and impatient
the people became as they grew less frightened. Daisy had long been fast
asleep. The day waned and drew near its ending. When sunset was, nobody
could tell by the light; but that night was at hand was at last evident
from the darkness.

"Your arms must be weary, Mr. Randolph," said Dr. Sandford. "Let me
relieve you of your burden."

"I cannot let you do that."

"I will," said the doctor. "Daisy being my charge as well as yours,
gives me a right." And the transfer was actually made before Daisy was
aware of it. She waked up however, with a feeling of some change and a
doubt upon her mind as to what custody she was in; but she was not sure,
till the woman of the house lit a miserable dip candle, which threw a
light that mocked the darkness over the weary company. Daisy did not
like the arrangement at all.

"Dr. Sandford!" she exclaimed. "I shall tire you. Please put me on the
floor and let me stand."

"No--you cannot," said the doctor decidedly. "Be a good child, Daisy.
Lay your head down and go to sleep again."

And greatly to Daisy's astonishment the doctor's moustache brushed her
lip. Now Daisy had always thought to herself that she would never allow
anybody that wore a moustache to kiss her; here it was done, without
leave asked; and if the doctor was so independent of rules as that, she
thought she had best not provoke him. Besides, she remembered that her
father must be tired with carrying her so long; and moreover, if Dr.
Sandford liked her well enough to kiss her, maybe he would not care for
the trouble of holding her for a while. At any rate Daisy submitted
peaceably to the necessity; put her arm over the doctor's shoulder to
support herself and laid her head down; though not to sleep. She watched
everything that was going on now. What a roomful of weary and impatient
people they were! packed like cattle in a pen, for closeness; and how
the rain poured and beat outside the house! The shelter was something to
be thankful for, and yet how unthankful everybody looked. Some of the
gentlemen shewed calm fortitude under their trials; but the poor ladies'
chagrined faces said that days of pleasure were misnamed. Alexander Fish
had gone to sleep; Ransom looked cross; Preston as usual gentlemanly,
though bored. From one to another Daisy's eye roved. Nora and Ella were
sitting on the table; in full confab. Other people were sitting there
too; the table was full.

"The storm is slackening--" Mr. Randolph remarked to the doctor.

"It will be over in a little while more."

"What do you think of it, Daisy?" said her father noticing her look.

"Of what, papa?"

"Parties of pleasure in general."

"Papa,--I have had a very nice time."

"You have had a nice sleep," said her father laughing; "and that colours
your views of things. The rest of us have not had that advantage."

"Daisy, I am surprised to hear you say what you do," the doctor remarked
as Mr. Randolph turned away. He spoke softly.

"Why, sir?"

"I thought your day had not been altogether agreeable?"

"Do you think anything is apt to be _altogether_ agreeable, Dr.
Sandford?" Daisy said, with a demure waiving of the subject which was
worthy of much older years. The quaintness of this remark was infinite.

"What has been the agreeableness to-day, for instance?"

"O, a great deal; my ride in the chair,--that was nice! and all _our_
walk, and what you were telling me; and coming over the river--" Daisy
paused.

"And what do you think of being carried in the arms of gentlemen," said
Mrs. Gary, who had overheard a few words,--"while other little girls
have to get along as they can? as tired as you are, I dare say."

"I cannot help it, aunt Gary," said Daisy. But the remark served to
justify her view of things; for what had in truth been altogether
agreeable up to that minute was so no longer. Daisy was uneasy.

"Dr. Sandford," she whispered after a few moments,--"I am rested--I can
stand now. I am tiring you. Please set me down."

"No. Be quiet, Daisy," said her friend peremptorily. And as the little
head went down again obediently on his shoulder, he gave again a gentle
kiss to her lips. Daisy did not mind Mrs. Gary after that.

The storm slackened off now rapidly. The patter of the rain lessened and
grew still; a sweet reviving air blew in at the windows. Of course the
road was drenched with wet and every tree dripping; nevertheless the
journey must be made to the boats, and the poor ladies were even glad to
set out to undertake it. But it would not be an easy journey either, on
the whole. Some time before this the doctor had despatched Logan on an
errand. He now declared he must wait for his return; and desired Mr.
Randolph to go forward and help take care of the rest of the party and
have no concern about Daisy; he would keep her in charge.

"Shall I do that, Daisy?" said Mr. Randolph, fearing it might trouble
her. But Daisy said, "Yes, papa"--with no hesitation; and the plan was
acted upon. Gathering up their floating muslin dresses, tying
handkerchiefs over their heads, with shrinking and yet eager steps, one
by one they filed out at the door of the little hut. Just as the last
one went, Logan came; he had been to the boats and brought thence the
doctor's cloak, which, with more providence than the rest of the party
who were less used to travelling, he had taken the precaution to bring.
Now this, by the doctor's order, was spread over Daisy's chair, which
having been pushed out of doors, had got wet; she was placed in it
then, and the folds of the cloak brought well round and over her, so
that nothing could be more secure than she was from the wet with which
every leaf and bough was dripping overhead, and every foot of soil
loaded underneath. Dr. Sandford took one end of the poles and Logan the
other, and the last of the party they set forth. Why Dr. Sandford had
made this arrangement, was best known to himself. Perhaps he preferred
it to having Mrs. Fish on his arm, who was a very fine lady; perhaps he
preferred it to the attentions he might have had to pay to the younger
damsels of the party, who would all three have been on his hands at
once, very likely. At all events he did prefer to be one of the
chair-bearers, and Daisy was very glad of it.

The rest of the party were well in advance, out of sight and hearing.
Tramp, tramp, the steady regular footfall of her bearers, and the light
plashing of rain drops as they fell, and the stir of the wind in the
leaves, were all the sounds that Daisy heard. No rain fell now; on the
contrary the heaven was clear as a bell, and light enough came through
the woods to shew the way with comfortable certainty. Overhead the stars
were shining down with wonderful brilliancy, through the air which the
storm had cleansed from all vapours; the moon was coming up somewhere,
too. The smell of the trees and other green things was exceedingly sweet
after the rain; and the delicious soft air was very delicious after the
sultry day. Never in her life after did Daisy forget that night's work.
This ride from the cottage to the shore was something she enjoyed with
all her might. It was so wild and strange as well as sweet. Rocks and
tree trunks, and the turnings of the road had all such a mysterious new
look, different from what daylight shewed them; it was an endless
pleasure. Till the walk ended. It came out at last upon the shore of the
river and into the moonlight. High in the eastern sky the moon hung,
shedding her broad light down all over the river which crisped and
sparkled under it; and there by the water's edge the members of the
party of pleasure were huddled together preparing to embark. Over their
heads the sails of Mr. Randolph's boat stood up in the moonlight. The
doctor and Logan set down their burden and waited. The Fish's were
getting on board their little vessel, which was moved by oars alone.

"Mrs. Stanfield, you had better come with us," Mr. Randolph said. "There
is plenty of room. Your boat is too small. You would find it
unpleasantly rough in mid-channel."

"O, is it rough?" exclaimed the lady.

"For your little row-boat--I am afraid you would find it so. The wind
has roughened the water considerably, and it has not had time to get
quiet. Come with us, and we will all take supper together at Melbourne."

It was arranged so. The party were stowed away in the large sail-boat,
which held them all well enough; the children being happy at finding
themselves seated together.

"What are we waiting for?" said Mrs. Gary when all had been in their
places some minutes, and conversation was the only thing moving. "What
are we staying here for?"

"Sam."

"Where's Sam?"

"He is yonder--in our late place of shelter. James and Michael have gone
to fetch him with Daisy's chair."

"Sam! Why, he might have stayed there till to-morrow and no hurt. Have
we got to wait till the men go there and bring him back? We shall be
late at supper!"

"The river will be all the quieter, Mrs. Gary," said Mr. Randolph
mischievously.

"The river? You don't mean to say it is not quiet?"

"It was not, quiet a while ago, I assure you."

"Well, I do think, if ever there was a misnamed thing, it is a party of
pleasure," said the lady disconsolately.

"They are very pleasant when they are over, sister Gary," said Mr.
Randolph.

"Daisy," Nora whispered, "are you afraid?"

"No."

"Your father says it is rough."

"He knows how to manage the boat," said Daisy.

"It isn't rough, I don't believe," said Ella Stanfield. "It isn't rough
now."

"I wish we were at the other side," said Nora.

"O Nora, I think it is nice," said Daisy. "How bright the moonlight is!
Look--all over the river there is a broad strip. I hope we shall sail
along just in that strip. Isn't it wonderful, Nora?"

"No. What?" said Nora.

"That there should be something like a looking-glass up in the sky to
catch the sunlight and reflect it down to us when we cannot see the sun
itself."

"What looking-glass?"

"Well, the moon catches the sunlight just so, as a looking glass would."

"How do you know, Daisy? _I_ think it shines."

"I know because I have been told. It does not shine, any more than a
looking-glass."

"Who told you?"

"Dr. Sandford," Daisy whispered.

"Did he! Then why don't we have the moon every night?"

"Because the looking-glass, if you can imagine that it is a
looking-glass, does not always hang where it can catch the sun."

"Don't it? I don't like to think it is a looking-glass," said Nora. "I
would a great deal rather think it is the moon."

"Well, so it is," said Daisy. "You can think so."

"Daisy, what should we do if it should be rough in the middle of the
river?"

"_I_ like it," said Ella Stanfield.

"Perhaps it will not be very rough," said Daisy.

"But suppose it should? And where the moon don't shine it is so dark!"

"Nora," said Daisy very low, "don't you love Jesus?"

Nora at that flounced round, and turning her face from Daisy and the
moonlight, began to talk to Ella Stanfield on the other side of her.
Daisy did not understand what it meant.

All this while, and a good while longer, the rest of the people were
waiting with various degrees of patience and impatience for the coming
of Sam and the men. It was pretty there by the shore, if they had not
been impatient. The evening breeze was exceedingly fragrant and fresh;
the light which streamed down from the moon was sparkling on all the
surface of the water, and laid a broad band of illumination like a
causeway across the river. In one or two places the light shewed the
sails of a sloop or schooner on her way up or down; and along the shore
it grew daintily hazy and soft. But impatience was nevertheless the
prominent feeling on board the sail-boat; and it had good time to
display itself before Michael and James could go all the distance back
to the house and bring Sam away from it.

"Here he is!" "There they are at last!"--were the words of hail with
which their appearance was greeted. "Now off"--and with all haste the
three were received on board and the vessel pushed out into the stream.
Immediately her sail caught the breeze which came fair down the river,
and careening a little as she took it, her head began to make good speed
across the causeway of moonlight. But then the ladies began to scream;
for in mid-channel the wind was fresh and the waters had not quite
forgotten yet the tumult of the late storm, which had tossed them well.
The sail-boat danced bravely, up and down, going across the waves. Among
the frightened people was Nora, who grasping Daisy's dress with one
hand and some part of the boat with the other, kept uttering little
cries of "Oh Daisy"--"Oh! Daisy"--with every fresh lurch of the vessel.
Ella Stanfield had thrown herself down in her mother's lap. Daisy was
very much tried.

"Nora," she said, "I wish you would not cry so!"

"But I am afraid!"

"I wish you would be comforted, and not cry out so," sighed Daisy. "Papa
says there is no danger--didn't you hear him?"

"But oh, I am afraid!" re-echoed Nora.

Daisy folded her hands and tried to bide patiently the time of smooth
water. It came, partially at least, as they neared the opposite bank.
The boat went steadily; spirits revived; and soon the passage was
brought to an end and the sail-boat laid alongside the little jetty, on
which the party, men, women and children, stepped out with as sincere a
feeling of pleasure as had moved them all day. Carriages were in
waiting; a few minutes brought the whole company to Melbourne House.

Here they were to stay supper; and the ladies and gentlemen dispersed to
various dressing rooms to prepare for it. Soonest of all ready and in
the drawing room were the three children.

"I am so hungry!" said Nora.

"So am I!" said Ella Stanfield.

"We shall have supper presently," said Daisy.

"O Daisy, weren't you afraid in the boat, when it went up and down so?"

"I do not think I was afraid," said Daisy, "if other people had not been
so disturbed."

"I don't see how they could help being disturbed," said Ella Stanfield.
"Why the boat didn't sail straight at all."

"But _that_ does not do any harm," said Daisy.

"How do you know?" said Nora. "_I_ think it does harm; I do not think it
is safe."

"But you know, Nora, when the disciples were in the boat, and thought it
was not safe--the wind blew so, you know--they ought to have trusted
Jesus and not been afraid."

Nora and Ella both looked at Daisy for a minute after this speech, and
then by some train of association Nora started another subject.

"Daisy, have you got my Egyptian spoon yet?"

Now was Daisy in a great difficulty. She flushed; the little face which
had been pale enough before, became of a delicate pink hue all over. Not
knowing what to say she said nothing.

"Have you got it yet?" repeated Nora curiously.

"No, Nora. I have not."

"You have _not_? What have you done with it?"

"Nothing."

"My Egyptian spoon! that Marmaduke gave me to give to you! You have not
kept it! What did you do with it, Daisy?"

"I did nothing with it."

"Did you break it?"

"No."

"Did you give it away?"

"O Nora, I loved it very much," said poor Daisy; "but I could not keep
it. I could not!"

"Why couldn't you? I would not have given it to you, Daisy, if I had
thought you would not have kept it."

"I wanted to keep it very much--but I could not," said Daisy with the
tears in her eyes.

"Why 'could not'? why couldn't you? did you give it away, Daisy? that
spoon I gave you?"

"Nora, I could not help it! Somebody else wanted it very much, and I was
obliged to let her have it. I could not help it."

"I shall tell Marmaduke that you did not care for it," said Nora in an
offended tone. "I wish I had kept it myself. It was a beautiful spoon."

Daisy looked very much troubled.

"Who has got it?" Nora went on.

"It is no matter who has got it," said Daisy. "I couldn't keep it."

"She is right, Nora," said Preston, who came up just then, at the same
time with the doctor. "She could not keep it, because it was taken away
from her without any leave asked. I mean she shall have it back, too,
one of these days. Don't you say another word to Daisy!--she has behaved
like a little angel about it."

Preston's manner made an impression, as well as his words. Nora was
checked.

"What is all that, Nora?" the doctor asked.

Now Nora had a great awe of him. She did not dare not answer.

"It is about a spoon I gave Daisy, that she gave away."

"She did not, I tell you!" said Preston.

"A spoon?" said the doctor. "Silver?"

"O no! A beautiful, old, very old, carved, queer old spoon, with a
duck's bill, that came out of an old Egyptian tomb, and was put there
ever so long ago."

"Did your brother give it to you?"

"Yes, to give to Daisy, and she gave it to somebody else."

"Nora, I did not give it as you think I did. I loved it very much. I
would not have let anybody have it if I could have helped it."

"Who has got it, Daisy?" asked the doctor.

Daisy looked at him, looked perplexed, flushed a little, finally said
with demure gentleness, "Dr. Sandford, I think I ought not to tell."

The doctor smiled, took Daisy's hand, and led her off to the supper
room, whither they were now invited. So it happened that her seat at the
table was again by his side. Daisy liked it. Just then she did not care
about being with Nora.

The people gathered, bright and fresh, around the supper table, all
seeming to have forgotten their fatigues and frights; and every face
looked smiling or gracious. The day was over, the river was crossed; the
people were hungry; and the most dainty and perfectly arranged supply of
refreshments stood on the board. Coffee and tea steamed out their
grateful announcements; ice cream stood in red and white pyramids of
firmness; oysters and cold meats and lobster salad offered all that
hungry people could desire; and everybody was in a peculiar state of
gratified content and expectation. Daisy was no exception. She had let
slip her momentary trouble about the Egyptian spoon; and in her quiet
corner, quite unnoticed as she thought, looked at the bright scene and
enjoyed it. She liked being under the doctor's care too, and his care of
her was very thoughtful and kind. He did not forget the little quiet
mouse at his elbow; but after he had properly attended to the other
people whose claims came first, he served her nicely with whatever was
good for her. Was Daisy going to omit her usual giving of thanks? She
thought of her mother's interference with a moment's flash of hesitancy;
but resolved to go on just as usual. She did not think she would be
noticed, everybody was so busy; and at any rate there was a burden of
gladness in her little heart that must speak. While the talking and
laughing and click of knives and forks was thick all around her, Daisy's
little head bent in a moment's oblivion of it all behind her hand.

She had raised her head and just taken her fork in her fingers when she
heard her own name. She looked up.

"Daisy--" said her mother quietly--"come here."

Daisy left her seat and went round to her mother's side.

"You may go up stairs," said Mrs. Randolph.

"Mamma?"--

"Go--and remain till I send for you."

Daisy slipped away quietly, before anybody could notice that she was
gone or going. Then slowly went up the stairs and along the passages to
her own room. It was empty and dark, except for the moonlight without;
June had not expected her to be there, and had not made preparation.
Daisy went and kneeled down in her old place by her window; her eyes
filled as full of tears as they could hold. She bent her little head to
brush them away, but they came again. Daisy was faint and tired; she
wanted her supper very much; and she had enjoyed the supper-table very
much; it was a great mortification to exchange it for the gloom and
silence of her moonlit room. She had not a bit of strength to keep her
spirits up. Daisy felt weak. And what was the matter? Only--that she
had, against her mother's pleasure, repeated her acknowledgment of the
hand that had given her all good things. How many good things that day!
And was she not to make such acknowledgment any more? Ought she to
please her mother in this? Had she really done wrong? Daisy could not
tell; she thought not; she could not wish she had not done what she did;
but at the same time it was very miserable to have Mrs. Randolph at odds
with her on such a point as this.

Daisy shed some tears about it; yet not a great many, and without the
least bitterness in them. But she felt faint and tired and disappointed.
Here, however, at her own room window, and alone, there was no bar to
thanksgivings; and Daisy had them in her heart, as well as prayers for
the people who had them not. She was too tired to pray at last; she only
knelt at the window with her arms on the sill, (Daisy was raised up on
an ottoman) and looked out at the moonlight, feeling as if she was going
into a dream.

"Miss Daisy!"--said the smothered voice of June behind her--"are you
there, Miss Daisy?"

June's accent was doubtful and startled. Daisy turned round.

"Miss Daisy!--I thought you was in the supper-room."

"No, June--I'm here."

"Will you go to bed, Miss Daisy?"

"I wish, June, you would get me something to eat, first," said Daisy
languidly.

"Didn't you get your supper, Miss Daisy?"

"No, and I'm hungry. I haven't had anything since the dinner at the
lake. I wish you'd make haste, June."

June knew from Daisy's way of speaking, as well as from the facts of the
case, that there was some trouble on foot. She went off to get supper,
and as she went along the passages the mulatto woman's hand was clenched
upon itself, though her face shewed only its usual wrinkles.

Small delay was there before she was back again, and with her June had
brought a supply of very nearly everything there had been on the
supper-table. She set down her tray, prepared a table for Daisy, and
placed a chair. The room was light now with two wax candles. Daisy sat
down and took a review.

"What will you have now, Miss Daisy? here's some hot oysters--nice and
hot. I'll get you some ice cream when you're ready to eat it--Hiram's
got it in the freezer for you. Make haste, Miss Daisy--these oysters is
good."

But Daisy did not make haste. She looked at the supper tray
thoughtfully.

"June," she said with a very gentle pure glance of her eyes up at the
mulatto woman's face--"I am very much obliged to you--but I don't think
mamma means me to eat these things to-night--Will you just get me some
milk and some bread? I'll take some bread and milk!"

"Miss Daisy, these oysters is good for you," said June.

"I'll take some bread and milk to-night--if you will please make haste.
Thank you, June."

"Miss Daisy--then maybe take a sandwich."

"No--I will have nothing but bread and milk. Only quick, June."

June went off for the bread and milk, and then very unwillingly carried
her supper-tray down stairs again. Going through one of the passages she
was met by her master.

"Where is that coming from, June?" he asked her in surprise.

"From Miss Daisy's room, sir."

"Has she been taking supper up there?"

"No, sir--Miss Daisy wouldn't touch nothing."

"Is she unwell?" Mr. Randolph asked in a startled tone.

"No, sir." June's tone was dry. Mr. Randolph marched at once to the room
in question, where Daisy was eating her bread and milk.

"What are you doing, Daisy?"

"Papa!"--said the child with a start; and then quietly--"I am taking my
supper."

"Were you not at the table down stairs?"

"Yes, papa."

"How came you not to have your supper there?"

"I had to come away, papa."

"Are you not well, Daisy?" said Mr. Randolph tenderly, bending down over
her chair.

"Yes, papa--quite well."

"Then why did you come away?"

Daisy's spoon lay still in her fingers and her eyes reddened.

"Mamma sent me."

If the child was to have any supper at all, Mr. Randolph saw, he must
forbear his questioning. He rose up from leaning over her chair.

"Go on, Daisy--" he said; and he left her, but did not leave the room.
He walked up and down the floor at a little distance, while Daisy
finished her bread and milk She was too much in want of it not to do
that. When it was done she got out of her chair and stood on the floor
looking at her father, as gentle as a young sparrow. He came and wheeled
her chair round and sat down upon it.

"What is the matter, Daisy?"

"Mamma was displeased with me." The child dropped her eyes.

"What about?"

"Papa"--said Daisy slowly, trying for words and perhaps also for
self-command--"mamma was displeased with me because--I--"

"What?"

"Papa--because I did what she did not like at dinner."

"At dinner? what was that?"

The child lifted her eyes now to her father's face, a little wistfully.

"Papa--don't you know?--I was only praying a minute."

Mr. Randolph stretched out his arm, drew Daisy up to him, placed her on
his knee, and looked down into her face.

"Did you have no supper down stairs?"

"No, sir."

"Do you like bread and milk better than other things?"

"No, papa."

"I met June with a great tray of supper things, and she said you would
not eat them. Why was that?"

"Papa," said Daisy, "I thought mamma did not mean me to have those
things to-night."

"She did not forbid you?"

"No, papa."

Mr. Randolph's arm was round Daisy; now he wrapped both arms about her,
bringing her up close to his breast, and putting down his lips to her
face, he kissed her over and over, with a great tenderness.

"Have you had a pleasant day?"

"Papa, I have had a great many pleasant things," said Daisy eagerly. Her
voice had changed and a glad tone had come into it.

"Dr. Sandford took proper care of you?"

"Papa, he is _very_ good!" said Daisy strongly.

"I rather think he thinks you are."

"He is nice, papa."

"Nice--" said Mr. Randolph. "He is pretty well. But now, Daisy, what do
you think of going to bed and to sleep?"

"Yes, papa."

"And to-morrow, if you have got into any difficulty, you may come to me
and talk about it."

Daisy returned a very earnest caress to her father's good night kiss,
and afterwards had no difficulty in doing as he had said. And so ended
the day on Silver Lake.




CHAPTER VII.


Daisy reflected the next morning as to what was her right course with
respect to the action that had troubled her mother so much. Ought she to
do it? In the abstract it was right to do it; but ought _she_ in these
circumstances? And how much of a Christian's ordinary duty might she be
required to forego? and where must the stand be made? Daisy did not
know; she had rather the mind of a soldier, and was much inclined to
obey her orders, as such, come what might. That is, it seemed to her
that so she would be in the sure and safe way; but Daisy had no appetite
at all for the fighting that this course would ensure. One thing she
knew by experience; that if she drew upon herself a direct command to do
such a thing no more, the order would stand; there would be no dealing
with it afterwards except in the way of submission. That command she had
not in this case yet received, and she judged it prudent not to risk
receiving it. She went down to breakfast as usual, but she did not bow
her little head to give any thanks or make any prayers. She hoped the
breakfast would pass off quietly. So it did as to that matter. But
another subject came up.

"What became of you last night at supper, Daisy?" her aunt asked. "Dr.
Sandford was enquiring for you. I think you received quite your share of
attention, for so young a lady, for my part."

"Daisy had more than anybody else, yesterday," remarked Eloise.

"A sprained or a broken ankle is a very good thing occasionally," said
Mr. Randolph.

"Yes," said Mrs. Gary--"I think Daisy had quite the best time of anybody
yesterday. A palanquin with gentlemen for her porters, and friendly arms
to go to sleep in--most devoted care!"

"Yes, I was one of her porters," said Ransom. "I think Dr. Sandford
takes rather too much on himself."

"Did he take _you_?" said Mr. Randolph.

"Yes, sir,--when there was no occasion."

"Why Ransom," said Daisy, "there was no one else to carry my chair but
Preston and you."

"Did Preston feel aggrieved?" asked his uncle.

"Certainly not, sir," replied the boy. "It was a pleasure."

"It was not Ransom's business," said Mrs. Randolph.

"I suppose it was not the doctor's business either," said Mr.
Randolph--"though he made it so afterwards."

"O, I dare say it was a pleasure to him, too," said Mrs. Gary. "Really,
the doctor did not take care of anybody yesterday, that I saw, except
Daisy. I thought he admired Frederica Fish--I had heard so--but there
was nothing of it. Daisy was quite queen of the day."

Mr. Randolph smiled. Ransom seemed to consider himself insulted. "I
suppose that was the reason," he said, "that she called me worse than a
dog, because I took a meringue from the dinner-spread."

"Did you do that, Daisy?" asked her mother.

"No, mamma," said Daisy low. Her nice had flushed with astonishment and
sorrow.

"You did," said Ransom. "You said just that."

"O no, Ransom you forget."

"What _did_ you say, Daisy?" asked her mother.

"Mamma, I did not say _that_. I said something--I did not mean it for
anything like that."

"Tell me exactly what you did say--and no more delay."

"Wait till after breakfast," said Mr. Randolph. "I wish to be present at
the investigation of this subject, Felicia--but I would rather take it
by itself than with my coffee."

So there was a lull in the storm which seemed to be gathering. It gave
Daisy time to think. She was in a great puzzle. How she could get
through the matter without exposing all Ransom's behaviour, all at least
which went before the blow given to herself, Daisy did not see; she was
afraid that truth would force her to bring it all out. And she was very
unwilling to do that, because in the first place she had established a
full amnesty in her own heart for all that Ransom had done, and wished
rather for an opportunity to please than to criminate him; and in the
second place, in her inward consciousness she knew that Mrs. Randolph
was likely to be displeased with her, in any event. She would certainly,
if Daisy were an occasion of bringing Ransom into disgrace; though the
child doubted privately whether her word would have weight enough with
her mother for that. Ransom also had time to think, and his brow grew
gloomy. An investigation is never what a guilty party desires; and
judging her by himself, Ransom had reason to dread the chance of
retaliation which such a proceeding would give his little sister. So
Daisy and Ransom wore thoughtful faces during the rest of
breakfast-time; and the result of Ransom's reflections was that the
investigation would go on most pleasantly without him. He made up his
mind to slip away, if he had a chance, and be missing. He had the
chance; for Mr. and Mrs. Randolph were engaged with a call of some
neighbours immediately after breakfast; all thought of the children's
affairs seemed to be departed. Ransom waited a safe time, and then
departed too, with Preston, on an expedition which would last all the
morning. Daisy alone bided the hour, a good deal disturbed in the view
of what it might bring.

She was summoned at last to the library. Her father and mother were
there alone; but just after Daisy came in she was followed by Dr.
Sandford. The doctor came with a message. Mrs. Sandford, his sister, he
said, sent by him to beg that Daisy might come to spend the day with
Nora Dinwiddie, who much desired her presence. In the event of a
favourable answer, the doctor said he would himself drive Daisy over,
and would call for that purpose in another hour or two. He delivered his
message, and Mrs. Randolph replied at once that Daisy could not go; she
could not permit it.

Mr. Randolph saw the flush of hope and disappointment on Daisy's face
and the witness of another kind in her eyes; though with her
characteristic steady self-control she neither moved nor spoke, and
suffered the tears to come no farther. Dr. Sandford saw it too, but he
said nothing. Mr. Randolph spoke.

"Is that decision on account of Daisy's supposed delinquency in that
matter?"

"Of course--" Mrs. Randolph answered drily.

"Can you explain it, Daisy?" her father asked, gravely and kindly
drawing her up to his side. Daisy struggled with some thought.

"Papa," she said softly, "will mamma be satisfied to punish me and let
it go so?"

"Let it go how?"

"Would she be satisfied with this punishment, I mean, and not make me
say anything more about it?"

"I should not. I intend to know the whole. Can you explain it?"

"I think I can, papa," Daisy said, but with a troubled unwillingness,
her father saw. He saw too that it was not the unwillingness of a
troubled conscience.

"Dr. Sandford, if you are willing to take the trouble of stopping
without the certainty of taking Daisy back with you, I have some hopes
that the result may be satisfactory to all parties."

"_Au revoir_, then," said the doctor, and he strode off.

"Now, Daisy," said her father, still having his arms about her--"what is
it?" Mrs. Randolph stood by the table and looked coldly down at the
group. Daisy was under great difficulty; that was plain.

"Papa--I wish Ransom could tell you!"

"Where is the boy?"

Mrs. Randolph rang the bell.

"It is no use, mamma; he has gone off with Preston somewhere."

"That is a mere subterfuge, Daisy, to gain time."

Daisy certainly looked troubled enough, and timid also; though her meek
look at her mother did not plead guilty to this accusation.

"Speak, Daisy; the telling whatever there is to tell must come upon
you," her father said. "Your business is to explain the charge Ransom
has brought against you."

All Daisy's meditations had not brought her to the point of knowing what
to say in this conjuncture. She hesitated.

"Speak, Daisy!" her father said peremptorily.

"Papa, they had put me--Eloise and Theresa Stanfield--they had put me to
watch the things."

"What things?"

"The dinner--the things that had been taken out of the hampers and were
spread on the tablecloth, where we dined."

"Watch for fear the fishes would carry them off?"

"No, sir, but Fido; Ransom's dog; he was running about."

"Oh! Well?--"

"I kept Fido off, but I could not keep Ransom--" Daisy said low. "He was
taking things."

"And why should he not?" said Mrs. Randolph coldly. "Why should not
Ransom take a sandwich, or a peach, if he wanted one? or anything else,
if he was hungry. There was enough provision for everybody."

Daisy looked up at her mother, with a quick refutation of this statement
of the case in her mind, but something stayed her lips. Mr. Randolph saw
and read the look. He put his arm round Daisy and drew her up to him,
speaking with grave decision.

"Daisy, say all you have to say at once--do you hear me? and spare
neither for Ransom nor yourself. Tell all there is to be told, without
any shuffling."

"Papa, I should not have objected to his having a sandwich--or as many
as he liked. I should have thought it was proper. But he took the
meringues--and so many that the dish was left very small; and then he
carried off Joanna's lark pie, the whole of it; and he did not mind what
I said; and then, I believe--I suppose that is what Ransom meant--I
believe I told him he was worse than Fido."

"Was Ransom offended at that?"

"Yes, papa. He did not like my speaking to him at all."

"Of course not," said Mrs. Randolph. "Boys never like to be tutored by
girls; and Daisy must expect her brother will not like it if she meddles
with him; and especially if she addresses such language to him."

"I said only exactly that, mamma."

"Ransom put it differently."

A flush came up all over Daisy's face; she looked at her mother
appealingly, but said nothing and the next moment her eyes fell.

"Did Ransom answer you at the time, Daisy?"

"Yes, sir," Daisy said in a low voice.

"How?"

"Papa!--" said Daisy confounded.

"What did he say to you?"

"He did not say much--" said Daisy.

"Tell me what his answer was?"

"Papa, he struck my ears," said Daisy. A great crimson glow came all
over her face, and she hid it in her father's breast; like an injured
thing running to shelter. Mr. Randolph was lying on a sofa; he folded
his arm round Daisy, but spoke never a word. Mrs. Randolph moved
impatiently.

"Boys will do such things," she said. "It is very absurd in Daisy to
mind it. Boys will do such things--she must learn that it is not her
place or business to find fault with her brother. I think she deserved
what she got. It will teach her a lesson."

"Boys shall not do such things in my house," said Mr. Randolph in his
usual quiet manner.

"As you please!" said the lady in a very dissatisfied way; "but I think
it is only what all boys do."

"Felicia, I wish to reverse your decision about this day's pleasure.
Seeing Daisy has had her lesson, do you not think she might be indulged
with the play after it?"

"As you please!" returned the lady very drily.

"Do you want to go, Daisy?"

"If you please, papa." Daisy spoke without shewing her face.

"Is Mr. Dinwiddie at Mrs. Sandford's?" inquired Mrs. Randolph.

"O no, mamma!" Daisy looked up. "He is not coming. He is gone a great
way off. I do not suppose he is ever coming here again; and Nora is
going away soon."

Mrs. Randolph moved off.

"Felicia--" said her husband. The lady paused. "I intend that Ransom
shall have a lesson, too. I shall take away the remaining week of his
vacation. To-morrow he goes back to school. I tell you, that you may
give the necessary orders."

"For this boy's freak, Mr. Randolph?"

"For what you please. He must learn that such behaviour is not permitted
here."

Mrs. Randolph did not share the folly with which she charged Daisy, for
she made no answer at all, and only with a slight toss of her haughty
head resumed her walk out of the room. Daisy would fain have spoken, but
she did not dare; and for some minutes after they were left alone her
father and she were profoundly silent. Mr. Randolph revolving the
behaviour of Daisy as he now understood it; her willing silence and
enforced speech, and the gentleness manifested towards her brother, with
the meek obedience rendered to her mother and himself. Perhaps his
thoughts went deeper still. While Daisy reflected with sorrow on the
state of mind sure to be produced now both in Ransom and Mrs. Randolph
towards her. A matter which she could do nothing to help. She did not
dare say one word to change her father's purpose about Ransom; she knew
quite well it would be no use. She stood silent by his sofa, one little
hand resting fondly on his shoulder, but profoundly quiet. Then she
remembered that she had something else to talk about.

"Papa--" she said wheeling round a little to face him.

"Well, Daisy?"

"Do you feel like talking?"

"Hardly--it is so hot," said Mr. Randolph. "Set open that sash door a
little more, Daisy. Now come here. What is it?"

"Shall I wait till another time, papa?"

"No."

He had passed an arm round her, and she stood as before with one hand
resting on his shoulder.

"Papa--it was about--what last night you said I might talk to you
about."

"I remember. Go on, Daisy."

"Papa," said the child, a little in doubt how to go on--"I want to do
what is right."

"There is generally little difficulty in doing that, Daisy."

Daisy thought otherwise!

"Papa, I think mamma does not like me to do what I think is right," she
said very low and humbly.

"Your mother is the best judge, Daisy. What are you talking about?"

"_That_, papa--that you said I might talk to you about."

"What is it? Let us understand one another clearly."

"About--It was only that I liked to pray and give thanks a minute at
meal times." Daisy spoke very softly and as if she would fain not have
spoken.

"That is a mere indifferent ceremony, Daisy, which some people perform.
It is not binding on you, certainly, if your mother has any objection to
your doing it."

"But, papa,"--Daisy began eagerly and then checked herself, and went on
slowly--"you would not like it if you were to give me anything, and I
should not thank you?"

"Cases are not parallel, Daisy."

She wondered in her simplicity why they were not; but her questions had
already ventured pretty far; she did not dare count too much upon her
father's gentleness. She stood looking at him with unsatisfied eyes.

"In one sense we receive everything we have from the bounty of Heaven."

"Yes, papa."

"If your wish were carried out, we should be covering our faces all the
time--if that formality is needed in giving thanks."

Daisy had thoughts, but she was afraid to utter them. She looked at Mr.
Randolph with the same unsatisfied eyes.

"Do you see, Daisy?"

"No, papa."

"Don't you!" said Mr. Randolph smiling. "Difficulties still unsolved?
Can you state them, Daisy?"

"Papa, you said I might shew you in the Bible things--do you remember?"

"Things? What things?"

"Papa, if I wanted to do things that I thought were right--you promised
that if _you_ thought they were in the Bible, I might do as it said."

"Humph!"--said Mr. Randolph, with a very doubtful sort of a grunt,
between displeasure at his own word, and annoyance at the trouble it
might bring upon him. Nevertheless, he remembered the promise. Daisy
went on timidly.

"When you get up--by and by, papa,--may I shew you what is in the
Bible?"

"You need not wait till I get up--shew it to me now."

"I cannot lift that big Bible, papa."

Mr. Randolph rose up from the sofa, went to the shelves where it lay,
and brought the great Bible to the library table. Then stood and watched
Daisy, who kneeled in a chair by the table and busily turned over the
large leaves, her little face very wise and intent, her little hands
small to manage the big book before her. Had such a child and such a
book anything to do with each other, Mr. Randolph thought? But Daisy
presently found her place, and looking up at him drew a little back that
her father might see it. He stooped over Daisy and read,

"_In everything give thanks_."

"Do you see it, papa?"

"Yes."

"Then here is another place--I know where to find it--"

She turned over more leaves, stopped again, and Mr. Randolph stooped and
read,--

"Giving thanks always for all things unto God and the Father in the name
of our Lord Jesus Christ."

Mr. Randolph read, and went and threw himself on his sofa again. Daisy
came beside him. A wistful earnestness in the one face; a careless sort
of embarrassment on the other.

"You are led astray, little Daisy, by a common mistake of ignorant
readers. You fancy that these words are to be taken literally--whereas
they mean simply that we should cultivate a thankful spirit. That, of
course, I agree to."

"But, papa," said Daisy, "is a thankful spirit the same thing quite as
giving thanks?"

"It is a much better thing, Daisy, in my opinion."

"But, papa, would not a thankful spirit like to _give_ thanks?"

"I have no objection, Daisy."

The tears came into Daisy's eyes. Her mother _had_.

"Papa--"

"Well? Let us get to the end of this difficulty if we can."

"I am afraid we cannot, papa. Because if you had told me to do a thing
so, you would mean it just so, and I should do it."

Mr. Randolph wrapped his arms round Daisy and brought her close to his
breast. "Look here, Daisy," said he--"tell me. Do you really try to give
thanks everywhere, and for all things, as the word says?"

"I do not _try_, papa--I like to do it."

"Do you give thanks for _everything_?"

"I think I do, papa; for everything that gives me pleasure."

"For Mrs. Sandford's invitation to-day, for instance?"

"O yes, papa," said Daisy smiling.

He brought the little head down within reach of his lips and kissed it a
good many times.

"I wish my little Daisy would not think so much."

"I think only to know what is right to do, papa."

"It is right to mind mamma and me, and let us think for you."

"And the Bible, papa?"

"You are quite growing an old woman a good while before the time."

Daisy kissed him with good child-like kisses, laying her little head in
his neck and clasping her arms around him; for all that, her heart was
busy yet.

"Papa," she said, "what do you think is right for me to do?"

"Thinking exhausts me, Daisy. It is too hot to-day for such an
exercise."

Daisy drew back and looked at him, with one hand resting on his
shoulder. She did not dare urge any more in words; her look spoke her
anxious, disappointed questioning of her father's meaning. Perhaps he
did not care to meet such a gaze of inquiry, for he pulled her down
again in his arms.

"I do not want you to be an old woman."

"But, papa--that is not the thing."

"I will not have it, Daisy."

"Papa," she said with a small laugh, "what shall I do to help it? I do
not know how I came to be an old woman."

"Go off and play with Nora Dinwiddie. Are you ready to go?"

"Yes, papa--except my hat and gloves."

"Do not think anymore to-day. I will think for you by and by. But Daisy,
why should you and I set ourselves up to be better than other people?"

"How, papa?"

"Do you know anybody else that lives up to your views on the subject of
thanksgiving?"

"O yes, papa."

"Who?"

Daisy softly said, "Juanita does, papa, I think."

"A poor ignorant woman, Daisy, and very likely full of superstitions.
Her race often are."

"What is a superstition, papa?"

"A religious notion which has no foundation in truth."

"Then papa, can it be superstition to do just what God tells us to do?"

"You are too deep for me, Daisy," said Mr. Randolph languidly. "Go and
get ready for Dr. Sandford. He will be here presently."

So Daisy went, feeling very uncertain of the result of her talk, but
doubtful and discouraged. Mr. Randolph had a book in hand when she
returned to the library: she could not speak to him any more; and soon
indeed the doctor came, helped her into his gig, and drove off with her.

Now it was pleasant. The fine gravelled roads in the grounds of
Melbourne were in beautiful order after the rain; no dust rose yet, and
all the trees and flowers were in a refreshed state of life and
sweetness. Truly it was a very hot day, but Daisy found nothing amiss.
Neither, apparently, did the doctor's good horse. He trotted along
without seeming to mind the sun; and Daisy in a good deal of glee
enjoyed everything. It was private glee--in her own mind; she did not
offer any conversation; and the doctor, of Mr. Randolph's mind, perhaps,
that it was a warm day, threw himself back in his seat and watched her
lazily. Daisy on the contrary sat up and looked busily out. They drove
in the first place for a good distance through her own home grounds,
coming out to the public road by the church where Mr. Pyne preached, and
near which the wintergreens grew. It looked beautiful this morning, with
its ivy all washed and fresh from the rain. Indeed all nature was in a
sort of glittering condition. When they came out on the public way it
was still beautiful; no dust, and fields and grass and trees all
shining.

The road they travelled now was one scarce known to Daisy; the carriages
from Melbourne never went that way; another was always chosen at the
beginning of all their excursions whether of business or pleasure. No
gentlemen's seats were to be seen; an occasional farmhouse stood in the
midst of its crops and meadows; and more frequently a yet poorer sort of
house stood close by the roadside. The road in this place was sometimes
rough, and the doctor's good horse left his trot and picked his way
slowly along, giving Daisy by this means an opportunity to inspect
everything more closely. There was often little pleasure in the
inspection. About half a mile from the church, Daisy's attention was
drawn by one of these poor houses. It was very small, unpainted and
dreary-looking, having a narrow courtyard between it and the road. As
the gig was very slowly going past, Daisy uttered an exclamation, the
first word she had uttered in a long while.

"O Dr. Sandford!--what is that? Something is the matter!"

"No," said the doctor coolly, "nothing is the matter--more than usual."

"But a woman was on her hands and knees on the ground? wasn't it a
woman?"

"Yes. She cannot move about in any other way. She is a cripple."

"She cannot stand up?" said Daisy, looking distressed and horrified.

"No. She has no use of her lower limbs. She is accustomed, to it, Daisy;
she never had the use of them, or never for a very long while."

"Is she _old_?"

"Pretty old, I fancy. But she does not know her age herself, and nobody
else knows it."

"Has she got nice people to take care of her?"

The doctor smiled at the earnest little face. "She has nobody."

"No one to take care of her?" said Daisy.

"No. She lives there alone."

"But, Dr. Sandford, how does she do--how does she manage?"

"In some way that would be difficult for you and me to understand, I
suppose--like the ways of the beavers and wasps."

"I can understand _those_" said Daisy, "they were made to get along as
they do; they have got all they want."

Daisy was silent, musing, for a little time; then she broke out again.

"Isn't she very miserable, Dr. Sandford?"

"She is a very crabbed old thing, so the inference is fair that she is
miserable. In fact, I do not see how she can avoid it."

Daisy pondered perhaps this misery which she could so little imagine;
however she let the subject drop as to any more words about it. She was
only what the doctor called "quaintly sober," all the rest of the way.

"Why she looks child-like and bright enough now," said Mrs. Sandford, to
whom he made the remark. Daisy and Nora were exchanging mutual
gratulations. The doctor looked at them.

"At the rate in which she is growing old," said he, "she will have the
soul of Methusaleh in a body of twenty years."

"I don't believe it," said Mrs. Sandford.

Nora and Daisy had a great day of it. Nothing broke the full flow of
business and pleasure during all the long hours; the day was not hot to
them, nor the shadows long in coming. Behind the house there was a deep
grassy dell through which a brook ran. Over this brook in the dell a
great black walnut tree cast its constant flickering shadow; flickering
when the wind played in the leaves and branches, although to-day the air
was still and sultry, and the leaves and the shadows were still too, and
did not move. But there was life enough in the branches of the old
walnut, for a large family of grey squirrels had established themselves
there. Old and young, large and small; it was impossible to tell, by
counting, how many there might be in the family; at least now while they
were going in and out and running all over; but Nora said Mrs. Sandford
had counted fifteen of them at one time. That was in cold weather, when
they had gathered on the piazza to get the nuts she threw to them. This
kind of intercourse with society had made the squirrels comparatively
tame, so that they had no particular objections to shew themselves to
the two children; and when Nora and Daisy kept quiet they had great
entertainment in watching the gambols of the pretty grey creatures. One
in particular, the mother of the family, Nora said, was bolder or more
familiar than the rest; and came often and came pretty near, to look at
the children with her bright little eyes, and let them see her beautiful
feathery tail and graceful motions. It was a great delight to Daisy.
Nora had seen them before, as she said, and did not care quite so much
about the sight.

"I wonder what use squirrels are?" said Daisy.

"I guess they are not of any use," said Nora.

"O, I guess everything is of use."

"Why no it isn't," said Nora. "Grass is not of any use."

"O Nora! Think--what would the cows and horses do?"

"Well, then, stones are not of any use."

"Yes they are--to build houses--don't you know?"

"Houses might be built of wood," said Nora.

"So they might. But then, Nora, wooden houses would not last so long as
stone ones."


"Well--people could build new ones."

"But houses might be wanted where there was not wood enough to build
them."

"I never saw such a place," said Nora. "I never saw a place where there
was not wood enough. And if there is such a place anywhere, people could
not live in it, because they would have nothing to make fires with."

Daisy considered.

"But Nora, I think it cannot be so. I guess everything is made for some
use. Dr. Sandford told me yesterday what the use is of those queer brown
leaves that grow upon rocks--you know--and the use of little mosses,
that I never thought before were good for anything. They are to begin
to prepare a place on the rocks where things can grow."

"Why, they grow themselves," said Nora.

"Yes, but I mean other things--ferns and flowers and other things."

"Well, what is the use of _them_?" said Nora.

"O Nora--just think how pretty they are."

"But prettiness isn't use."

"I think it is," said Daisy; "and I dare say they have other uses that
we do not know. And I think, Nora, that God would not have taken such
care to dress up the old rocks if the rocks were no good."

"Did He do it?" said Nora.

"Why, certainly. He did everything, you know."

"Of course; but I thought they just grew," said Nora.

The children were silent a little, watching the squirrels. Daisy began
again abruptly.

"Nora, did you ever see that crippled woman that lives on the mill road
a little way from our church?"

"Old Molly Skelton, do you mean?"

"I do not know what her name is--she cannot walk; she creeps about as if
she had no legs."

"I've seen her. Isn't she horrid?"

"Did you ever see her near by?"

"No, I guess I haven't. I have heard Duke tell about her."

"What? do tell me."

"O she's a horrid old thing--that is all I know."

"How, horrid?"

"Why, she is wicked, and she don't know anything. She would hardly
listen to Marmaduke when, he wanted to talk to her."

"Has she got a Bible, I wonder?" said Daisy in an awestruck voice.

"She? She can't read. She don't know anything; and she is as ugly and
cross as she can be."

"Was she cross to Mr. Dinwiddie?"

"Yes, indeed. He said he never saw such a crabbed old thing. O she's
horrid. I don't like to ride by that way."

The children were called in to dinner, and kept in the house by Mrs.
Sandford during the intensest heat of the day. But when the afternoon
was cooling off, or at least growing less oppressive, the two children
again sought the shade under the walnut tree, where the gurgle of the
water over the stones, and the company of the squirrels in the tree,
made the place pleasant. And there they sat down in a great state of
mutual contentment. Nora's feet were swinging about for very jollity.
But Daisy sat still. Perhaps she was tired. Nevertheless it could not be
that which made her little face by and by take on it as profound an
expression as if she had been looking over all Methuselah's years.

"Nora--" said Daisy, and stopped.

"What?" said Nora, kicking her heels.

"You know that poor old crippled woman--what did you call her?"

"Molly Skelton?"

"Suppose you were in her place--what do you think you would wish for?"

"In her place!" said Nora. "I should wish for everything."

"Yes, but I mean, things that you could have."

"I should wish some doctor would come and make me straight, the first
thing; and then--"

"No, Nora, but I mean, things that might be possible, you know. I do not
mean things like a fairy tale."

"I don't know," said Nora. "I don't believe Molly Skelton wishes for
anything."

"But what would _you_ wish for, in her place?"

"I should want to be straight, and stand and go about like other
people."

"Yes, Nora, but I say! I mean, what would you wish for that would not
be impossible?"

"Why, Daisy, how funny! Let me see. I should wish that somebody would
come and be good to me, I think."

"How?"

"O--tell me stories and read to me, and take tea with me--and I don't
know what!"

"Do you suppose nobody ever does take tea with her?" said Daisy, upon
whose fancy a new shadow of wretchedness darkened.

"I guess not," said Nora. "I don't believe anybody would. I guess nobody
likes her well enough, she is so bad."

"Who gets her tea for her then?"

"Why nobody. She does it herself."

"How _can_ she?"

"I don't know. Marmaduke says she keeps her house clean too, though she
only goes about on her hands and knees."

"Nora," said Daisy, "that isn't like the Bible."

"What isn't?"

"Don't you remember what the Bible says? that whatever we would like
other people to do to us, we should do so to them."

"What do you mean, Daisy?"

"I mean just so."

"But what isn't like the Bible?"

"Why--to let that poor old woman go without what we would like if we
were in her place."

"Why Daisy! Molly Skelton! The Bible does not mean that we ought to go
and make visits to such horrid people as that."

"You said you would like it if you were in her place," observed Daisy,
"and I know _I_ should. I thought so when you told me."

"But, Daisy, she is wicked!"

"Well, Jesus loves wicked people," said Daisy calmly. "Maybe she will
wear a white robe in heaven, and have a crown of gold upon her head."

"Daisy!--she is wicked," exclaimed Nora indignantly. "Wicked people do
not go to heaven."

"Yes, but if Jesus gives them his white robe, they do," said Daisy. "He
came to save wicked people."

"I don't want to talk any more about Molly Skelton," said Nora. "Look,
Daisy!--there's the old mother squirrel peeping out of her hole. Do you
see? Now she is coming out--see her black eyes! now there's her
beautiful feather tail!"--

This subject was to the full as interesting to Daisy as it was to her
friend; and in watching the grey family in the walnut tree and trying to
induce them to come near and get some almonds, the rest of the afternoon
flew by. Only the "mother squirrel" could be tempted near; but she,
older in experience and wisdom than her young ones, did venture into the
neighbourhood of the children, attracted by the nuts they threw down;
and getting pretty close to them, before she would venture quite so far
as where the nuts lay, she sat down on her haunches to look and see
whether all were safe; curling her thick, light plume of a tail up along
her back, or whisking it about in various lines of beauty, while her
bright little black eyes took all the observations they were equal to.
It was unending amusement for the children; and then to see Mrs. Bunny
finally seize an almond and spring away with it, was very charming. So
the afternoon sped; nor ever brought one moment of weariness, until the
summons came to bid the children into the house again to tea.




CHAPTER IX.


After tea the doctor took Daisy in his gig and drove her home. The drive
was unmarked by a single thing; except that just as they were passing
the cripple's house Daisy broke silence and asked,

"Is that woman--Molly Skelton--is she very poor, Dr. Sandford?"

"If to live on charity be poor. I do not suppose the neighbours let her
suffer."

"Is she cross to everybody, Dr. Sandford?"

"She has the name of it, I believe, Daisy. I really do not remember
whether she was cross to me or not."

"Then you know her?"

"Yes. I know everybody."

The family at Melbourne were found just taking their late tea as the
doctor and Daisy entered. They were met with complaints of the heat;
though Daisy thought the drawing room was exceeding pleasant, the air
came in at the long windows with such gentle freshness from the river.
The doctor took a cup of tea and declared the day was excellent if you
only rode fifty miles through the heat of it.

"Coolness is coolness, after that," he said.

Daisy sat in a corner and wondered at the people. Hot? and suffocating?
she had no recollection of any such thing all day. How delicious it had
been in that green dell under the walnut tree, with the grey squirrels!

"How has it been with you, Daisy?" said her aunt at last.

"Nice, aunt Gary."

Two or three people smiled; Daisy's favourite word came out with such a
dulcet tone of a smooth and clear spirit. It was a syrup drop of
sweetness in the midst of flat and acid qualities.

"It has been satisfactory, has it?" said her aunt, in a tone which did
not share the character. "Come here, Daisy--I have got something for
you. You know I robbed you a little while ago, and promised to try to
find something to make amends. Now come and see if I have done it.
Preston, fetch that box here."

A neat wooden case of some size was brought by Preston, and set at his
mother's feet. Mrs. Gary unlocked it, and went on to take out of its
enveloping coverings a very elegant French doll; a real empress Eugenie.
The doll's face was even modelled into some likeness to the beauty she
was named after; a diadem sat gracefully on her head, and her robes were
a miniature imitation of royalty, but very exquisitely fashioned.
Everybody exclaimed at the perfection of the beautiful toy, except Daisy
herself, who stood quite still and quiet looking at it. Mrs. Gary had
not done yet. The empress had a wardrobe; and such variety and elegance
and finish of attire of all sorts rarely falls to the lot of a doll. A
very large wardrobe it was, and every article perfectly finished and
well made as if meant for actual wear. Mrs. Gary displayed her present;
Daisy looked on, standing by her father's knee and with one hand resting
on it.

"Have you nothing to say to express your pleasure, Daisy?"--This was
Mrs. Randolph's question.

Daisy at the word pronounced a sober "thank you, aunt Gary." But it was
so very sober and passionless that Mrs. Randolph grew impatient.

"I do not hear you express any pleasure, Daisy," she said meaningly.

Daisy turned her face towards her mother with a doubtful look, and was
silent.

"Speak!" said Mrs. Randolph.

"What, mamma?"

"Whatever you choose, to shew your sense of your aunt's kindness."

"Do not concern yourself, my dear," said her sister. "I am sorry if I
have failed in meeting Daisy's taste--that is all."

"Daisy, speak, or leave the room"--said Mrs. Randolph.

"Mamma," said Daisy, pushed into a corner, "I would speak, but I do not
know what to say."

"Tell your aunt Gary she has given you a great deal of pleasure."

Daisy looked again mutely at her mother, somewhat distressed.

"Tell her so, Daisy!" Mrs. Randolph repeated in a tone of command.

"I cannot, mamma--" the child answered sorrowfully.

"Do you mean to tell your aunt that her exquisite present gives you _no_
pleasure?"

"I did not intend to tell her so," Daisy answered in a low voice.
Another storm rising! Storms seemed to get up very easily in these days.

"My dear," said Mrs. Gary, "do not concern yourself. It is not of the
least consequence, as far as I am concerned. Preston, remove this box.
If Daisy chooses to receive it, perhaps it will find more favour at
another time."

Mrs. Gary got up and moved off.

"Mr. Randolph, I will trouble you to dismiss Daisy," said his wife. "If
she cannot behave properly she cannot be in the room with me."

Daisy was still standing with her hand on her father's knee. The other
little hand came for a moment across her brows and rested there; but she
would not cry; her lip did not even tremble.

"First let me understand," said her father; and he lifted Daisy on his
knee kindly. "Daisy, I never saw you uncivil before."

"Papa, I am very sorry--" said the child.

"Can you explain it?"

"Papa, I would have been civil if I could; but I had nothing to say."

"That is the very place where a person of good manners shews himself
different from a person who has no manners at all. Good manners finds
something to say."

"But, papa, there was nothing _true_."

"The doll gave you no pleasure?"

"No, papa," said Daisy low.

"And you felt no obligation for the thoughtfulness and kindness of your
aunt in getting for you so elegant a present?"

Daisy hesitated and flushed.

"Daisy, answer," said her father gravely.

"No, papa,"--Daisy said low as before.

"Why not?"

"Papa," said Daisy with a good deal of difficulty and hesitation--"that
is all passed--I do not want to say anything more about it."

"About what?"

"About--papa, I do not think mamma would like to have me talk about it."

"Go on, Daisy.--About what?"

"All that trouble we had, papa."

"What I want to know is, why you did not feel grateful for your aunt's
kindness just now, which she had been at some pains to shew you."

"Papa," said Daisy wistfully,--"it was not kindness--it was pay; and I
did not want pay."

"Pay? For what?"

"For my Egyptian spoon, papa."

"I do not understand what you are talking of, Daisy."

"No, papa," said Daisy; so simply shewing her wish that he should not as
well as her knowledge that he did not, that Mr. Randolph could not
forbear smiling.

"But I mean to understand it," he said.

"It was my old Egyptian spoon, papa; the doll was meant to be pay for
that."

A little explanation was necessary in order to bring to Mr. Randolph's
mind the facts Daisy referred to, the spoon itself and the time and
occasion when it was bestowed on her.

"Did you give your Egyptian spoon to your aunt Gary?"

"I said she might have it, papa."

"Unwillingly?"

"No, papa--willingly."

"In exchange for this doll?"

"O no, papa--not in exchange for anything. I did not want any exchange."

"If I remember, Daisy," said Mr. Randolph, "your aunt Gary desired to
have that spoon the very day it was given to you; and I thought you did
not wish she should have it?"

"No, papa--so I didn't."

"Your mind changed afterward?"

"I do not think my mind changed," said Daisy slowly--"but I was willing
she should have it."

"Daisy, this whole affair is a mystery to me yet. In this case, why was
it not kind in your aunt to bestow this French doll upon you? it seems
to me very kind."

"Yes papa--you do not understand."

"Make me understand. Daisy, I command you to tell me all that you have
not told me. You need not think of anything now, except my command."

Daisy did, perhaps; for now her lip quivered slightly; and for a moment
she hid her face in her father's bosom. Mr. Randolph wrapped his arms
round her and stooped his head to hear the story which Daisy was
obliged to give. She gave it fully, and he heard it quite through in
silence. And he made no observation upon it when it was finished; he
only asked her,

"Was there no resentment in your refusal of thanks to your aunt just
now?"

"No, papa"--said Daisy; with too sweet and artless utterance for him to
doubt her.

"But then, Daisy, we come back to the cause of your mother's
displeasure. Good breeding requires that people should not be rude, even
by silence."

"Papa, I did not know how to be polite with truth."

"You could have said you were very much obliged to your aunt."

"But, I was _not_, papa."

"Not obliged to her?"

"No, sir."

"But, Daisy, that is a civil form, of expression which it is usual to
avail oneself of upon such occasions. It does not necessarily mean
much."

"But, papa, would she not have thought I meant it, if I had said so?"

"Very likely. That is the polite advantage gained."

"But papa. _I_ should have known that I did not mean it; and it would
not have been true."

"This is getting to be too deep a question for you to discuss
to-night--it is time for you to go to bed. But I cannot have you rude."

Daisy kissed her father, who had been extremely gentle and tender with
her, and went off to her room. Mr. Randolph's brow looked moody.

"Have you brought Daisy's ideas into order?" asked his wife, who had
been engaged in conversation with Dr. Sandford.

"She has rather brought confusion into mine," said the gentleman.

"What is the matter?"

"Truth and Daisy, versus civility and the world. And it is not easy to
make a child comprehend some of the fine distinctions we are accustomed
to draw. White and black are _very_ white and black, to such eyes, and
no allowance is made for a painter's lights and shades."

"She must make allowance for what your eyes see," said Mrs. Randolph.

Mr. Randolph made no answer.

"Daisy is entirely changed," her mother went on,--"and is become
utterly obstinate and unmanageable. Perfectly self-important too--she
thinks there is no wisdom now but her own. I may thank you for it, Dr.
Sandford."

"You do me too much honour," said the doctor.

"It is an honour you share with Mr. Dinwiddie."

"I did not know I shared anything with Mr. Dinwiddie."

"He has infected the child with a set of perfectly fanatical notions;
and you persisted in keeping her under that creature's care, where they
had time to grow strong."

"I will do all I can to repair mischief done," said the doctor. "Mrs.
Benoit is a good nurse for the body and you will bear me witness it was
for repairs of _that_ I was called in. What is the other damage referred
to?"

"Fanaticism."

"Rather young for that disease to take deep root," said the doctor.

"Anything takes deep root in Daisy; whatever she takes up she holds to."

"I advise you to let her be fanatical then a little while longer," said
the doctor, "till she has time to lay up some strength."

And the doctor took his departure.

"I am sure that is wise counsel, Felicia," Mr. Randolph said. But the
lady made him no answer.

Ransom went off to school the next day, as his father had promised.
Mrs. Randolph looked very gloomy; Mrs. Gary looked not otherwise; and
Daisy thought the mental and social horizon foreboded stormy weather.
But very happily, as it seemed to her, before dinner there was an
arrival of some expected visitors, coming to stay for a time in the
house. They had been desired as well as expected; there was a famous
lady and a learned gentleman among them; and every eye and ear were
taken up with attending to their words or waiting upon their movements.
Daisy and her concerns were, she thought, forgotten.

She enjoyed the feeling of this for a little while; and then ordered her
pony chaise. And presently you might have seen a little figure in a
white frock come out upon the front steps, with a large flat on her head
and driving gloves on her hands and in one of them a little basket. Down
the steps she came and took her place in the chaise and gathered up the
reins. The black pony was ready, with another boy in place of Sam;
nobody interfered with her; and off they went, the wheels of the little
chaise rolling smoothly over the gravel, Loupe in a gentle waddling
trot, and Daisy in a contented state of mind. It was very pleasant!
Clear sunny air, yet not too hot, and the afternoon shadows beginning to
make all things look lovely. Daisy took the way to the church, passed
out upon the high road, and turned the pony's head in the direction
which she had taken with Dr. Sandford the day before. She did not go
quite so fast, however; so that it was a little time before she came in
sight of the poor old house which she recognized as Molly Skelton's.
Daisy drew the reins then and let Loupe walk slowly up a slight ascent
in the road which led to it. But when the chaise was fairly opposite the
house door, Daisy drew the reins still more and brought Loupe to a
stand-still. She peered forth then anxiously to see if the poor old
inmate of the house were to be seen anywhere.

As she looked, the house door opened; and with a very straitened and
touched heart Daisy watched the crippled old creature come from within,
crawl down over the door step, and make her slow way into the little
path before the house. A path of a few yards ran from the road to the
house door, and it was bordered with a rough-looking array of flowers.
Rough-looking, because they were set or had sprung up rather confusedly,
and the path between had no care but was only worn by the feet of
travellers and the hands and knees of the poor inhabitant of the place.
Yet some sort of care was bestowed on the flowers themselves, for no
weeds had been suffered to choke them; and even the encroaching grass
had been removed from trespassing too nearly on their little occupation
of ground. The flowers themselves shot up and grew as they had a mind.
Prince's feather was conspicuous, and some ragged balsams. A few yellow
marigolds made a forlorn attempt to look bright, and one tall sunflower
raised its great head above all the rest; proclaiming the quality of the
little kingdom where it reigned. The poor cripple moved down a few
steps from the house door, and began grubbing with her hands around the
roots of a bunch of balsams.

Daisy looked a minute or two, very still, and then bade the boy hold her
pony; while without troubling herself about his mystification she got
out of the chaise, and basket in hand, opened the wicket and softly went
up the path. The neat little shoes and spotless white dress were close
beside the poor creature grubbing there in the ground before she knew
it, and there they stood still; Daisy was a good deal at a loss how to
speak. She was not immediately perceived; the head of the cripple had a
three-cornered handkerchief thrown over it to defend it from the sun and
she was earnestly grubbing at the roots of her balsam; the earth-stained
fingers and the old brown stuff dress, which was of course dragged along
in the dirt too, made a sad contrast with the spotless freshness of the
little motionless figure that was at her side, almost touching her.
Daisy concluded to wait till she should be seen, and then speak, though
how to speak she did not very well know and she rather dreaded the
moment.

It came, when in throwing her weeds aside a glance of the cripple saw,
instead of stones and grass, two very neat and black and well shaped
little shoes planted there almost within reach of her hand. She drew
herself back from the balsam and looked sideways up, to see what the
shoes belonged to. Daisy saw her face then; it was a bad face; so
disagreeable that she looked away from it instantly to the balsams.

"What are you doing to your flowers?" she asked gently. The gentle
little child voice seemed to astonish the woman, although after an
instant she made surly answer,--

"Whose business is it?"

"Wouldn't it be easier," said Daisy, not looking at her, "if you had
something to help you get the weeds up? Don't you want a fork, or a hoe,
or something?"

"I've got forks," said the cripple sullenly. "I use 'em to eat with."

"No, but I mean, something to help you with the weeds," said
Daisy--"that sort of fork, or a trowel."

The woman spread her brown fingers of both hands, like birds' claws,
covered with the dirt in which she had been digging. "I've got forks
enough," she said savagely--"them's what goes into my weeds. Now go
'long!--"

The last words were uttered with a sudden jerk, and as she spoke them
she plunged her hands into the dirt, and bringing up a double handful
cast it with a spiteful fling upon the neat little black shoes. Woe to
white stockings, if they had been visible; but Daisy's shoes came up
high and tight around her ankle, and the earth thrown upon them fell off
easily again; except only that it lodged in the eyelet holes of the boot
lacing and sifted through a little there, and some had gone as high as
the top of the boot and fell in. Quite enough to make Daisy
uncomfortable, besides that the action half frightened her. She quitted
the ground, went back to her pony chaise without even attempting to do
anything with the contents of her basket. Daisy could go no further with
her feet in this condition. She turned the pony's head and drove back to
Melbourne.




CHAPTER X.


"Will I take him to the stable, Miss Daisy?" inquired the boy, as Daisy
got out at the back door.

"No. Just wait a little for me, Lewis."

Up stairs went Daisy; took off her boots and got rid of the soil they
had brought home; that was the first thing. Then, in spotless order
again, she went back to Lewis and inquired where Logan was at work.
Thither she drove the pony chaise.

"Logan," said Daisy coming up to him; she had left Loupe in Lewis's
care; "what do you use to help you get up weeds?"

"Maybe a hoe, Miss Daisy; or whiles a weeding fork."

"Have you got one here?"

"No, Miss Daisy. Was it a fork you were wanting?"

"Yes, I want one, Logan."

"And will you be wanting it noo?"

"Yes, I want it now, if you please."

"Bill, you go home and get Miss Daisy one o' them small hand forks--out
o' that new lot--them's slenderer."

"And Logan, I want another thing. I want a little rose bush--and if you
can, I want it with a rose open or a bud on it."

"A rose bush!" said Logan. "Ye want it to be set some place, nae doute?"

"Yes, I do; but I want to set it out myself, Logan; so it must not be
_too_ big a bush, you know, for I couldn't manage it."

"Perhaps Miss Daisy had better let me manage it. It's dirty work, Miss
Daisy."

"No; I only want the rose bush. I will take care of it, Logan. Have you
got one that I can have?"

"Ou, ay, Miss Daisy! there's a forest of rose bushes; ye can just please
yourself."

"Where is it?"

[Illustration]

Seeing his little mistress was greatly in earnest and must be presently
satisfied, Logan cast a wistful glance or two at his own proper work in
hand which he was abandoning, and walked away with Daisy. The flower
garden and nursery were at some distance; but Daisy trudged along as
patiently as he. Her little face was busy-looking now and eager, as well
as wise; but no tinge of colour would yet own itself at home in those
pale cheeks. Logan glanced at her now and then and was, as she said,
"very good." He thought he was about the best business, after all, that
could occupy him. He directed his steps to a great garden that yet was
not the show garden, but hid away behind the plantations of trees and
shrubbery. There were a vast number of plants and flowers here, too; but
they were not in show order, and were in fact only the reserve stock,
for supplying vacancies or preparing changes or especially for
furnishing cut flowers to the house; of which a large quantity must
every day be sent in. There was a very nursery of rose trees, smaller
and larger. Logan peered about, very particular in his own line as to
how every thing should be done; at last he found and chose just the
right thing for Daisy. A slender, thrifty young plant, with healthy
strong leaves and shoots, and at the top a bud shewing red and a half
opened sweet rose. Daisy was quite satisfied.

"Now where is it going, Miss Daisy?" Logan inquired.

"I am going to plant it out myself, Logan; it is going in a place--where
I want it."

"Surely! but does Miss Daisy know how to plant a rose tree?"

"Won't you tell me how, Logan?"

"Weel, Miss Daisy, there must be a hole dug for it, in the first place;
you must take a trowel and make a hole for it--But your dress will be
the waur!" he exclaimed, glancing at his little mistress's spotless
draperies.

"Never mind; only go on and tell me exactly how to manage, Logan."

"Does Miss Daisy intend to do it this afternoon?"

"Yes."

"Aweel, you must take a trowel and make a hole," said Logan, nipping off
some useless buds and shoots from the plants in his neighbourhood as he
was speaking--"and be sure your hole is deep as it should be; and make
the bottom soft with your trowel, or throw in a little earth, well
broken, for the roots to rest on"------

"How shall I know when my hole is deep enough?"

"Weel, Miss Daisy, it depends on the haighth of the roots--ye must even
try and see till ye get it deep enough; but whatever ye do, keep the
crown of the plant above ground."

"And what is the crown of the plant, Logan?"

Logan stooped down and put his fingers to the stem of a rose tree.

"It's just called the crown o' the plant, Miss Daisy, here where the
roots goes one way and the stem springs up another. Miss Daisy sees,
there's a kind o' shouther there."

"No, I don't see," said Daisy.

Logan put in his spade, and with a turn or two brought up the little
rose bush he had chosen for her purpose; and holding the ball of earth,
in his hand, shewed her the part of the plant he spoke of, just above
the surface of the soil.

"It's the most tenderest pairt of the vegetable nature," he said; "and
it must be kept out of the ground, where it can breathe, like; it won't
answer to cover it up."

"I will not," said Daisy. "Then?--"

"Then, when ye have gotten the place prepared, ye must set in this ball
of earth, as haill as ye can keep it; but if it gets broken off, as it's
like it will!--then ye must set the roots kindly in on the soft earth,
and let them lie just natural; and put in the soft earth over them; and
when ye have got a little in press it down a bit; and then more, after
the same manner, until it's all filled up."

"Why must it be pressed down?"

"Weel, Miss Daisy, it must be dune; the roots is accustomed to have the
soil tight round them, and they don't like it unless they have it so.
It's a vara good way, to have a watering pot of water and make a puddle
in the bottom of the hole, and set the roots in that and throw in the
soil; and then it settles itself all round them, and ye need not to coax
it with your fingers. But if ye don't puddle the roots, the bush must be
well watered and soaked when ye have dune."

"Very well, Logan--thank you. Now please put it in a basket for me, with
a trowel, and let me take a watering pot of water too; or Lewis can
carry that, can't he?"

"He can take whatever ye have a mind," said Logan; "but where is it
going?"

"I'll take the basket with the rose," said Daisy--"it's going a little
way--you can set it just here, in my chaise, Logan."

The gardener deposited the basket safely in the chaise, and Daisy got in
and shook the reins. Lewis, much wondering and a little disgustful, was
accommodated with a watering pot full of water, by the grinning Logan.

"See ye ride steady now, boy," he said. "Ye won't want to shew any
graces of horsemanship, the day!"

Whatever Lewis might have wanted, the necessity upon him was pretty
stringent. A watering pot full of water he found a very uncomfortable
bundle to carry on horseback; he was bound to ride at the gentlest of
paces, or inflict an involuntary cold bath upon himself every other
step. Much marvelling at the arrangement which made a carriage and
horses needful to move a rose bush, Lewis followed as gently as he could
the progress of his little mistress's pony chaise; which was much
swifter than he liked it; until his marvelling was increased by its
turning out of Melbourne grounds and taking a course up the road again.
Towards the same place! On went Daisy, much too fast for the watering
pot; till the cripple's cottage came in sight a second time. There, just
at the foot of the little rise in the road which led up to the cottage
gate, Loupe suddenly fell to very slow going. The watering pot went
easily enough for several yards; and then Loupe stopped. What was the
matter?

Something was the matter, yet Daisy did not summon Lewis. She sat quite
still, looking before her up to the cottage, with a thoughtful, puzzled,
troubled face. The matter was, that just there and not before, the
remembrance of her mother's command had flashed on her--that she should
have nothing to do with any stranger out of the house unless she had
first got leave. Daisy was stopped short. Get leave? She would never get
leave to speak again to that poor crabbed, crippled, forlorn creature;
and who else would take up the endeavour to be kind to her? Who else
would even try to win her to a knowledge of the Bible and Bible joys?
and how would that poor ignorant mortal ever get out of the darkness
into the light? Daisy did not know how to give her up; yet she could not
go on. The sweet rose on the top of her little rose tree mocked her,
with kindness undone and good not attempted. Daisy sat still, confounded
at this new barrier her mother's will had put in her way.

Wheels came rapidly coursing along the road in front of her, and in a
moment Dr. Sandford's gig had whirled past the cottage and bore down the
hill. But recognizing the pony chaise in the road, he too came to a stop
as sudden as Daisy's had been. The two were close beside each other.

"Where away, Daisy?"

"I do not understand, Dr. Sandford."

"Where are you going? or rather, why are you standing still here?"

"Because I was in doubt what to do."

"Did the doubt take you here, in the middle of the road?"

"Yes, Dr. Sandford."

"What is it, Daisy? To whom are you carrying a rose bush?"

"I am afraid--nobody."

"What is the matter--or the doubt?"

"It is a question of duty, Dr. Sandford."

"Then I will decide it for you. Go on and do what you wish to do. That
will be right."

"O no, sir," said Daisy, smiling at her adviser--"that is just what
would be wrong. I cannot."

"Cannot what?"

"Do that, sir; do what I wish to do." And Daisy sighed withal.

"What do you wish to do?"

The doctor was quite serious and as usual a little imperative in his
questions, and Daisy knew him to be trusted.

"I wanted to take this little rose bush and set it out in the garden up
there."

"_There?_? do you mean the garden of that cottage?" said the doctor
pointing with his whip.

"Yes, sir."

"Are you bound thither now?"

"No, sir--I am going home."

"Rose bush and all? Daisy, let Lewis get Loupe home, and you come here
and ride with me. Come! I want you."

Truly Daisy wanted nothing else. She left rose bush and watering pot,
chaise and pony, to Lewis's management, and gladly let the doctor take
her up beside him. She liked to drive with him; he had a fine horse and
went fast; and there were other reasons.

Now they drove off in fine style; fast, over the good roads; whisked by
Melbourne, sped away along south, catching glimpses of the river from
time to time, with the hills on the further side hazily blue and
indistinct with the September haze of sunbeams. Near hand the green of
plantations and woodland was varied with brown grainfields, where grain
had been, and with ripening Indian corn and buckwheat; but more
especially with here and there a stately roof-tree or gable of some fine
new or old country house. The light was mellow, the air was good; in the
excitement of her drive Daisy half forgot her perplexity and
discomfiture. Till the doctor said, suddenly looking round at her with a
smile,

"Now I should like to know the history of that rose bush."

"O, there is no history about it," said Daisy, quite taken by surprise.

"Everything has a beginning, a middle, and an end," said the doctor.
"What was the beginning of this?"

"Only, Dr. Sandford," said Daisy doubtfully,--"I was sorry for that poor
woman, after what you told me about her."

"Molly Skelton?"

"Yes, sir."

"And you thought to comfort her with rose bushes?"

"No sir,--but--I wanted to get on good terms with her."

"Are you on any other terms?"

"She does not know me, you know, sir," said Daisy lifting to her friend
a face that was beyond his comprehension,--"and I do not think she was
very well pleased to see me in her garden a little while ago."

"You have been in her garden, then?"

"Yes, sir."

"Daisy, will you excuse me for asking, why you should be on any terms
whatever with Molly Skelton?"

"She is so unhappy, Dr. Sandford,"--Daisy said, looking up again.

"And do you think you can do anything to make her less unhappy?"

"I thought"--Daisy did not look up now, but the doctor watching her saw
a witnessing tinge that he knew coming about her eyelids, and a softened
line of lip, that made him listen the closer,--"I thought--I might teach
her something that would make her happy,--if I could."

"What would you teach her, Daisy?"

"I would teach her to read--perhaps--I thought; if she would like me and
let me."

"Is reading a specific for happiness?"

"No sir--but--the Bible!" Daisy said with a sudden glance. And so clear
and sure the speech of her childish eye was, that the doctor though
believing nothing of it would not breathe a question of that which she
believed.

"O that is it!" he said. "Well, Daisy, this is the beginning; but though
I came in upon the middle of the subject I do not understand it yet. Why
did not the rose tree get to its destination?"

"Because--I remembered, just when I had got to the bottom of the hill,
that mamma would not let me."

Daisy's tone of voice told more than she knew of her subdued state of
disappointment.

"Mrs. Randolph had forbidden you to go to Molly's cottage?"

"No sir; but she had forbidden me to speak to anybody without having her
leave. I had forgotten it till just that minute."

"Ask her leave, and then go. What is the difficulty in that, Daisy?"

"She will not give me leave, Dr. Sandford. Mamma does not like me
to----do such things."

"Do you care much about it?"

"Yes, sir."

"Present your request to Mrs. Randolph to-morrow, Daisy--that is my
advice to you."

"It would be no use, Dr. Sandford."

"Perhaps not; but I advise you to take my advice; and lay the rose bush
by the heels till to-morrow afternoon."

"By the heels, sir?"

"Yes. Logan will tell you what that means."

Daisy looked with such a gaze of steadfast inquiry up in the doctor's
face, that he had hard work to command his countenance. She could not
make out anything from his face, except that somehow she got a little
encouragement from it; and then they whirled in at the gate of Melbourne
and in another minute were at home. Daisy went off to see after her
rose-bush, find Logan, and have it laid by the heels. The doctor marched
in through the hall, into the library, and then catching sight of Mr.
Randolph on the piazza, he went out there. Mr. Randolph was enjoying the
September sunlight, and seemed to be doing nothing else.

"Good afternoon!" said the doctor.

"How do you do?" said Mr. Randolph. "Can you possibly have business on
hand, doctor, in this weather?"

"Very good weather for business," said the doctor.

"Too good. It is enough to look and breathe."

All Mr. Randolph was doing, apparently. He was lounging on a settee,
with a satisfied expression of countenance. The doctor put himself in a
great cane chair and followed the direction of his host's eyes, to the
opposite river and mountains; over which there was a glory of light and
atmosphere. Came back to Mr. Randolph's face with an air of the
disparaged business.

"It is not bad, driving."

"No, I suppose not!"

"Your little daughter likes business better than you do." A smile came
over Mr. Randolph's face, a smile of much meaning.

"She likes it too well, doctor. I wish I could infuse some degree of
nonchalant carelessness into Daisy's little wise head."

"We must deal with things as we find them," said the doctor. "I met her
this afternoon in the road, with a carriage-load of business on hand;
but what was very bad for her, it was arrested business."

"How do you mean?"

The doctor rose here to give his chair to Mrs. Randolph, who stepped out
through the library window. He fetched another for himself and went on.

"She was in the middle of the road, her chaise loaded with baskets and
greenhouse plants, and with a general distribution of garden tools
between herself and her outrider. All in the middle of the road at a
stand-still--chaise and pony and all,--and Daisy herself in particular.
I found it was an interrupted expedition, and invited Daisy to take a
ride with me; which she did, and I got at the rationale of the affair.
And I come now to make the request, as her physician, not as her friend,
that her expeditions may be as little interfered with as possible. Let
her energies work. The very best thing for her is that they should find
something to work upon, and receive no interruption."

"What interrupted her this afternoon?"

"Conscience--as I understand it."

"There is no dealing with Daisy's conscience, doctor," said Mr. Randolph
with a smile. "What _that_ says, Daisy feels herself bound to do."

"Do not burden her conscience then," said the doctor. "Not just
now--till she gets stronger."

"Where was she going this afternoon?" Mrs. Randolph asked in her calm
voice.

"On an errand of the most Utopian benevolence"--

"Having what for its object?"

"A miserable old crippled creature, who lives in a poor cottage about
half a mile from your gate."

"What was Daisy desiring to do, doctor?"

"Carry some comfort to this forlorn thing, I believe; whom nobody else
thinks of comforting."

"Do you know what shape the comfort was to take?"

"I think," said the doctor,--"I am not quite sure, but I think, it was a
rose bush."

Mr. Randolph looked at his wife and straightened himself up to a sitting
posture.

"And what hindered her, Dr. Sandford?"

"I think, some understanding that she had not liberty to go on."

"Very proper in Daisy," said Mrs. Randolph.

"That is your child who is wanting in docility," remarked Mr. Randolph.

"She might have remembered my orders before she got so far,"--said the
lady.

"I wish you would change the orders," said Dr. Sandford boldly.

"Not even to oblige you, doctor," said Mrs. Randolph. "Daisy has an idea
that the companions who are not fit for her are precisely the ones whom
she should cultivate."

"I think Daisy would state the question differently, however," Mr.
Randolph remarked.

"She has a tinge of the wildest fanaticism," Mrs. Randolph went on,
dropping her work and facing the doctor. "Wherever there are rags and
dirt, there, by force of contrast, Daisy thinks it is her business to
go. This is a miserable place, I suppose, that she was aiming for this
afternoon--is it not?"

"Very miserable. But the point is, to visit it would have made Daisy
happy."

"It is sheer fanaticism!" said Mrs. Randolph. "I cannot let her
encourage it. If I did, she would not be fit for anything by and by. She
is fit for very little now."

"You will of course judge as you please about it," said the doctor; "but
it is my duty to tell you that the danger in that line is far more than
compensated by the advantage to be gained. For Daisy's health, she
should be checked in nothing; let her go where she will and do what she
will; the more business on hand the better, that carries her out of
doors and out of herself. With a strong body and secure health, you will
find it far easier to manage fanaticism."

"I am sure Dr. Sandford is right, Felicia," said Mr. Randolph.

"I know Daisy--" said the lady.

"I think I know fanaticism," said the doctor; "and if I do, the best
thing you can do with it is to give it plenty of sun and air."

"Is it quite safe for Daisy to go to this cottage you speak of?" Mr.
Randolph asked.

"Quite safe."

"I cannot think of letting Daisy go there, Mr. Randolph!" said his wife.

"What danger do you apprehend, Felicia?"

It was not quite so easy to say. The lady handled her tetting pins,
which were in her fingers, for a moment or two in silence; then let them
fall, and raised her handsome head.

"Daisy must be withdrawn entirely from the associations which have taken
possession of her--if it is possible. The very best thing for her in my
opinion would be to send her to a boarding school. Unless you wish your
daughter to grow up a confirmed _religieuse_, Mr. Randolph. Do you wish
that?"

"I have not considered it. What do you suppose Daisy will do to harm
herself, at this place Dr. Sandford speaks of?"

"Some absurdity, that just cherishes the temper she is in."

"Quite as likely"--to wear it out, Mr. Randolph was going to say; but
some remembrance of Daisy came up and stopped him.

"Good evening!" said the doctor, rising to his feet.

"Are you going, Dr. Sandford?"

"Yes."

"Then you recommend that we let Daisy go to this place, and alone?"

"In my capacity of physician I should _order_ it," said the doctor with
a smile; "only, I do not like to give orders and have them dishonoured."

Off he went.

"Felicia," said Mr. Randolph, "I believe he is right."

"I am sure he knows nothing about it," said the lady.

"Do you? Daisy is very delicate."

"She will never die of want of resolution."

"Felicia, I mean to enquire into Daisy's wishes and purposes about this
matter; and if I find them unobjectionable, I shall give her leave to go
on with it."

"You do not know what you are about, Mr. Randolph."

"I shall find out, then," said the gentleman. "I would rather she would
be a _religieuse_ than a shadow."




CHAPTER XI.


Daisy pondered over the doctor's counsel. It was friendly; but she
hardly thought well advised. He did not know her father and mother so
well as she did. Yet she went to find out Logan that afternoon on her
return from the drive, and saw the rose-bush laid by the heels; with
perhaps just a shadow of hope in her heart that her friend the doctor
might mean to put in a plea for her somewhere. The hope faded when she
got back to the house, and the doctor was gone, and Mrs. Randolph's
handsome face looked its usual calm impassiveness. What use to ask her
such a thing as leave to go to the cripple's cottage? No use at all,
Daisy knew. The request alone would probably move displeasure. Every
look at her mother's face settled this conviction more and more deeply
in Daisy's mind; and she ended by giving up the subject. There was no
hope. She could do nothing for any poor person, she was sure, under her
mother's permission, beyond carrying soup and jelly in her pony chaise
and maybe going in to give it. And that was not much; and there were
very few poor people around Melbourne that wanted just that sort of
attention.

So Daisy gave up her scheme. Nevertheless next morning it gave her a
twinge of heart to see her rose-bush laid by the heels, exactly like her
hopes. Daisy stood and looked at it. The sweet half-blown rose at the
top of the little tree hung ingloriously over the soil, and yet looked
so lovely and smelt so sweet; and Daisy had hoped it might win poor
Molly Skelton's favour, or at least begin to open a way for it to come
in due time.

"So ye didn't get your bush planted--" said Logan coming up.

"No."

"Your hands were not strong enough to make the hole deep for it, Miss
Daisy?"

"Yes, I think they could; but I met with an interruption yesterday,
Logan."

"Weel--it'll just bide here till ye want it."

Daisy wished it was back in its old place again; but she did not like to
say so, and she went slowly back to the house. As she mounted the piazza
steps she heard her father's voice. He was there before the library
windows.

"Come here, Daisy. What are you about?" he said drawing her up in his
arms.

"Nothing, papa."

"How do you like doing nothing?"

"Papa, I think it is not at all agreeable."

"You do! So I supposed. What were you about yesterday afternoon?"

"I went to ride with Dr. Sandford."

"Did that occupy the whole afternoon?"

"O no, papa."

"Were you doing nothing the rest of the time?"

"No sir, not _nothing_."

"Daisy, I wish you would be a little more frank. Have you any objection
to tell me what you were doing?"

"No, papa;--but I did not think it would give you any pleasure. I was
only trying to do something."

"It would give me pleasure to have you tell about it."

"I must tell you more then, papa." And standing with her arm on her
father's shoulder, looking over to the blue mountains on the other side
of the river, Daisy went on.

"There is a poor woman living half a mile from here, papa, that I saw
one day when I was riding with Dr. Sandford. She is a cripple. Papa,
her legs and feet are all bent up under her, so that she cannot walk at
all; her way of moving is by dragging herself along over the ground on
her hands and knees; her hands and her gown all down in the dirt."

"That is your idea of extreme misery, is it not, Daisy?"

"Papa, do you not think it is--it must be--very uncomfortable?"

"Very, I should think."

"But that is not her worst misery. Papa, she is all alone; the
neighbours bring her food, but nobody stops to eat it with her. She is
all alone by night and by day; and she is disagreeable in her temper, I
believe, and she has nobody to love her and she loves nobody."

"Which of those two things is the worst, Daisy?"

"What two things, papa?"

"To love nobody, or to have nobody to love her?"

"Papa--I do not know." Then remembering Juanita, Daisy suddenly
added,--"Papa, I should think it must be the worst to love nobody."

"Do you? Pray why?"

"It would not make her happy, I think, to have people love her if she
did not love them."

"And you think loving others would be better, without anybody to give
love back?"

"I should think it would be very hard!"--said Daisy with a most profound
expression of thoughtfulness.

"Well--this poor cripple, I understand, lacks both those conditions of
happiness?"

"Yes, papa."

"What then? You were going to tell me something about her."

"Not much about _her_" said Daisy, "but only about myself."

"A much more interesting subject to me, Daisy."

You could only see the faintest expression of pleasure in the line of
Daisy's lips; she was looking very sober and a trifle anxious.

"I only thought, papa, I would try if I could not do something to make
that poor woman happier."

"What did you try?"

"The first thing was to get her to know me and like me, you know, papa;
because she is rather cross and does not like people generally, I
believe."

"So you went to see her?"

"I have never spoken much to her, papa. But I went inside of her gate
one day, and saw her trying to take care of some poor flowers; so then I
thought, maybe, if I took her a nice little rose-bush, she might like
it."

"And then like you? Well--you tried the experiment?"

"No, papa. I did get a rose-bush from Logan and he told me how to plant
it; and I was on my way to the cottage and had almost got there; and
then I recollected mamma had said I must not speak to anybody without
her leave."

"So you came home?"

"Yes, papa. No, papa, I went to ride with Dr. Sandford."

"Have you asked leave of your mother?"

"No, papa,"--said Daisy, in a tone of voice which sufficiently expressed
that she did not intend it.

"So my dear little Daisy," said her father drawing his arm round her a
little more closely--"you think a rose-bush would serve instead of
friends to make this poor creature happy?"

"O no, papa!"

"What was the purpose of it, then?"

"Only--to get her to like me, papa."

"What were _you_ going to do to make her happy?"

"Papa, if you lived in such a place, in such a way, wouldn't you like to
have a friend come and see you sometimes?"

"Certainly!--if you were the friend."

"I thought--by and by--she might learn to like it," Daisy said in the
most sedately meek way possible. Her father could not forbear a smile.

"But Daisy, from what you tell me, I am at a loss to understand the part
that all this could have had in _your_ happiness."

"O papa--she is so miserable!" was Daisy's answer. Mr. Randolph drew her
close and kissed her.

"_You_ are not miserable?"

"No, papa--but--"

"But what?"

"I would like to give her a little bit of comfort."

There was much earnestness, and a little sorrow, in Daisy's eyes.

"I am not sure that it is right for you to go to such places."

"Papa, may I shew you something?" said the child with sudden life.

"Anything, Daisy."

She rushed away; was gone a full five minutes; then came softly to Mr.
Randolph's shoulder with an open book in her hand. It was Joanna's
Bible, for Daisy did not dare bring her own; and it was open at these
words--

"Whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do ye even so to them."

"What does this mean, Daisy? It seems very plain; but what do I want
with it?"

"Only, papa, that is what makes me think it is right."

"What is right?"

"To do this, papa."

"Well but, are you in want of somebody to come and make you happy?"

"O no, papa--but if I were in her place, then I should be."

"Do you suppose this commands us to do in every case what we would like
ourselves in the circumstances?"

"Papa--I suppose so--if it wouldn't be something wrong."

"At that rate, I should have to let you go with your rose-bush," said
Mr. Randolph.

"O papa!" said Daisy, "do you think, if you asked her, mamma would
perhaps say I might?"

"Can't tell, Daisy--I think I shall try my powers of persuasion."

For answer to which, Daisy clasped her arms round his neck and gave him
some very earnest caresses, comprised in one great kiss and a clinging
of her little head in his neck for the space of half a minute. It meant
a great deal; so much that Mr. Randolph was unable for the rest of the
day to get rid of a sort of lingering echo of Daisy's Bible words; they
haunted him, and haunted him with a strange sense of the house being at
cross purposes, and Daisy's line of life lying quite athwart and
contrary to all the rest. "Whatsoever ye would that men should do unto
you;"--who else at Melbourne considered that for one moment?

However, Mr. Randolph had a fresh talk with his wife; the end of which
was that he gave Daisy leave to do what she liked in the matter of Molly
Skelton; and was rewarded on the spot by seeing the pink tinge which
instantly started into the pale cheeks.

No lack of energy had Daisy for the rest of that day. She went off first
to see what was the condition of her rose-bush; pretty fair; lying by
the heels seemed to agree with it quite well. Then the pony chaise was
ordered and a watering pot of water again; much to the boy's disgust who
was to carry it; and Daisy took her dinner with quiet satisfaction. So
soon as the afternoon had become pleasantly cool, Daisy's driving gloves
and hat went on, the chaise was summoned, and rose-bush and all she set
forth on her expedition. Mr. Randolph watched her off, acknowledging
that certainly for the present the doctor was right; whether in the
future Mrs. Randolph would prove to have been right also, he was
disagreeably uncertain. Still, he was not quite sure that he wished
Daisy anything other than she was.

Troubled by no fears or prognostications, meanwhile, the pony chaise and
its mistress went on their way. No, Daisy had no fears. She did doubt
what Molly's immediate reception of her advances might be; her first
experience bade her doubt; but the spirit of love in her little heart
was overcoming; it poured over Molly a flood of sunny affections and
purposes, in the warmth and glow of which the poor cripple's crabbedness
and sourness of manner and temper were quite swallowed up and lost.
Daisy drove on, very happy and thankful, till the little hill was
gained, and slowly walking up it Loupe stopped, nothing loth, before the
gate of Molly Skelton's courtyard.

A little bit of hesitation came over Daisy now, not about what was to be
done, but how to do it. The cripple was in her flowery bit of ground,
grubbing around her balsams as usual. The clear afternoon sunbeams shone
all over what seemed to Daisy all distressing together. The ragged
balsams--the coarse bloom of prince's feather and cockscomb--some
straggling tufts of ribband grass and four-o'clocks and marigolds--and
the great sunflower nodding its head on high over all; while weeds were
only kept away from the very growth of the flowers and started up
everywhere else, and grass grew irregularly where grass should not; and
in the midst of it all the poor cripple on her hands and knees in the
dirt, more uncared-for, more unseemly and unlovely than her little plot
of weeds and flowers. Daisy looked at her, with a new tide of tenderness
flowing up in her heart, along with the doubt how her mission should be
executed or how it would be received; then she gave up her reins, took
the rose-tree in her hands, and softly opened the little wicket gate.
She went up the path and stood beside the cripple, who hearing the gate
shut had risen from her grubbing in the earth and sat back looking at
who was coming. Daisy went on without hesitation now. She had prayed out
all her prayer about it before setting out from home.

"I have brought you a rose-bush," she said simply. "Do you like roses?
this is very sweet. I thought maybe you would like a rose. Where would
you like to have it go?"

The answer was a very strange sort of questioning
grunt--inarticulate--nevertheless expressive of rude wonder and
incredulity, as far as it expressed anything. And Molly stared.

"Where shall I put this rose-tree?" said Daisy. "Where would it look
prettiest? May I put it here, by these balsams?"

No answer in words; but instead of a sign of assent, the cripple after
looking a moment longer at Daisy and the rose-tree, put her hand beyond
the balsams and grubbed up a tuft of what the country people call
"creepin' Charley;" and then sitting back as before, signified to Daisy
by a movement of her hand that the rose-bush might go in that place.
That was all Daisy wanted. She fell to work with her trowel, glad enough
to be permitted, and dug a hole, with great pains and some trouble; for
the soil was hard as soon as she got a little below the surface. But
with great diligence Daisy worked and scooped, till by repeated trials
she found she had the hole deep enough and large enough; and then she
tenderly set the roots of the rose-tree in the prepared place and shook
fine soil over them, as Logan had told her; pressing it down from time
to time, until the job was finished and the little tree stood securely
planted. A great feat accomplished. Daisy stayed not, but ran off to the
road for the watering pot, and bringing it with some difficulty to the
spot without soiling herself, she gave the rose-bush a thorough
watering; watered it till she was sure the refreshment had penetrated
down to the very roots. All the while the cripple sat back gazing at
her; gazing alternately at the rose-bush and the planting, and at the
white delicate frock the child wore and the daintily neat shoes and
stockings, and the handsome flat hat with its costly riband. I think
the view of these latter things must in some degree have neutralized the
effect of the sweet rose looking at her from the top of the little bush;
because Molly on the whole was not gracious. Daisy had finished her work
and set down her empty watering pot, and was looking with great
satisfaction at the little rose-bush; which was somewhat closely
neighboured by a ragged bunch of four-o'clocks on one side and the
overgrown balsams on the other; when Molly said suddenly and gruffly,

"Now go 'long!"------

Daisy was startled, and turned to the creature who had spoken to see if
she had heard and understood aright. No doubt of it. Molly was not
looking at her, but her face was ungenial; and as Daisy hesitated she
made a little gesture of dismissal with her hands. Daisy moved a step or
two off, afraid of another shower of gravel upon her feet.

"I will come to-morrow and see how it looks"--she said gently.

Molly did not reply yes or no, but she repeated her gesture of
dismissal, and Daisy thought it best and wisest to obey. She bid her a
sweet "good bye," to which she got no answer, and mounted into her
chaise again. There was a little disappointment in her heart; yet when
she had time to think it all over she was encouraged too. The rose-tree
was fairly planted; that would keep on speaking to Molly without the
fear of a rebuff; and somehow Daisy's heart was warm towards the gruff
old creature. How forlorn she had looked, sitting in the dirt, with her
grum face!

"But perhaps she will wear a white robe in heaven!"--thought Daisy.

Seeing that the rose-tree had evidently won favour, Daisy judged she
could not do better than attack Molly again on her weak side, which
seemed to be the love of the beautiful!--in one line at least. But Daisy
was not an impatient child; and she thought it good to see first what
sort of treatment the rose-bush got, and not to press Molly too hard. So
the next day she carried nothing with her; only went to pay a visit to
the garden. Nothing was to be seen but the garden; Molly did not shew
herself; and Daisy went in and looked at the rose. Much to her
satisfaction, she saw that Molly had quite discarded the great bunch of
four-o'clocks which had given the little rose tree no room on one side;
they were actually pulled up and gone; and the rose looked out in fair
space and sunshine where its coarse-growing neighbour had threatened to
be very much in its way. An excellent sign. Molly clearly approved of
the rose. Daisy saw with great pleasure that another bud was getting
ready to open and already shewing red between the leaves of its green
calyx; and she went home happy.

Next morning she went among the flower beds, and took a very careful
survey of all the beauties there to see what best she might take for her
next attack upon Molly. The beauties in flower were so very many and so
very various and so delicious all to Daisy's eye, that she was a good
deal puzzled. Red and purple and blue and white and yellow, the beds
were gay and glorious. But Daisy reflected that anything which wanted
skill in its culture or shelter from severities of season would
disappoint Molly, because it would not get from her what would be
necessary to its thriving. Some of the flowers in bloom, too, would not
bear transplanting. Daisy did not know what to do. She took Logan into
her confidence, so far as she could without mentioning names or
circumstances.

"Weel, Miss Daisy," said the gardener, "if ye're bent on being a Lady
Flora to the poor creature, I'll tell ye what ye'll do--ye'll just take
her a scarlet geranium."

"A geranium?" said Daisy.

"Ay. Just that."

"But it would want to be in the greenhouse when winter comes."

"Any place where it wouldn't freeze," said Logan. "You see, it'll be in
a pot e'en now, Miss Daisy--and you'll keep it in the pot; and the pot
you'll sink in the ground till frost comes; and when the frost comes,
it'll just come up as it is and go intil the poor body's house, and make
a spot of summer for her in her house till summer comes again."

"O Logan, that is an excellent thought!"

"Ay, Miss Daisy--I'm glad ye approve it."

"And than she would have the flowers all winter."

"Ay--if she served it justly."

The only thing now was to choose the geranium. Daisy was some time about
it, there were so many to choose from. At last she suited herself with a
very splendid new kind called the "Jewess"--a compact little plant with
a store of rich purple-red blossoms. Logan murmured as he took up the
pot in which it was planted--"Less than the best will never serve ye,
Miss Daisy"--but he did not grumble about it after all, and Daisy was
content.

She was very content when she had got it in her pony chaise and was
driving off, with the magnificent purple-red blossoms at her feet. How
exquisitely those delicate petals were painted, and marked with dashes
of red and purple deeper than the general colour. What rich clusters of
blossoms. Daisy gave only half an eye to her driving; and it was not
till she had almost reached Melbourne gate that she discovered her
trowel had been forgotten. She sent her attendant back for it and
waited.

Loupe was always willing to stand, lazy little fat fellow that he was;
and Daisy was giving her undivided attention to the purple "Jewess,"
with a sort of soft prayer going on all the while in her heart that her
errand might be blessed; when she was suddenly interrupted.

"Why where are you going, Daisy?"

"Where have you been, Preston?" said Daisy as suddenly drawing up.

"Little Yankee!" said Preston. "Answer one question by another in that
fashion? You mustn't do it, Daisy. What are you doing?"

"Nothing. I am waiting."

"What are you going to do, then?"

"I am going to drive."

"Do you usually carry a pot of geraniums for company?"

"No, not usually," said Daisy smiling at him.

"Well set out the pot of geraniums, and we will have a glorious ride,
Daisy. I am going to the Fish's, to see some of Alexander's traps; and
you shall go with me."

"O Preston--I am sorry; I cannot."

"Why?"

"I cannot this afternoon."

"Yes, you can, my dear little Daisy. In fact you _must_. Consider--I
shall be going away before very long, and then we cannot take rides
together. Won't you come?"

"Not now--I cannot, Preston! I have got something to do first."

"What?"

"Something which will take me an hour or two. After that I could go."

"Scarcely, this afternoon. Daisy, it is a long drive to the Fish's. And
they have beautiful things there, which you would like to see, I know
you would. Come! go with me--that's my own little Daisy."

Preston was on horseback, and looked very much in earnest. He looked
very gay and handsome too, for he was well mounted and knew how to
manage himself and his horse. He wanted to manage Daisy too; and that
was difficult. Daisy would have been tempted, and would have gone with
him at the first asking; but the thought of Molly and her forlornness,
and the words warm at her heart--"Whatsoever ye would that men should do
to you"--and a further sense that her visitations of Molly were an
extraordinary thing and very likely to be hindered on short notice, kept
her firm as a rock. She had an opportunity now in hand; she would not
throw it away; not for any self-gratification. And to tell the truth, no
sort of self-gratification could balance for a moment in Daisy's mind
the thought of Molly's wearing a crown of gold in heaven. That crown of
gold was before Daisy's eyes; nothing else was worth a thought in
comparison.

"Are you going to see that wretched old being?" said Preston at last.

"Yes."

"Daisy--dear Daisy--I do not know what to do with you. Do you like, is
it possible that you can like, dirt and vulgarity?"

"I don't think I do," Daisy said gently; "but Preston, I like the poor
_people_."

"You do!" said Preston. "Then it is manifest that you cannot like me."
And he dashed spurs into his horse and sprung away, with a grace and
life that kept Daisy looking after him in admiration, and a plain mood
of displeasure which cast its shadow all over her spirit.

"Here is the trowel, Miss Daisy."

Her messenger had come back, and Daisy recalled to the business in hand
took up her reins again and drove on; but she felt deeply grieved. Now
and then her gauntleted hand even went up to her face to brush away a
tear that had gathered. It was not exactly a new thing, nor was Daisy
entirely surprised at the attempt to divert her from her purpose. She
was wise enough to guess that Preston's object had been more than the
pleasure of her company; and she knew that all at home, unless possibly
her father might be excepted, neither liked nor favoured her kindness to
Molly and would rejoice to interrupt the tokens of it. All were against
her; and Daisy's hand, went up again and again. "It is good I am weak
and not very well," she thought; "as soon as I grow strong mamma will
not let me do this any more. I must do all I can now."

So she came to the cripple's gate; and by that time the tears were all
gone.

Nobody was in the little courtyard; Daisy went in first to see how the
rose looked. It was all safe and doing well. While she stood there
before it, the cottage door opened and the poor inmate came out. She
crawled down the walk on hands and knees till she got near Daisy, and
then sat back to look at her.

"What do you want?" she said, in a most uninviting and ungracious tone
of voice.

"I came to see you," said Daisy, venturing to let her eyes rest for the
first time on those poor, restless, unloving eyes opposite her--"and I
wanted to see the rose, and I have brought you another flower--if you
will let me bring it in."

Her words were sweet as honey. The woman looked at her, and answered
again with the unintelligible grunt, of unbelieving wonder, which Daisy
had heard once before. Daisy thought on the whole the safest way was not
to talk but to fetch her beautiful "Jewess" flowers to speak for
themselves. So she ran off and brought the pot and set it on the ground
before Molly. It was a great attraction; Daisy could see that at once.
The cripple sat back gazing at it. Daisy prudently waited till her eyes
came round again from the flowers and rested on her little visiter's
face.

"Where shall I put it?" said Daisy. "Where would you like to have it
go?"

Molly's eyes presently followed hers, roaming over the little flower
plot in search of room for the geranium, which did not appear; prince's
feather and marigolds so choked up the ground where balsams did not
straggle over it. Molly looked as Daisy did at the possibilities of the
case, looked again at the strange sweet little face which was so busy in
her garden; and then made a sudden movement. With two or three motions
of hands and knees she drew herself a few steps back to one of the
exclusive bunches of balsams, and began with her two hands to root it
up. Actually she was grubbing, might and main, at the ungainly stalks of
the balsams, pulling them up as fast as she could and flinging them
aside, careless where. Daisy came to help with her trowel, and together
they worked, amicably enough but without a word, till the task was done.
A great space was left clear, and Molly threw herself back in her wonted
position for taking observations. Daisy wasted no time. In hopeful
delight she went on to make a hole in the ground in which to sink the
pot of geraniums. It was more of a job than she thought, and she dug
away stoutly with her trowel for a good while before she had an
excavation sufficient to hold the pot. Daisy got it in at last; smoothed
the surface nicely all round it; disposed of the loose soil till the bed
was trim and neat, as far as that was concerned; and then stood up and
spoke. Warm,--how warm she was! her face was all one pink flush, but she
did not feel it, she was so eager.

"There," she said, "that will stand there nicely; and when the cold
weather comes, you can take the pot up and take it into the house, just
as it is; and if you do not let it freeze, it will have flowers for you
in the winter."

"Cold?" said Molly.

"Yes--by and by, when the cold weather comes, this must be taken up. The
cold would kill it, if it was cold enough to freeze. It would have to go
in the house. The rose can stay out all winter if you like; but this
must be kept warm. This is a geranium. And it will give you flowers in
the winter."

"J'anium?" said Molly.

"Yes. This is called the 'Jewess'--there are so many kinds that they
have to be named. This is the 'Jewess' geranium."

"Water?"--said Molly.

"Water? No, this does not need water, because the roots are in a pot,
you know, and have not been disturbed. It will want water if rain don't
come, by and by."

"What's you?" was Molly's next question, given with more directness.

"Me? I am Daisy Randolph. And I love flowers; and you love flowers. May
I come and see you sometimes? Will you let me?"

Molly's grunt this time was not unintelligible. It was queer, but there
was certainly a tone of assent in it. She sat looking now at the
"Jewess" blossoms and now at Daisy.

"And I love Jesus," the child went on. "Do you love him?"

The grunt was of pure question, in answer to this speech. Molly did not
understand. Daisy stooped down to face her on more equal terms.

"There is a great King up in heaven, who loves you, Molly. He loves you
so well that he died for you. And if you love him, he will take you
there when you die and give you a white robe and a crown of gold, and
make you blessed."

It is impossible to describe the simple earnestness of this speech.
Daisy said it, not as a philosopher nor as even a preacher would have
done; she said it as a child. As she had received, she gave. The utter
certainty and sweetness of her faith and love went right from one pair
of eyes to the other. Nevertheless, Molly's answer was only a most
ignorant and blank, "What?"--but it told of interest.

"Yes," said Daisy. "Jesus loved us so well that he came and died for
us--he shed his blood that we might be forgiven our sins. And now he is
a Great King up in heaven; and he knows all we do and all we think; and
if we love him he will make us good and take us to be with him, and give
us white robes and crowns of gold up there. He can do anything, for he
raised up dead people to life, when he was in the world."

That was a master-stroke of Daisy's. Molly's answer was again a grunt of
curiosity; and Daisy, crouching opposite to her, took up her speech and
told her at length and in detail the whole story of Lazarus. And if
Daisy was engaged with her subject, so certainly was Molly. She did not
stir hand or foot; she sat listening movelessly to the story, which came
with such loving truthfulness from the lips of her childish teacher. A
teacher exactly fitted, however, to the scholar; Molly's poor closed-up
mind could best receive any truth in the way a child's mind would offer
it; but in this truth, the undoubting utterance of Daisy's love and
belief won entrance for her words where another utterance might not.
Faith is always catching.

So Daisy told the wonderful story, and displayed the power and love and
tenderness of the Lord with the affection of one who knew him _her_
Lord, and almost with the zeal of an eye-witness of his work. It was
almost to Daisy so; it seemed to her that she had beheld and heard the
things she was telling over; for faith is the substance of things not
seen; and the grief of the sisters, and their joy, and the love and
tenderness of the Lord Jesus, were all to her not less real than they
were to the actors in that far distant drama. Molly heard her
throughout, with open mouth and marvelling eyes.

Neither of them had changed her position, and indeed Daisy had scarce
finished talking, when she heard herself hailed from the road. She
started. Preston was there on horseback, calling to her. Daisy got up
and took up her trowel.

"Good bye," she said, with a little sigh for the lost vision which
Preston's voice had interrupted--"I'll come again, I hope." And she ran
out at the gate.

"It is time for you to go home, Daisy. I thought you did not know how
late it is."

Daisy mounted into her pony chaise silently.

"Have I interrupted something very agreeable?"

"You would not have thought it so," said Daisy diplomatically.

"What were you doing, down there in the dirt?"

"Preston, if you please, I cannot talk to you nicely while you are so
high and I am so low."

Preston was certainly at some height above Daisy, being mounted up in
his saddle on a pretty high horse, while the pony chaise was hung very
near the ground. He had been beside her; but at her last words he
laughed and set off at a good pace in advance, leaving the chaise to
come along in Loupe's manner. Daisy drove contentedly home through the
afternoon sunlight, which laid bands of brightness across her road all
the way home. They seemed bands of joy to Daisy.

Preston had gallopped ahead and was at the door ready to meet her. "What
kept you so long at that dismal place?" he asked as he handed her out of
the chaise.

"You were back very soon from the Fish place, I think," said Daisy.

"Yes--Alexander was not at home; there was no use in my staying. But
what were you doing all that while, Daisy?"

"It was not so very long," said Daisy. "I did not think it was a long
time. You must have deceived yourself."

"But do you not mean to tell me what you were about? What _could_ you
do, at such a place?"

Daisy stood on the piazza, in all the light of the afternoon sunbeams,
looking and feeling puzzled. How much was it worth while to try to tell
Preston of her thoughts and wishes?

"What was the attraction, Daisy? only tell me that. Dirt and ignorance
and rudeness and disorder--and you contented to be in the midst of it!
Down in the dirt! What was the attraction?"

"She is very unhappy, Preston."

"I don't believe it. Nonsense! All that is not misery to such people,
unless you make it so by shewing them something different. Marble tables
are not the thing for them, Daisy."

"Marble tables!" echoed Daisy.

"Nor fuchsias and geraniums either. That old thing's old flowers do just
as well."

Daisy was silent. She could have answered this. Preston went on.

"She won't be any better with her garden full of roses and myrtles, than
she is with her sunflowers now. What do you expect to do, little Daisy?"

"I know what I would like if I were in her place," said Daisy.

"_You_,--but she is not you. She has not your tastes. Do you mean to
carry her a silver cup and fork, Daisy? You would certainly like that,
if you were in her place. Dear little Daisy, don't you be a mad
philosopher."

But Daisy had not been thinking of silver cups and forks, and she was
not misled by this argument.

"Daisy, do you see you have been under a mistake?"

"No, Preston,"--she said looking up at him.

"Daisy, do you think it is _right_ for you to go into houses and among
people where my uncle and aunt do not wish you to go? You know they do
not wish it, though they have given consent perhaps because you were so
set upon it."

Daisy glanced behind her, at the windows of the library; for they were
at the back entrance of the house; and then seizing Preston's hand and
saying, "Come with me," she drew him down the steps and over the grass
till she reached one of the garden seats under the trees, out of hearing
of any one. There they sat down; Preston curious, Daisy serious and even
doubtful.

"Preston"--she began with all her seriousness upon her,--"I wish I had
the book here, but I will tell you. When the Lord Jesus comes again in
glory, and all the angels with him, he will have all the people before
him, and he will separate them into two sets. One will be on the right
and one on the left. One set will be the people that belong to him, and
the other set will be the people that do not belong to him. Then he will
welcome the first set, and bless them, because they have done things to
the poor and miserable such as they would have liked to have done to
themselves. And he will say--'Inasmuch as ye have done it to one of the
least of these, ye have done it unto me.'" Daisy's eyes were full of
water by this time.

"So you are working to gain heaven, Daisy?" said Preston, who did not
know how to answer her.

"O no!" said the child. "I don't mean that."

"Yes, you do."

"No,--that would be doing it for oneself, not for the Lord Jesus"--said
Daisy gravely looking at Preston.

"Then I don't see what you mean by your story."

"I mean only, that Jesus likes to have us do to other people what we
would want in their place."

"Suppose you were in my aunt and uncle's place--do you not think you
would like to have a little daughter regard their wishes?"

Daisy looked distressed.

"I think it is time to go in and get ready for dinner, Preston," she
said.

If she was distressed, Preston was displeased. They went in without any
more words. But Daisy was not perplexed at all. She had not told
Preston her innermost thought and hope--that Molly Skelton might learn
the truth and be one of that blessed throng on the right hand in the
Great Day; but the thought and hope were glowing at her heart; and she
thought she must carry her Master's message, if not positively
forbidden, to all whom she could carry it to. Preston's meditations were
different.

"I have tried my best," he said that evening when Daisy was gone to
bed,--"and I have failed utterly. I tried my best--and all I got was a
rebuke and a sermon."

"A sermon!" said Mrs. Randolph.

"An excellent one, aunt Felicia. It was orderly, serious, and pointed."

"And she went to that place?"

"Yes, ma'am. The sermon was afterwards."

"What do you mean, Preston! Speak intelligibly."

"Daisy did, ma'am. I am speaking sober truth, aunt Felicia."

"What is her motive in going to that horrid place? can you understand?"

"Its disagreeableness, ma'am--so far as I can make out."

"It is very singular," said Mrs. Gary.

"It is very deplorable." said Mrs. Randolph. "So at least it seems to
me. There will be nothing in common soon between Daisy and her family."

"Only that this kind of thing is apt to wear out, my dear. You have that
comfort."

"No comfort at all. You do not know Daisy. She is a persistent child.
She has taken a dose of fanaticism enough to last her for years."

"I am sure nevertheless that Dr. Sandford is right in his advice," said
Mr. Randolph;--"both as a physician and as a philosopher. By far the
best way is not to oppose Daisy, and take as little notice as possible
of her new notions. They will fade out."

"I do not believe it," said the lady "I do not believe it in the least.
If she had not your support, I would have an end of this folly in a
month."

"Indirect ways"--said Mrs. Gary--"indirect ways, my dear; those are your
best chance. Draw off Daisy's attention with other things. That is what
I would do."

And then the ladies put their heads together and concerted a scheme;
Preston joining eagerly in the discussion, and becoming the
manager-in-chief intrusted with its execution. Mr. Randolph heard, but
he gave no help and made no suggestion. He let the ladies alone.




CHAPTER XII.


Daisy came down to breakfast the next morning, looking so very bright
and innocent and fresh, that perhaps Mr. Randolph thought his wife and
sister were taking unnecessary trouble upon themselves. At least Mrs.
Randolph so interpreted his manner, as she saw him put his arm round
Daisy and bend down his head to hers. The gay visitors were still at
Melbourne, but they had not come down yet to breakfast that morning.

"Did you go to see your old woman yesterday?" Mr. Randolph said.

"Yes, papa."

"Did you enjoy your visit?"

"Very much, papa."

Mrs. Randolph's head made a motion of impatience, which however those
two did not see.

"How was that, Daisy? I do not comprehend in this instance the sources
of pleasure."

"Papa"--said Daisy hesitating--"I think I _gave_ pleasure."

She could not explain to him much more, but Mr. Randolph at least
understood that. He gave Daisy another kiss, which was not disapproving,
the child felt. So her breakfast was extremely happy.

She had a new plan in her head now about Molly. She wanted to get
established on the footing of a friend in that poor little house; and
she thought she had better perhaps not confine her line of advance to
the garden. After breakfast she sought the housekeeper's room, and let
Joanna know that she was in want of a nice little cake of some sort to
carry to a poor creature who could make nor buy none. Daisy was a great
favourite with Miss Underwood, especially ever since the night when she
had been summoned in her night dress to tell the child about the words
of the minister that day. Joanna never said "no" to Daisy if it was
possible to say "yes;" nor considered anything a trouble that Daisy
required. On this occasion, she promised that exactly what Daisy wanted
should be in readiness by the afternoon; and having thus secured her
arrangements Daisy went with a perfectly light heart to see what the
morning was to bring forth.

"Daisy!" shouted Preston as she was going down the piazza
steps,--"Daisy! where are you bound?"

"Out--" said Daisy, who was vaguely seeking the September sunshine.

"Well, 'out' is as good as anywhere. Wait till I get my hat. Come,
Daisy!--we have business on hand."

"What business?" said Daisy, as she was led along through the trees.

"Great business," said Preston,--"only I shall want help, Daisy--I want
a great deal of help. I cannot manage it alone. Wait till we get to a
real good place for a talk.--Here, this will do. Now sit down."

"How pretty it is to-day!" said Daisy.

For indeed the river opposite them looked a bright sheet of glass; and
the hills were blue in the morning light, and the sunshine everywhere
was delightsome. The beautiful trees of Melbourne waved overhead;
American elms hung their branches towards the ground; lindens stood in
masses of luxuriance; oaks and chestnuts spotted the rolling ground with
their round heads; and English elms stood up great towers of green. The
September sun on all this and on the well kept greensward; no wonder
Daisy said it was pretty. But Preston was too full of his business.

"Now, Daisy, we have got a great deal to do!"

"Have we?" said Daisy.

"It is this. Aunt Felicia has determined that she will give a party in
two or three weeks."

"A party! But I never have anything to do with parties--mamma's
parties--Preston."

"No. But with this one I think you have."

"How can I?" said Daisy. She was very pleasantly unconcerned as yet, and
only enjoying the morning and Preston and the trees and the sunshine.

"Why, little Daisy, I have got to furnish part of the entertainment; and
I can't do it without you."

Daisy looked now.

"Aunt Felicia wants me to get up some tableaux."

"Some what?" said Daisy.

"Tableaux. Tableaux vivants. Pictures, Daisy; made with living people."

"What do you mean, Preston?"

"Why we will choose some pictures, some of the prettiest pictures we can
find; and then we will dress up people to represent all the figures, and
place them just as the figures are grouped in the engraving; and then
they look like a most beautiful large painted picture."

"But pictures do not move?"

"No more do the people. They hold still and do not stir, any more than
if they were not real."

"I should think they would look like people though, and not like a
picture," said Daisy. "No matter how still you were to keep, I should
never fancy you were painted."

"No," said Preston laughing; "but you do not understand. The room where
the spectators are is darkened, and the lights for the picture are all
set on one side, just as the light comes in the picture; and then it all
looks just right. And the picture is seen behind a frame too, of the
folding doors or something."

Daisy sat looking at Preston, a little curious but not at all excited.

"So I shall want your help, Daisy."

"About what?"

"First, to choose what pictures we will have. We must look over all the
books of engravings in the house, and see what would do. Shall we go at
it?"

Daisy consented. They repaired to the library and took position by a
large portfolio of engravings.

"'Fortitude'! Capital!" cried Preston as he turned over the first sheet
in the portfolio. "Capital, Daisy! That's for you. You would make an
excellent 'Fortitude.'"

"I!--" said Daisy.

"Capital--couldn't be better. This is Sir Joshua Reynolds'
'Fortitude'--and you will do for it wonderfully well. You have half the
look of it now. Only you must be a little more stern."

"Why must Fortitude look stern?" said Daisy.

"O, because she has hard work to do, I suppose."

"What is Fortitude, Preston?"

"O Daisy, Daisy! are you going through life like that? Why you'll turn
all your play into work."

"Why?--But what _is_ it?"

"Fortitude? Why it is, let me see,--it is the power of endurance."

"The power of bearing pain, Daisy," said Mr. Randolph, who was walking
through the room.

"I do not think Fortitude ought to look stern."

"The old gentleman thought so. I suppose he knew. You must,
anyhow,--like the picture."

"But Preston, how could I look like that? My dresses are not made so."

"I hope not!" said Preston laughing. "But Daisy, we'll get some of aunt
Felicia's riggings and feathers and set you out in style."

"But you can't put feathers on my head like those," said Daisy. "They
wouldn't stay on. And I don't see why Fortitude should be dressed in
feathers."

"Why it is the crest of her helmet, Daisy! Fortitude must have something
strong about her, somewhere, and I suppose her head is as good a place
as any. We'll make a helmet for you. And I will make Dolce lie down at
your feet for the lion."

"You couldn't, Preston."

"I could make him do anything." Dolce was Preston's dog; a great shaggy
St. Bernard.

"Well!--" said Daisy with a half sigh.

"I think you'll make a beautiful Fortitude. Now let us see what next.
That is for one."

"How many pictures do you want?" said Daisy.

"O a good many. Plenty, or it wouldn't be worth taking all the trouble,
and shutting the people up in a dark room. 'Alfred in the neat-herd's
cottage'--getting a scolding for his burnt cakes. How splendid that
would be if we could get Dr. Sandford to be Alfred!"

"Who would be that scolding old woman?"

"No matter, because we can't get Dr. Sandford. We are not to have grown
folks at all. It is a pity Ransom is not here. We shall have to get
Alexander Fish--or Hamilton! Hamilton will do. He's a good looking
fellow."

"You would do a great deal better," said Daisy. "And Alexander would not
do at all. He has not a bit the look of a king about him."

"I must be that old man with the bundle of sticks on his head," said
Preston, who was however immensely flattered.

"But his beard?" said Daisy.

"O I'll put that on. A false beard is easy. You won't know me, Daisy.
That will be an excellent picture. See that girl blowing the burnt cakes
and making her face into a full moon!"

"Will you have her in the picture?"

"Certainly! Most assuredly."

"But, who will you get to do that, Preston?"

"Nora Dinwiddie, I reckon."

"Will _she_ come?"

"We shall want all we can get. All Mrs. Stanfield's young ones, and Mrs.
Fish's and Linwood's and everybody. Now Daisy, here you are! This is the
very thing."

"For what?" said Daisy.

"Don't you see? For you. This is Queen Esther before Ahasuerus--you know
the story?"

"O yes!--when he stretched out the golden sceptre to her. She is
fainting, isn't she?"

"Exactly. You can do that glorious, because you have always a pair of
pale cheeks on hand."

"I?"--said Daisy again. "Do you want me to be two things?"

"A dozen things, perhaps. You must be Queen Esther at any rate. Nobody
but you."

"And who will be Ahasuerus?"

"I don't know. Hamilton Rush, I reckon; he's a nice fellow."

"O Preston, why don't you be Ahasuerus?"

"I am manager, you know, Daisy; it won't do for the manager to take the
best pieces for himself. Ahasuerus is one of the best. See how handsome
the dress is--and the attitude, and everything."

"I don't see where you will find the dresses," said Daisy. "All those
are robes of silk and velvet and fur; and then the jewels, Preston!"

"Nonsense, Daisy. Aunt Felicia will let us take all her stores of satins
and velvets and feathers and jewellery too. It won't hurt them to be
looked at."

"I think," said Daisy slowly,--"I think I will not be Queen Esther."

"Why not? don't you like her looks?"

"O yes. _That's_ no matter; but I would rather somebody else would be
it."

"Why, little Daisy? You are the one; nobody can be Esther but you."

"I think I will not," said Daisy thoughtfully.

"What's the matter, Daisy? You _must_. I want you for Esther and nobody
else. What is the objection?"

"I would rather not," said Daisy. "I don't know Hamilton Rush much."

This was said with extreme demureness, and Preston bit his lips almost
till the blood came to prevent the smile which would have startled
Daisy.

"You won't know him at all when he is dressed and with his crown on.
It's all a play. You can imagine he is the real old Persian king, who
looked so fiercely on the beautiful Jewess when she ventured unsummoned
into his presence."

"I could not stand like that," said Daisy.

"Yes, you could. That's easy. You are fainting in the arms of your
attendants."

"Who will the attendants be?"

"I don't know. Who do you think?"

"I think I would rather not be in this picture,--" said Daisy.

"Yes, you will. I want you. It is too good to be given to somebody else.
It is one of the prettiest pictures we shall have, I reckon."

"Then you must be the king."

"Well--we will see," said Preston. "What comes next? 'Canute and his
courtiers.' That won't do, because we could not have the sea in."

"Nor the horse," said Daisy.

"Not very well.--What a stupid collection of portraits! Nothing but
portraits."--

"There are fortune tellers."

"That won't do--not interest enough. There! here's one. 'Little Red
Riding-hood.' That will be beautiful for you, Daisy."

"But Preston, I mustn't be everything."

"Plenty more things coming. You don't like Red Riding-hood? Then we will
give it to Nora or Ella."

"O like it," said Daisy. "I like it much better than Esther--unless you
will play Ahasuerus."

"Well I will put you down for both of 'em."

"But who's to be anything else?"

"Lots. Here.--Splendid! 'Marie Antoinette' going from the revolutionary
tribunal--that will be capital."

"Who will take that?" said Daisy.

"Let me see. I think--I think, Daisy, it must be Theresa Stanfield. She
is a clever girl, and it must be a clever girl to do this."

"But she will not look as old as she ought."

"Yes she will, when she is dressed. I know who will be our dresser, too;
Mrs. Sandford."

"Will she?" said Daisy.

"Yes. She knows how, I know. You and I must go and give invitations,
Daisy."

"Mamma will send the invitations."

"Yes, of course, to the party; but we have got to beat up recruits and
get contributions for the tableaux. You and I must do that. I engaged to
take all the trouble of the thing from aunt Felicia."

"Contributions, Preston?"

"Of people, Daisy. People for the tableaux. We must have all we can
muster."

"I can't see how you will make Theresa Stanfield look like that."

"_I_ cannot," said Preston laughing,--"but Mrs. Sandford will do part
and Theresa herself will do the other part. She will bring her face
round, you will see. The thing is, who will be that ugly old woman who
is looking at the queen with such eyes of coarse fury--I think I shall
have to be that old woman."

"You, Preston!" And Daisy went off into a fit of amusement. "Can you
make your eyes look with coarse fury?"

"You shall see. That's a good part. I should not like to trust it to
anybody else. Alexander and Hamilton Rush will have to be the Queen's
guards--how we want Ransom. Charley Linwood is too small. There's
George, though."

"What does that woman look at the queen so for?"

"Wants to see her head come down--which it did soon after."

"Her head come down?"--

"It had come down pretty well then, when the proud, beautiful queen was
exposed to the looks and insults of the rabble. But they wanted to see
it come down on the scaffold."

"What had she been doing, to make them hate her?"

"She had been a queen;--and they had made up their minds that nobody
ought to be queen, or anything else but rabble; so her head must come
off. A great many other heads came off; for the same reason."

"Preston, I don't think the poor would hate that kind of thing so, if
the rich people behaved right."

"How do you think rich people ought to behave?" said Preston gravely,
turning over the engravings.

Daisy's old puzzle came back on her; she was silent.

"Common people always hate the uncommon, Daisy. Now what next?--Ah! here
is what will do. This is beautiful."

"What is it?"

"Portia and Bassanio. He has just got that letter, you know."

"What letter?"

"Why, Antonio's letter. O don't you know the story? Bassanio was
Antonio's friend, and--O dear, it is a long story, Daisy. You must read
it."

"But what is the picture about?"

"This. Bassanio has just this minute been married to Portia,--the
loveliest lady in all the world; that he knew of; and now comes a
letter, just that minute, telling him that his dear friend Antonio is in
great danger of being cut to pieces through the wickedness of a fellow
that he had borrowed money from. And the money had been borrowed for
Bassanio, to set him up for his courtship--so no wonder he feels rather
bad."

"Does she know?"

"No; she is just asking what is the matter. That will be a capital
picture."

"But you couldn't stand and look like that," said Daisy.

"I shall not," said Preston, "but Hamilton Rush will. I shall give it to
him. And--let me see--for Portia--that Fish girl cannot do it, she is
not clever enough. It will have to be Theresa Stanfield."

"I should like to see anybody look like _that_," said Daisy.

"Well, you will. We shall have to go to another book of
engravings.--Hollo! here you are again, Daisy. This will do for you
exactly. Exactly!"

"What is it?"

"Why Daisy, these are two old Puritans; young ones, I mean, of course;
and they are very fond of each other, you know, but somehow they don't
know it. Or one of them don't, and he has been goose enough to come to
ask Priscilla if she will be his friend's wife. Of course she is
astonished at him."

"She does not look astonished."

"No, that is because she is a Puritan. She takes it all quietly, only
she says she has an objection to be this other man's wife. And then John
finds what a fool he is. That's capital. You shall be Priscilla; you
will do it and look it beautifully."

"I do not think I want to be Priscilla,"--said Daisy slowly.

"Yes, you do. You will. It will make such a beautiful picture. I reckon
Alexander Fish will make a good John Alden--he has nice curly hair."

"So have you," said Daisy; "and longer than Alexander's, and more like
the picture."

"I am manager, Daisy. That wouldn't do."

"I shall not be in that picture if Alexander is the other one," said
Daisy.

"Well--we will see. But Daisy, it is only playing pictures, you know. It
will not be Daisy and Alexander Fish--not at all--it will be Priscilla
and John Alden."

"_I_ should think it was Alexander Fish," said Daisy.

Preston laughed.

"But Preston, what is that word you said just now?--what is a Puritan?"

"I don't know. I think you are one. I do not know another."

"You said these were Puritans?"

"Yes, so they were. They were very good people, Daisy, that liked
wearing plain dresses. We shall have to have a stuff dress made for
you--I reckon you have not one of anything like a Puritan cut."

"Then how am I a Puritan, Preston?"

"Sure enough. I mean that you would be one, if you got a chance. How
many pictures have we chosen out?--Six? That is not half enough."

The search went on, through other books and portfolios. There was good
store of them in Mr. Randolph's library, and Daisy and Preston were very
busy the whole morning till luncheon time. After Daisy's dinner,
however, her mind took up its former subject of interest. She went to
Joanna, and was furnished with a nice little sponge cake and a basket
of sickle pears for Molly Skelton. Daisy forgot all about tableaux. This
was something better. She ordered the pony chaise and got ready for
driving.

"Hollo, Daisy!" said Preston as she came out upon the piazza;--"what
now?"

"I am going out."

"With me."

"No, I have business, Preston."

"So have I; a business that cannot wait, either. We must go and drum up
our people for the tableaux, Daisy. We haven't much time to prepare, and
lots of things to do."

"What?"

"First, arrange about the parts everybody is to take; and then the
dresses, and then practising."

"Practising what, Preston?"

"Why, the pictures! We cannot do them at a dash, all right; we must
drill, until every one knows exactly how to stand and how to look, and
can do it well."

"And must the people come here to practise?"

"Of course. Where the pictures and the dresses are, you know. Aunt
Felicia is to give us her sewing woman for as much time as we want her;
and Mrs. Sandford must be here to see about all that; and we must know
immediately whom we can have, and get them to come. We must go this
afternoon, Daisy."

"Must I?"

"Certainly. You know--or you would know if you were not a Puritan,
little Daisy, that I cannot do the business alone. You are Miss
Randolph."

"Did the Puritans not know much?" inquired Daisy.

"Nothing--about the ways of the world."

Daisy looked at the pony chaise, at the blue hills, at her basket of
pears; and yielding to what seemed necessity, gave up Molly for that
day. She went with Preston, he on horseback, she in her pony chaise, and
a very long afternoon's work they made of it. And they did not get
through the work, either. But by dint of hearing the thing talked over,
and seeing the great interest excited among the young folks, Daisy's
mind grew pretty full of the pictures before the day was ended. It was
so incomprehensible, how Theresa Stanfield could ever bring her merry,
arch face into the grave proud endurance of the deposed French queen; it
was so puzzling to imagine Hamilton Rush, a fine, good-humoured fellow,
something older than Preston, transformed into the grand and awful
figure of Ahasuerus; and Nora was so eager to know what part _she_ could
take; and Mrs. Sandford entered into the scheme with such utter good
nature and evident competence to manage it. Ella Stanfield's eyes grew
very wide open; and Mrs. Fish was full of curiosity, and the Linwoods
were tumultuous.

"We shall have to tame those fellows down," Preston remarked as he and
Daisy rode away from this last place,--"or they will upset everything.
Why cannot people teach people to take things quietly!"

"How much that little one wanted to be Red Riding-hood," said Daisy.

"Yes. Little Malapert!"

"You will let her, won't you?"

"I reckon I won't. You are to be Red Riding-hood--unless,--I don't know;
perhaps that would be a good one to give Nora Dinwiddie. I shall see."

That day was gone. The next day there was a great overhauling, by
Preston and his mother and Daisy, of the stores of finery which Mrs.
Randolph put at their disposal. Mrs. Randolph herself would have nothing
to do with the arrangements; she held aloof from the bustle attending
them; but facilities and materials she gave with unsparing hand. Daisy
was very much amused. Mrs. Gary and Preston had a good deal of
consultation over the finery, having at the same time the engravings
spread out before them. Such stores of satin and lace robes, and velvet
mantles, and fur wrappings and garnishings, and silken scarfs, and
varieties of adornment old and new, were gathered into one room and
displayed, that it almost tired Daisy to look at them. Nevertheless she
was amused. And she was amused still more, when later in the day, after
luncheon, Mrs. Sandford arrived and was taken up into the tiring room,
as Preston called it. Here she examined the pictures and made a careful
survey of the articles with which she must work to produce the desired
effects. Some of the work was easy. There was an old cardinal, of
beautiful red cloth, which doubtless would make up Red Riding-hood with
very little trouble. There were beautiful plumes for Fortitude's head;
and Daisy began to wonder how she would look with their stately grace
waving over her. Mrs. Sandford tried it. She arranged the plume on
Daisy's head; and with a turn or two of a dark cashmere scarf imitated
beautifully the classic folds of the drapery in the picture. Then she
put Daisy in the attitude of the figure; and by that time Daisy felt so
strange that her face was stern and grave enough to need no admonishing.
Preston clapped his hands.

"If you will only look like that, Daisy, in the tableau!"

"Look how?" said Daisy.

"Mrs. Sandford, did you ever see anything so perfect?"

"It is excellent," said that lady.

"If they will all do as well, we shall be encored. But there is no dress
here for Bassanio, Mrs. Sandford."

"You would hardly expect your mother's or your aunt's wardrobe to
furnish that."

"Hardly. But I am sure uncle Randolph's wardrobe would not do any
better. It will have to be made."

"I think I have something at home that will do--something that was used
once for a kindred purpose. I think I can dress Bassanio--as far as the
slashings are concerned. The cap and plume we can manage here--and I
dare say your uncle has some of those old-fashioned long silk hose."

"Did papa ever wear such things?" said Daisy.

"Portia will be easy," said Preston, looking round the room.

"Who is to be Portia?"

"Theresa Stanfield, I believe."

"That will do very well, I should think. She is fair--suppose we dress
her in this purple brocade."

"Was Portia married in purple?" said Preston.

Mrs. Sandford laughed a good deal. "Well"--she said--"white if you like;
but Theresa will look most like Portia if she wears this brocade. I do
not believe white is _de rigueur_ in her case. You know, she went from
the casket scene to the altar. If she was like me, she did not venture
to anticipate good fortune by putting on a bridal dress till she knew
she would want it."

"Perhaps that is correct," said Preston.

"How come you to know so much about the dresses?" said the lady. "That
is commonly supposed to be woman's function."

"I am general manager, Mrs. Sandford, and obliged to act out of
character."

"You seem to understand yourself very well. Priscilla!--we have no dress
for her."

"It will have to be made."

"Yes. Who is there to make it?"

The seamstress was now summoned, and the orders were given for
Priscilla's dress, to be made to fit Daisy. It was very amusing, the
strait-cut brown gown, the plain broad vandyke of white muslin, and
etceteras that Mrs. Sandford insisted on.

"She will look the part extremely well. But are you going to give her
nothing but Fortitude and Prudence, Preston? is Daisy to do nothing
gayer?"

"Yes ma'am--she is to be the queen of the Persian king here--what is his
name? Ahasuerus! She is Esther."

Daisy opened her lips to say no, but Preston got her into his arms and
softly put his hand upon her mouth before she could speak the word. The
action was so coaxing and affectionate, that Daisy stood still, silent,
with his arms round her.

"Queen Esther!" said Mrs. Sandford. "That will tax the utmost of our
resources. Mrs. Randolph will lend us some jewels, I hope, or we cannot
represent that old Eastern court."

"Mrs. Randolph will lend us anything--and everything," said Preston.

"Then we can make a beautiful tableau. I think Esther must be in white."

"Yes ma'am--it will lend to the fainting effect."

"And we must make her brilliant with jewels; and dress her attendants in
colours, so as to set her off; but Esther must be a spot of brilliancy.
Ahasuerus rich and heavy. This will be your finest tableau, if it is
done well."

"Alfred will not be bad," said Preston.

"In another line. Your part will be easy, Daisy--you must have a pair of
strong-armed handmaidens. What do you want Nora for, Preston?"

"Could she be one of them, Mrs. Sandford?"

"Yes,--if she can be impressed with the seriousness of the occasion; but
the maids of the queen ought to be wholly in distress for their
mistress, you know. She could be one of the princes in the tower, very
nicely."

"Yes, capitally," said Preston. "And--Mrs. Sandford--wouldn't she make a
good John Alden?"

"Daisy for Priscilla! Excellent!" said Mrs. Sandford. "If the two could
keep their gravity, which I very much doubt."

"Daisy can keep anything," said Preston. "I will tutor Nora."

"Well, I will help you as much as I can," said the lady, "But, my boy,
this business takes time! I had no notion I had been here so long. I
must run."




CHAPTER XIII.


As she made her escape one way, so did Daisy by another. When Preston
came back from attending Mrs. Sandford to her carriage he could find
nothing of his little co-worker. Daisy was gone.

In all haste and with a little self-reproach for having forgotten it,
she had ordered her pony chaise; and then examined into the condition of
her stores. The sponge cake was somewhat dry; the sickle pears wanted
looking over. Part of them were past ripe. Indeed so many of them, that
Daisy found her basket was no longer properly full, when these were
culled out. She went to Joanna. Miss Underwood, soon made that all right
with some nice late peaches; and Daisy thought with herself that sponge
cake was very good a little dry and would probably not find severe
criticism at Molly's house. She got away without encountering her
cousin, much to her satisfaction.

Molly was not in her garden. That had happened before. Daisy went in,
looked at the flowers, and waited. The rose tree was flourishing; the
geranium was looking splendid; with nothing around either of them that
in the least suited their neighbourhood. So Daisy thought. If all the
other plants--the ragged balsams and "creeping Charley" and the
rest--could have been rooted up, then the geranium, and the rose would
have shewn well together. However, Molly did not doubtless feel this
want of suitability; to her the tall sunflower was no question a
treasure and a beautiful plant. Would Molly come out!

It seemed as if she would not. No stir, and the closed house door
looking forbidding and unhopeful. Daisy waited, and waited, and walked
up and down the bit of a path, from the gate quite to the house door; in
hopes that the sound of her feet upon the walk might be heard within.
Daisy's feet did not make much noise; but however that were, there was
no stir of a sound anywhere else. Daisy was patient; not the less the
afternoon was passing away and pretty far gone already, and it was the
first of October now. The light did not last as long as it did a few
months ago. Daisy was late. She must go soon, if she did not see Molly;
and to go without seeing her was no part of Daisy's plan. Perhaps Molly
was sick. At any rate, the child's footsteps paused at the door of the
poor little house, and her fingers knocked. She had never been inside of
it yet, and what she saw of the outside was not in the least inviting.
The little windows, lined with paper curtains to keep out sunlight and
curious eyes, looked dismal; the weatherboards were unpainted; the
little porch broken. Daisy did not like such things. But she knocked
without a bit of fear or hesitation, notwithstanding all this. She was
charged with work to do; so she felt; it was no matter what she might
meet in the discharge of it. She had her message to carry, and she was
full of compassionate love to the creature whose lot in life was so
unlike her own. Daisy went straight on in her business.

Her knock got no answer, and still got none though, it was repeated and
made more noticeable. Not a sign of an answer. Daisy softly tried the
door then to see if it would open. There was no difficulty in that; she
pushed it gently and gently stepped in.

It looked just like what she expected, though Daisy had not got
accustomed yet to the conditions of such rooms. Just now, she hardly saw
anything but Molly. Her eye wandering over the strange place, was
presently caught by the cripple, sitting crouching in a corner of the
room. It was all miserably desolate. The paper shields kept out the
light of the sunbeams; and though the place was tolerably clean, it had
a close, musty, disagreeable, shut-up smell. But all Daisy thought of at
first was the cripple. She went a little towards her.

"How do you do, Molly?" her little soft voice said. Molly looked glum,
and spoke never a word.

"I have been waiting to see you," Daisy said, advancing a step
nearer--"and you did not come out. I was afraid you were sick."

One of Molly's grunts came here. Daisy could not tell what it meant.

"_Are_ you sick, Molly?"

"It's me and not you"--said the cripple morosely.

"O I am sorry!" said Daisy tenderly. "I want to bring in something for
you--"

She ran away for her basket. Coming back, she left the door open to let
in the sweet air and sun.

"What is the matter with you, Molly?"

The cripple made no answer, not even a grunt; her eyes were fastened on
the basket. Daisy lifted the cover and brought out her cake, wrapped in
paper. As she unwrapped it and came up to Molly, she saw what she had
never seen before that minute,--a smile on the cripple's grum face. It
was not grum now; it was lighted up with a smile, as her eyes dilated
over the cake.

"I'll have some tea!" she said.

Daisy put the cake on the table and delivered a peach into Molly's hand.
But she lifted her hand to the table and laid the peach there.

"I'll have some tea."

"Are you sick, Molly?" said Daisy again; for in spite of this
declaration and in spite of her evident pleasure, Molly did not move.

"I'm aching all through."

"What is the matter?"

"Aching's the matter--rheumatiz. I'll have some tea."

"It's nice and warm out in the sun," Daisy suggested.

"Can't get there," said Molly. "Can't stir. I'm all aches all over."

"How can you get tea, then, Molly? Your fire is quite out."

"Ache and get it--" said the cripple grumly.

Daisy could not stand that. She at first thought of calling her groom to
make a fire; but reflected that would be a hazardous proceeding. Molly
perhaps, and most probably, would not allow it. If she would allow
_her_, it would be a great step gained. Daisy's heart was so fall of
compassion she could not but try. There was a little bit of an iron
stove in the room, and a tea-kettle, small to match, stood upon it; both
cold of course.

"Where is there some wood, Molly?" said Daisy over the stove;--"some
wood and kindling? I'll try if I can make the fire for you, if you will
let me, please."

"In there--" said the cripple pointing.

Daisy looked, and saw nothing but an inner door. Not liking to multiply
questions, for fear of Molly's patience, she ventured to open the door.
There was a sort of shed room, where Daisy found stores of everything
she wanted. Evidently the neighbours provided so far for the poor
creature, who could not provide for herself. Kindling was there in
plenty, and small wood stacked. Daisy got her arms fall and came back to
the stove. By using her eyes carefully she found the matches without
asking anything, and made the fire, slowly but nicely; Molly meanwhile
having reached up for her despised peach was making her teeth meet in it
with no evidence of disapprobation. The fire snapped and kindled and
began immediately to warm up the little stove. Daisy took the kettle and
went into the same lumber shed to look for water. But though an empty
tin pail stood there, the water in it was no more than a spoonful.
Nothing else held any. Daisy looked out. A worn path in the grass
shewed the way to the place where Molly filled her water pail--a, little
basin of a spring at some distance from the house. Daisy followed the
path to the spring, filled her pail and then her kettle, wondering much
how Molly ever could crawl to the place in rainy weather; and then she
came in triumphant and set the tea-kettle on the stove.

"I am very sorry you are sick, Molly," said Daisy anew.

Molly only grunted; but she had finished her peach and sat there licking
her fingers.

"Would you like to see Dr. Sandford? I could tell him."

"No!"--said the poor thing decidedly.

"I'll pray to the Lord Jesus to make you well."

"Humph?"--said Molly, questioning.

"You know, he can do everything. He can make you well; and I hope he
will."

"He won't make me well--" said Molly.

"He will make you happy, if you will pray to him."

"Happy!" said Molly; as if it were a yet more impossible thing.

"O yes. Jesus makes everybody happy that loves him. He makes them good
too, Molly; he forgives all their sins that they have done; and in
heaven he will give them white robes to wear, and they will not do wrong
things nor have any pain any more."

One of Molly's grunts came now; she did not understand this or could not
believe. Daisy looked on, pitiful and very much perplexed.

"Molly, you have a great Friend in heaven," said the child; "don't you
know it? Jesus loves you."

"H--n?"--said Molly again.

"Don't you know what he did, for you and me and everybody?"

Molly's head gave sign of ignorance. So Daisy sat down and told her.
She told her the story at length; she painted the love of the few
disciples, the enmity of the world, the things that infinite tenderness
had done and borne for those who hated goodness and would not obey God.
Molly listened, and Daisy talked; bow, she did not know nor Molly
neither; but the good news was told in that poor little house; the
unspeakable gift was made known. Seeing Molly's fixed eyes and rapt
attention, Daisy went on at length and told all. The cripple's gaze
never stirred all the while, nor stirred when the story came to an end.
She still stared at Daisy. Well she might.

"Now Molly," said the child, "I have got a message for you."

"H--n?" said Molly, more softly.

"It is from the Lord Jesus. It is in his book. It is a message. The
message is, that if you will believe in him and be his child, he will
forgive you and love you; and then you will go to be with him in
heaven."

"Me?" said Molly.

"Yes," said Daisy, nodding her little head with her eyes full of tears.
"Yes, you will. Jesus will take you there, and you will wear a white
robe and a crown of gold, and be with him."

Daisy paused, and Molly looked at her. How much of the truth got fair
entrance into her mind, Daisy could not tell. But after a few minutes of
pause, seeing that Daisy's lips did not open, Molly opened hers and bade
her "Go on."

"I am afraid I haven't time to-day," said Daisy. "I'll bring my book
next time and read you the words. Can you read, Molly?"

"Read? no!"--

Whether Molly knew what reading was, may be questioned.

"Molly," said Daisy lowering her tone in her eagerness,--"would you
like to learn to read yourself?--then, when I am not here, you could see
it all in the book. Wouldn't you like it?"

"Where's books?" said the cripple.

"I will bring the book. And now I must go."

For Daisy knew that a good while had passed; she did not know how long
it was. Before going, however, she went to see about the fire in the
stove. It was burnt down to a few coals; and the kettle was boiling.
Daisy could not leave it so. She fetched more wood and put in, with a
little more kindling; and then, leaving it all right, she was going to
bid Molly good-bye, when she saw that the poor cripple's head had sunk
down on her arms. She looked in that position so forlorn, so lonely and
miserable, that Daisy's heart misgave her. She drew near.

"Molly--" said her sweet little voice, "would you like your tea now? the
water is boiling."

Molly signified that she would.

"Would you like to have me make it?" said Daisy doubtfully, quite afraid
of venturing too far or too fast. But she need not have been afraid.
Molly only pointed with her finger to a wall cupboard and said as
before,--"In there."

The way was clear for Daisy, time or no time. She went to the cupboard.
It was not hard to find the few things which Molly had in constant use.
The tea-pot was there, and a paper of tea. Daisy made the tea, with a
good deal of pleasure and wonder; set it to draw, and brought out
Molly's cup and saucer and plate and knife and spoon. A little sugar she
found too; not much. She put these things on the low table which was
made to fit Molly's condition. She could have it before her as she sat
on the floor.

"I don't see any milk for your tea, Molly."

"Milk? no. It's all gone," said Molly.

"I am sorry. You'll have to take your tea without milk then. Here it is.
I hope it is good."

Daisy poured out a cup, set the sugar beside it, and cut slices of
sponge cake. She was greatly pleased at being allowed to do it. Molly
took it as a very natural thing, and Daisy sat down to enjoy the
occasion a few minutes longer, and also to give such attentions as she
could.

"Won't you have some?" said Molly.

"No, I thank you. Mamma does not let me drink tea, except when I am
sick."

Molly had discharged her conscience, and gave herself now to her own
enjoyment. One cup of tea was a mere circumstance; Daisy filled and
refilled it; Molly swallowed the tea as if cupfuls had been mouthfuls.
It was a subject of question to Daisy whether the poor creature had had
any other meal that day; so eager she was, and so difficult to satisfy
with the sponge cake. Slice after slice; and Daisy cut more, and put a
tiny fresh pinch of tea into the tea-pot, and waited upon her with
inexpressible tenderness and zeal. Molly exhausted the tea-pot and left
but a small remnant of the cake. Daisy was struck with a sudden fear
that she might have been neglected and really want things to eat. How
could she find out?

"Where shall I put this, Molly?" she said, taking the plate with the
morsel of cake. "Where does it go?"

"In there--" said Molly.

"Here?--or here?" touching the two doors of the cupboard.

"'Tother one."

So Daisy opened the other door of the cupboard, just what she wanted to
do. And there she saw indeed some remnants of food, but nothing more
than remnants; a piece of dry bread and a cold muffin, with a small bit
of boiled pork. Daisy took but a glance, and came away. The plate and
cup and saucer she set in their place; bid good-bye to Molly, and ran
out.

Time indeed! The sun was sending long slant bright beams against the
cottage-windows and over the pony chaise, and the groom had got the
pony's head turned for home, evidently under the impression that Daisy
was staying a long time. A little fearful of consequences if she got
home after sundown, Daisy gathered up her reins and signified to Loupe
that he was expected to move with some spirit.

But Daisy was very happy. She was thoroughly at home now with Molly; she
was fairly admitted within the house and welcome there; and already she
had given comfort. She had almost done as Nora said; as near as possible
she had taken tea with Molly. Besides, Daisy had found out what more to
do for her. She thought of that poor cupboard with mixed feelings; not
pity only; for next day she would bring supplies that were really
needed. Some nice bread and butter--Daisy had seen no sign of
butter,--and some meat. Molly needed a friend to look after her wants,
and Daisy now had the freedom of the house and could do it; and joyfully
she resolved that she would do it, so long as her own stay at Melbourne
should be prolonged. What if her getting home late should bring on a
command that would put a stop to all this!

But nobody was on the piazza or in the library when she got home. Daisy
went safely to her own room. There was June all ready to dress her; and
making good speed, that business was finished and Daisy ready to go down
to the dinner-table at the usual time.




CHAPTER XIV.


She was a little afraid of questions at the dinner-table; but it
happened that the older people were interested about some matter of
their own and she was not noticed at all. Except in a quiet way by Mr.
Randolph, who picked out nuts for her; and Daisy took them and thought
joyfully of carrying a testament to Molly's cottage and teaching her to
read it. If she could do but that--Daisy thought she would be happy.

The evening was spent by her and Preston over engravings again. Some new
ones were added to the stock already chosen for tableaux; and Preston
debated with her very eagerly the various questions of characters and
dresses. Daisy did not care how he arranged them, provided she only was
not called upon to be Priscilla to Alexander Fish, or Esther to Hamilton
Rush. "I will not, Preston--" she insisted quietly; and Preston was in
difficulty; for as he truly said, it would not do to give himself all
the best pieces.

The next day, after luncheon, a general conclave assembled, of all the
young people, to determine the respective parts and hold a little
rehearsal by way of beginning. Mrs. Sandford was there too, but no other
grown person was admitted. Preston had certainly a troublesome and
delicate office in his capacity of manager.

"What are you going to give me, Preston?" said Mrs. Stanfield's lively
daughter, Theresa.

"You must be Portia."

"Portia? let me see--O that's lovely! How will you dress me, Mrs.
Sandford? I must be very splendid--I have just been married, and I am
worth any amount of splendour. Who's to be Bassanio?--"

"George Linwood, I think. He must have dark hair, you know."

"What are wigs good for?" said Theresa. "But he has nothing to do but to
hold the letter and throw himself backward--he's surprised, you know,
and people don't stand straight when they are surprised. Only that, and
to look at Portia. I guess he can do it. Once fix him and he'll
stay--that's one thing. How will you dress Portia, Mrs. Sandford? Ah,
let me dress her!"

"Not at all; you must be amenable to authority. Miss Stanfield, like
everybody else."

"But what will you put on her, Mrs. Sandford? The dress is Portia."

"No, by no means; you must look with a very delicate expression, Miss
Theresa. Your face will be the picture."

"My face will depend on my dress, I know. What will it be, Mrs.
Sandford?"

"I will give you a very heavy and rich purple brocade."

"Jewels?"

"Of course. Mrs. Randolph lets us have whatever we want."

"That will do!" said Theresa, clapping her hands softly. "I am made up.
What are you going to do with Frederica?"

"She has a great part. She must be Marie Antoinette going from the
revolutionary tribunal."

"De la Roche's picture!" said Theresa.

"She's not dressed at all"--remarked Frederica coldly looking at the
engraving.

"Marie Antoinette needed no dress, you know," Theresa answered.

"But she isn't handsome there."

"You will be standing for her," said Mrs. Sandford. "The attitude is
very striking, in its proud, indignant impassiveness. You will do that
well. I must dress your hair carefully, but you have just the right hair
and plenty of it."

"Don't she flatter her!" whispered Theresa to Preston;--then aloud,
"How will you make up the rest of the tableau, Preston?"

"I am going to be that old cross-eyed woman--Alexander will be one of
the guards--George Linwood another, I think. Hamilton Rush must shake
his fist at the queen over my head; and Theresa, you must be this nice
little French girl, looking at her unfortunate sovereign with weeping
eyes. Can you get a tear on your cheek?"

"Might take an uncommon strong spoonful of mustard--" said Theresa--"I
suppose that would do it. But you are not going to let the spectators
come so near as to see drops of tears, I hope?"

"No matter--your eyes and whole expression would be affected by the
mustard; it would tell, even at a distance."

When they got through laughing, some one asked, "What is Daisy to be?"

"O, she is to be Priscilla here--I thought nobody but Daisy would care
about being a Puritan; but it is her chosen character."

"It'll be a pretty tableau," said Theresa.

"And what am I to be, Preston?" said Nora.

"You are to be several things. You and Ella must be the two young
princes in the tower."

"What tower?" said Nora.

There was another general laugh, and then Daisy, who was well at home in
English history, pulled her little friend aside to whisper to her the
story and shew her the picture.

"What are those men going to do?" said Nora.

"They are going to kill the little princes. They have got a featherbed
or something there, and they are going to smother them while they are
asleep."

"But I don't want the featherbed on top of me!" said Nora.

"No, no,--it is not to come down on you; but that is the picture; they
will hold it just so; it will not come down."

"But suppose they should let it fall?"

"They will not let it fall. The picture is to have it held just so, as
if they were going to smother the poor little princes the next minute."

"I think it is a horrid picture!" said Nora.

"But it will only last a little while. All you will have to do will be
to make believe you are asleep."

"I don't want to make believe I am asleep. I would rather have my eyes
open. What else am I going to be, Daisy?"

"Preston will tell. I believe--you are to be one of Queen Esther's
women, to hold her up when she fainted, you know."

"Let me see. Where is it?"

Daisy obtained the picture. Nora examined it critically.

"I would like to be the king, he is so handsome. Who will be the queen?"

"I don't know yet," said Daisy.

"Are you going to have any part where you will be dressed up?"

"We shall have to be dressed for them all. We cannot wear our own
dresses, you know; it would not be a picture."

"But, I mean, are you going to be dressed up with nice things?--not like
this."

"This will be dressed up," said Daisy; "she will be very nicely
dressed--to be one of the queen's ladies, you know."

"Daisy! Daisy!--" was now called from the larger group of
counsel-takers, Daisy and Nora having separated themselves for their
private discourse. "Daisy! look here--come here! see what you are to be.
You are to be an angel."

"You are to be an angel, Daisy," Theresa repeated,--"with wonderful
wings made of gauze on a light frame of whalebone."

Daisy came near, looking very attentive; if she felt any more she did
not shew it in her face.

"Daisy, you will do it delightfully," said Mrs. Sandford. "Come and
look. It is this beautiful picture of the Game of Life."

"What is it, ma'am?" said Daisy.

"These two figures, you see, are playing a game of chess. The stake they
are playing for, is this young man's soul; he is one of the players, and
this other player is the evil one. The arch-fiend thinks he has got a
good move; the young man is very serious but perplexed; and there stands
his guardian angel watching how the game will go."

Daisy looked at the picture in silence of astonishment. It seemed to her
impossible that anybody could play at such a subject as that.

"Whom will you have for the fiend, Preston?" the lady went on.

"I will do it myself, ma'am, I think."

Daisy's "Oh no, Preston!"--brought down such a shower of laughter on all
sides, that she retreated into herself a little further than ever. They
pursued the subject for a while, discussing the parts and the making of
the angel's wings; deciding that Daisy would do excellently well for the
angel and would look the part remarkably.

"She has a good deal that sort of expression in ordinary times," said
Mrs. Sandford--"without the sadness; and that she can assume, I day
say."

"I would rather not do it--" Daisy was heard to say very gently but very
soberly. There was another laugh.

"Do what, Daisy? assume a look of sadness?" said Preston.

"I would rather not be the angel."

"Nobody else could do it so well," said Mrs. Sandford. "You are the very
one to do it. It will be admirable."

"_I_ should like to be the angel--" murmured Nora, low enough to have no
one's attention but Daisy's. The rest were agreeing that the picture
would be excellent and had just the right performers assigned to it.
Daisy was puzzled. It seemed to her that Nora had a general desire for
everything.

"Ella will be one of the princes in the tower," Preston went on. "Nora
will be Red Riding-Hood."

"I won't be Red Riding Hood--" said Nora.

"Why not? Hoity, toity!"

"It isn't pretty. And it has no pretty dress."

"Why, it is beautiful," said Mrs. Sandford; "and the dress is to be made
with an exquisite red cashmere cardinal of Mrs. Randolph's. You will
make the best Red Riding-Hood here. Though Daisy would be more like the
lamb the wolf was after,"--continued the lady appealing to the manager;
"and you might change. Who is to be queen Esther? Nora would do that
well--with her black eyes and hair--she is more of a Jewess than any
other of them."

"Esther is fainting," said Preston. "Daisy's paleness will suit that
best. Nora could not look faint."

"Yes, I could," said that damsel promptly.

"You shall blow the cakes that Alfred has let burn," said Preston.
"Capital! Look here, Nora. You shall be that girl taking up the burnt
cakes and blowing to cool them; and you may look as fierce as you like.
You will get great applause if you do that part well. Eloise is going
to be the scolding old woman. She and I divide the old women between
us."

"Too bad, Preston!" said Mrs. Sandford laughing. "What else are you
going to be?"

"I am going to be one of those fellows coming to murder the little
princes."

"Who is Bassanio?"

"Hamilton says he will undertake that. George declines."

"Suppose we do some work, instead of so much talking," said the former
person; who had hitherto been a very quiet spectator and listener. "Let
us have a little practice. We shall want a good deal before we get
through."

All agreed; agreed also that something in the shape of artistic
draperies was needed for the practice. "It helps"--as Hamilton Rush
remarked. So Daisy went to desire the attendance of June with all the
scarfs, mantles and shawls which, could be gathered together. As Daisy
went, she thought that she did not wish Nora to be queen Esther; she was
glad Preston was firm about that.

The practising of Bassanio and Portia was so very amusing that she
fairly forgot herself in laughter. So did everybody else; except Mrs.
Sandford, who was intent upon draperies, and Preston whose hands held a
burden of responsibility. Hamilton was a quiet fellow enough in
ordinary; but now nobody was more ready for all the life of the play. He
threw himself back into an attitude of irresolution and perplexity, with
the letter in his hand which had brought the fatal news; that is, it was
the make-believe letter, though it was in reality only the New York
Evening Post. And Daisy thought his attitude was very absurd; but they
all declared it was admirable and exactly copied from the engraving. He
threw himself into all this in a moment, and was Bassanio at once; but
Theresa was much too well disposed to laugh to imitate his example. And
then they all laughed at Theresa, who instead of looking grave and
inquiring, as Portia should, at her lord's unusual action and
appearance, flung herself into position and out of position with a
mirthfulness of behaviour wholly inconsistent with the character she was
to personify. How they all laughed!

"What is it, Daisy?" whispered Nora.

"Why, he has got a letter,"--said Daisy.

"Is that newspaper the letter?"

"Make believe it is," said Daisy.

"But what are they doing!"

"Why, this man, Bassanio, has just got a letter that says his dearest
friend is going to be killed, because he owes money that he cannot pay;
and as the money was borrowed for his own sake, of course he feels very
badly about it."

"But people are not killed because they cannot pay money," said Nora. "I
have seen people come to papa for money, and they didn't do anything to
him because he hadn't it."

"No, but--those were different times," said Daisy--"and Bassanio lived
in a different country. His friend owed money to a dreadful man, who was
going to cut out two pounds of his flesh to pay for it. So of course
that would kill him."

"O, look at Theresa now!" said Nora.

The young lady had brought her muscles into order; and being clever
enough in her merry way, she had taken the look of the character and was
giving it admirably. It was hardly Theresa; her moveable face was
composed to such an expression of simple inquiry and interest and
affectionate concern. The spectators applauded eagerly; but Nora
whispered,

"What does she look like that, for?"

"Why, it's the picture," said Daisy. "But what does she _look_ so for?"

"She is Bassanio's wife--they have just got married; and she looks so
because he looks so, I suppose. She does not know what is in the
letter."

"Is he going to tell her?"

"Not in the picture--" said Daisy, feeling a little amused at Nora's
simplicity. "He did tell her in the story."

"But why don't we have all the story?" insisted Nora.

"O, these are only pictures, you know; that is all; people dressed up to
look like pictures."

"They don't look like pictures a bit, _I_ think," said Nora; "they look
just like people."

Daisy thought so too, but had some faith in Preston's and Mrs.
Sandford's powers of transforming and mystifying the present very
natural appearance of the performers. However, she was beginning to be
of the opinion that it was good fun even now.

"Now, Daisy,--come, we must practise putting _you_ in position," said
Mrs. Sandford. "We will take something easy first--what shall it
be?--Come! we will try Priscilla's courtship. Where is your John Alden,
Preston?"

Preston quietly moved forward Alexander Fish and seated him. Daisy began
to grow warm with trepidation.

"You must let your hair grow, Sandie--and comb out your long curls into
your neck; so,--do you see? And you will have to have a dress as much as
Priscilla. This tableau will be all in the dress, Mrs. Sandford."

"We will have it. That is easy."

"Now, Alexander, look here, at the picture. Take that attitude as nearly
as you can, and I will stroke you into order.--That is pretty
well,--lean over a little more with that elbow on your knee,--you must
be very much in earnest."

"What am I doing?" said Alexander, breaking from his prescribed
attitude to turn round and face the company.

"You are making love to Priscilla; but the joke is, you have been
persuaded to do it for somebody else, when all the time you would like
to do it for yourself."

"I wouldn't be such a gumph as that!" muttered Alexander as he fell back
into position. "Who am I, to begin with?"

"A highly respectable old Puritan. The lady was surprised at him and he
came to his senses, but that is not in the picture. Now Daisy--take that
chair--a little nearer;--you are to have your hand on your spinning
wheel, you know; I have got a dear little old spinning wheel at home for
you, that was used by my grandmother. You must look at Alexander a
little severely, for he is doing what you did not expect of him, and you
think he ought to know better. That attitude is very good. But you must
look at him, Daisy! Don't let your eyes go down."

There was a decided disposition to laugh among the company looking on,
which might have been fatal to the Puritan picture had not Preston and
Mrs. Sandford energetically crushed it. Happily Daisy was too much
occupied with the difficulty of her own immediate situation to discover
how the bystanders were affected; she did not know what was the effect
of her pink little cheeks and very demure down-cast eyes. In fact Daisy
had gone to take her place in the picture with something scarcely less
than horror; only induced to do it, by her greater horror of making a
fuss and so shewing the feeling which she knew would be laughed at if
shewn. She shewed it now, poor child; how could she help it? she shewed
it by her unusually tinged cheeks and by her persistent down-looking
eyes. It was very difficult indeed to help it; for if she ventured to
look at Alexander she caught impertinent little winks,--most unlike John
Alden or any Puritan,--which he could execute with impunity because his
face was mostly turned from the audience; but which Daisy took in full.

"Lift your eyes, Daisy! your eyes! Priscilla was too much astonished not
to look at her lover. You may be even a little indignant, if you choose.
I am certain she was."

Poor Daisy--it was a piece of the fortitude that belonged to her--thus
urged, did raise her eyes and bent upon her winking coadjutor a look so
severe in its childish distaste and disapproval that there was a
unanimous shout of applause. "Capital, Daisy!--capital!" cried Preston.
"If you only look it like that, we shall do admirably. It will be a
tableau indeed. There, get up--you shall not practise any more just
now."

"It will be very fine," said Mrs. Sandford.

"Daisy, I did not think you were such an actress," said Theresa.

"It would have overset _me_, if I had been John Alden--" remarked
Hamilton Rush.

Daisy withdrew into the background as fast as possible, and as far as
possible from Alexander.

"Do you like to do it, Daisy?" whispered Nora.

"No."

"Are you going to have a handsome dress for that?"

"No."

"What sort, then?"

"Like the picture."

"Well--what is that?"

"Brown, with a white vandyke."

"Vandyke? what is a vandyke?"

"Hush," said Daisy; "let us look."

Frederica Fish was to personify Lady Jane Grey, at the moment when the
nobles of her family and party knelt before her to offer her the crown.
As Frederica was a fair, handsome girl, without much animation, this
part suited her; she had only to be dressed and sit still. Mrs. Sandford
threw some rich draperies round her figure, and twisted a silk scarf
about the back of her head; and the children exclaimed at the effect
produced. That was to be a rich picture, for of course the kneeling
nobles were to be in costly and picturesque attire; and a crown was to
be borne on a cushion before them. A book did duty for it just now, on a
couch pillow.

"That is what I should like--" said Nora. "I want to be dressed and look
so."

"You will be dressed to be one of the queen's women in Esther and
Ahasuerus, you know."

"But the queen will be dressed more--won't she?"

"Yes, I suppose she will."

"I should like to be the queen; that is what I should like to be."

Daisy made no answer. She thought she would rather Nora should _not_ be
the queen.

"Doesn't she look beautiful?" Nora went on, referring again to
Frederica.

Which Frederica did. The tableau was quite pretty, even partially
dressed and in this off hand way as it was.

Next Mrs. Sandford insisted on dressing Daisy as Fortitude. She had seen
perhaps a little of the child's discomposure, and wished to make her
forget it. In this tableau Daisy would be quite alone; so she was not
displeased to let the lady do what she chose with her. She stood
patiently, while Mrs. Sandford wound a long shawl skilfully around her,
bringing it into beautiful folds like those in Sir Joshua Reynolds'
painting; then she put a boy's cap, turned the wrong way, on her head,
to do duty for a helmet, and fixed a nodding plume of feathers in it.
Daisy then was placed in the attitude of the picture, and the whole
little assembly shouted with delight.

"It will do, Mrs. Sandford," said Preston.

"Isn't it pretty?" said the lady.

"And Daisy does it admirably," said Theresa. "You are a fairy at
dressing, Mrs. Sandford; your fingers are better than a fairy's wand. I
wish you were my godmother; I shouldn't despair to ride yet in a coach
and six. There are plenty of pumpkins in a field near our house--and
plenty of rats in the house itself. O, Mrs. Sandford! let us have
Cinderella!"

"What, for a tableau?"

"Yes, ma'am."

"You must ask the manager. I do not know anything about that."

Preston and Theresa and Hamilton and Alexander now went into an eager
discussion of this question, and before it was settled the party
discovered that it was time to break up.




CHAPTER XV.


"Well Daisy," said Mr. Randolph that evening, "how do you like your new
play that you are all so busy about?"

"I like it pretty well, papa."

"Only pretty well! Is that the most you can say of it? I understood that
it was supposed to be an amusement of a much more positive character."

"Papa, it is amusing--but it has its disagreeablenesses."

"Has it? What can they be? Or has everything pleasant its dark side?"

"I don't know, papa."

"What makes the shadows in this instance?"

It seemed not just easy for Daisy to tell, for her father saw that she
looked puzzled how to answer.

"Papa, I think it is because people do not behave perfectly well."

It was quite impossible for Mr. Randolph to help bursting into a laugh
at this; but he put his arms round Daisy and kissed her very
affectionately at the same time.

"How does their ill behaviour affect your pleasure, Daisy?"

"Papa--you know I have to play with them."

"Yes, I understand that. What do they do?"

"It isn't _they_, papa. It is only Alexander Fish--or at least it is he
most."

"What does _he_ do?"

"Papa--we are in a tableau together."

"Yes. You and he?"

"Yes, papa. And it is very disagreeable."

"Pray how, Daisy?" said Mr. Randolph, commanding his features with some
difficulty. "What is the tableau?"

"Papa, you know the story of Priscilla?"

"I do not think I do. What Priscilla?"

"Priscilla and John Alden. It is in a book of engravings."

"O!--the courtship of Miles Standish?"

"Miles Standish was his friend, papa."

"Yes, I know now. And are you Priscilla?"

"Yes, papa."

"And who is Miles Standish?"

"O, nobody; he is not in the picture; it is John Alden."

"I think I remember. Who is John Alden, then?"

"Papa, they have put Alexander Fish in, because he has long curling
hair; but I think Preston's hair would do a great deal better."

"Preston is under some obligation to the others, I suppose, because he
is manager. But how does Alexander Fish abuse his privileges?"

"Papa," said Daisy unwillingly,--"his face is turned away from the other
people, so that nobody can see it but me;--and he winks."

Daisy brought out the last word with an accession of gravity impossible
fully to describe. Mr. Randolph's mouth twitched; he bent his head down
upon Daisy's, that she might not see it.

"That is very rude of him, Daisy," he said.

"Papa," said Daisy, who did not relish the subject, and chose a
departure,--"what is a _Puritan_?"

"A Puritan!"

"Yes, papa. What is it? Priscilla was a Puritan."

"That was a name given to a class of people in England a long time ago."

"What did it mean?"

"They were a stiff set of people, Daisy; good enough people in their
way, no doubt, but very absurd in it also."

"What did they do, papa?"

"Concluded to do without whatever is graceful and beautiful and
pleasant, in dress or arts or manners. The more disagreeable they made
life, they thought it was the better."

"Why were they called that name? Were they purer than other people?"

"I believe they thought themselves so."

"I think they look nice in the picture," said Daisy meditatively. "Are
there any Puritans now, papa?"

"There are people that are called Puritans. It is a term apt to be
applied to people that are stiff in their religion."

"Papa," said Daisy when an interval of five minutes had passed,--"I do
not see how people can be stiff in their religion."

"Don't you. Why not?"

"Papa, I do not see how it can be _stiff_, to love God and do what he
says."

"No--" said Mr. Randolph; "but people can be stiff in ways of their own
devising."

"Ways that are not in the Bible, papa?"

"Well--yes."

"But papa, it cannot be _stiff_, to do what God says we must do?"

"No,--of course not," said Mr. Randolph getting up.

He left her, and Daisy sat meditating; then with a glad heart ran off
and ordered her pony chaise. If tableaux were to be the order of the day
every afternoon, she must go to see Molly in the morning. This time she
had a good deal to carry and to get ready. Molly was in want of bread.
A nice little loaf, fresh baked, was supplied by Joanna, along with some
cold rolls.

"She will like those, I dare say," said Daisy. "I dare say she never saw
rolls in her life before. Now she wants some meat, Joanna. There was
nothing but a little end of cold pork on the dish in her cupboard."

"Why I wonder who cooks for the poor wretch?" said Joanna.

"I think she cooks for herself, because she has a stove, and I saw iron
things and pots to cook with. But she can't do much, Joanna, and I don't
believe she knows how."

"Sick, is she too?" said Joanna.

"Sick with rheumatism, so that she did not like to stir."

"I guess I must go take a look at her; but maybe she mightn't let me.
Well, Miss Daisy, the way will be for you to tell me what she wants, if
you can find out. She must have neighbours, though, that take care of
her."

"We are her neighbours," said Daisy.

Joanna looked, a look of great complacency and some wonder, at the
child; and packed forthwith into Daisy's basket the half of a cold
chicken and a broken peach pie. A bottle of milk Daisy particularly
desired, and a little butter; and she set off at last, happier than a
queen--Esther or any other--to go to Molly with her supplies.

She found not much improvement in the state of affairs. Molly was
gathered up on her hearth near the stove, in which she had made a fire;
but it did not appear, for all that Daisy could see, that anything else
had been done or any breakfast eaten that morning. The cripple seemed to
be in a down-hearted and hopeless state of mind; and no great wonder.

"Molly, would you like another cup of tea?" said her little friend.

"Yes, it's in there. You fix it,"--said the poor woman, pointing as
before to the cupboard, and evidently comforted by Daisy's presence and
proposal. Daisy could hear it in the tone of her voice. So, greatly
pleased herself, Daisy went to work in Molly's house just as if she was
at home. She fetched water in the kettle again and made up the fire.
While that was getting ready, she set the table for breakfast. The only
table that Molly could use was a piece of board nailed on a chair. On
this Daisy put her plate and cup and saucer, and with secret glee
arranged the cold chicken and loaf of bread. For the cupboard, as she
saw, was as empty as she had found it two days before. What Molly had
lived on in the mean time was simply a mystery to Daisy. To be sure, the
end of cold pork was gone, the remains of the cake had disappeared, and
nothing was left of the peaches but the stones. The tea-kettle did not
boil for a time; and Daisy looked uneasily at Molly's cup and saucer and
plate meanwhile. They had not been washed, Daisy could not guess for how
long; certainly no water had touched them since the tea of two nights
ago, for the cake crumbs and peach stones told the tale. Daisy looked at
them with a great feeling of discomfort. She could not bear to see them
so; they ought to be washed; but Daisy disliked the idea of touching
them for that purpose more than I can make you understand. In all
matters of nicety and cleanliness Daisy was notional; nothing suited her
but the most fastidious particularity. It had been a trial to her to
bring those unwashed things from the cupboard. Now she sat and looked at
them; uneasily debating what she should do. It was not comfortable, that
Molly should take her breakfast off them as they were; and Molly was
miserable herself and would do nothing to mend matters. And
then--"Whatsoever ye would that men should do to you,"--As soon as that
came fairly into Daisy's head, she knew what she ought to be about. Not
without an inward sigh, she gathered up the pieces again.

"What you going to do?" said Molly.

"I'll bring them back," said Daisy. "I will be ready directly. The water
is not boiling yet."

For she saw that Molly was jealously eager for the hoped-for cup of tea.
She carried the things out into the shed, and there looked in vain for
any dish or vessel to wash them in. How could it be that Molly managed?
Daisy was fain to fetch a little bowl of water and wash the crockery
with her fingers, and then fetch another bowl of water to rinse it.
There was no napkin to be seen. She left the things to drain as they
could, and went to the spring to wash her own fingers; rejoicing in the
purifying properties of the sweet element. All this took some time, but
Daisy carried in her clean dishes with a satisfied heart.

"It's bi'lin',--" said Molly as soon as she entered.

So the little kettle was. Daisy made tea, and prepared Molly's table
with a little piece of butter and the bottle of milk. And no little girl
making an entertainment for herself with tiny china cups and tea-set,
ever had such satisfaction in it. Twenty dinners at home could not have
given Daisy so much pleasure, as she had now to see the poor cripple
look at her unwonted luxuries and then to see her taste them. Yet Molly
said almost nothing; but the grunt of new expression with which she set
down the bottle of milk the first time, went all through and through
Daisy's heart with delight. Molly drank tea and spread her bread with
butter, and Daisy noticed her turning over her slice of bread to examine
the texture of it; and a quieter, soothed, less miserable look, spread
itself over her wrinkled features. They were not wrinkled with age; yet
it was a lined and seamed face generally, from the working of unhappy
and morose feelings.

"Ain't it good!--" was Molly's single word of comment as she finished
her meal. Then she sat back and watched Daisy putting all the things
nicely away. She looked hard at her.

"What you fetch them things here for?" she broke out suddenly. "H--n?"

The grunt with which her question concluded was so earnest in its demand
of an answer, that Daisy stopped.

"Why I like to do it, Molly," she said. Then seeing the intent eyes with
which the poor creature was examining her, Daisy added,--"I like to do
it; because Jesus loves you."

"H--n?"--said Molly, very much at a loss what this might mean, and very
eager to know. Daisy stood still, with the bread in her hands.

"Don't you know, Molly?" she said. "He does. It is Jesus, that I told
you about. He loves you, and he came and died for you, that he might
make you good and save you from your sins; and he loves you now, up in
heaven."

"What's that?" said Molly.

"Heaven? that is where God lives, and the angels, and good people."

"There ain't none," said Molly.

"What?"

"There ain't no good people."

"O yes, there are. When they are washed in Jesus' blood, then they are
good. He will take away all their sins."

Molly was silent for a moment and Daisy resumed her work of putting
things away; but as she took the peach pie in her hands Molly burst out
again.

"What you bring them things here for?"

Daisy stopped again.

"I think it is because Jesus is my king," she said, "and I love him. And
I love what he loves, and so I love you, Molly."

Daisy looked very childish and very wise, as she said this; but over
Molly's face there came a great softening change. The wrinkles seemed to
disappear; she gazed at Daisy steadily as if trying to find out what it
all meant: and when the eyes presently were cast down, Daisy almost
thought there was a little moisture about them. She had no further
interruption in her work. The dishes were all put away, and then she
brought her book. Daisy had her Bible with her this time, that she might
give Molly more than her own words. And Molly she found as ready to
listen as could be desired. And she was persistent in desiring to hear
only of that incredible Friend of whom Daisy had told her. That name she
wanted; wherever that name came in, Molly sat silent and attentive; if
the narrative lost it, she immediately quickened Daisy's memory to the
knowledge of the fact that nothing else would do. At last Daisy proposed
that Molly herself should learn to read. Molly stared very hopelessly at
first; but after getting more accustomed to the idea and hearing from
Daisy that it was by no means an impossible thing, and further that if
she could learn to read, the Bible would be forthcoming for her own use,
she took up the notion with an eagerness far exceeding all that Daisy
had hoped for. She said very little about it; nevertheless it was plain
that a root of hope had struck down into the creature's heart. Daisy
taught her two letters, A and B, and then was obliged to go home.

It was quite time, for little Daisy was tired. She was not accustomed to
making fires and boiling kettles, neither to setting tables and washing
dishes. Yet it was not merely, nor so much, the bodily exertion she had
made, as the mind work. The excitement both of pleasure and
responsibility and eager desire. Altogether, Daisy was tired; and sat
back in her chaise letting the reins hang languidly in her hands and
Loupe go how he would. But Loupe judged it was best to get home and have
some refreshment, so he bestirred himself. Daisy had time to lie down a
little while before her dinner; nevertheless she was languid and pale,
and disposed to take all the rest of the day very quietly.

The rest of the day was of course devoted to the tableaux. The little
company had got warmed to the subject pretty well at the first meeting;
they all came together this fine afternoon with spirits in tone for
business. And Daisy, though she was tired, presently found her own
interest drawn in. She was not called upon immediately to take any
active part; she perched herself in the corner of a couch and looked on
and listened. Thither came Nora Dinwiddie, too much excited to sit down,
and stood by Daisy's elbow. They had been practising "Alfred in the
neat-herd's cottage;" Nora had been called upon to be the girl blowing
the burnt cakes; she had done it, and everybody had laughed, but the
little lady was not pleased.

"I know I look horrid!" she said to Daisy,--"puffing out my cheeks till
they are like a pair of soapbubbles!"

"But soapbubbles are not that colour," said Daisy. "Your cheeks didn't
look like soapbubbles."

"Yes, they did. They looked horrid, I know."

"But the picture is so," urged Daisy quietly. "You want to be like the
picture."

"No I don't. Not that picture. I would like to be something handsome. I
don't like that picture."

Daisy was silent, and Nora pouted.

"What are you going to be, Daisy?" said Ella Stanfield.

"I am going to be Priscilla. No, I don't know whether I am or not; but I
am going to be Fortitude, I believe."

"That's pretty," said Ella. "What else? O, you are going to be the
angel, aren't you? I wonder if that will be pretty. It will be queer.
Nora, shall you like to be one of the little princes in the Tower? with
that featherbed coming over us? But we shall not see it, I suppose,
because our eyes have got to be shut; but I shall be afraid every minute
they will let it fall on us."

"My eyes won't be shut," said Nora.

"O, they must. You know, the little princes were asleep, when the men
came to kill them. Your eyes must be shut and you must be asleep. O,
what are they doing to Theresa?"

"Dressing her--" said Daisy.

"What is she going to be?"

"Portia--" said Daisy.

"Isn't that beautiful!--" said Nora with a deep breath. "O, what a
splen--did dress! How rich-looking it is. What a lovely purple. O, how
beautiful Theresa is in it. O--! Isn't that splen--did?"

A very prolonged, though low, breath of admiring wonder testified to the
impressive power, upon the children at least, of Theresa's new
habiliments. The purple brocade was upon her; its full draperies swept
the ground in gorgeous colouring; a necklace of cameos was bound with
great effect upon her hair; and on the arms, which were half bare, Mrs.
Sandford was clasping gold and glittering jewels. Theresa threw herself
slightly back in her prescribed attitude, laid her arms lightly across
each other, and turned her head with a very saucy air towards the
companion figure, supposed to be Bassanio. All the others laughed and
clapped her.

"Not that, Theresa, not that; you have got the wrong picture. You are
going with the Prince of Arragon now, to the caskets; and you ought to
be anxiously asking Bassanio about his letter."

Theresa changed attitude and expression on the instant; bent slightly
forward, lost her sauciness, and laid her hand upon Bassanio's arm with
a grave, tender look of inquiry. They all shouted again.

"Bravo, Theresa! capital!" said Preston.

"Hamilton, can you act up to that?" said Mrs. Sandford.

"Wait till I get my robes on, ma'am. I can make believe a great deal
easier when I am under the persuasion that it is not me--Hamilton Rush."

"I'd like to see Frederica do as well as that," said Alexander Fish, in
a fit of brotherly concern.

"Let us try her--" said good-natured Mrs. Sandford. Mrs. Sandford
certainly was good-natured, for she had all the dressing to do. She did
it well, and very patiently.

"There," said Nora, when Ella had left the couch to go to her
sister,--"that is what I like. Didn't she look beautiful, Daisy?"

"Her dress looked beautiful--" said Daisy.

"Well, of course; and that made _her_ look beautiful. Daisy, I wish I
could have a nice part. I would like to be the queen in that fainting
picture."

"You are going to be in that picture."

"But, I mean, I would like to be the queen. She will have the best
dress, won't she?"

"I suppose she will be the most dressed," said Daisy.

"I don't want to be one of the women--I want to be the queen. Hamilton
Rush said I would be the best one for it, because she was a Jewess; and
I am the only one that has got black eyes and hair."

"But her eyes will not be seen," said Daisy. "She is fainting. When
people faint, they keep their eyes shut."

"Yes, but I am the only one that has got black hair. That will shew. Her
hair ought to be black."

"Why will not other hair do just as well?" said Daisy.

"Why, because she was a Jewess."

"Do Jewesses always have black hair?"

"Of course they _ought_ to have black hair," said Nora; "or Hamilton
Rush would not have said that. And my hair is black."

Daisy was silent. She said nothing to this proposition. The children
were both silenced for a little while the practising for "Marie
Antoinette" was going on. The principal part in this was taken by
Frederica, who was the beauty of the company. A few touches of Mrs.
Sandford's skilful hands transformed her appearance wonderfully. She put
on an old-fashioned straight gown, which hung in limp folds around her;
and Mrs. Sandford arranged a white handkerchief over her breast, tying
it in the very same careless loose knot represented in the picture; but
her management of Frederica's hair was the best thing. Its soft fair
luxuriance was, no one could tell how, made to assume the half dressed,
half undressed air of the head in Delaroche's picture; and Frederica
looked the part well.

"She should throw her head a little more back,"--whispered Hamilton Rush
to the manager;--"her head or her shoulders. She is not quite indignant
enough."

"That handkerchief in her hand is not right--" said Preston in a
responding whisper. "You see to it--while I get into disguise."

"That handkerchief, Mrs. Sandford--" Hamilton, said softly.

"Yes. Frederica, your hand with the pocket-handkerchief,--it is not
quite the thing."

"Why not?"

"You hold it like a New York lady."

"How _should_ I hold it?"

"Like a French queen, whose Austrian fingers may hold anything any way."
This was Hamilton's dictum.

"But how _do_ I hold it?"

"You have picked it up in the middle, and shew all the flower work in
the corners."

"You hold it too daintily, Frederica," said Theresa. "You must grasp
it--grasp it loosely--but as the distinguished critic who has last
spoken has observed."

Frederica dropped her handkerchief, and picked it up again exactly as
she had it before.

"Try again--" said Mrs. Sandford. "Grasp it, as Theresa says. Never mind
how you are taking it up."

"Must I throw it down again?"

"If you please."

"Take it up any way but in the middle," said Hamilton.

Down went the handkerchief on a chair, and then Frederica's fingers took
it up, delicately, and with a little shake displayed as before what
Hamilton called the flowers in the corners. It was the same thing. They
all smiled.

"She can't hold a handkerchief any but the one way--I don't believe,"
said her brother Alexander.

"Isn't it right?" said Frederica.

"Perfect, I presume, for Madison Square or Fifth Avenue--but not exactly
for a revolutionary tribunal," said Hamilton.

"What is the difference?"

"Ah, that is exactly what it is so hard to get at. Hello! Preston--is it
Preston? Can't be better, Preston. Admirable! admirable!"

"Well, Preston, I do not know you!" said Mrs. Sandford.

Was it Preston? Daisy could hardly believe her ears. Her eyes
certainly-told her another story. Was it Preston? in the guise and with
the face of an extremely ugly old woman--vicious and malignant,--who
taking post near the deposed queen, peered into her face with spiteful
curiosity and exultation. Not a trace of likeness to Preston could Daisy
see. She half rose up to look at him in her astonishment. But the voice
soon declared that it was no other than her cousin.

"Come,"--said he, while they were all shouting,--"fall in. You
Hamilton,--and Theresa,--come and take your positions."

Hamilton, with a glance at the picture, went behind Preston; and putting
on a savage expression, thrust his clenched fist out threateningly
towards the dignified figure of Frederica; while Theresa, stealing up
into the group, put her hands upon a chair back to steady herself and
bent towards the queen a look of mournful sympathy and reverence, that
in the veritable scene and time represented would undoubtedly have cost
the young lady her life. The performers were good; the picture was
admirable. There was hardly anybody left to look when George Linwood and
Alexander had taken post as the queen's guards; and to say truth they
did not in their present state of undisguised individuality add much to
the effect; but Mrs. Sandford declared the tableau was very fine, and
could be made perfect.

The question of Cinderella came up then; and there was a good deal of
talk. Finally it was decided that little Ella should be Cinderella, and
Eloise the fairy godmother, and Jane Linwood and Nora the wicked
sisters. A little practising was tried, to get them in order. Then
Esther was called for. Daisy submitted.

Hamilton Rush was made magnificent and kingly by a superb velvet mantle
and turbaned crown--the latter not perfect, but improvised for the
occasion. For a sceptre he held out a long wooden ruler this time; but
Preston promised a better one should be provided. The wooden ruler was
certainly not quite in keeping with the king's state, or the queen's.
Daisy was robed in a white satin dress of her mother's; much too long,
of course, but that added to the rich effect; it lay in folds upon the
floor. Her head was covered with a rose-coloured silken scarf wound
artistically round it and the ends floating away; and upon this drapery
diamonds were bound, that sparkled very regally over Daisy's forehead.
But this was only the beginning. A zone of brilliants at her waist made
the white satin dazzling and gathered its folds together; bracelets of
every colour and of great beauty loaded Daisy's little arms; till she
was, what Mrs. Sandford had said Esther must be, a spot of brilliancy.
Her two maids, Nora and Jane Linwood, at this time were not robed in
any other than their ordinary attire; perhaps that was one reason why
their maintenance of their characters was not quite so perfect as that
of the principal two. Hamilton stretched forward his wooden sceptre to
the queen with benignant haste and dignity. Daisy, only too glad to
shrink away, closed her eyes and lay back in the arms of her attendants
in a manner that was really very satisfactory. But the attendants
themselves were not in order.

"Jane, you must not laugh--" said her brother.

"I ain't laughing!"

"Yes, but you were."

"The queen is fainting, you know," said Mrs. Sandford. "You are one of
her maids, and you are very much distressed about it."

"I am not distressed a bit. I don't care."

"Nora, do not forget that you are another attendant. Your business is
with your mistress. You must be looking into her face, to see if she is
really faint or if you can perceive signs of mending. You must look very
anxious."

But Nora looked very cross; and as Jane persisted in giggling, the
success of that picture was not quite excellent this time.

"Nora is the most like a Jewess--" Theresa remarked.

"O, Nora will make a very good maid of honour by and by," Mrs. Sandford
replied.

But Nora had her own thoughts.

"Daisy, how shall I be dressed?" she inquired, when Daisy was disrobed
of her magnificence and at leisure to talk.

"I don't know. O, in some nice way," said Daisy, getting into her corner
of the couch again.

"Yes, but shall I--shall Jane and I have bracelets, and a girdle, and
something on our heads too?"

"No, I suppose not. The queen of course is most dressed, Nora; you know
she must be."

"I should like to have _one_ dress," said Nora. "I am not anything at
all. All the fun is in the dress. You are to have four dresses."

"Well, so are you to have four."

"No, I am not. What four?"

"This one, you know; and Red Riding-hood--and the Princes in the
Tower--and Cinderella."

"I am to be only one of the ugly sisters in Cinderella--I don't believe
aunt Frances will give her much of a dress; and I hate Red Riding-hood;
and the Princes in the Tower are not to be dressed at all. They are
covered up with the bed-clothes."

"Nora," said Daisy softly,--"would you like to be dressed as John
Alden?"

"As _what?_" said Nora, in no very accommodating tone of voice.

"John Alden--that Puritan picture, you know, with the spinning wheel. I
am to be Priscilla."

"A boy! Do you think I would be dressed like a boy?" cried Nora in
dudgeon. And Daisy thought _she_ would not, if the question were asked
her; and had nothing more to answer.

So the practising went on, with good success on the whole. The little
company met every other day; and dresses were making, and postures were
studied, and costumes were considered and re-considered. Portia and
Bassanio got to be perfect. So did Alfred in the neat-herd's
cottage--very nearly. Nora, however she grumbled, blew her cakes
energetically; Preston and Eloise made a capital old man and woman, she
with a mutch cap and he with a bundle of sticks on his head; while
Alexander Fish with his long hair and rather handsome face sat very well
at the table hearing his rebuke for letting the cakes burn. Alexander
was to have a six-foot bow in hand, which he and Hamilton were getting
ready: and meanwhile practised with an umbrella. But the tableau was
very good. Most of the others went very well. Still Daisy was greatly
tried by John Alden's behaviour, and continued to look so severe in the
picture as to draw out shouts of approving laughter from the company,
who did not know that Alexander Fish was to be thanked for it. And Nora
was difficult to train in Queen Esther. She wore obstinately a look of
displeased concern for herself, and no concern at all for her fainting
mistress. Which on the whole rather impaired the unity of the action,
and the harmony of the general effect.

"How is your task proceeding?" Mrs. Randolph asked one evening when Mrs.
Sandford was staying to tea.

"Excellently well. We shall make a good thing, I confidently expect."

"Hamilton is a good actor," said Preston.

"And Master Gary also," said Mrs. Sandford. "Your old French wife is
perfect, Preston."

"Much obliged, ma'am."

"Not to me. My dressing has nothing to do with that. But Preston, what
shall we do with Frederica's handkerchief? She can _not_ hold
it--right."

"Like a queen--" said Preston. "I do not know--unless we could scare her
out of her propriety. A good fright would do it, I think. But then the
expression would not suit. How is the Game, Mrs. Sandford?"

"Perfect! admirable! You and Hamilton do it excellently--and Daisy is a
veritable angel."

"How does _she_ like it all?" Mrs. Randolph inquired.

"Aunt Felicia, she is as much engaged as anybody."

"And plays as well," added Mrs. Sandford.

"She has found out to-day, aunt Felicia," Preston went on, speaking
rather low, "that she ought to have a string of red stones round her
head instead of white ones."

Mrs. Randolph smiled.

"She was quite right," said Mrs. Sandford. "It was a matter of colour,
and she was quite right. She was dressed for Queen Esther, and I made
her look at herself to take the effect; and she suggested, very
modestly, that stones of some colour would do better than diamonds round
her head. So I substituted some very magnificent rubies of yours, Mrs.
Randolph; quite to Daisy's justification."

"Doesn't she make a magnificent little 'Fortitude,' though!" said
Eloise.

"The angel will be the best," said Mrs. Sandford. "She looks so
naturally troubled. But we have got a good band of workers. Theresa
Stanfield is very clever."

"It will do Daisy a world of good," said Mrs. Gary.




CHAPTER XVI.


All this while Daisy's days were divided. Silks and jewels and pictures
and practising, in one part; in the other part, the old cripple Molly
Skelton, and her basket of bread and fruit, and her reading in the
Bible. For Daisy attended as regularly to the one as to the other set of
interests, and more frequently; for the practising party met only three
times a week, but Daisy went to Molly every day.

Molly was not sick now. Daisy's good offices in the material line were
confined to supplying her with nice bread and butter and fruit and milk,
with many varieties beside. But in that day or two of rheumatic pains,
when Molly had been waited upon by the dainty little handmaiden who came
in spotless frocks and trim little black shoes to make her fire and
prepare her tea, Daisy's tenderness and care had completely won Molly's
heart. She was a real angel in that poor house; no vision of one. Molly
welcomed her so, looked at her so, and would perhaps have obeyed her as
readily. But Daisy offered no words that required obedience, except
those she read out of the Book; and Molly listened to them as if it had
been the voice of an angel. She was learning to read herself; really
learning: making advances every day that shewed diligent interest; and
the interest was fed by those words she daily listened to out of the
same book. Daisy had got a large-print Testament for her at Crum Elbow;
and a new life had begun for the cripple. The rose-bush and the
geranium flourished brilliantly, for the frosts had not come yet; and
they were a good setting forth of how things were going in the house.

One lovely October afternoon, when air and sky were a breath and vision
of delight, after a morning spent in dressing and practising, Daisy went
to Molly. She went directly after luncheon. She had given Molly her
lesson; and then Daisy sat with a sober little face, her finger between
the leaves of the Bible, before beginning her accustomed reading. Molly
eyed her wistfully.

"About the crowns and the white dresses," she suggested.

"Shall I read about those?" said Daisy. And Molly nodded. And with her
little face exceedingly grave and humble, Daisy read the seventh chapter
of the Revelation, and then the twenty-first chapter, and the
twenty-second; and then she sat with her finger between the leaves as
before, looking out of the window.

"Will they all be sealed?" said Molly, breaking the silence.

"Yes."

"What is that?"

"I don't know exactly. It will be a mark of all the people that love
Jesus."

"A mark in their foreheads?"

"Yes, it says so."

"What mark?"

"I don't know, Molly; it says, 'His name shall be in their foreheads.'"
And Daisy's eyes became full of tears.

"How will that be?"

"I don't know, Molly; it don't tell. I suppose that everybody that looks
at them will know in a minute that they belong to Jesus."

Daisy's hand went up and brushed across her eyes; and then did it again.

"Do they belong to him?" asked Molly.

"O yes! Here it is--don't you remember?--'they have washed their robes
and made them white in the blood of the Lamb.'"

"So they are white, then?" said Molly.

"Yes. And his mark is on them."

"I wish," said the cripple slowly and thoughtfully,--"I wish 'twas on
me. I do!"

I do not think Daisy could speak at this. She shut her book and got up
and looked at Molly, who had put her head down on her folded arms; and
then she opened Molly's Testament and pressed her arm to make her look.
Still Daisy did not speak; she had laid her finger under some of the
words she had been reading; but when Molly raised her head she
remembered the sense of them could not be taken by the poor woman's
eyes. So Daisy read them, looking with great tenderness in the cripple's
face--

"'I will give unto him that is athirst of the fountain of the water of
life freely.' That is what it says, Molly."

"Who says?"

"Why Jesus says it. He came and died to buy the life for us--and now he
will give it to us, he says, if we want it."

"What life?" said Molly vaguely.

"Why _that_, Molly; that which you were wishing for. He will forgive us,
and make us good, and set his mark upon us; and then we shall wear those
robes that are made white in his blood, and be with him in heaven. And
that is life."

"You and me?" said Molly.

"O yes! Molly--anybody. It says 'whosoever is athirst.'"

"Where's the words?" said Molly.

Daisy shewed her; and Molly made a deep mark in the paper under them
with her nail; so deep as to signify that she meant to have them for
present study or future reference or both. Then, as Molly seemed to
have said her say, Daisy said no more and went away.

It was still not late in the afternoon; and Daisy drove on, past the
Melbourne gates, and turned the corner into the road which led to Crum
Elbow. The air was as clear as October could have it; and soft, neither
warm nor cold; and the roads were perfect; and here and there a few
yellow and red maple leaves, and in many places a brown stubble field,
told that autumn was come. It was as pleasant a day for drive as could
possibly be; and yet Daisy's face was more intent upon her pony's ears
than upon any other visible thing. She drove on towards Crum Elbow, but
before she reached it she turned another corner, and drew up before
Juanita's house.

It was not the first visit she had made here since going home; though
Daisy had in truth not come often nor stayed long. All the more glad
were Juanita and she to see each other now. Daisy took off her flat and
sat down on the old chintz couch, with a face of content. Yet it was
grave content; not joyous at all. So Juanita's keen eyes saw, through
all the talking which went on. Daisy and she had a great deal to say to
each other; and among other things the story of Molly came in and was
enlarged upon; though Daisy left most of her own doings to be guessed
at. She did not tell them more than she could well help. However, talk
went on a good while, and still when it paused Daisy's face looked
thoughtful and careful. So Juanita saw.

"Is my love quite well?"

"O yes, Juanita. I am quite well. I think I am getting strong, a
little."

Juanita's thanksgiving was earnest. Daisy looked very sober.

"Juanita, I have been wanting to talk to you."

Now they had been talking a good deal; but this, the black woman saw,
was not what Daisy meant.

"What is it, my love?"

"I don't know, Juanita. I think I am puzzled."

The fine face of Mrs. Benoit looked gravely attentive, and a little
anxiously watchful of Daisy's.

"The best way will be to tell you. Juanita, they are--I mean, we
are--playing pictures at home."

"What is that, Miss Daisy?"

"Why, they take pictures--pictures in books, you know--and dress up
people like the people in the pictures, and make them stand so or sit
so, and look so, as the people in the pictures do; and so they make a
picture of living people."

"Yes, Miss Daisy."

"They are playing pictures at home. I mean, we are. Mamma is going to
give a great party next week; and the pictures are to be all made and
shewn at the party. There are twelve pictures; and they will be part of
the entertainment. There is to be a gauze stretched over the door of the
library, and the pictures are to be seen behind the gauze."

"And does Miss Daisy like the play?" the black woman inquired, not
lightly.

"Yes, Juanita--I like some things about it. It is very amusing. There
are some things I do not like."

"Did Miss Daisy wish to talk to me about those things she not like?"

"I don't, know, Juanita--no, I think not. Not about those things. But I
do not exactly know about myself."

"What Miss Daisy not know about herself?"

"I do not know exactly--whether it is right."

"Whether what be right, my love?"

Daisy was silent at first, and looked puzzled.

"Juanita--I mean--I don't know whether _I_ am right."

"Will my love tell what she mean?"

"It is hard, Juanita. But--I don't think I am quite right. I want you to
tell me what to do."

Daisy's little face looked perplexed and wise. And sorry.

"What troubles my love?"

"I do not know how it was, Juanita--I did not care at all about it at
first; and then I began to care about it a little--and now--"

"What does my love care about?"

"About being dressed, Juanita; and wearing mamma's jewels, and looking
like a picture."

"Will Miss Daisy tell Juanita better what she mean?"

"Why, you know, Juanita," said the child wistfully, "they dress up the
people to look like the pictures; and they have put me in some very
pretty pictures; and in one I am to be beautifully dressed to look like
Queen Esther--with mamma's jewels all over me. And there is another
little girl who would like to have that part,--and I do not want to give
it to her."

Juanita sat silent, looking grave and anxious. Her lips moved, but she
said nothing that could be heard.

"And Juanita," the child went on--"I think, somehow, I like to look
better than other people,--and to have handsomer dresses than other
people,--in the pictures, you know."

Still Juanita was silent.

"Is it right, Juanita?"

"Miss Daisy pardon me. Who Miss Daisy think be so pleased to see her in
the beautiful dress in the picture?"

"Juanita--it was not that I meant. I was not thinking so much of _that_.
Mamma would like it, I suppose, and papa;--but I like it myself."

Juanita was silent again.

"Is it right, Juanita?"

"Why do Miss Daisy think it not right?"

Daisy looked undecided and perplexed.

"Juanita--I wasn't quite sure."

"Miss Daisy like to play in these pictures?"

"Yes, Juanita--and I like--Juanita, I like it!"

"And another little girl, Miss Daisy say, like it too?"

"Yes, I think they all do. But there is a little girl that wants to take
my part."

"And who Miss Daisy want to please?"

Daisy hesitated, and her eyes reddened; she sat a minute still; then
looked up very wistfully.

"Juanita, I think I want to please myself."

"Jesus please not himself"--said the black woman.

Daisy made no answer to that. She bent over and hid her little head in
Mrs. Benoit's lap. And tears undoubtedly came, though they were quiet
tears. The black woman's hand went tenderly over the little round head.

"And he say to his lambs--'Follow me.'"

"Juanita"--Daisy spoke without raising her head--"I want to please him
most."

"How Miss Daisy think she do that?"

Daisy's tears now, for some reason, came evidently, and abundantly. She
wept more freely in Juanita's lap than she would have done before father
or mother. The black woman let her alone, and there was silent
counsel-taking between Daisy and her tears for some time.

"Speak to me, Juanita"--she said at last.

"What my love want me to say?"

"It has been all wrong, hasn't it, Juanita? O have I, Juanita?"

"What, my love?"

"I know I have," said Daisy. "I knew it was not right before."

There was yet again a silence; a tearful silence on one part. Then Daisy
raised her head, looking very meek.

"Juanita, what ought I to do?"

"What my love said," the black woman replied very tenderly. "Please the
Lord."

"Yes; but I mean, how shall I do that?"

"Jesus please not himself; and he say, 'Follow me.'"

"Juanita, I believe I began to want to please myself very soon after all
this picture work and dressing began."

"Then it not please the Lord," said Juanita decidedly.

"I know," said Daisy; "and it has been growing worse and worse. But
Juanita, I shall have to finish the play now--I cannot help it. How
shall I keep good? Can I?"

"My love knows the Good Shepherd carry his lamb in his bosom, if she let
him. He is called Jesus, for he save his people from their sins."

Daisy's face was very lowly; and very touching was the way she bent her
little head and passed her hand across her eyes. It was the gesture of
penitent gentleness.

"Tell me some more, Juanita."

"Let the Lord speak," said the black woman turning over her well used
Bible. "See, Miss Daisy--'Charity suffereth long, and is kind; charity
envieth not; charity vaunteth not itself, is not puffed up, doth not
behave itself unseemly, seeketh not her own--'"

"I was puffed up," said Daisy, "because I was to wear those beautiful
things. I will let Nora wear them. I was seeking my own, all the time,
Juanita. I didn't know it."

"See, Miss Daisy--'That women adorn themselves in modest apparel, with
shamefacedness and sobriety; not with broidered hair, or gold, or
pearls, or costly array.'"

"Is there any _harm_ in those pretty things, Juanita? They are so
pretty!"

"I don't know, Miss Daisy; the Lord say he not pleased with them; and
the Lord knows."

"I suppose," said Daisy----but what Daisy supposed was never told. It
was lost in thought.

"My love see here what please the Lord--'the ornament of a meek and
quiet spirit, which is in the sight of God of great price.'"

Daisy lifted her little face and kissed the fine olive cheek of her
friend.

"I know now, Juanita," she said with her accustomed placidness. "I
didn't know what was the matter with me. I shall have to play in the
pictures--I cannot help it now--but I will let Nora be Queen Esther."

It was quite late by this time and Daisy after a little more talk went
home; a talk which filled the child's heart with comfort. Daisy went
home quite herself again, and looked as happy and busy as a bee when she
got there.

"Daisy! what late doings!" exclaimed her father. "Out all the afternoon
and practising all the morning--Where have you been?"

"I have been visiting, papa."

"Pray whom?"

"Molly, papa--and Juanita," Daisy said, not very willingly, for Mrs.
Randolph was within hearing.

"A happy selection!" said she. "Go and get ready for dinner, Daisy."

"Have you been all the afternoon at those two places, Daisy?" asked her
father, within whose arms she stood.

"Yes, papa."

He let her go; and a significant look passed between him and his wife.

"A little too much of a good thing," said Mr. Randolph.

"It will be too much, soon," the lady answered.

Nevertheless Daisy for the present was safe, thanks to her friend Dr.
Sandford; and she passed on up stairs with a spirit as light as a bird.
And after she was dressed, till it was time for her to go in to the
dinner-table, all that while a little figure was kneeling at the open
window and a little round head was bowed upon the sill. And after that,
there was no cloud upon Daisy's face at all.

In the drawing-room, when they were taking tea, Daisy carried her cup of
milk and cake to a chair close by Preston.

"Well, Daisy, what now?"

"I want to talk to you about the pictures, Preston."

"We did finely to-day, Daisy! If only I could get the cramp out of
Frederica's fingers."

"Cramp!" said Daisy.

"Yes. She picks up that handkerchief of hers as if her hand was a bird's
claw. I can't get a blue jay or a canary out of my head when I see her.
Did you ever see a bird scratch its eye with its claw, Daisy?"

"Yes."

"Well, that is what she puts me in mind of. That handkerchief kills
Marie Antoinette, dead. And she won't take advice--or she can't. It is a
pity you hadn't it to do; you would hold it right queenly. You do Esther
capitally. I don't believe a Northern girl can manage that sort of
thing."

Daisy sipped her milk and eat crumbs of cake for a minute without making
any answer.

"Preston, I am going to let Nora be Queen Esther."

"What!" said Preston.

"I am going to let Nora be Queen Esther."

"Nora! Not if I know it," said Preston.

"Yes, but I am. I would like it better. And Nora would like to be Queen
Esther, I know."

"I dare say she would! Like it! Of course. No, Daisy; Queen Esther is
yours and nobody's else. What has put that into your head?"

"Preston, I think Nora would like it; and you know, they said she was
most like a Jewess of all of us; I think it would be proper to give it
to her."

"I shall not do it. We will be improper for once."

"But I am going to do it, Preston."

"Daisy, you have not liberty. I am the manager. What has come over you?
You played Esther beautifully only this morning. What is the matter?"

"I have been thinking about it," said Daisy; "and I have concluded I
would rather give it to Nora."

Preston was abundantly vexed, for he knew by the signs that Daisy had
made up her mind; and he was beginning to know that his little cousin
was exceedingly hard to move when once she was fully set on a thing. He
debated within himself an appeal to authority; but on the whole
dismissed that thought. It was best not to disgust Daisy with the whole
affair; and he hoped coaxing might yet do the work. But Daisy was too
quick for him.

"Nora," she said at the next meeting, "if you like, I will change with
you in the fainting picture. You shall be the queen, and I will be one
of the women."

"Shall I be the queen?" said Nora.

"Yes, if you like."

"But why don't you want to do it?"

"I would rather you would, if you like it."

"Well, I'll do it," said Nora; "but Daisy, shall I have all the dress
you were going to wear?"

"Yes, I suppose so."

"Because, if I don't, I won't. I must have just exactly what you were
going to wear."

"Why you will of course, I suppose," said Daisy, a good deal astonished.

"Every bit," said Nora. "Shall I have that same white satin gown?"

"Yes, I suppose so. Of course you will. It is only you and I that
change; not the dress."

"And shall I have the ornaments too?"

"Just the same, I suppose; unless Mrs. Sandford thinks that something
else will look better."

"I won't have anything else. I want that same splendid necklace for my
girdle--shall I?"

"I suppose so, Nora."

"You say 'I suppose so' to everything. I want to _know_. Shall I have
that same pink silk thing over my hair?"

"That scarf? yes."

"And the red necklace on it? and the bracelets? and the gold and
diamonds round my neck? I won't be Esther if I don't have the dress."

"I suppose you will have the dress," said Daisy; "of course you will.
But if you say you do not want to be Esther, they will make me do it."

A hint that closed Nora's mouth. She did not say she did not want to be
Esther. Mrs. Sandford was astonished at the change of performers; but
Daisy's resignation was so simply made and naturally, and Nora's
acceptance was so manifestly glad, that nobody could very well offer any
hindrance. The change was made; but Preston would not suffer Daisy to be
one of the attendants. He left her out of the picture altogether and put
Jane Linwood in Nora's vacated place. Daisy was content; and now the
practising and the arrangements went on prospering.

There was a good deal of preparation to be made, besides what the
mantua-maker could do. Mr. Stilton was called into the library for a
great consultation; and then he went to work. The library was the place
chosen for the tableaux; the spectators to be gathered into the
drawing-room, and the pictures displayed just within the wide door of
communication between the two rooms. On the library side of this door
Mr. Stilton laid down a platform, slightly raised and covered with green
baize cloth, and behind the platform a frame-work was raised and hung
with green baize to serve as a proper background for the pictures. A
flower stand was brought in from the greenhouse and placed at one side,
out of sight from the drawing-room; for the purpose, as Preston informed
Daisy, of holding the lights. All these details were under his
management, and he managed, Daisy thought, very ably indeed. Meantime
the dresses were got ready. Fortitude's helmet was constructed of
pasteboard and gilt paper; and Nora said it looked just as if it were
solid gold. The crown of Ahasuerus, and Alfred's six-foot bow were also
made; and a beautiful old brown spinning wheel was brought from Mrs.
Sandford's house for Priscilla. Priscilla's brown dress was put
together, and her white vandyke starched. And the various mantles and
robes of velvet and silk which were to be used, were in some way
accommodated to the needs of the young wearers. All was done well, and
Preston was satisfied; except with Daisy.

Not that Daisy did not enter into the amusement of what was going
forward; for perhaps nobody took so much real share in it. Even Mr.
Stilton's operations interested her. But she was not engrossed at all.
She was not different from her usual self. All the glory of the tableaux
had not dazzled her, so far as Preston could see. And daily, every
morning, she stepped into that little pony chaise with a basket and
drove off--Preston was at the pains to find out--to spend a couple of
hours with Molly Skelton. Preston sighed with impatience. And then in
the very act of dressing and practising for the pictures, Daisy was
provokingly cool and disengaged. She did her part very well, but seemed
just as much interested in other people's parts and as much pleased with
other people's adornment. Queen Esther in particular was Daisy's care,
since she had given up the character; and without putting herself
forward she had once or twice made a suggestion to Mrs. Sandford, of
something that she either thought would please Nora or that she felt
called for by her own tastes; and in each case Mrs. Sandford declared
the suggestion had been an improvement.

But with a pleasure much greater and keener, Daisy had seen the pot
containing the 'Jewess' geranium taken up out of the ground, and set,
with all the glory of its purple-red blossoms, in Molly's poor little
room. There it stood, on a deal table, a spot of beauty and refinement,
all alone to witness for the existence of such things on the earth. And
heeded by Molly as well as by Daisy. Daisy knew that. And all the
pleasure of all the tableaux put together could give nothing to Daisy
equal to her joy when Molly first began to read. That day, when letters
began really to be put together into words to Molly's comprehension,
Daisy came home a proud child. Or rather, for pride is a bad word, she
came home with a heart swelling with hope and exultation; hope and
exultation that looked forward confidently to the glory to be revealed.




CHAPTER XVII.


The great day came, and the evening of the day; and June dressed Daisy
for the party. This was a simple dressing, however, of a white cambrick
frock; no finery, seeing that Daisy was to put on and off various things
in the course of the evening. But Daisy felt a little afraid of herself.
The perfected arrangements and preparations of the last few days had,
she feared, got into her head a little; and when June had done and was
sent away, Daisy kneeled down by her bedside and prayed a good while
that God would help her not to please herself and keep her from caring
about dress and appearance and people's flatteries. And then she got up
and looked very wistfully at some words of the Lord Jesus which Juanita
had shewed her first and which she found marked by Mr. Dinwiddie's
pencil. "The Father hath not left me alone; _for I do always those
things that please him_."

Daisy was beginning to learn, that to please God, is not always to seek
one's own gratification or that of the world. She looked steadily at the
words of that Friend in heaven whom she loved and wished to obey; and
then it seemed to Daisy that she cared nothing at all about anything but
pleasing him.

"Miss Daisy--" said June,--"Miss Nora is come."

Away went Daisy, with a bound, to the dressing-room; and carried Nora
off, as soon as she was unwrapped from her mufflings, to see the
preparations in the library.

"What is all that for?" said Nora.

"O, that is to shew the pictures nicely. They will look a great deal
better than if all the room and the books could be seen behind them."

"Why?"

"I suppose they will look more like pictures. By and by all those lights
on the stand will be lighted. And we shall dress in the library, you
know,--nobody will be in it,--and in the room on the other side of the
hall. All the things are brought down there."

"Daisy," said Nora looking at the imposing green baize screen, "aren't
you afraid?"

"Are you?" said Daisy.

"Yes--I am afraid I shall not do something right, or laugh, or
something."

"O, but you must not laugh. That would spoil the picture. And Mrs.
Sandford and Preston will make everything else right. Come and see the
crown for Ahasuerus!"

So they ran across the hall to the room of fancy dresses. Here Ella
presently joined them with her sister, and indeed so many others of the
performers that Preston ordered them all out. He was afraid of mischief,
he said. They trooped back to the library.

"When are they going to begin?" said Nora.

"I don't know. O, by and by. I suppose we shall have tea and coffee
first. People at a party must get through that."

To await this proceeding, and indeed to share in it, the little company
adjourned to the drawing-room. It was filling fast. All the
neighbourhood had been asked, and all the neighbourhood were very glad
to come, and here they were, pouring in. Now the neighbourhood meant all
the nice people within ten miles south and within ten miles north; and
all that could be found short of some seven or eight miles east. There
was one family that had even come from the other side of the river. And
all these people made Melbourne House pretty full. Happily it was a
very fine night.

Daisy was standing by the table, for the little folks had tea at a
table, looking with a face of innocent pleasure at the scene and the
gathering groups of people, when a hand laid gentle hold of her and she
found herself drawn within the doctor's arm and brought up to his side.
Her face brightened.

"What is going on, Daisy?"

"Preston has been getting up some tableaux, Dr. Sandford, to be done by
the young people."

"Are you one of the young people?"

"They have got me in," said Daisy.

"Misled by your appearance? What are you going to play, Daisy?"

Daisy ran off to a table and brought him a little bill of the
performances. The doctor ran his eye over it.

"I shall know what it means, I suppose, when I see the pictures. What is
this 'Game of Life?'"

"It is Retsch's engraving," Daisy answered, as sedately as if she had
been forty years old.

"Retsch! yes, I know him--but what does the thing mean?"

"It is supposed to be the devil playing with a young man--for his soul,"
Daisy said very gravely.

"Who plays the devil?"

"Preston does."

"And who is to be the angel?"

"I am to be the angel," said Daisy.

"Very judicious. How do you like this new play, Daisy?"

"It is very amusing. I like to see the pictures."

"Not to be in them?"

"I think not, Dr. Sandford."

"Daisy, what else are you doing, besides playing tableaux, all these
days?"

"I drive about a good deal," said Daisy. Then looking up at her friend
with an entirely new expression, a light shining in her eye and a
subdued sweetness coming into her smile, she added--

"Molly is learning to read, Dr. Sandford."

"Molly!" said the doctor.

"Yes. You advised me to ask leave to go to see her, and I did, and I got
it."

Daisy's words were a little undertone; the look that went with them the
doctor never forgot as long as he lived. His questions about the
festivities she had answered with a placid, pleased face; pleased that
he should ask her; but a soft irradiation of joy had beamed upon the
fact that the poor cripple was making a great step upwards in the scale
of human life. The doctor had not forgotten his share in the permission
Daisy had received, which he thought he saw she suspected. Unconsciously
his arm closed upon the little figure it held and brought her nearer to
him; but his questions were somehow stopped. And Daisy offered no more;
she stood quite still, till a movement at the table seemed to call for
her. She put her hand upon the doctor's arm, as a sign that it must hold
her no longer, and sprang away.

And soon now all the young people went back again to the library. Mrs.
Sandford came with them to serve in her arduous capacity of dresser.
June attended to give her help.

"Now what are we going to do?" whispered Nora in breathless excitement.
"What is to be the first picture? O Daisy, I wish you would get them to
have my picture last of all."

"Why, Nora?"

"O because. I think it ought to come last. Aren't you afraid? Whew!
lam."

"No, I don't think I am."

"But won't you want to laugh?"

"Why?" Daisy. "No, I do not think I shall want to laugh."

"I shall be too frightened to laugh," said Jane Linwood.

"I don't see, Daisy, how you will manage those queer wings of yours,"
Nora resumed.

"I have not got to manage them at all. I have only to keep still."

"I can't think how they will look," said Nora. "They don't seem to me
much like wings. I think they will look very funny."

"Hush, children--run away; you are not wanted here. Go into the
drawing-room--and I will ring this hand bell when I want you."

"What comes first, aunt Sandford?"

"Run away! you will see."

So the younger ones repaired to the drawing-room, for what seemed a
weary time of waiting. Nora expressed her entire disapprobation of being
shut out from all the fun of the dressing; she wanted to see that. She
then declared that it would be impossible to shew all the twelve
pictures that evening, if it took so long to get ready for one. However,
the time was past at length; the signal was given; the lights in the
drawing-room were put down, till the room was very shadowy indeed; and
then, amid the breathless hush of expectation, the curtain that hung
over the doorway of the library was drawn back.

The children thought it was fairy-land.

Frederica Fish sat there facing the company, quaintly dressed in antique
costume; and before her knelt on one knee two grand-looking personages,
very richly attired, presenting a gilt crown upon a satin cushion. Lady
Jane Grey and the lords who came to offer her the kingdom The draperies
were exceedingly well executed and did Mrs. Sandford great credit. They
were the picture.

"Isn't she _beau_-tiful!" Nora exclaimed under her breath.

"Isn't it like a picture!" said Daisy.

"How funnily those boys kneel and twist themselves round!" said Jane.
"Who are they?"

"Daisy, wouldn't you like to be dressed every day like that?" said Nora.

"I don't think it would be convenient," said Daisy. "I think a white
frock is nicer."

"O but it makes people look so handsome! Frederica looks like--she is a
real beauty! I should like to be dressed so. Daisy, don't you suppose
queens and ladies, like those in the pictures, _are_ always dressed so?"

"I suppose they put on nightgowns when they go to bed," said Ella
Stanfield soberly. "They can't _always_ be dressed so."

"O but, I mean, when they are up. And I dare say they wear beautiful
nightgowns--Daisy, don't you think they do? I dare say they have
splendid lace and ribands; and you can make a white dress very
handsome, if you put plenty of lace and ribands."

"O it's gone!" exclaimed Jane and Ella. The curtain had fallen. The
company clapped their hands and cheered.

"What's that for?" said Nora.

"That means that they like it, I suppose," said Daisy. "You will have to
go now, Nora, I know. Little Red Riding-Hood comes next. Come--we'll all
go."

"Horrid Little Red Riding-Hood!" said Nora. "I hate that picture!"

"Why do you hate it?"

"Because!--It is nothing but a red hood."

Mrs. Sandford's bell sounded.

"O Daisy!" said Nora as they went, "won't you get them to leave Esther
to the last? They will do whatever you ask them. Do!"

"Why, Nora?"

"O because!--"

What Nora's "because" meant, Daisy did not know; that it had reference
to some supposed advantage of place, was pretty certain. Daisy stood
thinking about it while she saw Nora dressed, and then ran into the
drawing-room to take the effect of the tableau. The curtain was
withdrawn; Daisy was astonished; she had no idea that Nora could be so
changed by a little arrangement of lights and dress. The picture was
exceeding pretty. Nora's black hair and bright cheeks peeped out from
under the shadowing red cardinal, which draped her arms also--Mrs.
Sandford had mysteriously managed it. She had got over her hatred of the
part, for she looked pleased and pleasant; and the little basket in her
hand and the short petticoat and neat little feet completed a tidy Red
Riding-Hood. The applause was loud. "Lovely!" the ladies said. "What a
sweet little thing! how beautiful she looks!" Nora did not smile, for
that would have hurt her picture; but she stood with swelling
complacency and unchanging red cheeks as long as the company were
pleased to look at her.

"Who is that, Daisy?" asked her father, near whom Daisy had stationed
herself.

"It is Nora Dinwiddie, papa."

"She is a pretty little girl. When does your turn come?"

"I do not know, papa."

"Not know! Why I thought all this was your affair."

"O no, papa; it is Preston's affair."

Off ran Daisy however when the curtain fell, or rather when it was
drawn, to see the getting ready of the next tableau. There was something
of a tableau on hand already. June stood holding up a small featherbed,
and two little figures in white nightgowns were flying round, looking
and laughing at two exceedingly fierce, bearded, moustached,
black-browed individuals, on whose heads Mrs. Sandford was setting some
odd-looking hats.

"Who are those, Nora?" said Daisy to Little Red Riding-Hood.

"Daisy, did you like it? did I stand well?"

"Yes, I liked it very much; it was nice. Nora, who are those two?"

"Why one of 'em is Preston--I don't know who the other is. Daisy, did
you ask about Esther?"

Could it be possible that Preston had so transformed himself? Daisy
could hardly see that it was he. His fellow she did not recognize at
all. It was big George Linwood.

"Now are the little princes ready?" said Preston. "Because we will
finish up this business."

"O you won't let the featherbed come down on us?" cried Jane Linwood.

"If you don't be quiet and keep still, I will," said Preston. "Let only
your eye wink or your mouth move to smile--and you are an unlucky
prince! I am a man without mercy."

"And I am another," said George. "I say, old fellow, I suppose I'm all
right for that French pikeman now, hey? After this smothering business
is attended to."

"You think the trade is the thing, and the costume a matter of
indifference?" said Preston. "In the matter of morals I dare say you are
right;--in tableaux before spectators it's not exactly so. Here
June--hand on your big pillow there--"

Mrs. Sandford was laughing at him, and in fact there was a good deal of
hilarity and some romping before the actors in the tableau could be
settled in their places.

"Don't keep us long," said Preston. "I never knew before what an
uninteresting thing a featherbed is--when you are obliged to hold it in
your arms. Everything in its place, I find. I used to have a good
opinion of them."

Daisy ran back to the drawing-room, and was utterly struck with wonder
at the picture over which all this fun had been held. It was beautiful,
she thought. The two children lay so naturally asleep, one little bare
foot peeping out from under the coverings; and the grim faces that
scowled at them over the featherbed with those strange hats
overshadowing, made such a contrast; and they were all so breathlessly
still, and the lights and shadows were so good; Daisy was disposed to
give her verdict that there never was a play like this play. The
"Princes in the Tower" was greatly applauded.

"Have you asked about my picture?" said Nora, who stood beside Daisy.

"No, I have not had a chance."

"Do, Daisy! I want that to be the last."

Daisy thought she was unreasonable. Why should Nora have the best place,
if it was the best. She was not pleased with her.

The next picture was Marie Antoinette; and that drew down the house.
Frederica Fish had nothing to do but to stand as she was put, and Mrs.
Sandford had seen to it that she stood right; another person might have
done more in the picture, but that was all that could be got from
Frederica. Her face was coldly impassive; she could come no nearer to
the expression of the indignant queen. But Preston's old woman, and
Theresa's pretty young French girl; one looking as he had said, with
eyes of coarse fury, the other all melting with tenderness and reverent
sympathy; they were so excellent that the company were delighted.
Frederica's handkerchief, it is true, hung daintily in her fingers,
shewing all the four embroidered corners; Mrs. Sandford had not seen it
till it was just too late; and Preston declared afterwards the "fury" in
his face was real and not feigned as he glared at her. But the company
overlooked the handkerchief in favour of the other parts of the picture;
and its success was perfect.

"Alfred in the neat-herd's cottage" followed next, and would have been
as good; only that Nora, whose business it was to blow her cheeks into a
full moon condition over the burnt cakes, would not keep her gravity;
but the full cheeks gave way every now and then in a broad grin which
quite destroyed the effect. Preston could not see this, but Daisy took
her friend to task after it was over. Nora declared she could not help
it.

"You don't know how it felt, Daisy, to keep my cheeks puffed out in that
way. I couldn't do it; and whenever I let them go, then I couldn't help
laughing. O, Daisy! is my picture to be the last?"

"I will see, as soon as I can, Nora." Daisy said gravely. It was her own
turn now, and while Mrs. Sandford was dressing her she had no very good
chance to speak of Esther. How wonderfully Mrs. Sandford arranged the
folds of one or two long scarfs, to imitate Sir Joshua Reynolds'
draperies. Preston declared it was beautiful, and so did Hamilton Rush;
and when the little helmet with its plumes was set on Daisy's head, Mrs.
Sandford smiled and Preston clapped his hands. They had still a little
trouble to get Dolce into position. Dolce was to enact the lion, emblem
of courage and strength, lying at Fortitude's feet. He was a sensible
dog, but knowing nothing about playing pictures, naturally, did not
immediately understand why it should be required of him to lie down
there, on that platform of green baize, with his nose on his paws.
However, more sensible than some animals of higher order are apt to be,
he submitted patiently to the duty of obedience where he did not
understand; and laid down accordingly his shaggy length at Daisy's feet.

The curtain was drawn aside, and the company shouted with delight. No
picture had been so good yet as this one. The little grave figure, the
helmet with its nodding plumes in mock stateliness; the attitude, one
finger just resting on the pedestal of the broken column, (an ottoman
did duty for it) as if to shew that Fortitude stood alone, and the
shaggy St. Bernard at her feet, all made in truth an extremely pretty
spectacle. You could see the faintest tinge of a smile of pleasure on
the lips of both Mr. and Mrs. Randolph; they were silent, but all the
rest of the people cheered and openly declared their delight. Daisy
stood like a rock. _Her_ mouth never gave way; not even when Dolce,
conceiving that all this cheering called upon him to do something, rose
up and looking right into Daisy's face wagged his tail in the blandest
manner of congratulation. Daisy did not wince; and an energetic "Down,
Dolce, down!"--brought the St. Bernard to his position again, in the
very meekness of strength; and then the people clapped for Daisy and the
dog together. At last the curtain fell.

[Illustration]

"Well, that will do," said Mrs. Sandford.

"Dolce--you rascal!" said Preston, as the great creature was now wagging
his tail in honour of his master,--"how came you to forget your business
in that style, sir?"

"I do not think it really hindered the effect at all, Preston," said
Mrs. Sandford. "Daisy kept her countenance so well."

"Yes,--if Fortitude had smiled!--" said Theresa, "Mrs. Sandford, is it
out of character for Fortitude to smile?"

"It would be out of character for Portia, just at this crisis--so take
care of her."

"What made them make such a great noise, Daisy?" said Nora while Daisy
was getting undressed.

"I suppose they liked the picture," said Daisy.

"But they made a great deal more noise than they did for anybody else,"
said Nora.

"I suppose they liked the picture better than they liked any of the
others," said Ella Stanfield. "I know they did, for I was in the other
room. Come, let's go see this picture!"

"Not you, Daisy," said Mrs. Sandford as the children were running
off--"I want you. Priscilla comes next."

So Daisy had to stay and be dressed for Priscilla. She missed Portia and
Bassanio. It was not much missed, for her little heart began to be
beating with excitement; and she wished very much that Priscilla might
be as much liked as Fortitude. The dressing was an easy matter, for the
costume had been prepared for her and a gown and vandyke made on
purpose. Would Alexander dare to wink this time, she wondered? And then
she remembered, to her great joy, that he could not; because his face
would be in full view of the people behind the scenes in the library.
The little brown spinning-wheel was brought on the platform; a heap of
flax at which Priscilla is supposed to have been working, was piled
together in front of it; and she and Alexander took their places. The
curtain was drawn aside, and a cry of pleasure from the company
testified to the picturesque prettiness of the representation. It was
according to the fact, that Priscilla should be looking in John Alden's
face; it was just at the moment when she is supposed to be rebuking him
for bringing to her his friend's suit and petition. Thinking herself
safe, and wishing to have the picture as good as possible, Daisy had
ventured to direct her eyes upon the face of Alexander Fish, who
personified the Puritan suitor. To her horror, Alexander, wholly
untouched by the poetry of the occasion and unawed by its hazards, dared
to execute a succession of most barefaced and disagreeable winks right
at Priscilla's eyes. Poor Daisy could not stand this. Forgetting her
character and the picture and everything, her eyes went down; her
eyelids drooped over them; and the expression of grave displeasure would
have done for a yet more dissatisfied mood of mind than Priscilla is
supposed to have known at the time. The company could not stand this,
either; and there burst out a hearty chorus of laughter and cheers
together, which greatly mortified Daisy. The curtain was drawn, and she
had to face the laughing comments of the people in the library. They
were unmerciful, she thought. Daisy grew very pink in the face.

Cinderella was the next picture, in which she had also to play. Dresses
were changed in haste; but meanwhile Daisy began to think about
herself. Was she all right? Mortified at the breaking of her picture;
angry at Alexander; eager to get back praise enough to make amends for
this loss;--whom was little Daisy trying to please? Where was the
ornament of a meek and quiet spirit now? was it on?

They had after all given her place in the Cinderella tableau; she was
one of the two wicked sisters; and she looked dissatisfied enough for
the character. She wanted to get away to be alone for two minutes; but
she had this part to fill first. It is very hard to play when one's
heart is heavy. Daisy could not go on so. She could not bear it. Without
waiting till June could undress her, she slipped away, the moment the
curtain was drawn, and ran across the hall to the dressing room. People
were coming and going everywhere; and Daisy went out upon the piazza.
There, in a dark spot, she kneeled down and prayed; that this terrible
spirit of pleasing herself might be put away from her. She had but a
minute; she knew she must be back again immediately; but she knew too it
takes but a minute for ever so little a prayer to go all the way to
heaven; and the answer does not take any longer to come, if it pleases
God. Daisy was very much in earnest, and quite well knew all that. She
went back to the library feeling humbled and ashamed, but quiet. The
library was all in commotion.

Nora was begging that Esther might be put off till the last. Mrs.
Sandford and Preston objected. They chose that it should come next.

"Here is Priscilla," said Hamilton Rush,--"I beg pardon! it is
Cinderella's wicked sister--I don't know what _her_ name was. Let us
have your vote, my angel; I will address you in your prospective
character; will you put on your wings at once? Or shall we get done with
the terrestrial first? What do you say?--I hope you are going to make
Miss Stanfield the queen, Mrs. Sandford; she has done one part so well
that I should like to see her in another."

"Why, you are going to be Ahasuerus yourself!" said the lady.

"Am I?" said Hamilton; who it must be noticed had not met for the
practisings as often as the other people, being held not to need them.
"Then I must respectfully be allowed to choose my own queen. I vote for
Miss Theresa."

"It is a capital idea," said Preston.

"I think so too," said Mrs. Sandford. "Theresa, my dear, I wonder we did
not think before of something so much to our advantage; but these
children seemed to have got the picture into their own hands. You will
do it far better. Come! let me robe you."

"I would rather be Vashti," murmured Theresa. "I don't like submissive
characters. Mrs. Sandford, Vashti is far more in my line. Go off, boys,
and get ready! What a pity we didn't think of having Vashti, Mrs.
Sandford."

However, Theresa made no objection to be dressed for Esther.

"Who will be your supporters? Ella is too short. Jane and Nora?--Where
is Nora!"

Nora was in the furthest corner of the room, seated in gloom.

"Nora!--"

"I am not going to play any more--" said Nora.

"You must come and be one of the queen's women--I want you for that."

"I am not going to play--" repeated Nora; but nobody heard except Daisy.
"I am Esther myself! nobody else has any right to be it. I have
practised it, and I know how to do it; and I am Esther myself. Nobody
else has any right to be Esther!"

Daisy stood by in dismay. She did not know what comfort to bring to this
distress.

"I won't play at all!" said Nora. "If I can't be Esther I won't be
anything. You have all the good things, Daisy! you have all the
prettiest pictures; and I might have had just this one. Just Esther. I
just wanted to be Esther! It's mean."

"Why you've been plenty of things I think," said Jane Linwood, coming
near this corner of gloom.

"I haven't! I have been that hateful prince in the tower and
Cinderella's ugly sister--only hateful things."

"But you were Little Red Riding-Hood."

"Red Riding-Hood!" exclaimed Nora in unspeakable disdain. "Red
Riding-Hood was nothing at all but a red cloak! and Daisy wore feathers,
and had the dog--"

And the vision of Queen Esther's jewels and satin gown and mantle here
overcame Nora's dignity if not her wrath: she began to cry.

"But won't you come and be one of the queen's maids? _they_ will be very
nicely dressed too," Daisy ventured gently.

"No!--I won't be anybody's maid, I tell you," sobbed the disconsolate
child.

"Bring her along, Daisy," Mrs. Sandford called from the other side of
the room.--"I am almost ready for her."

Daisy made another vain effort to bring Nora to reason, and then went
sorrowfully to Mrs. Sandford. She thought tableaux were on the whole a
somewhat troublesome amusement.

"Will I do, Mrs. Sandford?" she said. "Nora does not want to play."

"In dudgeon, hey?" said the lady. "I expected as much. Well Daisy--I
will take you. I might perch you up on a foot-cushion to give you a
little more altitude. However--I don't know but it will do. Theresa will
be letting down her own height."

"I think I am letting myself down altogether, Mrs. Sandford, in allowing
Ahasuerus to pick me out in that lordly style. But never mind--I shan't
touch his sceptre any way. Boys, boys!--are you ready?"

"Splendid, Theresa!" said Preston as he came in. "Splendid! You are the
very thing."

"I am diamonds and satin, you mean. I thank you. I know that is what I
am at present."

"You look the character," said Hamilton.

Theresa made him a mock little courtesy. It was admirably done. It was
the slightest gesture of supercilious disdain--excellent pantomime. The
boys laughed and shouted, for Theresa's satin and diamonds gave effect
to her acting, and she was a good actor.

This picture had been delayed so long, that at last hearing the shout of
applause behind the scenes, the audience began to call for their share.
In haste, but not the less effectively, Theresa and the rest threw
themselves into attitude and the curtain was pulled aside. Daisy wished
she could have been in the drawing-room, to see the picture; she knew it
must be beautiful; but she was supporting one jewelled arm of Queen
Esther and obliged by her duty to look only at the Queen's face. Daisy
thought even that was a good deal to look at, it was so magnificently
surrounded with decoration: but at the same time she was troubled about
Nora and sorry for her own foolishness, so that her own face was
abundantly in character for the grave concern that sat upon it. This
picture met with, great favour. The people in the library were in much
glee after it was over; all but Daisy and Nora.

"It is all spoiled!" said the latter. "The evening has been hateful. I
wish I hadn't come."

"O Nora! don't say that," Daisy urged. "The pictures are almost over
now; and then we shall have supper."

"I don't want supper! I only wanted to be Queen Esther and you said I
might. It was the prettiest picture of the whole lot."

"But I couldn't help it, Nora."

"I could have done it just as well as Theresa! She didn't look handsome
a bit."

"O Nora, I think she did--for a picture."

"She didn't a bit; the things she had on looked handsome."

Daisy was called away. Her last dressing was to be done now, and the one
of which Daisy was most doubtful. She was to stand for the angel in the
"Game of Life." Other people had no doubt about it. Mrs. Sandford was
sure that the angel's wings would make a good representation, which
Daisy was slow to believe; near by, they looked so very like gauze and
pasteboard! They were arranged, at any rate, to appear as if they grew
out of her shoulders; she was arrayed in flowing white draperies over
her own little cambrick frock; and then she was ready. Hamilton came in.
He was to be the young man in the picture. Daisy liked his appearance
well. But when Preston followed him, she felt unspeakably shocked.
Preston was well got up, in one respect; he looked frightful. He wore a
black mask, ugly but not grotesque; and his whole figure was more like
the devil in the picture than Daisy had imagined it could be. She did
not like the whole business at all. There was no getting out of it now;
the picture must be given; so the performers were placed.

Hamilton and Preston sat on two sides of a chess-board, and behind them
the little angel stood watching the game. Mrs. Sandford was right. By a
skilful placing and shielding of the lamps, the lights were thrown
broadly where they ought to be, on faces and draperies, leaving the
gauze wings of the angel in such obscurity that they just shewed as it
was desired they should. The effect was extremely good, and even
artistic. The little angel herself was not in full light; it was through
a shade of gloom that her grave face of concern looked down upon the
game on the chess-board. Truly Daisy looked concerned and grave. She
thought she did not like to play such things as this. One of the
figures below her was so very wicked and devilish in its look; and
Hamilton leaned over the pieces on the board with so well-given an
expression of doubt and perplexity,--his adversary's watch was so
intent,--and the meaning of the whole was so sorrowfully deep; that
Daisy gazed unconsciously most like a guardian angel who might see with
sorrow the evil one getting the better over a soul of his care. For it
was real to Daisy. She knew that the devil does in truth try to bewitch
and wile people out of doing right into doing wrong. She knew that he
tries to get the mastery of them; that he rejoices every time to sees
them make a "false move;" that he is a great cunning enemy, all the
worse because we cannot see him, striving to draw people to their ruin;
and she thought that it was far too serious and dreadful a thing to be
made a _play_ of. She wondered if guardian angels did really watch over
poor tempted souls and try to help them. And all this brought upon
Daisy's face a shade of awe, and sorrow, and fear, which was strangely
in keeping with her character as an angel, and very singular in its
effect on the picture. The expressions of pleasure and admiration which
had burst from the company in the drawing-room at the first sight of it,
gradually stilled and ceased; and it was amid a profound and curious
silence and hush that the curtain was at length drawn upon the picture.
There were some people among the spectators not altogether satisfied in
their minds.

"How remarkable!" was the first word that came from anybody's lips in
the darkened drawing-room.

"Very remarkable!" somebody else said. "Did you ever see such acting?"

"It has all been good," said a gentleman, Mr. Sandford; "but this _was_
remarkable."

"Thanks, I suppose you know to whose management," said the soft voice of
the lady of the house.

"Management is a good thing," said the gentleman; "but there was more
than management here, Mrs. Randolph. It was uncommon, upon my word! I
suppose my wife came in for the wings, but where did the _face_ come
from?"

"Daisy," said Mr. Randolph as he found his little daughter by his side
again,--"are you here?"

"Yes, papa."

Her father put his arm round her, as if to assure himself there were no
wings in the case.

"How do you like playing pictures?"

"I think I do not like them very much--" Daisy said sedately, nestling
up to her father's side.

"Not? How is that? Your performance has been much approved."

Daisy said nothing. Mr. Randolph thought he felt a slight tremor in the
little frame.

"Do you understand the allegory of this last tableau, Daisy?" Dr.
Sandford asked.

"I do not know what an allegory is, Dr. Sandford."

"What is the meaning of the representation, then, as you think of it?"

"This last picture?"

"Yes."

"It is a trial of skill, Dr. Sandford."

The room was still darkened, and the glance of intelligence and
amusement that passed between her friend and her father, their own eyes
could scarcely catch. Daisy did not see it. But she had spoken
diplomatically. She did not want to come any nearer the subject of the
picture in talking with Dr. Sandford. His mind was different, and he
went on.

"What is the trial of skill about, Daisy?"

The child hesitated, and then said, speaking low and most unchildlike--

"It is about a human soul."

"And what do you understand are the powers at work--or at play?"

"It is not play," said Daisy.

"Answer Dr. Sandford, Daisy," said her father.

"Papa," said the child, "it isn't play. The devil tries to make people
do wrong--and if they try to do right, then there is a--"

"A what?"

"I don't know--a fight, papa."

Mr. Randolph again felt a tremor, a nervous trembling, pass over Daisy.

"You do not suppose, my darling," he said softly, "that such a fight
goes on with anything like this horrible figure that your cousin Preston
has made himself?"

"I do not suppose he looks like that, papa."

"I do not think there is such a personage at all, Daisy. I am sure you
need not trouble your little head with thinking about it."

Daisy made no answer.

"There is a struggle always going on, no doubt, between good and evil;
but we cannot paint good and evil without imagining shapes for them."

"But papa,--" said Daisy, and stopped. It was no place or time for
talking about the matter, though her father spoke low. She did not want
even Dr. Sandford to hear.

"What is it, Daisy?"

"Yes," said the doctor, "I should like to know what the argument is."

"Papa," said Daisy, awesomely,--"there is a _place_ prepared for the
devil and his angels."

Mr. Randolph was silent now. But he felt again that Daisy was nervously
excited, by the quiver that passed over her little frame.

"So you think, Daisy," said the doctor leaning towards her,--"that the
white and the black spirits have a fight over the people of this world?"

Daisy hesitated, struggled, quivered, with the feeling and the
excitement which were upon her, tried for self-command and words to
answer. Mr. Randolph saw it all and did not hurry her, though she
hesitated a good deal.

"You think they have a quarrel for us?" repeated the doctor.

"I don't know, Dr. Sandford--" Daisy answered in a strangely tender and
sober voice. It was strange to her two hearers.

"But you believe in the white spirits, I suppose, as well as in the
other branch of the connection?"

"Papa," said Daisy, her feeling breaking a little through her composure
so much as to bring a sort of cry into her voice--"there is joy among
the angels of heaven whenever anybody grows good!--"

She had turned to her father as she spoke and threw her arms round his
neck, hiding her face, with a clinging action that told somewhat of that
which was at work in her mind. Mr. Randolph perhaps guessed at it. He
said nothing; he held her close to his breast; and the curtain drew at
that moment for the last tableau. Daisy did not see it, and Mr. Randolph
did not think of it; though people said it was very good, it was only
the head and shoulders of Theresa Stanfield as an old country
schoolmistress, seen behind a picture frame, with her uplifted finger
and a bundle of rods. Theresa was so transformed that nobody would have
known her; and while the company laughed and applauded, Daisy came back
to her usual self; and slid out of her father's arms when the show was
over, all ready for supper and Nora Dinwiddie.

There was a grand supper, and everybody was full of pleasure and
complimentary speeches and discussion and praise of the tableaux. That
was among the elder portion of the company. The four or five children
were not disposed to such absolute harmony. Grapes and ices and
numberless other good things were well enjoyed, no doubt; but amidst
them all a spirit of criticism was rife.

"Daisy, your wings didn't look a bit like real wings--" said Jane
Linwood.

"No," echoed Nora, "I guess they didn't. They were like--let me see what
they were like! They were like the wings of a windmill."

"No, they weren't!" said Ella. "I was in the drawing-room--and they
didn't look like a windmill a bit. They looked queer, but pretty."

"Queer, but pretty!" repeated Nora.

"Yes, they did," said Ella. "And you laughed when you were Red
Riding-hood, Nora Dinwiddie."

"I didn't laugh a bit!"

"It is no matter if you did laugh, Nora," said Daisy;--"you got grave
again, and the picture was very nice."

"I didn't laugh!" said Nora; "and if I did, everybody else did. I don't
think the pictures I saw were at all like pictures--they were just like
a parcel of people dressed up."

Some gay paper mottoes made a diversion and stopped the little mouths
for a time; and then the people went away.

"Well Daisy," said Mrs. Gary,--"how do you like this new entertainment?"

"The pictures? I think they were very pretty, aunt Gary."

"How happened it that somebody else wore my diamonds?" said her
mother,--"and not you. I thought you were to be dressed for Queen
Esther?"

"Yes, mamma, so I was at first; and then it was thought best--"

"Not by me," said Preston. "It was no doing of mine. Daisy was to have
been Esther, and she herself declared off--backed out of it, and left me
to do as best I could."

"What was that for, Daisy?" said Mrs. Gary. "You would have made an
excellent Esther."

"What was that for, Daisy?" said Mrs. Randolph. "Did you not like to be
Esther?"

"Yes, mamma--I liked it at one time."

"And why not at another time?"

"I found out that somebody else would like it too, mamma; and I
thought----"

Mrs. Randolph broke out with a contemptuous expression of displeasure.

"You thought you would put yourself in a corner! You were not manager,
Daisy; and you must remember something is due to the one that is. You
have no right to please yourself."

"Come here, Daisy," said her father, "and bid me good night. I dare say
you were trying to please somebody else. Tell mamma she must remember
the old fable, and excuse you."

"What fable, Mr. Randolph?" the lady inquired, as Daisy left the room.

"The one in which the old Grecian told the difficulty of pleasing more
people than one or two at once."

"Daisy is ruined!" said Mrs. Randolph.

"I do not see how it appears."

"She has not entered into this thing at all as we hoped she would--not
at all as a child should."

"She looked a hundred years old, in the Game of Life," said Mrs. Gary.
"I never saw such a representation in my life. You would have said she
was a real guardian angel of somebody, who was playing his game not to
please her."

"I am glad it is over!" said Mrs. Randolph. "I am tired of it all." And
she walked off. So did Mr. Randolph, but as he went he was thinking of
Daisy's voice and her words--"There is joy among the angels of heaven
whenever anybody grows good."




CHAPTER XIX.


It was growing late in the fall now. Mrs. Randolph began to talk of
moving to the city for the winter. Mr. Randolph more than half hinted
that he would like as well to stay where he was. But his wife said that
for Daisy's sake they must quit Melbourne, and try what new scenes, and
lessons, and dancing school would do for her. "Not improve the colour in
her cheeks, I am afraid," said Mr. Randolph; but however he did not
oppose, and Mrs. Randolph made her arrangements.

It was yet but a day or two after the tableaux, when something happened
to disturb her plans. Mr. Randolph was out riding with her, one fine
October morning, when his horse became unruly in consequence of a stone
hitting him; a chance stone thrown from a careless hand. The animal was
restive, took the stone very much in dudgeon, ran, and carrying his
rider under a tree, Mr. Randolph's forehead was struck by a low-lying
limb and he was thrown off. The blow was severe; he was stunned; and had
not yet recovered his senses when they brought him back to Melbourne.
Mrs. Randolph was in a state almost as much beyond self-management.
Daisy was out of the house. Mrs. Gary had left Melbourne; and till the
doctor arrived Mrs. Randolph was nearly distracted.

He came; and though his fine face took no gloom upon it and his blue eye
was as usual impenetrable, the eyes that anxiously watched him were not
satisfied. Dr. Sandford said nothing; and Mrs. Randolph had
self-control sufficient not to question him, while he made his
examinations and applied his remedies. But the remedies, though severe,
were a good while in bringing back any token of consciousness. It came
at last, faintly. The doctor summoned Mrs. Randolph out of the room then
and ordered that his patient should be kept in the most absolute and
profound quiet. No disturbance or excitement must be permitted to come
near him.

"How long, doctor?"

"I beg your pardon, Mrs. Randolph?--"

"How long will it be before he is better?"

"I cannot say that. Any excitement or disturbance would much delay it.
Let him hear nothing and see nothing--except you, and some attendant
that he is accustomed to."

"O doctor, can't you stay till he is better?"

"I will return again very soon, Mrs. Randolph. There is nothing to be
done at present for which I am needed."

"But you will come back as soon as you can?"

"Certainly!"

"And O, Dr. Sandford, cannot you take Daisy away?"

"Where is she?"

"I don't know--she is not come home. Do take her away!"

The doctor went thoughtfully down stairs, and checking his first
movement to go out of the front door, turned to the library. Nobody was
there; but he heard voices, and passed out upon the piazza. Daisy's pony
chaise stood at the foot of the steps; she herself had just alighted.
Preston was there too, and it was his voice the doctor had first heard,
in anxious entreaty.

"Come, Daisy!--it's capital down at the river; and I want to shew you
something."

"I think I am tired now, Preston. I'll go another time," said Daisy.

"Daisy, I want you now. Come! come!--I want you to go now, this
minute."

"But I do not feel like a walk, Preston. I can't go till I have had my
dinner."

Preston looked imploringly at the doctor, towards whom Daisy was now
mounting the steps. It is safe to say that the doctor would willingly
have been spared his present task.

"Where have you been now, Daisy?" he said.

Daisy's face brightened into its usual smile at sight of him. "I have
been to Crum Elbow, Dr. Sandford."

"Suppose you go a little further and have luncheon with Mrs. Sandford
and me? It will not take us long to get to it."

"Does mamma say so, Dr. Sandford?"

"Yes."

"Then I will be ready in a moment."

"Where are you going?" said her friend stopping her.

"Only up stairs for a minute. I will be ready in two minutes, Dr.
Sandford."

"Stop," said the doctor, still detaining her. "I would rather not have
you go up stairs. Your father is not quite well, and I want him kept
quiet."

What a shadow came over Daisy's sunshine.

"Papa not well! What is the matter?"

"He does not feel quite like himself, and I wish him left in perfect
repose."

"What is the matter with him, Dr. Sandford?"

Daisy's words were quiet, but the doctor saw the gathering woe on her
cheek; the roused suspicion. This would not do to go on.

"He has had a little accident, Daisy; nothing that you need distress
yourself about; but I wish him to be quite quiet for a little."

Daisy said nothing now, but the speech of her silent face was so
eloquent that the doctor found it expedient to go on.

"He was riding this morning; his horse took him under the low bough of
a tree, and his head got a severe blow. That is all the matter."

"Was papa _thrown_?" said Daisy under her breath.

"I believe he was. Any horseman might be unseated by such a thing."

Daisy again was mute, and again the doctor found himself obliged to
answer the agony of her eyes.

"I do not think he is in much, if any, pain, Daisy; but I want him to be
still for a while. I think that is good for him; and it would not be
good that you should disturb him. Your mother is there, and that is
enough."

Daisy stood quite still for a few minutes. Then making an effort to
withdraw herself from the doctor's arm she said,

"I will not go into the room--I will not make any noise."

"Stop! Daisy, you must not go up stairs. Not this morning."

She stood still again, grew white and trembled.

"As soon as I think it will do him good to see you, I will let you into
his room. Now, shall we send June up for anything you want?"

"I think, Dr. Sandford," said Daisy struggling for steadiness, "I will
not go away from home."

Her words were inexpressibly tender and sorrowful. The doctor was
unrelenting.

"Your mother desired it."

"Did mamma----?"

"Yes; she wished me to carry you home with me. Come, Daisy! It is hard,
but it is less hard after all than it would be for you to wander about
here; and much better."

Daisy in her extremity sunk her head on the doctor's shoulder, and so
remained, motionless, for more minutes than he had to spare. Yet he was
still too, and waited. Then he spoke to her again.

"I will go," said Daisy.

"You wanted something first?"

"I did not want anything but to change my gloves. It is no matter."

Very glad to have gained his point, the doctor went off with his charge;
drove her very fast to his own home, and there left her in Mrs.
Sandford's care; while he drove off furiously again to see another
patient before he returned to Melbourne.

It was a long day after that to Daisy; and so it was to Mrs. Sandford.
Nora Dinwiddie was no longer with her; there was nobody to be a
distraction or a pleasure to the grave little child who went about with
such a weird stillness or sat motionless with such unchildlike quiet.
Mrs. Sandford did not know what to do; but indeed nothing could be done
with Daisy. She could not be amused or happy; she did not wish Nora were
there; she could only keep patient and wait, and wait, with a sore,
straining heart, while the hours passed and Dr. Sandford did not come
and she had no tidings. Was she patient? It seemed to Daisy that her
heart would burst with impatience; or rather with its eager longing to
know how things were at home and to get some relief. The hours of the
day went by, and no relief came. Dr. Sandford did not return. Daisy took
it as no good omen.

It was hard to sit at the dinner-table and have Mr. and Mrs. Sandford
shewing her kindness, while her heart was breaking. It was hard to be
quiet and still and answer politely and make no trouble for her
entertainers. It was hard; but Daisy did it. It was hard to eat too; and
that Daisy could not do. It was impossible.

"Mustn't be cast down," said Mr. Sandford. He was one of the people who
look as if they never could be. Black whiskers and a round face
sometimes have that kind of look. "Mustn't be cast down! No need.
Everybody gets a tumble from horseback once or twice in his life. I've
had it seven times. Not pleasant; but it don't hurt you much, nine times
in ten."

"Hush, Mr. Sandford," said his wife. "Daisy cannot feel about it just as
you do."

"Never been thrown yet herself, eh! Give her one of those peaches, my
dear--she will like that better than meats to-day. Eat one of my
red-cheeked peaches, Daisy; and tell me whether you have any so good at
Melbourne. I don't believe it."

Daisy peeled her peach. It was all she could bear to do. She peeled it
carefully and slowly; there never was a peach so long in paring; for it
was hardly more than finished when they rose from table. She had tried
to taste it too; that was all; the taste never reached her
consciousness. Mrs. Sandford knew better than her husband, and let her
alone.

Daisy could think of nothing now but to watch for the doctor; and to do
it with the most comfort and the best chance she placed herself on the
steps of the piazza, sitting down on the uppermost step. It was a fair
evening; warm and mild; and Mrs. Sandford sitting in her drawing-room
with the windows open was but a few feet from Daisy and could observe
her. She did so very often, with a sorrowful eye. Daisy's attitude
bespoke her intentness; the child's heart was wound up to such a pitch
of expectation that eye and ear were for nothing else. She sat bending
both upon the road by which she looked for the doctor to come; her
little figure did not stir; her head rested slightly on her hand with a
droop that spoke of weariness or of weakness. So she sat looking down
the road, and the sweet October light was all over her and all around
her. Mrs. Sandford watched her, till the light lost its brightness and
grew fair and faint, and then began to grow dim. Daisy sat still, and
Mrs. Sandford looked at her, till a step within the room drew her
attention on that side.

"Why there you are!" said the lady--"come the other way. What news?"

"I have no news."

"Yes, but how is Mr. Randolph?" The lady had dropped her voice very low.

"He is sensible."

"Sensible!" Mrs. Sandford said with a startled look; but then drawing
the doctor silently to her side she pointed to the watching, anxious
little figure there on the steps. It did not need that Dr. Sandford
should speak her name. Daisy had perfectly well heard and understood the
words that had passed; and now she rose up slowly and came towards the
doctor who stepped out to meet her.

"Well, Daisy--have you been looking for me?" he said. But something in
the little upturned face admonished him that no light words could be
borne. He sat down and took her hand.

"Your father looks better than he did this morning; but he feels badly
yet after his fall."

Daisy looked at him and was silent a moment.

"Will they send for me home?"

"Not to-night, I think. Mrs. Randolph thought better that you should
stay here. Can't you do it contentedly?"

Daisy made no audible answer; her lip quivered a very little; it did not
belie the singular patience which sat upon her brow. Her hand lay yet in
the doctor's; he held it a little closer and drew the child
affectionately to his side, keeping her there while he talked with Mrs.
Sandford upon other subjects; for he said no more about Melbourne. Still
while he talked he kept his arm round Daisy, and when tea was brought he
hardly let her go. But tea was not much more to Daisy than dinner had
been; and when Mrs. Sandford offered to shew her to her room if she
desired it, Daisy accepted the offer at once.

Mrs. Sandford herself wished to supply the place of June, and would have
done everything for her little guest if she could have been permitted.
Daisy negatived all such proposals. She could do everything for herself,
she said; she wanted no help. A bag of things had been packed for her
by June and brought in the doctor's gig. Daisy was somehow sorry to see
them; they looked like preparations for staying.

"We will send for June to-morrow, Daisy, if your mamma will leave you
still with me."

"O, I shall go home to-morrow--I hope," said Daisy. "I hope--" she
repeated humbly.

"Yes, I hope so," said Mrs. Sandford. She kissed Daisy and went away. It
was all Daisy wanted, to be alone. The October night was mild; she went
to the window; one of the windows, which looked out upon the grass and
trees of the courtyard, now lighted by a faint moon. Daisy sunk down on
her knees there; the sky and the stars were more homelike than anything
else; and she felt so strange, so miserable, as her little heart had
never known anything like before. She knew well enough what it all
meant, her mother's sending her away from home, her father's not being
able to bear any disturbance. Speak as lightly, look as calmly as they
would, she knew what was the meaning underneath people's faces and
voices. Her father had been very much hurt; quite well Daisy was assured
of that. He was too ill to see her, or too ill for her mother to like
her to see him. Daisy knelt down; she remembered she had a Father in
heaven, but it seemed at first as if she was too broken hearted to pray.
Yet down there through the still moonlight she remembered his eye could
see her and she knew he had not forgotten his little child. Daisy never
heard her door open; but it did once, and some time after it did again.

"I do not know what to do--" said Mrs. Sandford down stairs. There the
lamps made a second bright day; and the two gentlemen were busy over the
table with newspapers and books. Both of them looked up, at the sound of
her perplexed voice.

"That child,--" said Mrs. Sandford. "She is not in bed yet."

The lady stood by the table; she had just come from Daisy's room.

"What is she doing?" her husband asked.

"I don't know. She is kneeling by the open window. She was there an hour
ago, and she is there yet. She has not moved since."

"She has fallen asleep--" suggested Mr. Sandford. "I should say, wake
her up."

"She is too wide awake now. She is lifting her little face to the sky,
in a way that breaks my heart. And there she has been, this hour and
more."

"Have some supper directly, and call her down,--" was the second
suggestion of the master of the house. "It will be supper-time soon.
Here--it's some time after nine."

"Grant, what is the matter with Mr. Randolph? Is it very serious?"

"Mrs. Randolph thinks so, I believe. Have you spoken to Daisy?"

"No, and I cannot. Unless I had good news to carry to her."

"Where is she?" said the doctor getting up.

"In the room next to yours."

So Mrs. Sandford sat down and the doctor went up stairs. The next thing
he stood behind Daisy at her window. She was not gazing into the sky
now; the little round head lay on her arms on the window-sill.

"What is going on here?" said a soft voice behind her.

"O! Dr. Sandford--" said the child jumping up. She turned and faced her
friend, with a face so wistful and searching, so patient, yet so
strained with its self-restraint and fear, that the doctor felt it was
something serious with which he had to do. He did not attempt a light
tone before that little face; he felt that it would not pass.

"I came up to see _you_" he said. "I have nothing new to tell, Daisy.
What are you about?"

"Dr. Sandford," said the child, "won't you tell me a little?"

The inquiry was piteous. For some reason or other, the doctor did not
answer it with a put-off, nor with flattering words, as doctors are so
apt to do. Perhaps it was not his habit, but certainly in other respects
he was not too good a man to do it. He sat down and let the moonlight
show Daisy his face.

"Daisy," he said, "your father was stunned by his blow, and needs to be
kept in perfect quiet for a time, until he is quite over it. People
after such a fall often do; but I do not know that any other
consequences whatever will follow."

"He was stunned--" repeated Daisy.

"Yes."

The child did not say any more, yet her eyes of searching eagerness
plainly asked for fuller information. They were not content nor at rest.

"Can't you have patience and hope for other tidings to-morrow?"

"May I?--" said Daisy.

"May you? Certainly. It was your mother's wish to send you here--not
mine. It was not needful; though if you could be content, I think it
would be well."

She looked a little relieved; very little.

"Now what are you doing? Am I to have two patients on my hand in your
family?"

"No, sir."

"What are you doing then, up so late? Watching the stars?"

"No, sir."

"I am your physician--you know you must tell me everything. What were
you about, Daisy?"

"Dr. Sandford," said Daisy, in difficulty how to speak,--"I was seeking
comfort."

And with the word, somehow, Daisy's self-restraint failed; her head
went down on the doctor's shoulder; and when she lifted it up there were
two or three tears that needed to be brushed away. No more; but the
doctor felt the slight little frame tremble.

"Did you find comfort, Daisy?" he said kindly. "I ask as your physician;
because if you are using wrong measures for that end I shall forbid
them. What were you doing to get comfort?"

"I did not want to go to sleep, sir."

"Daisy, I am going to carry you down to have some supper."

"O, I do not want any, Dr. Sandford!"

"Are you ready to go down?"

"No sir--in a minute,--I only want to brush my hair."

"Brush it, then."

Which Daisy did; then coming to her friend with a face as smoothly in
order as the little round head, she repeated humbly,

"I do not want anything, Dr. Sandford."

"Shall I carry you down?"

"O no, sir."

"Come then. One way or the other. And Daisy, when we are down stairs,
and when you come up again, you must obey my orders."

The supper-table was laid. Mrs. Sandford expressed delight at seeing
Daisy come in, but it would maybe have been of little avail had her
kindness been the only force at work. It was not. The doctor prescribed
peaches and bread, and gave Daisy grapes and a little bit of cold
chicken; and was very kind and very imperative too; and Daisy did not
dare nor like to disobey him. She eat the supper, which tasted good when
he made her eat it; and then was dismissed up stairs to bed, with orders
to go straight to sleep. And Daisy did as she was told.




CHAPTER XX.


The doctor's horse was before the door, and Daisy was on the piazza. The
doctor came out, ready for his day's work.

"Do you want me to do anything for you at Melbourne, Daisy?"

"Cannot I go home to-day, Dr. Sandford?"

"I do not know. Supposing that you be still kept in banishment--what
then?"

Daisy struggled with herself--succeeded, and spoke calmly.

"I should like to have Loupe sent, Dr. Sandford, if you please."

"Loupe? what is that? What is Loupe, Daisy?"

"My pony, sir. My pony chaise."

"Oh!--Not to drive to Melbourne?"

Daisy met the doctor's blue eye full, and answered with guileless
submission. "No, sir."

"I will send Loupe. By the way--Daisy, have you business on hand?"

"Yes, sir."

"So much that you can do none for me?"

"O no, sir. I have not a great deal of business. What may I do, Dr.
Sandford?"

"Can you go to Crum Elbow?"

"Yes, sir. I have got to go there."

"All right, then. Daisy, there is a poor family down by the railway
that were burnt out a night or two ago; they have lost everything. The
neighbours will have to supply them with a few things. Will you go to
the village and buy clothing for two little children, six and seven
years old? One is a girl, the other a boy."

The doctor took out his pocket-book and began to look over bank bills.

"Dresses, do you mean, Dr. Sandford?--and a boy's dress?"

"I mean, everything they need to put on--dresses and petticoats, and
jacket and trowsers, and a shirt or two for the boy. Here is money,
Daisy; spend whatever you find needful."

"But, Dr. Sandford--"

"Well?"

"I don't believe Mr. Lamb keeps those things ready made."

"I am sure he does not. Buy the stuff, Daisy--all the stuff--we will see
about getting it made afterwards. You can consult my sister, Mrs.
Sandford, about quantities and all that; or I dare say the storekeeper
can tell you."

So away went the doctor. Daisy felt in great need of consulting
somebody; but Mrs. Sandford was busy, and so engaged that there was no
chance for several hours. Not indeed before the pony chaise came; and
Daisy resolved then to wait no longer, but to do some other business
first.

The news that she eagerly asked for from Melbourne was not much when she
got it. Sam knew little; he believed Mr. Randolph was better, he said;
but his tone of voice was not very encouraging, and Daisy drove off to
Juanita's cottage. There was one person, she knew, who could feel with
her; and she went with a sort of eagerness up the grassy pathway from
the road to the cottage door, to get that sympathy.

Juanita was within, busy at some ironing. The work fell from her hands
and the iron was set down with an expression of pleasure as she saw
Daisy come in. The next minute her tone changed and her look.

"What ails my love?"

"Juanita--" said Daisy standing still and pale by the ironing table,
"--haven't you heard? Papa--"

"What, Miss Daisy?"

"Papa--he was knocked off his horse yesterday--_and they won't let me
see him!_"

So far Daisy's power of composure went, and no further. With that last
word her voice failed. She threw her arms around Juanita, and hiding her
face in her gown, burst into such tears as Daisy rarely shed at all;
very rarely under any one's observation. Juanita, very much startled,
sat down and drew the child into her arms, so far as she could; for
Daisy had sunk on her knees, and with her face in Juanita's lap was
weeping all her heart out. Mrs. Benoit hardly knew how to ask questions.

"Why must not Miss Daisy see her papa?"

"I don't know!--I suppose--he's not well enough."

Juanita breathed more freely.

"Let us pray for him, Miss Daisy."

"O yes, Juanita, do!--"

There was an intensity of meaning in these words and in Daisy's hurried
assuming of another place and posture to leave Juanita free to kneel
too, that almost took away the black woman's power of speech. She read
what was breaking the child's heart; she knew what for was that
suppressed cry of longing. For a moment Juanita was silent. But she had
long known not only trouble but the refuge from trouble; and to that
refuge she now went, and carried Daisy. As one goes who has often been
there; who has many a time proved it a sure refuge; who knows it sure
and safe and unfailing. So she prayed; while Daisy's sobs at first were
excessive, and then by degrees calmed and quieted and ceased. They were
quite still before Juanita finished; and when they rose up from their
knees Daisy's face was composed again. Then, she came and stood with her
hand on Juanita's shoulder, both of them silent; till Daisy put her lips
to the fine olive-dark cheek of the old woman and kissed it. Juanita
drew her into her arms, and Daisy sat there, nestling and tired.

"Can Miss Daisy trust the Lord?"

"Trust him,--how. Juanita?"

"That he do no harm to his little child?"

"O it isn't _me_, Juanita--" Daisy said with a very tender and sad
accent.

"When Joseph--my love knows the story--when he was sold away from his
father and home, to be servant of strangers far off--maybe he thought it
was hard times. But the Lord meant it for good, and the father and the
child came together again, in a happy day."

Daisy rose up, or rather raised her head, and looked steadily in her
friend's face as if to see what this might mean.

"The Lord knoweth them that trust in him," said the black woman.

Daisy's head went down again; and there was a long silence. It was
broken at last by Juanita's offering her some refreshment; and then
Daisy started up to the business on hand. She explained to Juanita where
she was staying, and what she had that morning to do. Meanwhile Juanita
made her take some bread and milk.

"So how much must I get, Juanita? can you tell me? how much for two
little frocks, and two little petticoats, and one suit of boy's
clothes?"

"My love knows, it must be accordin' to the stuff. If the stuff narrow,
she want more; if wide, she want less."

"Then you cannot tell me;--and Mrs. Sandford could not either. And I
cannot tell. What shall I do?"

"Mrs. Sandford maybe get the things for Miss Daisy."

"No, she must not. Dr. Sandford wants me to do it. I must get them,
Juanita."

"Hm! Suppose I put up my irons and walk round to the village--and Miss
Daisy go in her shay."

"To the store!" cried Daisy. "O yes, Juanita; get ready, and I will take
you with me. Then you can tell me all about it."

Juanita demurred and objected to this proposal, but Daisy was greatly
pleased and would have it so. Mrs. Benoit put up her ironing work, and
arrayed her head in a new clean bright handkerchief, wonderfully put on;
she was ready then; and Sam grinned to see the tall fine figure of the
old coloured woman sitting in the pony chaise by the side of his little
mistress. It was as good to Daisy as anything could have been that day.
They drove into Crum Elbow, went to the store; and there she and Juanita
had a pretty large morning's business in choosing the various goods Dr.
Sandford had desired Daisy to get. Daisy got excited over it. Calico for
a little frock, and muslin for the underclothes, and stuff for the boy's
jacket and trowsers and shirt; Juanita knew the quantities necessary,
and Daisy had only the trouble of choice and judgment of various kinds.
But that was a great responsibility, seeing she was doing it for Dr.
Sandford. It took a good while. Then Daisy drove Juanita home again,
gave her another kiss, and with her carriage load of dry goods and a
tired and hungry little body went home to Mrs. Sandford's.

It was then pretty late in the day, and the doctor not come in. Daisy
dressed, and went down to the drawing-room to wait for him. Not long
this time. There was a certain air of calm strength about Dr. Sandford's
face and cool blue eye, that Daisy loved; she felt she loved it now, as
she saw him come in; she trusted him. He spoke first to his brother and
sister; then came where Daisy was standing, sat down on the sofa and
placed her beside him.

"I have no bad news for you, Daisy," he said kindly,--"and not the good
news neither that you are looking for. Your father is no worse, though
it will require several days to let him recover from the immediate
effects of his accident. The quieter he is meanwhile the better."

"And mamma--she said--?"

"She said--yes, you have guessed it; she would like to have you remain
here for a few days longer. She thinks you are better under my care than
under hers."

"Under _my_ care, I think it is," said Mrs. Sandford.

"Can you bear it, Daisy?"

She looked up meekly and answered, "Yes, Dr. Sandford." So meekly that
the doctor's eye took special note of her.

"Have you been to Crum Elbow to-day?"

"Yes, sir. I got all the things."

"All of them?"

"Yes, sir."

"What reward shall I give you?"

She had been speaking with a sad meekness, a sober self restraint,
unlike her years. If Dr. Sandford meant to break it up, which I think he
did, he had partial success. Daisy looked up and smiled at him. But yet
it was a meek smile, and sad even in its composed denial of any notion
of reward. Not satisfactory to the doctor.

"I always repay anybody that does me any service," he went on.

"Ought one always to do that?" said Daisy.

"What is your judgment?"

"I think _everybody_ could not."

"Why not?"

"Some people have nothing to pay with,--for things that are done for
them."

"I do not believe that."

"_Some_ people, Dr. Sandford?"

"Whom do you know in that condition--for instance?"

"Why, I--for instance."

"You! What cannot you pay for?"

"A great many things," said Daisy slowly. "Hardly any thing. I am only a
child."

"How is it about Molly Skelton? Does she pay you for the various
attentions she receives from you?"

"Pay me, Dr. Sandford! I do not want pay."

"You are very unlike me, then," said the doctor; "that is all I have to
say."

"Why Dr. Sandford, what pay could she give me?"

"Don't you get any, then?"

"Why no, sir," said Daisy, eagerly answering the doctor's blue eye.
"Except--yes, of course, I get a sort of pay; but Molly does not--yes
she _does_ give it to me; but I mean, she does not mean to pay me."

The doctor smiled, one of those rare pleasant smiles, that shewed his
white teeth in a way that Daisy liked; it was only a glimmer.

"What sort of pay is that?--which she gives, and does not mean to give,
and you take and do not ask for?"

"O!--_that_ sort of pay!" said Daisy. "Is it _that_ sort you mean, Dr.
Sandford?"

"That is one sort."

"But I mean, is it the sort that you always give, you say?"

"Always, when people deserve it. And then, do you not think it is
natural to wish to give them, if you can, some other sort of pay?"

"I think it is," said Daisy sedately.

"I am glad you do not disapprove of it."

"But I do not think people _want_ that other kind of pay. Dr. Sandford."

"Perhaps not. I suppose it is a selfish gratification of oneself to give
it."

Daisy looked so earnestly and so curiously at him, as if to see what all
this was about, that the doctor must have had good command of his lips
not to smile again.

They went in to dinner just then and the conversation stopped. But
though not talked to, Daisy was looked after; and when she had forgotten
all about dinner and was thinking mournfully of what was going on at
home, a slice of roast beef or a nice peach would come on her plate with
a word from the doctor--"You are to eat that, Daisy"--and though he said
no more, somehow Daisy always chose to obey him. At last they went into
the drawing-room again and were drinking coffee. Daisy was somewhat
comforted; she thought Dr. Sandford did not act as if there were
anything very dreadful the matter at home.

"Daisy," said the doctor, "you have done work for me to-day--would you
object to be paid?"

Daisy looked up smiling; it depended on what the pay might be, she
thought; but she said nothing.

"Would it be violently against your principles?"

"I do not want pay, Dr. Sandford."

"Not if I were to offer to give you a sight of those little baskets on
the frond of the _Marchantia_?"

Daisy's face all changed; but she said in the quietest manner, "Can you
do that, Dr. Sandford?"

"Come with me."

He held out his hand, which Daisy willingly took, and they went up
stairs together. Just short of her room the doctor stopped, and turned
into his own. This was a very plain apartment; there was no beauty of
furniture, though it struck Daisy there was a great deal of something.
There were boxes, and cabinets, and shelves full of books and boxes, and
bookcases, and one or two tables. Yet it was not a pretty-looking room,
like the others in Mrs. Sandford's house. Daisy was a little
disappointed. The doctor however gave her a chair, and then brought one
of the unlikely deal boxes to the table and opened it. Daisy forgot
everything. There appeared a polished, very odd brass machine, which the
doctor took out and spent some time in adjusting. Daisy patiently looked
on.

"Do you know what this is, Daisy?"

"No, sir."

"It is a microscope. And looking through this, you will see what you
could not see with your two eyes alone; there are some strong magnifying
glasses here--and I found to-day some plants of Marchantia growing in a
sheltered place. Here is one of the baskets for you--"

"Is it on that bit of green leaf?"

"Yes, but you can see nothing there. Try this view."

[Illustration]

He stood back and helped Daisy to take a kneeling position in her chair,
so that her eye could reach the eye-piece of the microscope. Daisy
looked, took her eye away to give a wondering glance of inquiry at her
friend's face, and then applied it to the microscope again; a pink hue
of delight actually spreading over her poor little pale cheeks. It was
so beautiful, so wonderful. Again Daisy took her eye away to examine out
of the glass the coarse little bit of green leaf that lay upon the
stand; and looked back at the show in the microscope with a bewitched
mind. It seemed as if she could never weary of looking from one to the
other. The doctor bade her take her own time, and Daisy took a good
deal.

"What stuffs did you buy this morning?" the doctor asked. Daisy drew
back from the microscope.

"I got all you told me, sir?"

"Exactly. I forget what that was."

"I bought a little piece of red and green linsey-woolsey for a frock
for the little girl--and some brown strong stuff for the boy's suit; and
then white muslin to make things for the girl, and blue check for the
boy's shirt."

"Just right. Did your money hold out?"

"O I had three dollars and two shillings left, Dr. Sandford. Two
shillings and sixpence, I believe."

"You did well." The doctor was arranging something else in the
microscope. He had taken out the bit of liverwort.

"I had Juanita to help me," said Daisy.

"How do you suppose I am going to get all those things made up?" said
the doctor.

"Won't Mrs. Sandford attend to it?"

"Mrs. Sandford has her own contribution to attend to. I do not wish to
give her mine too."

"Cannot the children's mother make the things?"

The doctor's lip curled in funny fashion.

"They have no mother, I think. There is an old aunt, or grandmother, or
something, that does _not_ take care of the children. I shall not trust
the business certainly to her."

Daisy wondered a little that Mrs. Sandford, who was so good-natured,
could not do what was needful; but she said nothing.

"I think I shall turn over the whole thing in charge to you, Daisy?"

"But, Dr. Sandford, what can _I_ do?"

"Drive down with me to-morrow and see how big the children are, and then
have the things made."

"But I am afraid I do not know enough."

"I dare say you can find out. _I_ do not know enough--that is very
certain; and I have other things to attend to besides overseeing
mantua-makers."

"Our seamstress could do it,--if I could see her."

"Very well, then some other seamstress can. Now, Daisy--you may look at
this."

"What a beautiful thing! But what is it, Dr. Sandford?"

"What does it look like?"

"It does not look like anything that I ever saw."

"It is a scale from a butterfly's wing."

"Why, it is as large as a small butterfly," said Daisy.

The doctor shewed her where the little scale lay, so little that she
could hardly see it out of the glass; and Daisy went back to the
contemplation of its magnified beauty with immense admiration. Then her
friend let her see the eye of a bee, and the tongue of a fly, and divers
other wonders, which kept Daisy busy until an hour which was late for
her. Busy and delightfully amused.




CHAPTER XXI.


One day passed after another, and Daisy looked longingly for her summons
home, and still she did not receive it. Her fears and agonies were
somewhat quieted; because Dr. Sandford assured her that her father was
getting better; but he never said that her father was well, or that he
had not been very ill. Daisy knew that the matter had been very serious
that had prevented her being at Melbourne all these days. Her imaginings
of evil were doubtful and dim; but it seemed to her that her father
himself would have commanded her presence in all ordinary circumstances;
and a doubt like an ice-wind sometimes swept over her little spirit,
whether he could be too ill to know of her absence! No word that could,
be said would entirely comfort Daisy while this state of things lasted;
and it was very well for her that she had a wise and energetic friend
watching over her welfare, in the meanwhile. If business could keep her
from pining and hinder her from too much imagining, Dr. Sandford took
care that she had it. He contrived that she should indeed oversee the
making of the dresses for the poor children, and it was a very great
charge for Daisy. A great responsibility; it lay on her mind for days,
and gave occasion for a number of drives to Crum Elbow and to Juanita's
cottage. Then at evening, after hearing her report progress, the doctor
would take Daisy up to his room, and shew her many a wonder and beauty
that little Daisy had never dreamed of before; and the friendship
between the two grew closer than ever.

"Grant, you are a good fellow!" said Mrs. Sandford one night. "I do not
know what I should do with that child, if it were not for you."

"You would do nothing. She would not be here if it were not for me."

"I do not suppose, however, that your care for her is dictated by a
conscientious regard for that fact. It is good of you."

"She is my patient, Mrs. Sandford."

"Yes, yes; _im_patient would be the word with some young men."

"I am glad you do not class me with such young men."

"Well, no child ever gave less cause for impatience, I will say that.
Nor had more. Poor child! How she looks at you every day when you come
home! But I suppose you doctors get hard hearts."

Dr. Sandford's lips curled a little into one of the smiles that Daisy
liked, but he said nothing.

Daisy did look hard at her friend those days, but it was only when he
came home. So she was not expecting anything the next morning when he
said to her,

"Daisy--will you take a ride with me?"

Daisy looked up. The doctor was sitting by the breakfast-table, poring
over a newspaper. Breakfast was done, and Daisy herself busy with a
book. So she only answered,

"If you please, Dr. Sandford."

"Where shall we go?"

Daisy looked surprised. "I supposed you had business, sir."

"So I have. I am going to visit a patient. Perhaps you would like to
make the visit with me."

"To one of your patients, Dr. Sandford?"

"Yes, one. Not more than one. But I think that one would like to see
you."

A light came into Daisy's face, and colour started upon her cheeks,
almost painfully.

"Dr. Sandford--do you mean--"

"I think so, Daisy," said her friend quietly. "It will do no harm,--if
you are a good child."

He was so quiet, that it stilled Daisy's feeling, which else might have
been impetuous. There was danger of that, as the child's eye and cheek
bore witness. But she only said, "I'll get ready, Dr. Sandford--" and
went off in orderly style till she reached the hall and was out of
sight. Then Daisy's feet made haste up the stairs. In three minutes she
was back again, with her hat and gloves in her hand.

The doctor threw down his newspaper and drew her up to him.

"Daisy, can you be quiet?"

"I think so, Dr. Sandford."

"I think so too; therefore I tell you beforehand that I wish it. Your
father has not fully recovered his strength yet; and it would not be
good for him to be excited. You will be very glad to see him, and he
will be very glad to see you; that is quite enough; and it would be too
much, if you were to shew him _how_ glad you are."

Daisy said nothing, but she thought within herself she could not do
that!

"Can you command yourself, Daisy?"

"I will try, Dr. Sandford."

"You _must_ do it--for my sake," added the doctor.

"Dr. Sandford," said Daisy, "was that what you meant?"

"When?"

"When you said, if I was a good child?"

"It must have been that I meant, I think. I could have said it in no
other connection."

"The pony-chaise, ma'am, for Miss Randolph--" said a servant at the
door.

"The chaise may go away again, Daisy, I suppose," said Mrs. Sandford.
"You will not want it."

"Yes, she will," said the doctor,--"to drive to Melbourne. Go, Daisy,
since you are ready; I will follow you. That little waddling fellow can
be overtaken without any great difficulty."

"Do you want me to drive slowly, sir?"

"Not at all," said the doctor; "only drive well, for I shall come and
see."

If ever a little pride in her driving accomplishments had lodged in
Daisy's mind, she certainly did not feel it that afternoon. She drove
without knowing very well how she drove; she did not think of Dr.
Sandford's criticism, or admiration; what she thought of, was the miles
of the road to Melbourne.

They were not very many, and unconsciously the eager spirit in Daisy's
fingers made itself known to Loupe's understanding, through the medium
of the reins. He travelled better than usual, so that they were not more
than half way from Melbourne when the doctor's gig overtook them. And
then Loupe went better yet.

"Remember, Daisy, and keep quiet--" said the doctor as he took her out
of the chaise. Daisy trembled, but she followed him steadily through the
hall and up the stairs and into her father's room. Then she went before
him, yet even then she went with a moderated step, and stood by her
father's couch at last silent and breathless. Breathless with the very
effort she made to keep silent and quiet. With excitement too; for Mr.
Randolph was looking feeble and pale, more than Daisy had ever seen him,
and it frightened her. He was not in bed but on a sofa and as Daisy came
to his side he put out his arm and drew his little daughter close to
him. Without a word at first and Daisy stooped her lips to his, and then
stood hiding her face on his shoulder; perfectly quiet, though
trembling with contained emotion, and not daring to say anything lest
she should say too much.

"Daisy," said her father,--"Daisy,--do you know I have been ill?"

There was a little, little tone of surprise or disappointment in the
voice. Daisy felt it, knew it, but what could she do? She was afraid to
speak to say anything. She turned her face a little to Dr. Sandford; he
saw an agony struggling in the eye that appealed to him. This was not
what he wanted.

"She knows it almost too well," he said, coming to the rescue; "I have
been her gaoler all these days; a severe one."

"Are you glad to see me, Daisy?" said Mr. Randolph.

Daisy half raised herself, half glanced at his face, and turning from
him threw herself upon Dr. Sandford's arm with a cry and gave way to a
deep passion of weeping. Deep and still; her sobs could not but be
heard, but they were kept under as much as the heaving of that little
breast could bear. Mr. Randolph's pale face flashed; and the doctor saw
that his precautions had been too good.

"Why Daisy!" he said lightly, "is this your self-command?"

"Let me have her--" said Mr. Randolph. "Self-command is a good thing,
doctor; but people may have too much of it."

And getting hold of Daisy's hand, which the doctor brought within his
reach, he again drew the sobbing child to his breast and folded her
close in both his arms. The sobs were very soon hushed; but during all
the rest of the doctor's visit and through all the conversation that
took place, Daisy and her father never changed their position. The
conversation indeed was not much, being confined to a few quiet
questions and answers and remarks; and then Dr. Sandford took his
departure, leaving Daisy very unconscious of his movements. He only
waved his hand to Mr. Randolph, with a smile at Daisy who did not see
him.

"Daisy--my darling--" said Mr. Randolph, when he was gone.

"Papa!--" came in a whisper.

"What is the matter?"

Daisy lifted her face from its resting place and kissed, with kisses
that were like velvet, first one side of her father's mouth and then the
other.

"Papa--Dr. Sandford told me I must keep quiet."

"Well, you shall," said Mr. Randolph. "That is right enough. You shall
keep quiet, and I will go to sleep."

So he did. But he did not loose his hold of Daisy; and she lay, still as
happiness could make her, with her head upon his breast. She knew, she
was conscious, that he must be very feeble yet, to go to sleep in that
way; but she was with him again, and in his arms, and her heart was so
full of joy that it could do nothing but overflow in silent
thanksgivings and prayers. Daisy would not have stirred till he did, no
matter how long it might have been; but there came an interruption. A
door opened, and Mrs. Randolph appeared on the threshold, and so soon as
she saw Daisy beckoned her to come to another room. Mr. Randolph's arms
had relaxed their hold somewhat, and Daisy obeyed the signal and left
him.

Her mother wanted then to know all the story of her days at Mrs.
Sandford's; and Daisy had a good deal to tell. That is, Mrs. Randolph's
questionings made it so. Daisy herself would not have had it a long
story. Then, she must see June, and Joanna; and then came dinner. It was
not till the afternoon was well passed that the call came for her to go
to her father again. Daisy had watched and waited for it; her mother had
forbidden her to go in without it. At last she was sent for, and Daisy
sprang away.

Mrs. Randolph was there.

"No noise!--remember," she said, lifting her finger as Daisy came in.
Daisy came near slowly. Her father held out his hand to her, and folded
her in his arms again.

"You are such a noisy child!" he said,--"your mother does wisely to warn
you."

"She is an excitable child,"--said Mrs. Randolph;--"and I think you want
warning too."

"We will keep each other quiet," said Mr. Randolph.

The lady looked on, with what seemed a doubtful eye. Nobody watched it.
Her husband's eyes were often closed; Daisy's little head lay on his
breast, quiet enough, unless when she moved it to give soft noiseless
kisses to her father's cheek. They remained so a good while, with scarce
any word spoken; and Mrs. Randolph was busy at her tetting. The light
faded; the evening drew on.

"It is time for Daisy's tea." It was the first thing that broke a long
silence.

"She and I will have it together," said Mr. Randolph.

"Will that be best for you, Mr. Randolph?"

"I hope so."

"I doubt it."

"Most things in this world are doubtful," said Mr. Randolph; "but we
will try."

"Will you choose to have tea now, then?"

"Now?--no."

"This is Daisy's time."

"Very well. She must wait for my time."

Not a word did Daisy say; only little alternate throbs of joy and fear,
as her father or her mother spoke, passed through her heart. Mrs.
Randolph gave it up; and there was another hour of quiet, very sweet to
Daisy. Then lights were brought, and again Mrs. Randolph proposed, to
have the tea served; but again Mr. Randolph negatived her proposal; and
things remained as they were. At last Mrs. Randolph was summoned to
preside at the tea-table down stairs; for even now there were one or two
guests at Melbourne. Then there was a stir in the room up stairs. The
tray came with Mr. Randolph's supper; and Daisy had the delight of
sharing it and of being his attendant in chief. He let her do what she
would; and without being unquiet, Daisy and her father enjoyed
themselves over that entertainment.

"Now I think I could bear a little reading," said Mr. Randolph, as he
laid his head back on his couch.

"What, papa?" said Daisy, a sudden hope starting into some dark corner
of her heart, almost without her knowing it.

"What?--what you please."

"Shall I read what, I like, papa?"

"Yes. If I do not like it, I will tell you."

Daisy ran away and flew through the rooms to her own, and there hastily
sought her Bible. She could not wait to get another; she took her own
and ran back softly with it. Her father's languid eye watched the little
white figure coming towards him, book in hand; the gentle eager step,
the slight flush on the cheek; till she took her seat beside him.

"What have you got there, Daisy?" he asked.

"Papa--my Bible."

"Well--what are you going to read?"

"I don't know, papa--" said Daisy doubtfully. What would come next?

"Do you remember your picture, the 'Game of Life'?"

"Yes, papa."

"Do you remember your talk about good and evil spirits?"

"Yes, sir."

"Find me the grounds of your philosophy."

Daisy thought what that might mean, and guessed at it. She turned to the
twenty-fifth chapter of Matthew, a favourite chapter, and read the
parable of the sheep and the goats. The servant had withdrawn; Daisy
and her father were alone. There was a moment's pause when she had done.

"Is that all?" said Mr. Randolph.

"That is all of _this_, papa."

"There is nothing there about the rejoicings of the good spirits,"--said
Mr. Randolph.

Daisy's fingers trembled, she hardly knew why, as she turned over the
leaves to find the place. Her father watched her.

"Are you sure it is there, Daisy?"

"O yes, papa--it is in the story of the man with a hundred sheep--I will
find it directly."

So she did, and read the parable in the fifteenth chapter of Luke. Her
father listened with shut eyes, while the child's voice gave the words
in a sort of sweet clear gravity.

"'Then drew near unto him all the publicans and sinners for to hear him.
And the Pharisees and scribes murmured, saying, This man receiveth
sinners, and eateth with them. And he spake this parable unto them,
saying, What man of you, having an hundred sheep, if he lose one of
them, doth not leave the ninety and nine in the wilderness, and go after
that which is lost, until he find it? And when he hath found it, he
layeth it on his shoulders, rejoicing. And when he cometh home, he
calleth together his friends and neighbours, saying unto them, Rejoice
with me; for I have found my sheep which was lost. I say unto you, that
likewise joy shall be in heaven over one sinner that repenteth, more
than over ninety and nine just persons, which need no repentance. Either
what woman, having ten pieces of silver, if she lose one piece, doth not
light a candle, and sweep the house, and seek diligently till she find
it? And when she hath found it, she calleth her friends and her
neighbours together, saying, Rejoice with, me; for I have found the
piece which I had lost. Likewise I say unto you, there is joy in the
presence of the angels of God over one sinner that repenteth.'"

There Daisy stopped, and there was silence. Presently her father opened
his eyes. He saw that hers were full, but they were not looking at her
book, neither at him; they were gazing away at the light, with an
intent, very serious expression.

"Daisy!--" said her father.

She came back instantly to a sweet happy look at him.

"What were you studying?"

"Papa!--I was thinking--"

"What were you thinking?"

"I was thinking, papa," said Daisy unwillingly,--"how strange it is that
anybody should try to _hide himself from God_."

She started a little and rose up, for her mother stood on the other side
of the light now. Mrs. Randolph's voice was a note belonging to another
chord.

"Daisy, it is your bedtime."

"Yes, mamma."

Mr. Randolph made no attempt to hinder his wife's arrangements this
time. Daisy exchanged a very tender good-night with him and then went
away. But she went away very happy. She thought she saw good days
coming.

There were good days that followed that one, for a while. Daisy's
readings and sweet companionship with her father were constant, and grew
sweeter as he grew stronger. But the strengthening process was not
rapid. About a fortnight had passed, when Mrs. Sandford one day made
enquiry about it of her brother-in-law.

"Slow work--" said the doctor.

"He will get over it, won't he?"

"I hope he will."

"But cannot anything be done for him, Grant?"

"He is going to do the best thing. He is going to Europe."

"To Europe!--This winter?"

"Now, in a few weeks, or less."

"It will be good for your pet Daisy."

"Doubtfully--" said the doctor with a very complicated expression of
face; but he was taking off his boot at the moment, and maybe it
pinched him. "She will not go."

"Not go! Daisy! Does not her mother go?"

"Yes."

"And not Daisy? Why not Daisy?"

"She gives so much trouble--" said the doctor.

"Trouble!--I thought her parents were so fond of her."

"Mr. Randolph is unequal to any agitation; and Mrs. Randolph regulates
everything."

"But wouldn't it be good for Daisy?"

"I think so."

"Poor child! What will they do with her?"

"Send her to a Southern plantation, under care of a governess, as I
understand."

"It will half kill Daisy," said Mrs. Sandford.

"It takes a great deal to kill people," said the doctor.

"I do not know how to believe you," said the lady. "Is it all fixed and
settled. Grant?"

"They leave Melbourne next week."


THE END.






End of Project Gutenberg's Melbourne House, Volume 2, by Susan Warner

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MELBOURNE HOUSE, VOLUME 2 ***

***** This file should be named 12964.txt or 12964.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/1/2/9/6/12964/

Produced by Karen Lofstrom and PG Distributed Proofreaders

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
