The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Mirror of Literature, Amusement, and
Instruction, No. 494., by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Mirror of Literature, Amusement, and Instruction, No. 494.

Author: Various

Release Date: August 2, 2004 [EBook #13090]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MIRROR OF LITERATURE ***




Produced by Jonathan Ingram, Victoria Woosley and PG Distributed
Proofreaders








THE MIRROR OF LITERATURE, AMUSEMENT, AND INSTRUCTION.



No. 494.]     SATURDAY, JUNE 18, 1831.     [Price 2d.



[Illustration.]


EXETER HALL, STRAND.


We rejoice to see the site of Burleigh House partly occupied by the
above Building. Its object is to afford accommodation for the meetings
of Philanthropic Societies--so that whatever may be the olden
celebrity of the spot, it is reasonable to expect that its present
appropriation will be associated with the most grateful recollections.

This building is, perhaps, the most perfect erection of its kind in
England. The approach from the Strand is remarkably modest: it is by a
very narrow, though very chaste, door-way, situated between two
Corinthian columns and pilasters. Within the door is a hall, with two
flights of steps, which afterwards unite, and lead up to the entrance
of the great hall itself; the hall below leads into a broad passage,
which extends to the farther extremity of the building, opening right
and left into various offices. On entering the door of the great hall,
a vast and splendid room is presented to view, with scarcely a single
interruption to the eye throughout its whole extent, capable of
containing, with comfort, more than 3,000 persons. The floor is
covered with substantial oak seats, equal to the accommodation of
2,500 persons. The greater portion of these are situated on a gentle
rise, to permit a perfect view of the platform on which the
proceedings take place. The platform is raised about six feet from the
floor, and extends the whole breadth of the room, curving inwards, the
extremities bending towards the audience: it contains seats for nearly
300 individuals. Behind this gallery again, are very capacious
recesses, which will hold from three to four hundred persons. The
lower part of the walls of the room is quite plain, the architect,
probably, regarding the audience as a sufficient ornament in that
quarter, though the rising of the seats would obscure carved-work if
it were there. The windows are at a considerable height from the
ground, and are of dimmed glass, with a chaste and classical border.
The ceiling, which is at a noble height, is beautifully laid out in
squares, with borderings and rosettes. An oblong opening occurs in the
centre, with massive beams stretching across, presenting to view an
erection in the roof, a form of construction, probably, necessary to
so immense a mass of roofing, and serving also for the purposes of
ventilation, as it contains windows at each end. There are four
pillars near the end of the hall, rising to the ceiling, the capitals
of which, as also those of some pilasters at the upper extremity of
the hall, are exquisitely carved in straw-coloured marble. Behind the
platform are numerous and convenient committee-rooms. The word
"Philadelpheion," which may be rendered "loving brothers," is carved
in Greek capitals over the entrance in the Strand.[1]

Exeter Hall has been erected by subscription, by a public company
established for the purpose.

    [1] Ballot Newspaper.

       *       *       *       *       *


WILLS OF SHAKSPEARE, MILTON AND BUONAPARTE.

(_To the Editor._)


The last wills and testaments of the three greatest men of modern ages
are tied up in one sheet of foolscap, and may be seen together at
Doctors Commons. In the will of the "Bard of Avon" is an
interlineation in his own handwriting--"I give unto my wife my brown
best bed, with the furniture." It is proved by William Byrde, 22nd
July, 1616.

The will of the Minstrel of Paradise is a nuncupative one taken by his
daughter, the great poet being blind.

The will of Napoleon, to whom future ages, in spite of legitimacy,
will confirm the epithet "le grand," is signed in a bold style of
handwriting; the codicil, on the contrary, written shortly before his
death, exhibits the then weak state of his body.

T.H.K.

       *       *       *       *       *


VERNAL STANZAS.

(_For the Mirror._)


  The earth displayed its robe of gorgeous hues,
  And o'er the tufted violets softly stole
  The downy pinions of the fragrant wind,
  Which tuned the brook with music; there were clouds
  O'er the blue heaven dispersed in various shapes,
  And touch'd with most impassive light, whereon
  The heart might dwell and dream of future bliss;
  And as the sound of distant bells awaked
  The echoes of the woods, they raised the thoughts
  To worlds more bright and beautiful than ours!

                                              G.R.C.

  The spring has waved her sunny wing
    Upon the verdant earth,
  And winds from distant, places bring
    The festal tones of mirth;
  The sky appears an azure field,
  With clouds emblazoned like a shield.

  A golden light has touched the woods,
    And o'er the silent dell
  A languid breathless quiet broods,
    Scarce broken by the swell
  Of streams that whisper through the air,
  As if they were awaked to pray'r.

  Survey the lovely scene around,
    The river beams in gold,
  Its rippling waves with song resound,
    And rainbow light unfold,
  And as the flow'rs unclose their eyes,
  Their hue seems coloured by the skies.

  The mould'ring church on yonder slope,
    Perchance by heaven designed
  To consecrate the heart with hope,
    In ivy-wreaths is shrined:
  Its rural tombs are green with age,
  And types of earthly pilgrimage.

  On this delightful vernal day,
    In scenes so rich and fair,
  The spirit feels a hallow'd ray
    Kindling its essence there;
  And Fancy haunts the mourner's urn,
  "With thoughts that breathe, and words that burn."

_Deal._                                  G.R.C.

       *       *       *       *       *


POPULAR SUPERSTITIONS.

(_For the Mirror._)

    All power of fancy over reason is a degree of
    insanity.--JOHNSON.


In a former number I gave some observations on apparitions, and I
shall here continue my remarks.

The argument that was used by Dr. Johnson was founded on premises
that are as inadmissible as his conclusion, viz. that the popular
opinion in favour of the reality of apparitions could only obtain
universal credence by its truth. This is very plausible, but destitute
of foundation. Does the learned doctor mean to deny the universality
of errors? does he mean to call the whole body of the learned and
enlightened cavillers? and that because they are not willing to
consent to his monstrous opinion? To reverse the argument, does he
mean to deny the truth of the Scriptures, or is he bold enough to
assert that they have received universal credence? So much for the
arguments wielded by Dr. Johnson, who has not been unaptly termed the
Colossus of Literature. The idea that departed spirits revisited the
earth, probably took its rise from the opinion of the immortality of
the soul, which was very general in both ancient and modern times.[2]
This supposition is most consonant with probability. It is always to
be remarked that this species of superstition is most prevalent in
those countries where learning and reason have made but little
progress. The demons [Greek: Daimones] and genii of former times were
exactly the same as the ghosts of this; the same attributes, the same
power, and the same malice were observed of one, as are now attributed
to the other. By the Chaldeans these demons were divided into two
kinds, good and bad. But as it is foreign to my purpose to enter into
an investigation of the opinions of the ancients on this subject, I
shall content myself with referring the curious reader to Stanley's
_History of Philosophy_, a deservedly popular work.

    [2] It must not be supposed that the opinion on the
    immortality of the soul was confined either to Christians or
    Jews; according to Herodotus, (lib. 2) the Massagetae believed
    in the immortality of the soul; the most eminent of the
    ancient philosophers invariably advocated that doctrine, one
    of the most important in the Christian's Creed.

I shall here recount one of the most extraordinary tales relating to
this subject that I ever heard; I believe the solution is evident, and
I am not aware that it has appeared before; but if it has, some of the
readers of the Mirror may not have seen it.

A surgeon of Edinburgh was confined to his bed by some illness, and at
"the dewy hour of eve," when the room was lighted by nothing but the
glimmering and flickering light of a wood fire, he perceived _a female
sitting at the foot of the bed clothed in white_! Imagining that it
was some defect in his sight, he gazed more intensely at it, still it
was there. He then raised his hand before his eyes and he did not
perceive it; on withdrawing it the apparition was there. Closing his
eyes he went through a mathematical calculation to convince himself he
was in his right senses; upon reopening them he still perceived her
there. The fire then went out and he saw no more. I confess I see no
difficulty in accounting for this, by supposing the gentleman was
afflicted with that horrid disease of which Sir Walter Scott gives
many cases in his _Demonology and Witchcraft._ Although I have no
warrant for asserting spirits do not return, yet I must say, all the
tales I have ever heard do not necessarily require any such
interpretation on them. It may be true, and so may everything which we
have no evidence against or for. If my opinion on the subject was to
be shaken by anything, it would be with the following story, which was
given to me by one whose veracity I have no reason to doubt.

There is, or rather was, a very ancient castle in Lancashire, near
Liverpool, called Castle de Bergh, which belongs to a noble family of
that name. Many years ago the possessor of the castle, Mr. de Burgh,
died, and the castle was then let out to various of the tenantry,
among whom was a carpenter. Two years after the death of Mr. de Burgh,
as this carpenter was employed in his workshop, about a quarter of a
mile from the castle, melting glue, it being evening, and only four of
his men with him, he perceived a gentleman in mourning passing the
lathe where the men were at work. He was immediately seized with a
violent trembling and weakness, his hair stood on end, and a clammy
sweat spread over his forehead. The lights were put out, he knew not
how, and at last, in fear and terror, he was obliged to return home.
On his arrival at the castle, as he was passing up the stairs, he
heard a footstep behind, and on turning round he perceived the same
apparition. He hastily entered his room, and bolted, locked, and
barred the door, but to his horror and surprise this offered no
impediment to his ghostly visiter, for the door sprang open at his
touch, and he entered the room! The apparition was seen by various
others, all of whom asserted it bore the strongest resemblance to
their deceased master! One gentleman spoke to him, and the spirit told
him "that he was not happy."

_Foley Place._ AN ANTIQUARY.

       *       *       *       *       *


LINES.

(_For the Mirror._)


  Upon the silent grassy bed,
  Shall maiden's tears at eve be shed,
  And friendship's self shall often there
  Heave the sigh, and breathe the pray'r.
  Young flowers of spring around shall bloom,
  And summer's roses deck thy tomb.
  The primrose ope its modest breast
  Where thy lamented ashes rest,
  And cypress branches lowly bend
  Where thy lov'd form with clay shall blend.
  The silver willow darkly wave
  Above thy unforgotten grave,
  And woodbine leaves will fondly creep,
  Where * * lies in holy sleep.

_Sturminster._                       COLBOURNE.

         *       *       *       *       *


PARLIAMENTARY SCRAPS.

(_For the Mirror._)


Lord Coke, in his fourth institute, defines certain qualities
essentially requisite to constitute a good member of parliament; and
he refers to a parliament roll, 3 Henry VI., which affirms that a
parliament man should have three properties ascribed to the
elephant--1. That he hath no gall; 2. That he is inflexible, and
cannot bow; 3. That he is of a most ripe and perfect memory.--1. To be
without malice, rancour, heat, and envy;--in elephante melancholia
transit in nutrimentum corporis: every gallish inclination, if any
were, should tend to the good of the whole body--the commonwealth. 2.
That he be constant, inflexible, and not be bowed, or turned from the
right, either from fear, reward, or favour; not in judgment respect
any person. 3. That in remembering perils past, dangers to come may be
prevented.

To these, addition is made by Lord Coke of two other properties of
elephants: the one, that though they be maximae virtutis et maximi
intellectus, of great strength and understanding, _tamen gregatim
semper incedunt_, yet they are sociable, and go in companies; for
_animalia gregalia non sunt nociva, sed animalia solivaga sunt
nociva_: sociable creatures that go in flocks or herds are not
hurtful--as deer, sheep, &c.; but beasts that walk solely or
singularly, as bears, foxes, &c., are dangerous and hurtful. The other
property is, that the elephant is philanthropos, homini erranti viam
ostendit. And, in the opinion of Coke, these properties ought every
parliament man to have.

Neither the ancient nor modern election statutes mention, or imply,
the existence of a "candidate." The old laws direct that the
representative shall be freely and indifferently chosen by the
electors. The choice was of their own motion, and the person elected
was passive. Even at the present day, the law does not contemplate his
asking for votes, and therefore does not allow, after the issuing of
the writ, sufficient time for a regular canvass. The term "candidate"
had its derivation from the person being _candidatus,_ clothed in
white, as symbolical of the wearer's purity.

James I. issued a proclamation, in which the voters for members of
parliament are directed "not to choose curious and wrangling lawyers,
who seek reputation by stirring needless questions."

At the Sussex election, in 1807, an elector, named Morton, voted in
right of his patrimonial land at Rusper, which had been in possession
of his ancestors 750 years.

W.G.C.

         *       *       *       *       *


SONNET

TO AN EOLIN HARP, HEARD AT EVENING.

(_For the Mirror._)


  Soft breathings of aerial melody,
    Ye seem like love-songs from the elfin land,
    Or soundings from that heaven-commissioned band,
  Ushering the good man to the bliss on high.
  Now swells the chorus full, anon ye die
    Away upon the breeze, so soft and bland
    Melting on evening's ear. Sure Love's own hand
  In kindest mood hath wrought this minstrelsy.
  How to the lorn heart does its influence creep,
    As the wild winds sweep o'er the fairy strings,
    Bringing again departed, perish'd things,
  O'er which we feel it luxury to weep.
  Sing on ye zephyr-sprites, your vespers cheer
  The heart, whose off'ring is a holy tear.

_Sturminster._ COLBOURNE.

       *       *       *       *       *



THE COSMOPOLITE.

HINTS FOR SELF-ADVANCEMENT; OR, HOW TO MAKE ONE'S WAY IN THE WORLD.

(_For the Mirror._)


When you visit married people, pay particular attention to their
children: the more noisy, troublesome, and disagreeable they are, the
more is it incumbent upon you to praise them. Should the baby
entertain you with a passionate squall for an hour or two, vow that it
is "a charming child"--"a sweet pet"--"a dear, pretty, little
creature," &c. &c. Call red hair auburn, and "a sweet, uncommon
colour;" a squint, or cross-eye, think "an agreeable expression;"
maintain that an ugly child is extremely handsome, and the image
either of one or other of its parents, or of its handsomest,
wealthiest, or most aristocratic relations. Discover which of a
family is mamma's, and which papa's favourite, and pay your court
accordingly; for it is better to lavish, in this case, your attentions
and encomiums upon one or two, than upon all.

When requiring an introduction to any great people, scruple not to
avail yourself of the services of the little; but when mounted as high
as you please, by all means kick down your ladders, cast away your
stepping stones--since they might, instead of being of any further
assistance, only prove incumbrances to you.

Take every opportunity of joining in conversation with those to whom
you desire to recommend yourself. Should you feel at a loss for topics
of discourse, mention servants, and tradesmen, upon whom fail not to
bestow most hearty abuse;--vow that they are an unprincipled set of
knaves, scoundrels, and thieves. Hence you will be thought to have
"much to say for yourself;" and should you be enabled to narrate any
grievous losses sustained from these members of society, you will
obtain credit for having "something to lose" at any rate, and find it
of incalculable value.

When you direct a letter to a knight bachelor--though it is indeed
customary and well-bred to omit altogether the Knt.--yet it will never
be taken amiss should you venture to address him as a Knight of the
Garter, Bath, &c. &c., or even as a Baronet. Undoubtedly it is as
vulgar to misapprehend and confound titles, as it is to mispronounce
and misspell names; nevertheless rest assured, that flattered vanity
will go far to pardon vulgarity.

If a gentleman, pay infinite attention to the single ladies of a
family--compliment, flirt, converse with, and ask them to dance. This
conduct will obtain for you, on account of the fair creatures,
marvellous good report, numerous invitations; and if you have
sufficient tact to steer clear of committing yourself for more than a
few flattering and general attentions, you may be considered one of
the happiest of those who live--by their wits, and upon their friends.

Should your "dancing days be over," which is scarcely probable,
considering how greatly it is now the fashion for "potent, grave, and
reverend signors," and signoras also, to join the gay quadrille, &c.
(and here we may as well note, that in genteel society, dowager
honourables and old ladies may dance, whilst young, plain misses may
not)--there are sundry modes of rendering yourself agreeable, which
your own taste and talents, it is to be presumed, will naturally
suggest: chess, whist, ecarte, quadrille, &c. &c., not to mention a
little practical knowledge of music, are acquirements which cause an
individual to be considered "very agreeable"--because very useful; and
rely upon it, as the world goes, utility in nine cases out of ten is,
with society, a consideration. Hence, no creature is so universally
voted disagreeable as one from whom no kind of service can be exacted;
and whilst roues, gamesters, and tipplers, duelists, pugilists, and
blacklegs, are tolerated in society, stupid men are overlooked, or
thrust out of it with contempt.

Dress in the extreme of fashion: you can neither gain nor maintain
your ground without so doing; and as you have an end to answer, which
your tailors or milliners have not, of course you will not suffer the
unfashionable dictates of conscience, respecting their bills, to
interfere with your proceedings.

Answer an invitation as soon as it is received; many individuals defer
so doing for some days, which certainly shows fashionable ease and
nonchalance, besides allowing time for the arrival of another and
preferable one; but, by those who are absolutely bent upon advancing
themselves in society, this practice is to be eschewed, since by
perplexing, it so annoys the donor of a fete, that the chances are
greatly against your ever again being asked.

Never omit, the day after a party, to send or leave your card, as an
acknowledgment for the civility you have received. This ceremony,
indeed, it is to your interest frequently to repeat at the doors of
your friends, since it will ensure your never being forgotten by them.

Never go to an evening party until you are pretty certain that
everybody else is coming away. Your consequence will by this conduct
be enhanced;--you may protest that you have already appeared at two or
three balls, &c. When, if a student or fashionable novel-writer, your
time may have been more rationally employed at home, you go too late
to dance much, if the exercise, or rather the partners, be
disagreeable to you; you ensure being seen, which is something,--for,
alas! how many worthy aspirants to fashion, fortune, and fame, if of
no actual importance, are fated to pass unnoticed in a crowd! and the
opportunity is besides afforded you of paying almost undivided
attention to your host, hostess, and family, which must materially
advance your interests. Neither be in too great haste to quit the
houses of those to whom you desire to recommend yourself. Parties,
even the worst, cost both money and trouble; and whilst the givers of
them feel it no compliment to be run away from, as if a pestilence
raged in their habitations, it is positively insulting to inform them
that another soiree, from which you hope better things, awaits your
presence.

If a lady, "set up for a beauty:" rely upon it, no persons will "cry
you up" as such unless you give them the note. Should you be extremely
plain, no matter; friz your hair until it stands out one English ell
from your face, and mount it, in bows, braids, &c., three yards at
least from the crown of your head; drawl, or lisp in your speech;
bring out words and phrases from every living tongue with which you
may happen to be slightly acquainted; boast of "the continent;" mince
your gait; wriggle forward upon your toes when you walk; and swim and
dip, whenever led into the atrocity of committing a _quad_-rille. In
brief, give yourself unimaginable airs; then protest that your
manners, as well as your costume, are of the newest Parisian mode--and
it is ten to one but that affectation will be accepted in lieu of, or
mistaken for, beauty.

Never forget, that as it is sometimes very prudent to be deaf and dumb
in society, so is it extremely convenient upon occasions to be blind.
The cuts, direct and oblique--the looks at, and the looks over--the
distant, formal bow, and the adroit turn upon the heel (should you
perceive the party, intended to be cut for the time being at least,
advancing with dire intent of obliging a recognition), may be,
especially upon old and provincial friends, practised _ad libitum_,
without the slightest danger of your character for etiquette,
politeness, suavity, and general pleasantness, being impeached. Indeed
it is not incompatible with the highest breeding, to allow your
slighted and amazed acquaintance to hear you quizzing, and see you
laughing at, him heartily, should it be your interest so to do; and
then next day, to walk boldly up to him, protest he is the best fellow
in the world; and should he be so senseless as to venture an allusion
to your "late conduct," to vow, with the extremest audacity, that he
happens to be under some evident and deplorable mistake, &c. &c. In
short, should you really find yourself in a scrape, to back out of it
as well as you are able.

When at a ball, it may sometimes be to your advantage (though
fashionable insolence should not be carried too far) to act in the
following manner:--

1. Ask a lady if she is engaged to dance. Should she answer "No,"
whilst her eyes say "Yes, if you will be my partner," then, instead of
offering yourself for that purpose, protest that "dancing is a mighty
bore, which no gentleman would endure, could he possibly help it," and
walk away.

2. Having elicited from a lady that she is not engaged for the ensuing
dance, exclaim, with a smile of triumph, "I am! and must go and find
my partner."

3. When conversing with one young lady, whom you do not design to
compliment by leading out for waltz, quadrille, or galoppe, mazurka,
or Russian cotillon, &c., take particular care, in her hearing, to
engage yourself to another. This is equally kind and polite.

4. Upon the conclusion of a dance, either leave your partner standing
in the middle of the room--which I have beheld performed with
admirable effect---or, hastily leading her to a seat, quit her
instantly: which proceeding says, in plain English, "Lady, I would not
stay another moment with you for anything that could be offered me,
lest the world should choose to fancy we are engaged."

Respecting giving and lending, which are sometimes necessary worldly
duties, your guide must be this brief, but infallible rule--"Venture a
small fish to catch a large one." Those antiquated beings, indeed,
whom the polite style "horrid bores," but whose generic appellation is
Christians, are accustomed to "lend and give, not hoping to receive;"
yet this maxim cannot of course be supposed to influence the conduct
of those who desire to advance themselves in the world, because they
are bound to bear in mind, that they cannot admit of any principle of
action which tends, in the slightest degree, to militate against their
interest.--_Et caetera desunt._

M.L.B.

       *       *       *       *       *



THE NATURALIST.

THE WHITE-HEADED, OR BALD EAGLE.

(_Concluded from page 389._)


The intrepidity of character, before mentioned, may be farther
illustrated by the following fact, which occurred a few years ago,
near Great Egg Harbour, New Jersey. A woman, who happened to be
weeding in the garden, had set her child down near, to amuse itself
while she was at work; when a sudden and extraordinary rushing sound,
and a scream from her child, alarmed her, and starting up, she beheld
the infant thrown down, and dragged some few feet, and a large bald
eagle bearing off a fragment of its frock, which being the only part
seized, and giving way, providentially saved the life of the infant.

The appetite of the bald eagle, though habituated to long fasting, is
of the most voracious and often the most indelicate kind. Fish, when
he can obtain them, are preferred to all other fare. Young lambs and
pigs are dainty morsels, and made free with on all favourable
occasions. Ducks, geese, gulls, and other sea fowl, are also seized
with avidity. The most putrid carrion, when nothing better can be had,
is acceptable; and the collected groups of gormandizing vultures, on
the approach of this dignified personage, instantly disperse, and make
way for their master, waiting his departure in sullen silence, and at
a respectful distance, on the adjacent trees.

In one of those partial migrations of tree squirrels that sometimes
take place in our western forests, many thousands of them were
destroyed in attempting to cross the Ohio; and at a certain place, not
far from Wheeling, a prodigious number of their dead bodies were
floated to the shore by an eddy. Here the vultures assembled in great
force, and had regailed themselves for some time, when a bald eagle
made his appearance, and took sole possession of the premises, keeping
the whole vultures at their proper distance for several days. He has
also been seen navigating the same river on a floating carrion, though
scarcely raised above the surface of the water, and tugging at the
carcass, regardless of snags, sawyers, planters, or shallows. He
sometimes carries his tyranny to great extremes against the vultures.
In hard times, when food happens to be scarce, should he accidentally
meet with one of these who has its craw crammed with carrion, he
attacks it fiercely in the air; the cowardly vulture instantly
disgorges, and the delicious contents are snatched up by the eagle
before they reach the ground.

The nest of this species is generally fixed on a very large and lofty
tree, often in a swamp or morass, and difficult to be ascended. On
some noted tree of this description, often a pine or cypress, the bald
eagle builds, year after year, for a long series of years. When both
male and female have been shot from the nest, another pair has soon
after taken possession. The nest is large, being added to and repaired
every season, until it becomes a black prominent mass, observable at
a considerable distance. It is formed of large sticks, sods, earthy
rubbish, hay, moss, &c. Many have stated to me that the female lays
first a single egg, and that, after having sat on it for some time,
she lays another; when the first is hatched, the warmth of that, it is
pretended, hatches the other. Whether this be correct or not, I cannot
determine; but a very respectable gentleman of Virginia assured me,
that he saw a large tree cut down, containing the nest of a bald
eagle, in which were two young, one of which appeared nearly three
times as large as the other. As a proof of their attachment to their
young, a person near Norfolk informed me, that, in clearing a piece of
wood on his place, they met with a large dead pine tree, on which was
a bald eagle's nest and young. The tree being on fire more than half
way up, and the flames rapidly ascending, the parent eagle darted
around and among the flames, until her plumage was so much injured
that it was with difficulty she could make her escape, and even then,
she several times attempted to return to relieve her offspring.

The flight of the bald eagle, when taken into consideration with the
ardour and energy of his character, is noble and interesting.
Sometimes the human eye can just discern him, like a minute speck,
moving in slow curvatures along the face of the heavens, as if
reconnoitering the earth at that immense distance. Sometimes he glides
along in a direct horizontal line, at a vast height, with expanded and
unmoving wings, till he gradually disappears in the distant blue
ether. Seen gliding in easy circles over the high shores and
mountainous cliffs that tower above the Hudson and Susquehanna, he
attracts the eye of the intelligent voyager, and adds great interest
to the scenery. At the great Cataract of Niagara, already mentioned,
there rises from the gulf into which the Falls of the Horse-Shoe
descend, a stupendous column of smoke, or spray, reaching to the
heavens, and moving off in large black clouds, according to the
direction of the wind, forming a very striking and majestic
appearance. The eagles are here seen sailing about, sometimes losing
themselves in this thick column, and again reappearing in another
place, with such ease and elegance of motion, as renders the whole
truly sublime.

  High o'er the watery uproar, silent seen,
  Sailing sedate in majesty serene,
  Now midst the pillar'd spray sublimely lost,
  And now, emerging, down the Rapids tost,
  Glides the bald eagle, gazing, calm and slow,
  O'er all the horrors of the scene below;
  Intent alone to sate himself with blood,
  From the torn victims of the raging flood.

The white-headed eagle is three feet long, and seven feet in extent;
the bill is of a rich yellow; cere the same, slightly tinged with
green; mouth flesh-coloured; tip of the tongue, bluish black; the
head, chief part of the neck, vent, tail coverts, and tail, are white
in the perfect, or old birds of both sexes, in those under three years
of age these parts are of a gray brown; the rest of the plumage is
deep, dark brown, each feather tipt with pale brown, lightest on the
shoulder of the wing, and darkest towards its extremities. The
conformation of the wing is admirably adapted for the support of so
large a bird; it measures two feet in breadth on the greater quills,
and sixteen inches on the lesser; the longest primaries are twenty
inches in length, and upwards of one inch in circumference where they
enter the skin; the broadest secondaries are three inches in breadth
across the vane; the scapulars are very large and broad, spreading
from the back to the wing, to prevent the air from passing through;
another range of broad flat feathers, from three to ten inches in
length, also extend from the lower part of the breast to the wing
below, for the same purpose; between these lies a deep triangular
cavity; the thighs are remarkably thick, strong, and muscular, covered
with long feathers pointing backwards, usually called the femoral
feathers; the legs, which are covered half way below the knee, before,
with dark brown downy feathers, are of a rich yellow, the colour of
ripe Indian corn; feet the same; claws blue black, very large and
strong, particularly the inner one, which is considerably the largest;
soles, very rough and warty; the eye is sunk, under a bony, or
cartilaginous projection, of a pale yellow colour, and is turned
considerably forwards, not standing parallel with the cheeks, the iris
is of a bright straw colour, pupil black.

The male is generally two or three inches shorter than the female; the
white on the head, neck, and tail being more tinged with yellowish,
and its whole appearance less formidable; the brown plumage is also
lighter, and the bird itself less daring than the female, a
circumstance common to almost all birds of prey.

The eagle is said to live to a great age--sixty, eighty, and, as some
assert, one hundred years. This circumstance is remarkable, when we
consider the seeming intemperate habits of the bird. Sometimes
fasting, through necessity, for several days, and at other times
gorging itself with animal food till its craw swells out the plumage
of that part, forming a large protuberance on the breast. This,
however, is its natural food, and for these habits its whole
organization is particularly adapted. It has not, like men, invented
rich wines, ardent spirits, and a thousand artificial poisons, in the
form of soups, sauces, and sweetmeats. Its food is simple, it indulges
freely, uses great exercise, breathes the purest air, is healthy,
vigorous, and long lived. The lords of the creation themselves might
derive some useful hints from these facts, were they not already, in
general, too wise, or too proud, to learn from their _inferiors,_ the
fowls of the air and beasts of the field.

       *        *        *        *        *



NOTES OF A READER.

THE LATE MRS. SIDDONS.


The subsequent account of Mrs. Siddons, nearly fifty years since, will
perhaps give the reader a better outline of that "Queen of Tragedy"
than any that has since appeared. We ought to mention that it is
quoted from Mr. Boaden's _Memoirs_, and was written on the appearance
of Mrs. Siddons in the character of Isabella, for the first time in
London, October 10, 1782. Mr. Boaden thus introduces the quotation, in
vol. i. of his work:--

As the person of our great actress has undergone some change, and her
features by time became stronger, I should find it difficult now to
describe her accurately by memory, as she stood before the audience on
the night of the 10th of October. I am relieved from this difficulty
by an account of her written at the time. I shall change only a few of
the expressions then used, more from a feeling as to composition than
alteration as to sentiment.

There never, perhaps, was a better stage-figure than that of Mrs.
Siddons. Her height is above the middle size, but not at all inclined
to the _em-bon-point_. There is, notwithstanding, nothing sharp or
angular in the frame; there is sufficient muscle to bestow a roundness
upon the limbs, and her attitudes are, therefore, distinguished
equally by energy and grace. The symmetry of her person is exact and
captivating. Her face is peculiarly happy, the features being finely
formed, though strong, and never for an instant seeming overcharged,
like the Italian faces, nor coarse and unfeminine under whatever
impulse; on the contrary, it is so thoroughly harmonized when
quiescent, and so expressive when impassioned, that most people think
her more beautiful than she is; so great, too, is the flexibility of
her countenance, that the rapid transitions of passion are given with
a variety and effect that never tire upon the eye. Her voice is
naturally plaintive, and a tender melancholy in her level speaking
denotes a being devoted to tragedy; yet this seemingly settled quality
of voice becomes at will sonorous or piercing, overwhelms with rage,
or in its wild shriek absolutely harrows up the soul. Her sorrow, too,
is never childish--her lamentation has a dignity which belongs, I
think, to no other woman: it claims your respect along with your
tears. Her eye is brilliant and varying like the diamond; it is
singularly well placed; "it _pries_," in Shakspeare's language,
"through the portal of the head," and has every aid from brows
flexible beyond all female parallel, contracting to disdain, or
dilating with the emotions of sympathy, or pity, or anguish. Her
memory is tenacious and exact--her articulation clear and
distinct--her pronunciation systematic and refined.

Nor has Nature been partially bountiful: she has endowed her with a
quickness of conception, and a strength of understanding equal to the
proper use of such extraordinary gifts. So entirely is she mistress of
herself, so collected, and so determined in gestures, tone, and
manner, that she seldom errs, like other actors, because she doubts
her powers or comprehension. She studies her author attentively,
conceives justly, and describes with a firm consciousness of
propriety. She is sparing in her action, because English nature does
not act much; but it is always proper, picturesque, graceful, and
dignified: it arises immediately from the sentiments and feeling, and
is not seen to prepare itself before it begins. No studied trick or
start can be predicted;--no forced tremulation of the figure, where
the vacancy of the eye declares the absence of passion, can be
seen;--no laborious strainings at false climax, in which the tired
voice reiterates one high tone beyond which it cannot reach, is ever
heard;--no artificial heaving of the breasts, so disgusting when the
affectation is perceptible;--none of those arts by which the actress
is seen, and not the character, can be found in Mrs. Siddons. So
natural are her gradations and transitions, so classical and correct
her speech and deportment, and so intensely interesting her voice,
form, and features, that there is no conveying an idea of the pleasure
she communicates by words. She must be seen to be known. What is still
more delightful, she is an original: she copies no one living or dead,
but acts from nature and herself.

       *       *       *       *       *



SPIRIT OF THE PUBLIC JOURNALS.


THE TWO MUNCHAUSENS.

_By a veteran._


In the late ---- Regiment of Light Dragoons, were two worthy persons,
who were denominated the regimental liars: a distinction to which,
giving every man his due, they were eminently entitled. The great and
fundamental requisites for accomplished lying, I conceive to be a good
memory, a fertile fancy, a ready wit, fluency of speech, and a brazen
countenance, so that you shall tell a man a most bare-faced falsehood,
and afterwards adduce such connected proofs as especially characterize
actual facts. The following dialogue is a specimen of the talents of
the aforementioned mendacious personages.

C.--"See a man walk after he was shot dead! so have I, a whole day's
march."

B.--"Come, come, that's stealing a march on our senses. No, no, it
won't do: that's a naked one; do pray turn them out with some kind of
probability covering over them."

C.--"What, doubt my veracity;"

B.--"Not for the world; that would be illiberal and unkind, and by the
way, now I think on it, I believe the possibility of a man travelling
without his _cranium,_ for at the battle of Laswaree, during that
desperate contest for British India, I saw a sergeant of the
seventy-sixth shot dead; yet the fellow pursued his antagonist some
hundred yards afterwards, threatening vengeance on the miscreant for
having robbed the service of one of its best men. Finding himself weak
from loss of blood, he deliberately unscrewed his head, threw it
violently at the foe, and took him on the spine; down he tumbled; the
veteran jumped upon him; fearful was the struggle; chest to chest,
fist to fist; at last they joined in the death grapple, and dreadful
indeed was their dying hug."

C.--"My dear friend, I was an eye witness of the whole transaction.
You have however forgotten the best part of the story. After the
sergeant had well pummelled his enemy, he picked up his head again,
and thrust into a neighbouring great gun: from the want of his
_peepers_ he made a random shot, and killed the horse on which Lord
Lake was riding--his Lordship saluted the sod."

B.--"I recollect it perfectly; for the nose of the said sergeant
(recognised by sundry carbuncles) was so hard, that the following day
it was extracted from the abdomen of the unfortunate animal."

C.--"You make a mistake about the nose; it was discovered lodged in a
loaf in a corporal's knapsack; the man could swear to it, for it was
perforated by three balls, and otherwise curiously marked. Report said
that a shell had once blown it completely off, and that it was
stitched on again by a shoe-maker, who, ever after, went by the name
of the _nosy_ cobbler."

B.--"Nothing impossible. It reminds me of a story somewhat as strange:
During the battle of Delhi there was a quarter-master in the regiment,
a queer fellow, who was never at a loss; (he is now in the corps, and
can vouch for my statement) he was charging at the head of his
squadron, when he caught a cannon shot in his hands: instantly
dismounting, he chucked the ball into a field-piece, but, for want of
a ramrod, he drove it home with his head. One of the enemy, seeing him
thus zealously occupied, fired off the gun; strange to tell he was not
killed! From constant exposure to the sun, in search of toddy, and
from the free use of cocoa-nut oil, his head had become proof against
shot. The distance from the place whence he was projected, to that
where he was picked up, measured three miles, two furlongs, three
yards, and eleven inches. A hard-headed fellow, Sir.--In his career he
upset his colonel and a brace of captains."

C.--"He did; and where the colonel was capsized, he made such a hole
by his enormous weight, that the sovereign of Delhi ordered a large
well to be dug on the spot, in memory of the event."

B.--"I remember the well--twelve feet, three inches and a half, was
the exact depth of the excavation occasioned by the fall."

C.--"There you are wrong; only eleven feet, three inches--"

B.--"No, believe me, I am right; twelve feet, and three inches to a
barleycorn."

C.--"Never mind: a little, this way or that, is of no consequence.
The most extraordinary thing was, that the gallant colonel only
sprained his right arm."

B.--"By no means extraordinary. You remember the great gun of Agra, in
which a regiment of cavalry used to drill."

C--"I do. The one that fired the stone ball to the wall of Futtipoore
Sikrah--twenty miles."

B.--"The same. Well, when that gun was fired, a thing that never
occurred but once, the head of the rash man who fired it was
afterwards found in the Old Woman's Tank, eleven miles from the spot,
without so much as a blemish, except a slight singing of the right
whisker."

C.--"Ah! I can never forget the time; I had just landed in Calcutta
when we heard the report. Some of the wadding went as far as
Cawnpore."

Here the trumpet, sounding for morning drill, put a stop to the
colloquy.--_Englishman's Magazine._

       *       *       *       *       *


THE MISER'S GRAVE.

BY THE ETTRICK SHEPHERD.


  Here's a lesson for the earth-born worm,
  So deep engraven on the meagre platen
  Of human frailty, so debased in hue,
  That he who dares peruse it needs but blush
  For his own nature. The poor shrivell'd wretch,
  For whose lean carcass yawns this hideous pit,
  Had naught that he desired in earth or heaven--
  No God, no Saviour, but that sordid pelf,
  O'er which he starved and gloated. I have seen him
  On the exchange, or in the market-place
  When money was in plenteous circulation,
  Gaze after it with such Satanic looks
  Of eagerness, that I have wonder'd oft
  How he from theft and murder could refrain.
  'Twas cowardice alone withheld his hands,
  For they would grasp and grapple at the air,
  When his grey eye had fixed on heaps of gold,
  While his clench'd teeth, and grinning, yearning face,
  Were dreadful to behold. The merchants oft
  Would mark his eye, then start and look again,
  As at the eye of basilisk or snake.
  His eye of greyish green ne'er shed one ray
  Of kind benignity or holy light
  On aught beneath the sun. Childhood, youth, beauty,
  To it had all one hue. Its rays reverted
  Right inward, back upon the greedy heart
  On which the gnawing worm of avarice
  Preyed without ceasing, straining every sense
  To that excruciable and yearning core.
    Some thirteen days agone, he comes to me,
  And after many sore and mean remarks
  On men's rapacity and sordid greed,
  He says, "Gabriel, thou art an honest man,
  As the world goes. How much, then, will you charge
  And make a grave for me, fifteen feet deep?"--
    "We'll talk of that when you require it, sir."
    "No, no. I want it made, and paid for too;
  I'll have it settled, else I know there will
  Be some unconscionable overcharge
  On my poor friends--a ruinous overcharge."--
    "But, sir, were it made now, it would fill up
  Each winter to the brim, and be to make
  Twenty or thirty times, if you live long." "There!
  there it is! Nothing but imposition!
  Even Time must rear his stern, unyielding front,
  And holding out his shrivelled skeleton hand,
  Demands my money. Naught but money! money!
  Were I coin'd into money I could not
  Half satisfy that craving greed of money.
  Well, how much do you charge? I'll pay you now,
  And take a bond from you that it be made
  When it is needed. Come, calculate with reason--
  Work's very cheap; and two good men will make
  That grave at two days' work: and I can have
  Men at a shilling each--_without_ the meat--
  That's a great matter! Let them but to meat,
  'Tis utter ruin. I'll give none their meat--
  That I'll beware of. Men now-a-days are cheap,
  Cheap, dogcheap, and beggarly fond of work.
  One shilling each a-day, _without_ the meat.
  Mind that, and ask in reason; for I wish
  To have that matter settled to my mind."--
    "Sir, there's no man alive will do't so cheap
  As I shall do it for the ready cash,"
  Says I, to put him from it with a joke.
  "I'll charge you, then, one-fourth part of a farthing
  For every cubic foot of work I do,
  Doubling the charge each foot that I descend."
    "Doubling as you descend! Why, that of course.
  A quarter of a farthing each square foot--
  No meat, remember! Not an inch of meat,
  Nor drink, nor dram. You're not to trust to these.
  Wilt stand that bargain, Gabriel?"--"I accept."
    He struck it, quite o'erjoy'd. We sought the clerk,
  Sign'd--seal'd. He drew his purse. The clerk went on
  Figuring and figuring. "What a fuss you make!
  'Tis plain," said he, "the sum is eighteen-pence"--
    "'Tis somewhat more, sir," said the civil clerk--
  And held out the account. "Two hundred round,
  And gallant payment over." The Miser's face
  Assumed the cast of death's worst lineaments.
  His skinny jaws fell down upon his breast;
  He tried to speak, but his dried tongue refused
  Its utterance, and cluck'd upon the gum.
  His heart-pipes whistled with a crannell'd sound;
  His knell-knees plaited, and his every bone
  Seem'd out of joint. He raved--he cursed--he wept--
  But payment he refused. I have my bond,
  Not yet a fortnight old, and shall be paid.
  It broke the Miser's heart. He ate no more,
  Nor drank, nor spake, but groan'd until he died;
  This grave kill'd him, and now yearns for his bones.
  But worse than all. 'Tis twenty years and more
  Since he brought home his coffin. On that chest
  His eye turn'd ever and anon. It minded him,
  He said, of death. And as be sat by night
  Beside his beamless hearth, with blanket round
  His shivering frame, if burst of winter wind
  Made the door jangle, or the chimney moan,
  Or crannied window whistle, he would start,
  And turn his meagre looks upon that chest;
  Then sit upon't, and watch till break of day.
     Old wives thought him religious--a good man!
  A great repentant sinner, who would leave
  His countless riches to sustain the poor.
  But mark the issue. Yesterday, at noon,
  Two men could scarcely move that ponderous chest
  To the bedside to lay the body in.
  They broke it sundry, and they found it framed
  With double bottom! All his worshipp'd gold
  Hoarded between the boards! O such a worm
  Sure never writhed beneath the dunghill's base!
  Fifteen feet under ground! and all his store
  Snug in beneath him. Such a heaven was his.
    Now, honest Teddy, think of such a wretch,
  And learn to shun his vices, one and all.
  Though richer than a Jew, he was more poor
  Than is the meanest beggar. At the cost
  Of other men a glutton. At his own,
  A starveling. A mere scrub. And such a coward,
  A cozener and liar--but a coward,
  And would have been a thief--But was a coward.

_Blackwood's Magazine._

       *       *       *       *       *



THE SELECTOR; AND LITERARY NOTICES OF _NEW WORKS._


PARIS AND ITS HISTORICAL SCENES.

(_Library of Entertaining Knowledge, Part 18._)

We have little inclination to quote more than a few passages from the
General View of Paris in this Number; the topographical portion of
which, (as far as a four months residence there will serve our
judgment) is eminently characteristic.


_Ancient City._

The Archbishop of Narbonne, writing in the reign of Francis I., (about
1520,) calls Paris even then a world rather than a city[3]; yet at
that period its population was probably not much more than the fifth
part of what it now is; nor did the quantity of ground it covered bear
even the same proportion to the immense space over which it has now
extended. But in both convenience and elegance, Paris has made still
more extraordinary advances since the time of Francis than even in
population and extent. It was then, compared to what it now is, but a
gloomy and incommodious fortress, without even the security which
encompassing fortifications might be supposed to yield. Lighted only
by candles placed here and there by the inhabitants themselves in
their windows, it was so infested by thieves and assassins that hardly
any person ventured out after dark, and the approach of night was the
source of constant terror even to those who remained in their houses.
The streets thus imperfectly lighted, were worse paved; and most of
them were as dirty and narrow as those still to be seen in the more
ancient part of the city. The supply of water was so inadequate that
the severest miseries were sometimes suffered from the absolute want
of that necessary of life, and the greatest inconveniences at all
times from its scarcity. Finally, the public edifices were without
splendour, and even the best of the private houses unprovided with
many of what are now accounted the most indispensable accommodations.
Instead of all this, we behold Paris now one of the very central seats
of civilization; and although still deficient in many of the
accommodations which supply to the necessities of the many instead of
the luxuries of the few, in possession of the greater portion of the
most important provisions which ingenuity has found out, whether for
the comfort or the embellishment of existence. What a contrast between
the French capital of 1831, and that Lutetia of the ancient Parisii,
which Caesar found nearly nineteen hundred years ago occupying the
little island, around which has since extended itself so wide a circle
of wealth, industry, intelligence, and the works which these create!

    [3] Felibien, Histoire de Paris, tome i.

_Bridges._

Paris, stands, like London, on both banks of a river, and is thus cut
into two great divisions, one to the north, and the other to the
south, of the water. The Seine, however, is not nearly so broad as the
Thames; and the northern and southern halves of Paris are not,
therefore, by any means so much separated from each other, either
locally, politically, or socially, as are the corresponding portions
of the English metropolis. They form, in all respects one city.

The Seine flows in a direction nearly opposite to that of the Thames,
namely, from south-east to north-west. It preserves almost a perfectly
straight course in passing through Paris, except that it bends
considerably to the south immediately before leaving the town. The
river, as it flows through the heart of the city, is interrupted by
three small islands lying in succession, the two most westerly of
which, the Ile de la Cite (otherwise called the Ile du Palais) and the
Ile St. Louis, or de Notre Dame, are covered with streets and houses.
The third, called the Ile Louvier, is used only as a depot for
fire-wood. The parts of the town on the opposite sides of the river
are connected with each other, and with these islands, by nineteen
bridges, thirteen of which are constructed of stone, and two of stone
and iron: of the others two are chain-bridges, one is built of wood,
and two of wood and iron. Several of these structures, especially the
Pont des Arts, the Pont Louis XVI., and the Pont de Jena, or de
l'Ecole Militaire, all of which are to the west of the Ile du Palais,
are distinguished by their majesty or elegance, and add much beauty
and picturesque effect to the vista of the river. Excepting at one
place where the two branches enclosing the Ile du Palais unite,
immediately to the west of that island, the breadth of the Seine at
Paris is no where greater than about 550 English feet, and at some
points it is not more than half that distance from the one bank to
the other. The bridges, therefore, by which the Seine is traversed,
are not to be compared in point of magnitude with those of the Thames
at London. Even the Pont Neuf, which connects the Ile du Palais with
both the northern and the southern divisions of the city, and
comprehends in fact two bridges, with an intermediate street, is
shorter taken altogether, than Waterloo bridge by more than 200 feet;
and the Pont Louis XVI., which next to the Pont Neuf is the longest of
the Parisian stone bridges, measures only about 485 feet between the
abutments, while Westminster Bridge measures 1223, and Waterloo Bridge
1242 feet. It is in the _number_ of its bridges alone, therefore, that
the Seine is superior to the Thames.

_The Boulevards._

The most remarkable feature in the general appearance of Paris, is the
inner inclosure formed by the celebrated road called the _Boulevards._
On the north side of the river, the Boulevards follow a line nearly
midway, on an average, between the river and the wall. The space which
they comprehend, therefore, is but a small portion of that included
within the outer boundary of the city. The length of this part of the
road is about 5,200 English yards, or somewhat under three miles. That
on the south side of the river is of far greater extent, approaching,
as it does, throughout its whole sweep, very much closer to the wall,
and in some parts entirely coinciding with it. It measures about
16,000 yards, or above nine miles in length. Each of these lines,
although in reality forming an uninterrupted road from its
commencement to its termination, is divided into a succession of
parts, each having its particular name. The northern Boulevards are
twelve in number, the southern seven. We have nothing in England like
the Parisian Boulevards. They may be generally described as a road or
street, of great breadth, along each side of which are planted double
rows of elms. But these shady avenues do not present merely a picture
of rural beauty. Rising as they do in the heart of a great city, they
partake also of its artificial elegance and splendour, and are
associated with all the luxuries of architectural decoration.
Considered merely as a range of streets, the Boulevards are hardly
rivalled by any other part of Paris. Those to the north of the river
are lined on both sides throughout their whole extent, by buildings
more uniformly handsome than are those of almost any other street in
the city, and by many which may be even described as magnificent. Some
of these are private residences; others are shops, cafes, public
hotels, and theatres. The crowds by whom so many parts of these
Boulevards are frequented chiefly give to the scene its singular
liveliness and brilliancy. The southern Boulevards, though equally
beautiful, are far from being so much the habitual resort of the
citizens; but the walks on this very account, have a charm for some
moods of mind which the others want. Another road, planted in a
similar manner, has more recently been carried round the outside of
the present walls of the city. It is distinguished from the inner
Boulevards by the name of the _Boulevards Exterieurs._

_Streets._

To a person accustomed to the appearance of the streets of London, or
indeed of any other English town, those of the interior of Paris will
present considerable novelty of aspect. The extreme narrowness, in the
first place, of those in the more ancient parts of the city, and the
great height of the houses, with their windows in many cases fortified
by bars of iron, would alone give them an air of gloom and precaution,
almost sufficient to impress the Englishman who walks through them
with the feeling that he has been transported, not only into another
country, but into another age. Even where these indications of the
more ancient evils of Paris are not visible, the general aspect of the
town shows that it has not grown with the growth of a free people,
amongst whom the inequalities of rank have been softened down by
respect to the comforts of all classes. Under the ancient regime,
which was in full activity half a century ago, there were only two
classes in Paris, the _noblesse_, and the _bourgeoisie_; and the
latter, being driven into the gutters by the carriage-wheels of their
arrogant masters, went by the general name of the _canaille._ Few of
the streets even now have any side pavement for foot passengers--that
invaluable accommodation which gives such perfect security to the
pedestrian even in our most crowded and tumultuous thoroughfare. The
causeway itself, on which walkers and drivers are thus mingled
together in confusion, is often most uneven and rugged. The stones of
which it is formed, about ten inches square, present each a convex
surface, usually wet and slippery, so that under the most favourable
circumstances, walking in the streets of Paris is anything but an
agreeable exercise. Still farther to abridge the level space, the
street is made to incline from both sides towards the centre, in order
to form there a sort of ditch, in which flows a black and fetid
stream. From the want of a proper system of drains, this receptacle of
filth is generally sufficiently replenished even in the driest
weather, to keep the whole street wet and dirty. Carriages, having
usually one wheel in the midst of the kennel, dash about the offensive
puddle in all directions. But the principle of a clear middle way,
such as our English streets possess, is neglected in all the
arrangements connected with those of Paris. Even the lights, instead
of being fixed on posts, as ours are, at the sides, are suspended in
the middle on ropes swung across, and having their opposite ends
fastened to the walls of the houses. It was these ropes which the mob,
in the Revolution of 1789, were wont to make use of as halters for
their victims; whence their famous cry of _a la lanterne_, as they
dragged them along to execution.

The aspect of Paris by night, except in a few of the principal streets
where gas has been very partially introduced, is singularly gloomy.
The darkness is occasionally relieved by the brilliancy of a cafe; but
in the more quiet parts of the town, particularly in the fashionable
quarter of the Faubourg St. Germain, it is almost impossible for the
pedestrian to direct his steps aright. It is quite evident that the
arrangements of this capital have not been made for a walking people.
This evil, however, is fast disappearing. Numerous _passages_ have
been constructed, within the last ten years, which are paved with flat
stones, and brilliantly lighted; and the active and pleasure-seeking
population of Paris crowd to these attractive and convenient places,
to the Boulevards, or to the Palais-Royal, and leave the narrow and
dirty streets principally to the few who keep their own carriages, or
to the many who hire public conveyances. These are of various kinds;
and such was the growing importance of the middle classes, that
_fiacres_ (so called after the sign of St Fiacre, at the house where
they were first established) were in use a century and a half ago.

The remainder of the Part is occupied with a sketch of the Revolution
of 1789.

       *       *       *       *       *


REFORM OF EARLY PARLIAMENTS.


Though no language can adequately condemn the base subserviency of
Henry's parliament, it may be reasonably doubted whether his reign
was, in its ultimate consequences, injurious to public liberty. The
immense revolutions of his time in property, in religion, and in the
inheritance of the crown, never could have been effected without the
concurrence of parliament. Their acquiescence and co-operation in the
spoliation of property, and the condemnation of the innocent, tempted
him to carry all his purposes into execution, through their means.
Those who saw the attainders of queens, the alteration of an
established religion, and the frequent disturbance of the regal
succession, accomplished by acts of parliament, considered nothing as
beyond the jurisdiction of so potent an assembly.[4] If the supremacy
was a tremendous power, it accustomed the people to set no bounds to
the authority of those who bestowed it on the king. The omnipotence of
parliament appeared no longer a mere hyperbole. Let it not be
supposed, that to mention the good thus finally educed from such
evils, is intended or calculated to palliate crimes, or to lessen our
just abhorrence of criminals. Nothing, on the contrary, seems more to
exalt the majesty of virtue than to point out the tendency of the
moral government of the world, which, as in this instance, turns the
worst enemies of all that is good into the laborious slaves of
justice. Of all outward benefits, the most conducive to virtue as well
as to happiness is, doubtless, popular and representative government.
It is the reverse of a degradation of it to observe, that its
establishment among us was perhaps partially promoted by the
sensuality, rapacity, and cruelty of Henry VIII. The course of affairs
is always so dark, the beneficial consequences of public events are so
distant and uncertain, that the attempt to do evil in order to produce
good is in men a most criminal usurpation.

    [4] The observations of Nathaniel Bacon, or rather of Selden
    from whose MS. notes he is said to have written his book,
    deserve serious consideration. Bacon on the Laws and
    Government of England, chap. 27.

Some direct benefits the constitution owes to this reign. The act
which established a parliamentary representation in so considerable a
territory as Wales may be regarded as the principal reformation in the
composition of the House of Commons since its legal maturity in the
time of Edward I. That principality had been divided into twelve
shires: of which eight were ancient,[5] and four owed their origin to
a statute of Henry's reign.[6] Knights, citizens, and burgesses were
now directed to be chosen and sent to parliament from the shires,
cities, and burghs of Wales.[7] A short time before, the same
privileges were granted to the county palatine of Chester, of which
the preamble contains a memorable recognition and establishment of the
principles which are the basis of the elective part of our
constitution.[8] Nearly thirty members were thus added to the House of
Commons on the principle of the Chester bill: that is disadvantageous
to a province to be unrepresented; that representation is essential to
good government; and that those who are bound by the laws ought to
have a reasonable share of direct influence on the passing of laws. As
the practical disadvantages are only generally alleged, and could
scarcely have been proved, they must have been inferred from the
nature of a House of Commons. The British constitution was not thought
to be enjoyed by a district till a popular representation was bestowed
on it. Election by the people was regarded, not as a source of tumult,
but as the principle most capable of composing disorder in territories
not represented.--_Cabinet Cyclopaedia_, vol. xix. _Sir James
Mackintosh's History of England_, vol. ii.

    [5] Glamorgan, Carmarthen, Pembroke, Cardigan, Flint,
    Carnarvon, Anglesea and Merioneth.

    [6] Radnor, Brecknock, Montgomery, and Denbigh, 27 Henry 8 c.
    26.

    [7] 34 and 35 Henry 8. c. 26. s. 50.

    [8] 34 and 35 Henry 8. c. 13.--"That the said county have
    hitherto been excluded from the high court of parliament, to
    have any knights and burgesses within the said court, by
    reason whereof the inhabitants have sustained manifold damages
    in their lands, goods, and bodies, as well as in the good
    governance of the commonwealth of their said country; and for
    as much as they have been bound by the acts of the said court,
    and yet have had no knights and burgesses therein, for lack
    whereof they have been often touched and grieved by the acts
    of the said parliament, prejudicial to the commonwealth,
    quietness, rest, and peace of your highness's bounden
    subjects, inhabiting within the said county," &c.

       *       *       *       *       *



THE TOPOGRAPHER.


TRAVELLING NOTES IN SOUTH WALES.

(_Continued from page 312._)


The grounds of Penrice Castle, which stretch to the sea-shore, and on
which art has embellished scenery possessing capabilities of a high
order--are exceedingly picturesque and extensive. Penrice bears marks
of having been a Roman station. Henry de Newburgh, Earl of Warwick,
here defeated the Welsh prince, Rhys, which decided the fate of Gower.
He was beheaded after the battle, whence the Welsh name, Pen-Rhys. On
the field of battle the victor erected Penrice Castle, which is now
certainly a striking ruin. On the coast near Penrice is the village
and ruins of the Castle of Oxwich, now a barn--_sic transit!_

The afternoon was waxing apace--we had lost time in attending to our
horses, for ostler there was none--and in musing amongst the simply
decorated graves in the humble churchyard;[9] after discussing with
great relish our repast of eggs and bacon, and Welsh ale, the best the
village afforded, (by the way, we shall not readily forget the fluster
of our Welsh hostess when we talked of dining on our arrival at the
little hostelrie) we then rode down to the sea-shore, intending to
cross the sandy beach of Oxwich, which extends several miles, on our
return to the Gower Inn. The tide flows with great rapidity on this
coast, and it had already advanced to the foot of a stupendous
headland, which juts into the beach about half way. We waded our
horses through the surf--but how can we do justice to the splendour of
the scenery around us. The alternations of stern and savage
beauty--the gigantic masses of "fantastic cliffs," and caverns, that
have stood the combat of the mighty Atlantic for countless ages?
Oxwich is almost unknown to the traveller, and there are few coast
scenes in these islands that surpass it in beauty. We lingered long on
the shore. There is a perpetual "jabble" against the cliffs on this
coast--and we have seldom met with a soul save an aged and solitary
fisherwoman--a study for a Bonington--pursuing her precarious calling
of crab or shrimp fishing, or of pulling lobsters from their retreats
in the savage cliffs.

    [9] See _Mirror_, vol. xvi. p. 253.

                           A holy peace,
  Pervades this _sea-shore solitude_--The world
  And all who love that world, are far away.
                                  N.T. CARRINGTON.

It was getting dusk when we ascended from the shore, on our way
homewards, past the wild--the truly shattered, and desolate ruins of
Pennard Castle; which bear, we think, decided marks of having been
erected long prior to the Norman era. The country people tell you its
origin was supernatural; and some writers ascribe it to that great
castle-builder, Henry de Newburgh. Pennard stands in a situation of
extreme beauty, and deeply rivets the attention:

  "The stones have voices, and the walls do live,
  It is the House of Memory!"
                                 MATAIRE.

Our favourite mare and her companion were in high spirits, (horses are
generally so on returning) exhilarated by the rapid motion; and our
hearts elate with the "songs of spring," we returned home on as sweet
an April evening as ever blessed man.

Another interesting excursion maybe made to Cefyn-bryn, the most
elevated hill in the district, about twelve miles from Swansea. The
road to Western Gower is carried over it; the summit is level, and a
carriage may be driven in safety for a couple of miles to the southern
point; which commands, on a clear day, in one direction, a vast and
unbounded view of the Bristol Channel, the whitened houses of
Ilfracombe, with the hills of Devon and Somerset, Lundy Island, and
the scenery of Swansea Bay. And on the reverse of the picture, almost
the whole peninsula of Gower, the extensive estuary of the Burry
River, and part of the beautiful expanse of the County and Bay of
Carmarthen, is spread out like a map before you. King Arthur's Stone,
an immense rock of _lapis molaris_, twenty tons weight, supported by a
circle of others--the remains of Druidism--invites the attention of
the antiquary, on the north-west point of Cefyn-bryn. We may here
remark that this district, especially the coast, offers a rich harvest
to the geologist. The general substratum of the peninsula is limestone
and marble, bounded to the north by an immense iron and coalfield. The
limestone stratum is continually "cropping out" in the interior, and
of course it can be worked at a trifling expense. This may account for
the general healthiness of the district. Though rain in consequence of
the western exposure, falls frequently, and sometimes with great
violence, yet it speedily runs off, leaving none of the bad effects
which would be produced in a tenacious soil. Marble of valuable
quality is worked at Oystermouth.

But we must hasten to close our Notes on Gower--_to proceed with our
circuit of the coast:--West from Oxwich is Porteyron_, where there is
an extensive lobster and oyster fishery, near which is Landewy Castle.
There is a wonderful precipice here. Further west we come to the
village of Rossilly, near the Worms-Head, the termination of a range
of rocks, which form the western point of the peninsula, being
connected with it by a low isthmus. It extends more than a mile into
the ocean, and at half-flood becomes an island. The name arose by
mariners comparing it to a worm with its head erect, between the Nass
Point and St. Gower's Head, in Pembrokeshire. The scenery here is
deeply interesting. This wild and desolate coast has proved fatal to
numberless ships; the recent erection of the light-house on Caldy
Island, near Tenby, on the opposite point of Carmarthen Bay, has,
however, been most important. Several Indiamen have been wrecked here,
and about fifty years since, a quantity of Spanish dollars, date 1625,
were found amongst the sand, when the tide had receded unusually far,
supposed to be part of the cargo of the "Scanderoon galley" lost on
this coast nearly two centuries ago. This would do for the "Vigo Bay
Company." We proceed along the western shore of Carmarthen Bay, till
we pass Whitford Point, a singular _peninsula of sand_, covered with
reeds, which stands the fury of the tide, forming one side of the wide
estuary of Barry, along the coast of which we pass a Roman encampment
at Llanmadoc--the striking Castle of Llanridian, and other ruins, as
we return eastward to Swansea; till we arrive at the village--we
forget ourselves, the _Borough_ of Castell Llwchyr, or Loughor, the
_Leucarum_ of Antoninus, and the fifth Roman station on the _Via
Julia._ It is seven miles from Swansea. Upon a mount, the supposed
work of the Romans, is a square tower, the remains of a castle built
by Henry, Earl of Warwick. Three miles to the east are two Roman
encampments; many Roman coins have been found at Loughor, from whence
there is a ferry to the Carmarthenshire side opposite, which is
fordable at low water. There is a large colliery here. It is a
delightful sail from this village down the Burry River to Whitford
Point, or round the coast to Worms-Head.

VYVYAN.

       *       *       *       *       *



THE GATHERER.

    "A snapper-up of unconsidered trifles."
                                SHAKSPEARE.


_The following curious letter was found among the papers of a Mr.
Goldwyre, Surgeon, of Salisbury._

To Mr. Edward Goldwyre, at his house on the Close of Salisbury.

Sir,--Being informed that you are the only surgeon in this city (or
country) that anatomises men, and I being under the present unhappy
circumstances, and in a very mean condition, would gladly live as long
as I can, but by all appearances I am to be executed next March, but
having no friends on earth that will speak a word to save my life, nor
send me a morsel of bread to keep life and soul together until that
fatal day; so if you will vouchsafe to come hither, I will gladly
sell you my body (being whole and sound) to be ordered at your
discretion, knowing that it will rise again at the general
resurrection, as well from your house as from the grave. Your answer
will highly oblige, yours, &c.

JAMES BROOKE.
_Fisherton-Auger Gaol_,           _Oct._ 3, 1736.

       *       *       *       *       *

A farmer walking out one day, by chance met Jack Ketch, and jocosely
asked him whether he could tell him the difference between their
trades. "That I can," said Jack, "the only difference is
_utility_--you till, I tie."

WALTER.

       *       *       *       *       *

What is the most suitable motto for a doctor's carriage? Live or die.

Why is the _carver_ in a cook-shop like a naval officer? Because he
commands a _cutter._

W.G.C.

       *       *       *       *       *


EPITAPHS.

  Here lies poor Thomas, and his Wife,
  Who led a pretty jarring life;
  But all is ended--do you see?
  He holds his tongue, and so does she.

  If drugs and physic could but save
  Us mortals from the dreary grave,
  'Tis known that I took full enough
  Of the apothecaries' stuff
  To have prolong'd life's busy feast
  To a full century at least;
  But spite of all the doctors' skill,
  Of daily draught and nightly pill,
  Reader, as sure as you're alive,
  I was sent here at twenty-five.

       *       *       *       *       *


FOR ALL FAMILIES.

This Day, Second Edition, price 5s.

FAMILY MANUAL and SERVANTS' GUIDE,
With upwards of One Thousand New and Approved Receipts, arranged and
adapted for Families and all Classes of Servants.

"We shall recommend this book every where, if it were only for the
sake of the excellent suggestions on the 'self-improvement' of
house-servants."--_Gardeners' Magazine_, June 1830.

"It should find a place in the kitchen or servants' hall of those who
desire to blend comfort with elegance, and prudence with
luxury."--_New Monthly Magazine_, Feb. 1831.

"This book contains a mass of information that cannot fail to be
useful in the conduct of household affairs."--_Atlas_, May 22.

"No servant should he without it."--_Morning Advertiser_, April 27.

Printed for JOHN LIMBIRD, 143. Strand.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Printed and Published by J. LIMBIRD, 143, Strand, (near Somerset
House,) London; sold by ERNEST FLEISCHER, 626, New Market, Leipsic;
G.G. BENNIS, 55, Rue Neuve, St. Augustin, Paris; and by all Newsmen
and Booksellers._







End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Mirror of Literature, Amusement,
and Instruction, No. 494., by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MIRROR OF LITERATURE ***

***** This file should be named 13090.txt or 13090.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/1/3/0/9/13090/

Produced by Jonathan Ingram, Victoria Woosley and PG Distributed
Proofreaders


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
