The Project Gutenberg EBook of Notes & Queries, No. 40, Saturday, August
3, 1850, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Notes & Queries, No. 40, Saturday, August 3, 1850
       A Medium Of Inter-Communication For Literary Men, Artists, Antiquaries,

Author: Various

Release Date: September 7, 2004 [EBook #13389]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NOTES & QUERIES, NO. 40, ***




Produced by Jon Ingram, David King, the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team, and The Internet Library of Early Journals,





NOTES AND QUERIES:

A MEDIUM OF INTER-COMMUNICATION FOR LITERARY MEN, ARTISTS, ANTIQUARIES,
GENEALOGISTS, ETC.

       *       *       *       *       *

"When found, make a note of."--CAPTAIN CUTTLE.

       *       *       *       *       *

NO. 40.] SATURDAY, AUGUST 3, 1850. [Price Threepence  Stamped Edition 4d.

       *       *       *       *       * {145}


CONTENTS.

NOTES:--Page
  Translations of Juvenal--Wordsworth
  Dedication to Milton by Antonio Malatesti, by S.W. Singer
  Pulteney's Ballad of "The Honest Jury," by C.H. Cooper
  Notes on Milton
  Folk Lore:--High Spirits considered a Sign of impending
    Calamity or Death--Norfolk Popular Rhymes--Throwing
    Salt over the Shoulder--Charming for
    Warts
  Notes on College Salting; Turkish Spy; Dr. Dee: from
    "Letters from the Bodleian, &c.," 2 vols. 1813
  Minor Notes:--Alarm--Taking a Wife on Trial--Russian
    Language--Pistol and Bardolph--Epigram
    from Buchanan

QUERIES:--
  Calvin and Servetus
  Etymological Queries
  Minor Queries:--Countess of Desmond--Noli me tangere--Lines
    in Milton's "Penseroso"--"Mooney's
    Goose"--Translation of the Philobiblon--Achilles
    and the Tortoise--Dominicals--Yorkshire Dales

REPLIES:--
  Tobacco in the East
  "Job's Luck," by Coleridge, by J. Bruce
  Eccius Dedolatus
  Replies to Minor Queries:--Hiring of Servants--George
    Herbert--Lord Delamere--Execution of
    Charles I.--Charade--Discursus Modestus--"Rapido
    contrarius Orbi"--"Isabel" and "Elizabeth"--Hanap--Cold
    Harbour

MISCELLANEOUS:--
  Notes on Books, Sales, Catalogues, &c.
  Books and Odd Volumes Wanted
  Notices to Correspondents
  Advertisements

       *       *       *       *       *


NOTES.

TRANSLATIONS OF JUVENAL--WORDSWORTH.

Mr. Markland's ascertainment (Vol. i., p. 481.) of the origin of
Johnson's "From China to Peru," where, however, I sincerely believe our
great moralist intended not so much to borrow the phrase as to profit by
its temporary notoriety and popularity, reminds me of a conversation,
many years since, with the late William Wordsworth, at which I happened
to be present, and which now derives an additional interest from the
circumstance of his recent decease.

Some mention had been made of the opening lines of the tenth satire of
Juvenal:

  "Omnibus in terris, quae sunt a Gadibus usque
  Auroram, et Gangem pauci dignoscere possunt
  Vera bona, atque illis multum diversa, remota
  Erroris nebula."

"Johnson's translation of this," said Wordsworth, "is extremely bad:

  "'Let Observation, with extensive view,
  Survey mankind from China to Peru.'

"And I do not know that Gifford's is at all better:

  "'In every clime, from Ganges' distant stream,
  To Gades, gilded by the western beam,
  Few, from the clouds of mental error free,
  In its true light, or good or evil see.'

"But", he added, musing, "what is Dryden's? Ha! I have it:

  "'_Look round the habitable world_, how few
  Know their own good, or, knowing it, pursue.'

"This is indeed the language of a poet; it is better than the original."

The great majority of your readers will without doubt, consider this
compliment to Dryden well and justly bestowed, and his version, besides
having the merit of classical expression, to be at once concise and
poetical. And pity it is that one who could form so true an estimate of
the excellences of other writers, and whose own powers, it will be
acknowledged, were of a very high order, should so often have given us
reason to regret his puerilities and absurdities. This language,
perhaps, will sound like treason to many; but permit me to give an
instance in which the late poet-laureate seems to have admitted (which
he did not often do) that he was wrong.

In the first edition of the poem of Peter Bell (the genuine, and not the
pseudo-Peter), London, 8vo. 1819, that personage sets to work to bang
the poor ass, the result of which is this, p. 36.:

  "Among the rocks and winding crags--
  Among the mountains far away--
  Once more the ass did lengthen out
  More ruefully an endless shout,
  The long dry see-saw of his horrible bray."{146}

After remarks on Peter's strange state of mind when saluted by this
horrible music, and describing him as preparing to seize the ass by the
neck, we are told his purpose was interrupted by something he just then
saw in the water, which afterwards proves to be a corpse. The reader is,
however, first excited and disposed to expect something horrible by the
following startling conjectures:--

  "Is it the moon's distorted face?
  The ghost-like image of a cloud?
  Is it a gallows these pourtrayed?
  Is Peter of himself afraid?
  Is it a coffin--or a shroud?

  "A grisly idol hewn in stone?
  Or imp from witch's lap let fall?
  Or a gay ring of shining fairies,
  Such as pursue their brisk vagaries
  In sylvan bower or haunted hall?

  "Is it a fiend that to a stake
  Of fire his desperate self is tethering?
  Or stubborn spirit doomed to yell
  In solitary ward or cell,
  Ten thousand miles from all his brethren."

  "Is it a party in a parlour?
  Cramm'd just as they on earth revere cramm'd--
  Some sipping punch, some sipping tea,
  But, as you by their faces see,
  All silent and all damn'd!

  "A throbbing pulse the gazer hath," &c.
                        Part i., pp. 33, 39.

This last stanza was omitted in subsequent editions. Indeed, it is not
very easy to imagine what it could possibly mean, or how any stretch of
imagination could connect it with the appearance presented by a body in
the water.

To return, however, from this digression to the subject of translations.
In the passage already quoted, the reader has been presented with a
proof how well Dryden could compress the words, without losing the
sense, of his author. In the following, he has done precisely the
reverse.

  "Lectus erat Codro Procula minor."--_Juv. Sat._ iii. 203.

  "Codrus had but one bed, so short to boot,
  That his short wife's short legs hung dangling out!"

In the year 1801 there was published at Oxford, in 12mo., a translation
of the satires of Juvenal in verse, by Mr. William Rhodes, A.M.,
superior Bedell of Arts in that University, which he describes in his
title-page as "nec verbum verbo." There are some prefatory remarks
prefixed to the third satire in which he says:

"The reader, I hope, will neither contrast the following, nor the tenth
satire, with the excellent imitation of a mighty genius; though similar,
they are upon a different plan. I have not adhered rigidly to my author,
compared with him; and if that were not the case, I am very sensible how
little they are calculated to undergo so fiery an ordeal."

And speaking particularly of the third satire, he adds:

"This part has been altered, as already mentioned, to render it more
applicable to London: nothing is to be looked for in it but the
ill-humour of the emigrant."

The reader will perhaps recollect, that in the opening of the third
satire, Juvenal represents himself about to take leave of his friends
Umbritius, who is quitting Rome for Canae: they meet on the road (the Via
Appia), and turning aside, for greater freedom of conversation, into the
Vallis Egeriae, the sight of the fountain there, newly decorated with
foreign marbles, leads to an expression of regret that it was no longer
suffered to remain in the simplicity of the times of Numa:

  "In valem Egeriae descendimus, et speluncas
  Dissimiles veris. Quanto praestantius esset
  Numen aquae, viridi si margine clauderet undas
  Herba, nec ingenuum violarent marmora tophum?"
                            _Sat._ iii. 17.

In imitating this passage, Mr. Rhodes, finding no fons Egeriae, no Numa,
and perhaps no Muses in London, transfers his regrets from a rivulet to
a navigable stream; and makes the whole ridiculous, by suggesting that
the Thames would look infinitely better if it flowed through grass, as
every ordinary brook would do.

  "Next he departed to the river side,
  Crowded with buildings, tow'ring in their pride.
  How much, much better would this river look,
  Flowing 'twixt grass, like every other brook,
  If native sand its tedious course beguil'd,
  Nor any foreign ornament defil'd."

W (1.)

       *       *       *       *       *

DEDICATION TO MILTON BY ANTONIO MALATESTI.

Dr. Todd, in his _Life of Milton_, ed. 1826, mentions the accidental
discovery of a manuscript by Antonio Malatesti, bearing the following
title:

"La Tina Equivoci Rusticali di Antonio Malatesti, c[=o]posti nella sua
Villa di Taiano il Settembre dell' Anno 1637. Sonetti Cinqu[=a]nta.
Dedicati al' III'mo Signore et Padrone Oss'mo Signor Giovanni Milton,
Nobil' Inghilese."

It seems that this MS. had been presented, together with Milton's works,
to the Academy della Crusca, by Mr. Brand Hollis, but had by some chance
again found its way to England, and was sold by auction at Evans's some
short time before Mr. Todd published this second edition of Milton's
Life.

I know not if there has been any further notice of this MS., which is
interesting as a monument of the respect and attention our great poet
received from the most distinguished literary men of Italy at the time
of his visit, and I should be glad if any of your correspondents can
indicate its existence, {147} and the place where it is now preserved.
When it was on sale, I had permission to copy the title and a few of the
sonnets, which were such as we could not imagine would have given
pleasure to the chaste mind of Milton; each of them containing, as the
title indicates, an _equivoque_, which would bear an obscene sense, yet
very ingeniously wrapped up. The first sonnet opens thus:--

  "Queste Sonnetti, o Tina, ch' i' ho composto,
  Me gl' ha dettati una Musa buffona,
  Cantando d' improviso, alla Carlona,
  Sul suono, spinto dal oalor del Mosto."

The second may serve to show the nature of the _equivoque_:--

  "Tina, I' so legger bene, e rilevato
  La Storia di Liombrune, e Josafatte,
  Se ben, per esser noto in queste fratte
  Sotto il Maestro mai non sono stato.

  "E il lere del dificio m' ha giurato,
  Quand' egli ha visto le Poesie ch' i' ho fatte,
  Ch' elle son belle, e i piedi in terra batte,
  E vuol ch' io mi sia in Pisa adottorato.

  "Io canto, quand' io son ben ben satollo,
  Sul Chitarrin con voce si sottile,
  Ch'io ne disgrado insien Maestro Apollo.

  "Vien un poco da me, Tina gentile,
  Che s' egli avvien che tu mi segga in collo,
  M' sentirai ben tosto alzar lo stile."

Antonio Malatesti was a man of mark in his time, being distinguished for
his talent as an improvisatore. Among his friends were Galileo,
Coltellini, and Valerio Chimentelli, who have all commendatory poems
prefixed to Malatesti's "Sphinx," a collection of poetical enigmas,
which has been frequently reprinted. Beside his poetical talent, he
studied astronomy, probably under Galileo; and painting, in which he was
a pupil of Lorenzo Lippi, author of the "Malmantile Raqquistato," who
thus designates him under his academical name of _Amostante Latoni_
(canto i. stanza 61.):--

  "E General di tutta questa Mandra
  Amostante Laton Poeta insigne.
  Canta improviso, come un Calandra:
  Stampa gli Enigmi, 'Strologia, e Dipigne."

Malatesti was a member of the Academy degli Apatisti, of which Milton's
friends Coltellini and Carlo Dati had been the principal founders. The
house of the latter was a court of the Muses, and it was at the evening
parties there that all who were distinguished for science or literature
assembled: "Era in Firenze la sua Casa la Magione de' Letterati,
particolarmente Oltramontani, da lui ricevuti in essa, e trattati con
ogni sorta di gentilezza."[1] Heinsius, Menage, Chapelain, and other
distinguished foreigners were members of this academy; and it is more
than probable that, were its annals consulted, our poet's name would
also be found there.

S.W. SINGER.

Mickleham, July 15, 1850.

[Footnote 1: Salvino Salvini Fasti Consolari dell' Academia Fiorentina,
1717, p. 548. Milton's stay of two months at Florence must have been to
him a period of pure enjoyment, and seems to have been always remembered
with delight:--"Illa in urbe, quam prae ceteris propter elegantiam cum
linguae tum ingeniorum semper colui, ad duos circiter menses substiti;
illie multorum et nobilium sane et doctorum hominum familiaritatem
statim contraxi; quorum etiam privatas academias (qui mos illie cum ad
literas humaniores assidue frequentavi). Tui enim Jacobe Gaddi, Carole
Dati, Frescobalde, Cultelline, Bonmatthaei, Chimentille Francine,
aliorumque plurium memoriam apud me semper gratam atque jucundam, nulla
dies delebit."--_Defensio Secunda_, p. 96., ed. 1698.]

       *       *       *       *       *

PULTENEY'S BALLAD OF "THE HONEST JURY."

On the application for a new trial, in the case of The King _against_
William Davies Shipley, Dean of St. Asaph (1784), wherein was raised the
important and interesting question, whether in libel cases the jury were
judges of the law as well as the fact, Lord Mansfield, in giving
judgment, remarked in reference to trials for libel, before Lord
Raymond:

    "I by accident (from memory only I speak now) recollect one
    where the _Craftsman_ was acquitted; and I recollect it from a
    famous, witty, and ingenious ballad that was made at the time by
    Mr. Pulteney; and though it is a ballad, I will cite the stanza
    I remember from it, because it will show you the idea of the
    able men in opposition, and the leaders of the popular party in
    those days. They had not an idea of assuming that the jury put
    it upon another and much better ground. The stanza I allude to
    is this:--

      "'For Sir Philip well knows,
         That his _innuendos_
       Will serve him no longer,
         In verse or in prose;
      For twelve honest men have decided the cause,
      Who are judges of fact, though not judges of laws.'

    "It was the admission of the whole of that party; they put it
    right; they put it upon the meaning of the _innuendos_; upon
    _that_ the jury acquitted the defendant; and they never put up a
    pretence of any other power, except when talking to the jury
    themselves."

In Howell's _State Trials_ (xxi. 1038.) is a note on this passage. This
note (stated to be from the _Speeches of Hon. Thomas Erskine_) is as
follows:--

    "It appears by a pamphlet printed in 1754, that Lord Mansfield
    is mistaken. The verse runs thus:--

      "'Sir Philip well knows,
        That his innuendos
      Will serve him no longer in verse or in prose:
      For twelve honest men have determined the cause,
      _Who are judges alike of the facts and the laws._'"{148}

Lord Campbell, in his _Lives of the Chancellors_ (v. 25.) and _Lives of
the Lord Chief Justices_ (ii. 543.), and Mr. Harris, in his _Life of
Lord Chancellor Hardwicke_ (i. 221.), give the lines as quoted by Lord
Mansfield, with the exception of the last and only important line, which
they give, after the note to Erskine's speeches, as

  "Who are judges alike of the facts and the laws."

And Lord Campbell (who refers to _State Trials_, xxi.) says that Lord
Mansfield, in the Dean of St. Asaph's Case, misquoted the lines "to suit
his purpose, or from lapse of memory."

I know not what is the pamphlet referred to as printed in 1754; but on
consulting the song itself, as given in the 5th volume of the
_Craftsman_, 337., and there entitled "The Honest Jury; or, Caleb
Triumphant. To the tune of 'Packington's Pound,'" I find not only that
Lord Mansfield's recollection of the stanza he referred to was
substantially correct, but that the opinion in support of which he cited
it is expressed in another stanza besides that which he quoted. The
first verse of the song is as follows:

  "Rejoice, ye good writers, your pens are set free;
  Your thoughts and the _press_ are at full liberty;
  For your _king_ and your _country_ you safely may write,
  You may say _black_ is _black_, and prove _white_ is _white_;
    Let no pamphleteers
    Be concerned for their ears;
    For every man now shall be tried by his _peers_.
  _Twelve good honest men_ shall decide in each cause,
  And be judges of _fact_, tho' not judges of _laws_."

In the third verse are the lines Lord Mansfield cited from memory:--

  "For Sir Philip well knows
    That _innuen-does_
  Will serve him no longer in verse or in prose;
  Since _twelve honest men_ have decided the cause,
  And were judges of _fact_, tho' not judges of _laws_."

Lord Campbell and Mr. Harris both make another mistake with reference to
this ballad which I may perhaps be excused if I notice. They say that it
was composed on an unsuccessful prosecution of the _Craftsman_ by Sir
Philip Yorke, and that this unsuccessful prosecution was subsequent to
the successful prosecution of that paper on December 3rd, 1731. This was
not so: Sir Philip Yorke's unsuccessful prosecution, and to which of
course Pulteney's ballad refers, was in 1729, when Francklin was tried
for printing "The Alcayde of Seville's Speech," and, as the song
indicates, acquitted.

C.H. COOPER.

Cambridge, July 29. 1850.

       *       *       *       *       *

NOTES ON MILTON.
(Continued from Vol. ii., p. 115)

_Comus._

On l. 8. (G.):--

  "After life's fitful fever he sleeps well."

_Macbeth_, iii. 2.

On l. 101. (M.):--

  "The bridegroom Sunne, who late the Earth had spoused,
  Leaves his star-_chamber_; early in the _East_
  He shook his sparkling locks."

Fletcher's _Purple Island_ C. ix. St. 1.

On l. 102. (M.):--

  "And welcome him and his with _joy and feast_."
  Fairfax's _Tasso_, B. i. St. 77.

On l. 155. (D.):--

  "For if the sun's bright beams do _blear_ the sight
  Of such as fix'dly gaze against his light."

Sylvester's _Du Bartas_. Week i. Day 1.

On l. 162. (G.):--

  "Such reasons seeming plausible."

Warners _Albion's England_, p. 155. ed. 1612.

On l. 166. (G.):--

  "We are a few of those collected here
  That ruder tongues distinguish _villager_."

Beaumont and Fletcher's _Two Noble Kinsmen_, iii. 5.

On l. 215. (G.) "Unblemished" was originally (_Trin. Coll. Cam. MSS._)
written "unspotted," perhaps from Drayton:--

  "Whose form unspotted chastity may take,"

On l. 254. (G.) Add to Mr. Warton's note, that after the creation of Sir
Robert Dudley to be Earl of Leicester by Queen Elizabeth in 1564, "He
sat at dinner in his _kirtle_." So says Stow in _Annals_, p. 658. edit.
1633.

On l. 290. (G.):--

  "My wrinckl'd face,
  Grown _smooth as Hebe's_."

Randolph's _Aristippus_, p. 18. 4to. ed. 1630.

On l. 297. (G.):--

  "Of frame more than celestial."

Fletcher's _Purple Island_, C. 6. S. 28. p. 71. ed. 1633.

On l. 331. (G.):--

  "Night begins to _muffle up_ the day."

Wither's _Mistresse of Philarete_.

On l. 335. (G.):--

  "That whiles thick _darkness_ blots the light,
  My thoughts may cast another _night_:
   In which _double shade_," &c.

Cartwright's _Poems_, p. 220. ed. 1651.

On l. 345. (G.):--

  "Singing to the sounds of _oaten reed_."

_Drummond_, p. 128.

On l. 373. (G.):--

  "Virtue gives herself light thro' darkness for to wade."

Spenser's _F. Queene_. {149}

(D.) For what is here finely said, and again beautifully expressed (v.
381.), we may perhaps refer to Ariosto's description of the gems which
form the walls of the castle of Logistilla, or Reason:--

  "Che chi l'ha, ovunque sia, sempre che vuole,
  Febo (mal grado tuo) si puo far giorno."

_Orl. Fur_. x. 60.

On l. 404. (G.):--

  "Whiles a puft and _rechlesse_ libertine,
  Himselfe the primrose path of dalliance treads,
  And _reakes_ not his owne reed."

_Hamlet>_ i. 3.

On l. 405. (G.):--

  "Where death and danger _dog_ the heels of worth."

_All's Well that ends Well_, iii. 4.

On l. 421. (M.):--

  "Thrice is he armed that hath his quarrel just:
  And he but naked, though locked up in steel,
  Whose conscience with injustice is corrupted."

2 _Henry IV._, iii. 2.

On l. 424. (G.):--

  "And now he treads th' _infamous_ woods and downs."

Ph. Fletcher's _Eclog._, i. p. 4. ed. 1633.

On l. 494. (G.) The same sort of compliment occurs in Wither's
_Sheperd's Hunting_. (See _Gentleman's Mag._ for December 1800, p.
1151.)

  "Thou wert wont to charm thy flocks;
  And among the massy rocks
  Hast so cheered me with thy song,
  That I have forgot my wrong."

He adds:--

  "Hath some churle done thee a spight?
  Dost thou miss a lamb to-night?"

_Juvenilia_, p. 417. ed. 12mo. 1633.

On l. 535. (M.):--

  "Not powerful Circe with her _Hecate rites_."

Ph. Fletcher's _Poetical Miscellanies_, p. 65. ed. 1633.

On l. 544. (D.):--

  "The soft sweet moss shall be thy bed
  With crawling woodbine overspread."

Herrick's _Hesperides_, p. 223.

On l. 554 (G.):--

  "And flattery to his sinne _close curtain_ draws."

Ph. Fletcher's _Purple Island_, p. 112. ed. 1633.

On l. 635. (G.):--

  "_His clouted shoon_ were nailed for fear of wasting."

Ph. Fletcher's _Purple Island_, p. 113.

On l. 707. (G.) A passage in the Spanish Tragedy confirms Mr. Warton's
reasoning--

  "After them doth Hymen hie as fast,
  _Clothed in sable_ and a saffron robe."

_Old Plays_, vol. iii. p. 214. ed. 1780.

On l. 734. (G.):--

  "Saw you not a lady come this way on a sable horse
  _studded with stars_ of white?"

Beaumont and Fletcher's _Philaster_, Act iv.

On l. 752. (G.):--

  "A sweet _vermilian tincture_ stained
  The bride's fair cheek."

Quarles' _Argalus and Parthenia_, p. 118. ed. 1647.

On l. 812. (G.):--

  "_Bathed_ in worldly _bliss_."

_Drayton_, p. 586. ed. 1753.

  "The fortunate who bathe in floods of joys."

E. of Sterline's _Works_, p. 251. ed. 1637.

On l. 834. (D.):--

  "The lily-wristed morn."

The Country Life, Herrick's _Hesperides_, p. 269.

(G.):--

  "Reacht him her ivory hand."

Ph. Fletcher's _Purple Island_, p. 117.

On l. 853. (G.) Compare this line of Drayton in his _Baron's Warrs_:--

  "Of gloomy magicks and benumbing charms."

Vol. i. p. 110. ed. 1753.

On l. 861. (G.):--

  "Through whose _translucent_ sides much light is born."

Ph. Fletcher's _Pur. Island_, C. 5. St. 31. p. 54.

On l. 862. (M.):--

  "All hundred nymphs, that in his rivers dwell,
  About him flock, with water-lilies crowned."

Ph. Fletcher's _Poet. Miscell._, p 67. ed. 1633.

On l. 863. (G.) The use of Ambergris, mentioned in Warton's note,
appears from Drayton, v. ii. p. 483.:--

  "Eat capons cooked at fifteen crowns apiece,
  With their fat bellies stuft with ambergrise."

On l. 886. (G.):--

  "The wealth of Tarsus nor the _rocks of pearl_,
  _That pave the court of Neptune_, can weigh down
  That virtue."

Beaumont and Fletcher's _Philaster_, Act iv.

On l. 894. (G.):--

  "Beset at th' end with emeralds and turches."

Lingua iv. 4. _Old Plays_, v. 5. p. 202. ed. 1780.

On l. 924. (M.) Mr. Warton says this votive address was suggested by
that of Amoret in the _Faithful Shepherdess_; but observes that "the
form and subject, rather than the imagery, is copied." In the following
maledictory address from Ph. Fletcher's 2nd eclogue, st. 23., the
imagery is precisely similar to Milton's, the good and evil being made
to consist in the fulness or decrease of the water, the clearness or
muddiness of the stream, and the nature of the plants flowing on its
banks:--

  "But thou, proud Chame, which thus hast wrought me spite,
  Some greater river drown thy hatefull name;
  Let never myrtle on thy banks delight;
  But willows pale, the leads of spite and blame,
  Crown thy ungratefull shores with scorn and shame: {150}
    Let dirt and mud thy lazie waters seize,
    Thy weeds still grow, thy waters still decrease;
  Nor let thy wretched love to Gripus ever cease."

P. 13. ed. 1633.

See also the "Masque," in Beaumont and Fletcher's _Maid's Tragedy_, Act
I. vol. i. p. 17. edit. 1750.

On l. 936. (G.):--

  "And here and there were pleasant arbors pight,
   And shadie seats and sundry flowring banks."

Spenser's _F. Queen_, vol. ii. p. 146. ed. 1596.

On l. 958. (G.):--

  "How now! back friends! shepherd, go off a little."

_As You Like It_, iii. 2.

On l. 989. (D.) See Bethsabe's address to Zephyr in tire opening of
Peele's _David and Bethsabe_:--

  "And on thy wings bring delicate perfumes."

On l. 995. (D.):--

  "Her gown should be goodliness
    Well ribbon'd with renown,
  _Purfil'd_ with pleasure in ilk place
    Furr'd with fine fashioun."

Robert Henryson's _Garment of Good Ladies_. See Ellis' _Spec. of Early
Eng. Poets_, i. 362.

J.F.M.

       *       *       *       *       *

FOLK LORE.

_High Spirits considered a Sign of impending Calamity or Death_ (Vol.
ii., p. 84.).--

  "_Westmoreland_. Health to my lord, and gentile cousin, Mowbray.

  _Mowbray_. You wish me health in very happy season;
  For I am, on the sudden, something ill.

  _Archbishop of York_. Against ill chances, men are ever merry;
  But heaviness foreruns the good event.

  _West_. Therefore be merry, cos; since sudden sorrow
  Serves to say thus,--Some good thing comes to-morrow.

  _Arch_. Believe me, I am passing light in spirit.

  _Mow_. So much the worse, if your own rule be true."

Second Part of _King Henry IV._, Act iv. Sc. 2.

In the last act of _Romeo and Juliet_, Sc. 1, Romeo comes on, saying,--

  "If I may trust the flattering eye of sleep,
  My dreams presage some joyful news at hand:
  My bosom's lord sits lightly on his throne;
  And, all this day, an unacustom'd spirit
  Lifts me above the ground with cheerful thoughts."

Immediately a messenger comes in to announce Juliet's death.

In Act iii. Sc. 2., of _King Richard III._, Hastings is represented as
rising in the morning in unusually high spirits. This idea runs through
the whole scene, which is too long for extraction. Before dinner-time he
is beheaded.

X.Z.

_Norfolk Popular Rhymes_.--On looking over an old newspaper, I stumbled
on the following rhymes, which are there stated to be prevalent in the
district in which these parishes are situated, viz. between Norwich and
Yarmouth:--

  "Halvergate hares, Reedham rats,
  Southwood swine, and Cantley cats;
  Acle asses, Moulton mules,
  Beighton bears, and Freethorpe fools."

They seem to proceed simply on the alliterative principle mentioned by
J.M.B. (Vol. i., p. 475.) as common to many popular proverbs, &c. Two
others I subjoin from my own recollection, which differ in this
particular:--

  "Blickling flats, Aylsham fliers,
  Marsham peewits, and Hevingham liars."

These are four villages on the road between Norwich and Cromer. A third
couplet alludes merely to the situation of a group of villages near the
sea-coast,--

  "Gimingham, Trimingham, Knapton, and Trunch,
  Northrepps and Southrepps, hang all in a bunch."

E.S.T.


_Throwing Salt over the Shoulder_.--This custom I have frequently
observed, of taking a pinch of salt without any remark, and flinging it
over the shoulder. I should be glad to know its origin.

E.S.T.


_Charming for Warts_.--In Vol. i., p. 19., a correspondent asks if the
custom of "charming for warts" prevails in England.

A year or two ago I was staying in Somersetshire, and having a wart
myself, was persuaded to have it "charmed." The village-charmer was
summoned; he first cut off a slip of elder-tree, and made a notch in it
for every wart. He then rubbed the elder against each, strictly
enjoining me to think no more about it, as if I looked often at the
warts the charm would fail.

In about a week the warts had altogether disappeared, to the delight of
the operator.

N.A.B.

       *       *       *       *       *

NOTES ON COLLEGE SALTING; TURKISH SPY; DR. DEE; FROM "LETTERS FROM THE
BODLEIAN, &c." 2 VOLS. 1813.

Having been lately reading through this interesting collection, I have
"noted" some references to subjects which have been discussed in your
columns.

1. _College Salting. Salt at Eton Montem_ (Vol. i., pp. 261. 306. 321.
384. 390. 492.).--I am not quite clear as to the connection between
these two subjects: but an identity of origin is not improbable. A
letter from Mr. Byrom to Aubrey, "On the Custom of Salting at Eton,"
Nov. 15. 1693, is in vol. ii. p. 167.: {151}

    "I could send you a long answer to your queries, but have not
    the confidence to do it; for all that I can say was only heard
    from others when I was at school at Eton, and if I should depend
    upon that, perhaps I should make too bold with truth. 'Twas then
    commonly said that the college held some lands by the custom of
    salting; but having never since examined it, I know not how to
    account for it. One would think, at first view, considering the
    foundation was designed for a nursery of the Christian religion,
    and has not been in being much above 250 years, that it is not
    likely any remains of the Gentiles, relating to their
    sacrifices, should in so public a manner be suffered in it;
    however, I cannot but own with those that understand anything of
    antiquity, that the Christians very early assumed some rites of
    the heathens; and probably it might be done with this
    design,--that the nations, seeing a religion which in its
    outward shape was something like their own, might be the sooner
    pursuaded to embrace it. To be free, sir, with you, I am apt to
    believe, for the honour of that society of which I was once an
    unworthy member, that the annual custom of salting alludes to
    that saying of our Saviour to His disciples, '_Ye are the salt
    of the earth_;' for as salt draws up all that matter that tends
    to putrefaction, so it is a symbol of our doing the like in a
    spiritual state, by taking away all natural corruption.... If
    this will not please, why may it not denote that wit and
    knowledge by which boys dedicated to learning ought to
    distinguish themselves. You know what _sal_ sometimes signifies
    among the best Roman authors: _Publius Scipio omnes sale
    facetiisque superabat_, Cic.; and Terent, _Qui habet salem qui
    in te est_."

The Editor has a note on this letter:--

    "There have been various conjectures relative to the origin of
    this custom. Some have supposed that it arose from an ancient
    practice among the friars of selling consecrated salt and
    others, with more probability, from the ceremony of the _bairn_
    or _boy_-bishop, as it is said to have been formerly a part of
    the Montem-celebration for prayers to be read by a boy dressed
    in the clerical habit."

A letter from Dr. Tanner to Mr. Hearne on _Barne_ or _Boy-bishops_, is
in vol. i., p. 302.

2. _The Turkish Spy_ (Vol. i., p. 324.; vol. ii., p. 12.).--The letter
or the authorship of this work quoted by DR. RIMBAULT from the Bodleian
MSS., is printed in vol. i. p. 233.; and I observe that DR. R. has
incorporated in his communication the Editor's note on the passage.

3. _Dr. Dee_ (Vol. i., pp. 216. 284.).--A letter about Dr. Dee from Mr.
Ballard to T. Hearne occurs in vol. ii. p. 89. It does not throw light
on the question of why Dr. Dee left Manchester College? There are also
notes for a life of Dee among Aubrey's _Lives_, appended to these
_Letters_ (vol. ii. p. 310.) Both letters and notes refer to original
sources of information for Dee's Life.

CH.

       *       *       *       *       *

MINOR NOTES.

_Alarm_.--A man is indicted for striking at the Queen, with intent
(among other things) to _alarm_ her Majesty. It turns out that the very
judge has forgotten the legal (which is also the military) meaning of
the word. An alarm is originally the signal to arm: Query, Is it not
formed from the cry _a l'arme_, which in modern times is _aux armes_?
The judge said that from the courage of her family, most likely the
Queen was not alarmed, meaning, not frightened. But the illegal intent
to alarm merely means the intent to make another think that it is
necessary to take measures of defence or protection. When an _alarm_ is
sounded, the soldier who is _not_ alarmed is the one who would be held
to be frightened.

M.


_Taking a Wife on Trial_.--The following note was made upon reading _The
Historical and Genealogical Account of the Clan of Maclean_, by a
Seneachie, published by Smith, Elder, and Co., London, 1838. It may be
thought worthy of a corner amongst the Notes on Folk Lore, which form so
curious and entertaining a portion of the "NOTES AND QUERIES."

In the beginning of the year 1608 a commission, consisting of the
Archbishop of Glasgow, the Bishop of the Isles (Andrew Knox), Andrew
Stewart, Lord Ochiltree, and Sir James Hay of Kingask, proceeded to the
Isles with power to summon the chiefs to a conference, for the purpose
of intimating to them the measures in contemplation by the government. A
meeting for this purpose was held at Aross Castle, one of the seats of
Maclean, in Mull, at which the principal barons and heads of houses
attended.

The regulations contemplated had for their object the introduction of an
additional number of pious divines, who were to be provided for out of
the lands of the great island proprietors; the abolishing a certain
remarkable custom which till then prevailed, namely, that of taking a
wife on approbation, or, in plain intelligible terms, _on trial_!

The following are two examples recorded of this singular custom.

John Mac-Vic Ewen, fourth laird of Ardgour, had _handfasted_ (as it was
called) with a daughter of Mac Ian of Ardnamurchan, whom he had taken on
a promise of marriage, if she pleased him. At the expiration of two
years he sent her home to her father; but his son by her, the gallant
John of Invorscaddel, a son of Maclean of Ardgour, celebrated in the
history of the Isles, was held to be an illegitimate offspring by virtue
of the "handfast ceremony."

Another instance is recorded of a Macneil of Borra having for several
years enjoyed the society of a lady of the name of Maclean on the same
principle; but his offspring by her were deprived {152} of their
inheritance by the issue of his subsequent marriage with a lady of the
Clanrannald family.

These decisions no doubt tended to the abolition of a custom or
principle so subversive of marriage and of the legitimacy of offspring.

J.M.G.

Worcester, July 19.

_Russian Language_.--A friend of mine, about to go to Russia, wrote to
me some time since, to ask if he could get a _Russian grammar in
English, or any English books bearing on the language_. I told him I did
not think there were any; but would make inquiry. Dr. Bowring, in his
_Russian Anthology_, states as a remarkable fact, that the first Russian
grammar ever published was published in England. It was entitled _H.W.
Ludolfi Grammatica Russica quae continet et Manuductionem quandum ad
Grammaticam Slavonicam_. Oxon. 1696. The Russian grammar next to this,
but published in its own language, was written by the great Lomonosov,
the father of Russian poetry, and the renovator of his mother tongue: I
know not the year, but it was about the middle of the last century. I
have a German translation of this grammar "Von Johann Lorenz
Stuvenhagen: St. Petersburgh, 1764." Grotsch, Jappe, Adelung, &c., have
written on the Russian language. Jappe's grammar, Dr. Bowring says, is
the best he ever met with. I must make a query here with regard to Dr.
Bowring's delightful and highly interesting _Anthologies_. I have his
Russian, Dutch, and Spanish _Anthologies_: _Did he ever publish any
others_? I have not met with them. I know he contemplated writing
translations from Polish, Servian, Hungarian, Finnish, Lithonian, and
other poets.

Jarltzberg.


_Pistol and Bardolph_.--I am glad to be able to transfer to your pages a
Shakspearian note, which I met with in a periodical now defunct. It
appears from an old MS. in the British Museum, that amongst canoniers
serving in Normandy in 1436, were "Wm. Pistail--R. Bardolf." Query, Were
these common English names, or did these identical canoniers transmit a
traditional fame, good or bad, to the time of Shakspeare, in song or
story?

If this is a well-known Query, I should be glad to be referred to a
solution of it, if not, I leave it for inquiry.

G.H.B.


EPIGRAM FROM BUCHANAN.

    Doletus writes verses and wonders--ahem--When there's nothing in
    _him_, that there's nothing in _them_.

J.O.W.H.

       *       *       *       *       *


QUERIES.

CALVIN AND SERVETUS.

The fate of Servetus has always excited the deepest commiseration. His
death was a judicial crime, the rank offence of religious pride,
personal hatred, and religious fanaticism. It borrowed from superstition
its worst features, and offered necessity the tyrant's plea for its
excuse. Every detail of such events is of great interest. For by that
immortality of mind which exists for ever as History, or through the
agency of those successive causes which still link us to it by their
effects, we are never separated from the Past. There is also an
eloquence in immaterial things which appeals to the heart through all
ages. Is there a man who would enter unmoved the room in which
Shakspeare was born, in which Dante dwelt, or see with indifference the
desk at which Luther wrote, the porch beneath which Milton sat, or Sir
Isaac Newton's study? So also the possession of a book once their own,
still more of the MS. of a work by which great men won enduring fame,
written in a great cause, for which they struggled and for which they
suffered, seems to efface the lapse of centuries. We feel present before
them. They are before us as living witnesses. Thus we see Servetus as,
alone and on foot, he arrived at Geneva in 1553; the lake and the little
inn, the "Auberge de la Rose," at which he stopped, reappear pictured by
the influence of local memory and imagination. From his confinement in
the old prison near St. Peter's, to the court where he was accused,
during the long and cruel trial, until the fatal eminence of Champel,
every event arises before us, and the air is peopled with thick coming
visions of the actors and sufferer in the dreadful scene. Who that has
read the account of his death has not heard, or seemed to hear, that
shriek, so high, so wild, alike for mercy and of dread despair, which
when the fire was kindled burst above through smoke and flame,--"that
the crowd fell back with a shudder!" Now it strikes me, an original MS.
of the work for which he was condemned still exists; and I, thinking
that others may feel the interest I have tried to sketch in its
existence, will now state the facts of the case, and lay my authorities
before your readers.

    "We condemn you, said the council, Michael Servetus, to be bound
    and led to Champel, where you are to be fastened to a stake, and
    burnt alive together with your book, as well the printed as the
    MS."

    "About midday he was led to the stake. An iron chain encompassed
    his body; on his head was placed a crown of plaited straw and
    leaves strewed with sulphur, to assist in suffocating him. At
    his girdle were suspended his printed books; and the MS. he had
    sent to Calvin."

This MS. had been completed in 1546, and sent
to Geneva for his opinion. Calvin, in a letter to
Farel says:

    "Servetus wrote to me lately, and accompanied his letter with a
    long volume _of his insanities_."

This long volume was the MS. of the "Restitutio Christianismi," now
ready for the press. We {153} have seen that it was sent to Calvin. It
was never returned, but produced in evidence, and burnt with him at the
stake. Nevertheless, he either possessed another copy or took the pains
of writing it afresh, and thus the work was secretly printed at Vienna,
at the press of Balshazar Arnoullet in 1553. Of this edition, those at
Frankfort were burnt at the instance of Calvin; at Geneva, Robert
Stephens sacrificed all the copies which had come into his hands; so
that of an edition of one thousand, it is said only six copies were
preserved. These facts I owe to the excellent Life of Calvin by Mr. T.H.
Dyer, recently published by Mr. Murray. Now does the following MS. bear
relation to that described as recopied by Servetus, from which Arnoullet
printed? or is it the first rough sketch? Can any of your readers say
into what collection it passed?

The extract is from the Catalogue of the Library of Cisternay Dufay, by
Gabriel Martin, Paris, 8vo. 1725, being lot 764., p. 98., and was sold
for 176 livres.

    "Librorum Serveti de Trinitate Codex MS. autographus. In fronte
    libri apparet note quae sequitur, manu ipsius defuncti D. du Fay
    exarata.

    "Forsan ipsius auctoris autographus Codex hic MS. qui fuit
    percelebris Bibliopolae Basiliensis Coelii Horatii Curionis.
    Videtur prima conceptio (vulgo l'Esquisse, en termes de
    Peinture) Libri valde famigerati Mich. Serveti, a Joanne Calvino
    cum ipso Serveto combusti, cui Titulus, _Christianismi
    Restitutio, hoc est totius Ecclesiae Apostolicae ad sua limina
    Vocatio_, &c. &c., typis mandati anno 1554, Viennae Allobrogum,
    8vo. pagg. 734," concluding with an anecdote of the rarity of
    the volume.

There may be some to whom these "Notes" may be of use, others to whom a
reply to the "Queries" may have interest, and so I send them to you.
Such MSS. are of great historical importance.

S.H.

Athenaeum, July 26.

       *       *       *       *       *

ETYMOLOGICAL QUERIES.

Any remarks on the meaning and derivation of the following words, will
be thankfully received.

_Rykelot_.--A magpie?

_Berebarde_.--"In the fever or the _Berebarde_."

_Wrusum_, or _Wursum_.--"My wounds that were healed gather new _wrusum_,
and begin to corrupt."

_Deale_.--Placed always between two sentences without any apparent
connection with either of them. Is it an abbreviation of "Dieu le sait?"

_Sabraz_.--"He drinks bitter _sabraz_ to recover his health."

_Heteneste_.--"Inclosed _hetenest_ in a stone coffin or tomb."

_Schunche_.--"Schunche away."

_I-menbred_.--"A girdle _i-menbred_."

_Blodbendes_ of silk.

_Hesmel_.--"Let their _hesmel_ be high _istiled_, al without broach."

_Irspille_.--"Wear no iron, nor haircloth, nor _irspilles_ felles."

J. Mn.

       *       *       *       *       *

MINOR QUERIES

_Countess of Desmond_.--I should be much obliged if any of your readers
would inform me of the manner of the death of Catherine Fitzgerald,
Countess of Desmond, commonly called the "old Countess of Desmond," who
died in 1626, aged above 140 years,--some say, 162 years. I think I
remember reading, some years since, that she died from a fall from a
cherry-tree, at the age of 144 years. If so, where can the account be
found?

K.

Cheetham Hill.


_Noli me tangere_.--Can any of your readers refer me to pictures upon
the subject of _Noli me tangere_. I want to know what artists have
treated the subject, and where their pictures exist.

B.R.


_Line in Milton's "Penseroso."_--In those somewhat hacknied lines,

  "And may my due feet never fail," &c.,

I am somewhat puzzled to understand the expression,

  "With antique pillars massy _proof_."

Now what is "proof,"--a substantive or adjective? If the latter, no
edition is rightly stopped; for, of course, there should be a comma
after "massy;" and then I somewhat doubt the propriety of "proof" for
"proved," unless joined with another word, as "star-proof,"
"rain-proof."

If "proof" is a substantive, "massy proof" is in apposition to "antique
pillars," and is very meaningless. Can any of your readers suggest an
explanation?

H.A.B.


_"Mooney's Goose."_--As a pendant to "Ludlam's dog," I beg to insert the
proverb of "Full of fun and _fooster_, like Mooney's goose," with the
hope that your acute and ingenious correspondent D.V.S. may be able to
throw some light upon "Mooney." Let me add that D.V.S. has perhaps
somewhat misconceived my brief comment on Ludlam, which my regard for
conciseness has left some deal obscure; and it does not appear worth
while to go over the ground again. I repeatedly heard "Dick's hat-band"
quoted by Lancashire friends exactly as given by Southey. Does not the
variation "cobbler's dog" tend to prove the alliterative principle for
which I had been contending?

J.M.B.


_Translation of the Philobiblon_.--Where can I procure a translation of
Robert de Bury's _Philobiblon_?

L.S.{154}

_Achilles and the Tortoise_.--Where is the paradox of "Achilles and the
Tortoise" to be found? Leibnitz is said to have given it solution in
some part of his works.

There is also a geometrical treatment of the subject by Gregoire de S.
Vincent. Will some reading man oblige me with information or reference
concerning it.

[Greek: Idiotaes.]

_Dominicals_.--I am desirous of obtaining information on a subject of
much interest to Exeter.

An ancient payment is made to the rectors of each parish within the city
of Exeter, called "Dominicals," amounting to 1d. per week from every
householder within the parish. Payments of a similar nature are made in
London, Canterbury, and I believe Worcester. Can any of your numerous
readers state the origin of Dominicals, and give any information
respecting them.

W.R.C.


_Yorkshire Dales_.--A Pedestrian would be much obliged by being informed
if there is any map, guide, or description published, that would serve
as a hand-book to the Dales in the West Riding of Yorkshire, between
Lancashire and Westmoreland.

       *       *       *       *       *


REPLIES

TOBACCO IN THE EAST.

In the _Edinburgh Cabinet Library_, vol. iii. p. 383., art. "China," it
is stated that three species of tobacco have been found in India and in
China, under circumstances which can leave no doubt of their being
native plants.

Dr. Bigelow (_American Botany_, 4to., vol. ii. p. 171.) tells us that
_Nicot. fructicosa_ is said to have been cultivated in the East prior to
the discovery of America. Linnaeus sets down the same as a native of
China and the Cape of Good Hope. Sir G. Staunton says that there is no
traditional account of the introduction of tobacco into China; nor is
there any account of its introduction into India[2]; though, according
to Barrow, the time when the cotton plant was introduced into the
southern provinces of China is noted in their annals. Bell of Antermony,
who was in China in 1721, says,

    "It is reported the Chinese have had the use of tobacco for many
    ages," &c.--_Travels_, vol. ii. p. 73., Lond. ed. 4to. 1763.

Ledyard says, the Tartars have smoked from remote antiquity (_Travels_,
326.). Du Halde speaks of tobacco as one of the natural productions of
Formosa, whence it was largely imported by the Chinese (p. 173. Lond.
ed. 8vo. 1741).

The prevalence of the practice of smoking at an early period among the
Chinese is appealed to by Pallas as one evidence that in Asia, and
especially in China, the use of tobacco for smoking is more ancient than
the discovery of the New World. (See _Asiat. Journ_., vol. xxii. p.
137.)

The Koreans say they received tobacco from Japan, as also instructions
for its cultivation, about the latter end of the sixteenth century.
(Authority, I think, Hamel's _Travels, Pink. Coll._, vii. 532.) Loureiro
states that in Cochin China tobacco is indigenous, and has its proper
vernacular name.

Java is said to have possessed it before 1496. Dr. Ruschenberg says,

    "We are informed the Portuguese met with it on their first visit
    to Java."--_Voy. of U.S.S. Peacock_, vol. ii. p. 456, Lond. ed.
    8vo. 1838.

Crauford dates its introduction into Java, 1601, but admits that the
natives had traditions of having possessed it long before. (_Indian
Archipelago_, vol. i. pp. 104. 409, 410. 8vo.) Rumphius, in the latter
part of the seventeenth century, found it universal even where the
Portuguese and Spaniards had never been.

Savary, in his _Parfait Negociant_, states that the Persians have used
tobacco 400 years, and probably received it from Egypt. (See _Med. Chir.
Review_, 1840, p. 335.)

Olearius found it fully established in Persia, 1637, only about fifty
years after its arrival in England. (Lond. 1662, in fol. p. 322.)
Chardin states, the Persians smoked long before the discovery of
America, and had cultivated tobacco time immemorial.

    "Coffee without tobacco is meat without salt."--Persian Proverb,
    Sale's _Koran_, Preliminary Discourse, 169. ed. 8vo.

In 1634 Olearius found the Russians so addicted to tobacco that they
would spend their money on it rather than bread. (See edit. above
quoted, lib. iii. p. 83.)

According to Prof. Lichtenstein, the Beetjuanen smoked and snuffed long
before their intercourse with Europeans. (_Med. and Chir. Rev._, 1840,
p. 335.)

Liebault, in his _Maison Rustique_, asserts that he found tobacco
growing naturally in the forest of Ardennes. Libavius says that it grows
in the Hyrcinian forest. (Ibid.)

Dr. Cleland shows the three last to be falsehoods(?).

Ysbrants Ides found tobacco in general use among the Ostiaks and other
tribes passed in his route to China, 1692. (Harris's _Coll._, fol. vol.
ii. pp. 925. and 926.)

The story told of Amurath IV. punishing a Turk for smoking seems to be a
mistake, since Amurath only began to reign 1622; whereas Sandys relates
the same story of a certain Morad Bassa, probably Murat III., who began
to reign {155} 1576, and ended 1594. If this be the case, the Turks were
smokers before tobacco was known in England.--In Persia smoking was
prohibited by Shah Abbas. There were two princes of this name. The first
began his reign 1585 A.D., died 1628: the second began 1641, died 1666.
The proclamation against smoking was probably issued by the first, since
(as before mentioned) in 1634 Olearius found the custom firmly
established. If so, the Persians must have been early smokers. Smoking
seems to have obtained at a very remote period among several nations of
antiquity. Dr. Clarke quotes Plutarch on Rivers to show that the
Thracians were in the habit of intoxicating themselves with smoke, which
he supposes to have been tobacco. The _Quarterly Review_ is opposed to
this.

Lafitau quotes Pomp. Mela and Solin to show the same; also Herodotus and
Maximin of Tyre, as evidences to the same custom prevailing amongst the
Scythians, and thinks that Strabo alludes to tobacco in India. (See, for
the Scythians, the _Universal History_.) Logan, in his _Celtic Gaul_,
advances that smoking is of great antiquity in Britain. He says that
pipes of the Celts are frequently found, especially at Brannocktown, co.
Kildare, where in 1784 they were dug up in great numbers; that a
skeleton dug out of an ancient barrow, actually had a pipe sticking
between its teeth when found. (From _Anthol. Hibern._, i. 352.) Halloran
says Celtic pipes are found in the Bog of Cullen. In form, these pipes
were very similar to those in use at this day.

Eulia Effendi mentions having found a tobacco pipe, still in good
preservation, and retaining a smell of smoke, embeded in the wall of a
Grecian edifice more ancient than the birth of Mahomet. (_Med. Chir.
Rev._ 1840, p. 335.) This Dr. Cleland proves to be a lie(?). He proves
the same of Chardin, Bell of Antermony, Mr. Murray, Pallas, Rumphius,
Savary, &c.

Masson describes a "chillum," or smoking apparatus, found embedded in an
ancient wall in Beloochistan. (_Travels_, ii. 157.)

Dr. Yates saw amongst the paintings in a tomb at Thebes the
representation of a smoking party. (_Travels in Egypt_, ii. 412.)

There is an old tradition in the Greek Church, said to be recorded in
the works of the early Fathers, of the Devil making Noah drunk with
tobacco, &c. (Johnson's _Abyssinia_, vol. ii. p. 92.)

Nanah, the prophet of the Sikhs, was born 1419. Supposing him fifty when
he published his _Ordinances_, it would bring us to 1469, or 23 years
before the discovery of America by Columbus. In these _Ordinances_ he
forbade the use of tobacco to the Sikhs; but found the habit so deeply
rooted in the Hindu that he made an exception in their favour. (Masson's
_Beloochistan_, vol. i. p. 42.) Should this be true, the Hindu must have
been in the habit of smoking long before the discovery of America, to
have acquired so inveterate a predilection for it.

If the prophecy attributed to Mahomet be not a fabrication of after
times, it is strongly corroborative, and goes to show that he was himself
acquainted with the practice of smoking, viz.

    "To the latter day there shall be men who will bear the name of
    Moslem, but will not be really such, and they shall smoke a
    certain weed which shall be called tobacco."--See Sale's
    _Koran_, ed. 8vo. p. 169.

Query. Is tobacco the word in the original? If so, it is a
stumbling-block.

Lieut. Burns, in his _Travels_, has the following curious statement:

    "The city of Alore was the capital of a great empire extending
    from Cachemere to the sea. This was conquered by the Mahomedans
    in the seventh century, and in the decisive battle they are
    reported to have brought fire, &c., in their pipes to frighten
    the elephants."

Lieut. Burns conjectures that they must have smoked bang, &c., tobacco
being then unknown.

Buchanan's account of the cultivation and preparation of tobacco in
Mysore, carries with it a conviction that these elaborate processes were
never communicated to them by Europeans, nor brought in any way from
America, where they have never been practised. They strike one as
peculiarly ancient and quite indigenous.

The rapid dissemination of tobacco, as also of forms and ceremonies
connected with its use; its already very extensive cultivation in the
remotest parts of the continent and islands of Asia, within a century of
its introduction into Europe, amounts to the miraculous; and
particularly when we see new habits of life, and novelties in their
ceremonies of state, at once adopted and become familiar, to such
otherwise unchangeable people as the orientals are known to be.
Extraordinary also is the fact that the forms and ceremonies adopted
should so precisely coincide (in most respects) with those in use among
the American Indians, and should not be found in any of the intermediate
countries through which we must suppose them to have passed. Who taught
them the presentation of the pipe to guests, a form so strictly observed
by the Red Men of America, &c.? But the "narghile," the "kaleoon," the
"hookah," the "hubble-bubble," whence came they? They are indigenous.

Great stress is laid on the silence of Marco Polo, Rubruquis,--the two
Mahomedans, Drake, Cavendish, and Pigafelta; also of the _Arabian
Nights_, on the subject of smoking,--and with reason; but, after all, it
is negative evidence: for we have examples of the same kind the other
way. Sir Henry Blount, who was in Turkey in 1634, describes manners and
customs very minutely without a single allusion to smoking, though we
know {156} that twenty years previously to that date the Turks were
inveterate smokers. M. Adr. Balbi insists likewise on the prevalence of
the Haitian name "tambaku" being conclusive as to the introduction of
tobacco from America. This, however, is not exactly the case: in many
countries of the East it has vernacular names. In Ceylon it is called
"dun-kol" or smoke-leaf; in China, "tharr"--Barrow says, "yen."

The Yakuti (and Tungusi?) call it "schaar." The Crim Tartars call it
"tuetuen." The Koreans give it the name of the province of Japan whence
they first received it. In the Tartar (Calmuc and Bashkir?) "gansa" is a
tobacco-pipe. In America itself tobacco has many names, viz. "goia,"
"gozobba" or "cohobba," "petun," "y'ouly," "yoly," and "uppwoc." Are
there any proofs of its growing wild in America? At the discovery it was
every where found in a state of cultivation. The only mention I have met
with is in Drake's _Book of the Indians_[3], where he says it grew
spontaneously at Wingandacoa[4], and was called by the natives
"uppewoc." Does not this very notice imply something unusual? and might
not this have been a deserted plantation?

The Indians have always looked to Europeans for presents of tobacco,
which they economise by mixing with willow-bark, the uva-ursi, &c., and
there are some tribes totally unacquainted with its use. M'Kenzie says,
the Chepewyans learnt smoking from Europeans, and that the Slave and
Dogrib Indians did not even know the use of tobacco.

In mentioning the silence of early visitors to the East on the subject
of smoking, I might have added equally the silence of the Norwegian
visitors to America on the same subject.

A.C.M.

Exeter, July 25. 1850.

[Footnote 2: There is no positive notice of its introduction into
Turkey, Persia, or Russia?]

[Footnote 3: Book iv., p. 5., ed. 8vo., Boston.]

[Footnote 4: Virginia.]

The tobacco-plant does not appear to be indigenous to any part of Asia.
Sir John Chardin, who was in Persia about the year 1670, relates in his
travels, that tobacco had been cultivated there from time immemorial.
"Honest John Bell" (of Antermony), who travelled in China about 1720,
asserts that it is reported the Chinese have had the use of tobacco for
many ages. Rumphius, who resided at Amboyna towards the end of the
seventeenth century, found it universal over the East Indies, even in
countries where Spaniards or Portuguese had never been. The evidence
furnished by these authors, although merely traditional, is the
strongest which I am aware of in favour of an Asiatic origin for the use
of tobacco.

Mr. Lane, on the other hand, speaks of the "introduction of tobacco into
the East, in the beginning of the seventeenth century of our era,"
(_Arabian Nights_, Note 22. cap. iii.), "a fact that has been completely
established by the researches of Dr. Meyer of Konigsberg, who discovered
in the works of an old Hindostanee physician a passage in which tobacco
is distinctly stated to have been introduced into India by the Frank
nations in the year 1609." (Vide _An Essay on Tobacco_, by H.W. Cleland,
M.D. 4to. Glasgow, 1840, to which I am indebted for the information
embodied in this reply to Z.A.Z., and to which I would beg to refer him
for much curious matter on the subject of tobacco.)

My own impression is, that the common use of _hemp_ in the East, for
intoxicating purposes, from a very early period, has been the cause of
much of the misconception which prevails with regard to the supposed
ante-European employment of "tobacco, divine, rare, super-excellent
tobacco," in the climes of the East.

J.M.B.

       *       *       *       *       *

"JOB'S LUCK," BY COLERIDGE.

These lines (see Vol. ii., p. 102.) are printed in the collected
editions of the poems of Coleridge. In an edition now before me, 3 vols.
12mo., Pickering, 1836, they occur at vol. ii. p. 147. As printed in
that place, there is one very pointed deviation from the copy derived by
Mr. Singer from the Crypt. The last line of the first stanza runs thus:

  "_And_ the sly devil did not take his spouse."

In the _Gentleman's Magazine_ for February, 1848, there is a poem by
Coleridge, entitled "The Volunteer Stripling," which I do not find in
the collected edition above mentioned. It was contributed to the _Bath
Herald_, probably in 1803; and stands there with "S.T. Coleridge"
appended in full. The first stanza runs thus:

  "Yes, noble old warrior! this heart has beat high,
  When you told of the deeds which our countrymen wrought;
  O, lend me the sabre that hung by thy thigh,
  And I too will fight as my forefathers fought."

I remember to have read the following version of the epigram descriptive
of the character of the world some twenty or thirty years ago; but
where, I have forgotten. It seems to me to be a better _text_ than
either of those given by your correspondents:

  "Oh, what a glorious world we live in,
  To lend, to spend, or e'en to give in;
  But to borrow, to beg, or to come at one's own,
  'Tis the very worst world that ever was known."

J. Bruce.

       *       *       *       *       *

ECCIUS DEDOLATUS.

Mr. S.W. Singer, for an agreeable introduction to whom I am indebted to
"Notes and Queries," having expressed a wish (Vol. ii., {157} p. 122.)
"to see and peruse" the rare and amusing satire, entitled _Eccius
dedolatus, authore Joanne-francisco Cottalembergio, Poeta Laureato_, I
shall willingly forward to him a quarto volume which contains two copies
of it, at any time that an opportunity may present itself. In the
meanwhile, he may not have any objection to hear that these are copies
of distinct impressions; neither of them intentionally recording place
or printer.

Four separate and curious woodcuts decorate the title-page of one
exemplar, which was certainly printed at Basil, apud Andream Cratandrum.
The topmost woodcut, dated 1519, is here misplaced; for it should be at
the bottom of the page, in which position it appears when employed to
grace the title of the facetious _Responsio_ of Simon Hess to Luther.
The second copy is in Gothic letter, and has typographical ornaments
very similar to those used at Leipsic in the same year. A peculiar
colophon is added in the Basle edition; and after the words "Impressum
in Utopia," a quondam possessor of the tract, probably its contemporary,
has written with indignation, "Stulte mentiris!" The duplicate, which I
suppose to be of Leipsic origin, concludes with "Impressum per Agrippun
Panoplium, Regis Persarum Bibliopolam L. Simone Samaritano et D. Juda
Schariottide Consulibus, in urbe Lacernarum, apud confluentes Rhenum et
Istrum."

Professor Ranke, referred to by Mr. Singer, was mistaken in assigning
"March, 1520," as the date of _Eccius dedolatus_. The terms "Acta decimo
Kalendas Marcii" are, I believe, descriptive of Tuesday, the 20th of
February, in that year.

Perhaps Mr. Singer may be able to communicate some tidings respecting
the Apostolic Prothonotary Simon Hess, of whom I have casually spoken.
Natalis Alexander (_Hist. Eccles._, viii. 105. Paris, 1699) attributes
the humorous production which bears his name ("Lege et ridebis,"
declares the original title-page) to Luther himself, amongst whose works
it may be seen (tom. ii, fol. 126-185. Witeb. 1551); and it is a
disappointment to read in Seckendorf, "Hessus _Simon_. Quis hic fuerit,
compertum mihi non est." (_Scholia sive Supplem ad Ind. i. Histor._,
sig. 1. 3. _Francof_. 1692.)

R.G.

       *       *       *       *       *

Replies to Minor Queries.

_Hiring of Servants_ (Vol. ii., p. 89.).--It was provided by several old
statutes, the first of which was passed in 1349, that all able-bodied
persons who had no evident means of subsistence should put themselves as
labourers to any that would hire them. In the following year were passed
several other acts relating to labourers, by one of which, 25 Edward
III. stat. i. c. i., entitled, "The Year and Day's Wages of Servants and
Labourers in Husbandry," it was enacted that ploughmen and all other
labourers should be hired to serve for the full year, or other usual
terms, and not by the day; and further,

    "That such labourers do carry openly in their hands, in market
    towns, their instruments of labour, and be there hired in a
    public place, and not privately."

For carrying into effect these provisions, it would be necessary to have
certain days, and a fixed place set apart for the hiring of servants. In
the former particular, no days would be so convenient as feast days:
they were well known, and were days commonly computed from; they were,
besides, holidays, and days for which labourers were forbidden to
receive wages (_see_ 34 Edw. III. c. 10. and 4 Henry IV. c. 14.); so
that, although absent from labour, they would lose no part of the scanty
pittances allowed them by act of parliament or settled by justices. As
to the latter requirement, no place was so public, or would so naturally
suggest itself, or be so appropriate, as the market-place.

Thus arose in our own land the custom respecting which W.J. makes
inquiry, and also our statute fairs, or statutes; thus called on account
of their reference to the various "Statutes of Labourers." I was not
aware that any usage to hire on all festivals (for to such, I take it,
your correspondent refers) still existed in England. As to France, I am
unable to speak; but it is not improbable that a similar custom in that
country may be due to causes nearly similar.

Arun.


_George Herbert._--J.R. FOX (Vol. ii., p. 103.) will find in Major's
excellent edition of Walton's _Lives_ the information he requires. At p.
346. it is stated that Mrs. Herbert, the widow of George Herbert, was
afterwards the wife of Sir Robert Cook, of Highnam, in the county of
Gloucester, Knt., eight years, and lived his widow about fifteen; all
which time she took a pleasure in mentioning and commending the
excellences of Mr. George Herbert. She died in the year 1653, and lies
buried at Highnam; Mr. Herbert in his own church, under the altar, and
covered with a gravestone without any inscription.

And amongst the notes appended by Major to these _Lives_, is the
following additional notice of Herbert's burial-place. The parish
register of Bemerton states that

    "Mr. George Herbert, Esq., parson of Inggleston and Bemerton,
    was buried the 3rd day of March, 1632."

"Thus he lived and thus he died," says Walton, "like a saint, unspotted
of the world, full of almsdeeds, full of humility, and all the examples
of a virtuous life, which I cannot conclude better than with this
borrowed observation:

  "'--All must to their cold graves;
  But the religious actions of the just
  Smell sweet in death, and blossom in the dust.'"

Altered from a dirge written by Shirley, attached {158} to his
_Contention of Ajax and Ulysses for the Armour of Achilles_, Lond. 1659,
8vo. See Percy's _Reliques of English Poetry_, vol. i. p. 284.

J.M.G.

Worcester, July 22.

_Lord Delamere_ (Vol. ii., p. 104.).--In Mr. Thomas Lyte's _Ancient
Ballads and Songs_, 12mo. 1827, is a ballad, taken down from tradition,
entitled _Lord Delamere_. It begins as follows, and though different
from the opening lines given by Mr. Peacock, I am inclined to think that
it is another version of the same ballad:

  In the parliament house,
  A great rout has been there,
  Betwixt our good king
  And the Lord Delamere;
  Says Lord Delamere
  To his Majesty full soon,
  Will it please you, my liege,
  To grant me a boon?

After nine more stanzas, the editor remarks,

    "We have not, as yet, been able to trace out the historical
    incident upon which the ballad appears to have been founded, yet
    those curious in such matters may consult, if they list,
    _Proceedings and Debates in the House of Commons for 1621 and
    1622_, where they will find that some stormy debatings in these
    several years have been agitated in Parliament regarding the
    corn laws, which bear pretty close upon the leading features of
    the above."

Edward F. Rimbault.

_Execution of Charles I._ (Vol. ii., p. 72.).--P.S.W.E. is referred to
_An exact and most impartial Accompt of the Indictment, Arraignment,
Trial, and Judgment (according to law), of twenty-nine Regicides, &c._,
1660.

Therein he will find minutes of the trial and _conviction_ of one
"William Hulett, alias Howlett," on the charge of having struck "the
fatal blow." How far the verdict was consistent with the evidence (or,
indeed, the whole proceedings of that court with the modern sense of
justice), abler judges than I have long since determined.

On behalf of the prisoner Hulett, witnesses ("not to be admitted upon
oath against the king") deposed that the common hangman, Richard
Brandon, had frequently confessed (though he had also denied) that _he_
had beheaded the king. One of these depositions, that of William Cox, is
so remarkable that I am induced to transcribe it. If it be true,
"Matfelonensis" is certainly justified in saying, "We need hardly
question that Richard Brandon was the executioner."

    "_William Cox_ examined.

    "When my Lord Capell, Duke Hamilton, and the Earl of Holland,
    were beheaded in the Palace-yard, in Westminster, my Lord Capell
    asked the common hangman, said he, 'Did you cut off my master's
    head?' 'Yes,' saith he. 'Where is the instrument that did it?'
    He then brought the ax. 'Is this the same ax; are you sure?'
    said my Lord. 'Yes, my Lord,' saith the hangman, 'I am very sure
    it is the same.' My Lord Capell took the ax and kissed it, and
    gave him five pieces of gold. I heard him say, 'Sirrah, wert
    thou not afraid?' Saith the hangman, 'They made me cut it off,
    and I had thirty pound for my pains.'"

William Franks Mathews.

_Charade_ (Vol. ii., p. 120.).--I think I can answer Mr. Gatty's Query
as to the authorship of the charade in question. A schoolfellow of mine
at Charterhouse wrote the following:

  "What's that which all love more than life,
  Fear more than death or mortal strife;
  That which contented men desire,
  The poor possess, the rich require,
  The miser spends, the spendthrift saves,
  And all men carry to their graves?"

This was taken from the original copy, and it was certainly his own
invention while at school, and was written about five years ago. I have
not seen him since, and do not like therefore to give his name.

While on the subject of charades, can any of your correspondents inform
me of either the authorship or the answer of the following:

  "Sir Hilary charged at Agincourt--
  Sooth! 'twas a fearful day!
  The Rufflers of the camp and court
  Had little time to pray.
  'Tis said Sir Hilary utter'd there
  Two syllables, by way of prayer--
  The first to all the young and proud
  Who'll see to-morrow's sun;
  The next, with its cold and quiet cloud,
  To those who'll meet a dewy shroud
  Before to-day's is gone:
  And both together to all bright eyes,
  That weep when a warrior nobly dies."

I quote from recollection, so perhaps have omitted part, but believe it
to be pretty correct. I heard it at the same time as the one quoted in
No. 31., and believe both to be hoaxes, as no answer I have heard
(including that given in No. 35.) can be considered satisfactory. The
former charade was attributed at the time to the late Archbishop of
Canterbury, and it was reported that a reward of 100l. was promised for
the correct answer, and I know that a clergyman sent him an answer with
that belief. Among the answers suggested was "Tapir," taken in its
various significations, which I think was as near the mark as "Church,"
as given in No. 35.

I have never heard any answer suggested to Sir Hilary's dissyllabic
prayer.

B.H.C.

_Discursus Modestus_ (Vol. i., pp. 142. 205.).--Such of your readers as
have been making inquiries and suggestions respecting _Discursus
Modestus_ will {159} be glad to hear that a copy exists in the British
Museum. Its title is as follows:

    "A Sparing Discoverie of ovr English Iesuits, and of Fa.
    Parson's proceedings vnder pretence of promoting the Catholick
    Faith in England: for a caueat to all true Catholicks, ovr very
    louing brethren and friends, how they embrace such very
    uncatholike, though Iesuiticall deseignments. Eccles. 4. _Vidi
    calumnias quae sub sole geruntur, et lachrymas innocentium, et
    neminem consolatorem_.--Newly imprinted, 1601."

At the end of the Preface are the initials W.W., making it clear that
Watson, the author of _Important Considerations_ and the _Quodlibets_,
was the writer, and accounting for the connection which seemed to exist
between the _Discursus_ and the _Quodlibets_.

The two passages quoted by Bishop Andrewes (_Resp. ad Apol._ pp. 7.
117.) are to be found in p. 13. But the question now arises, from what
earlier book the quotations are taken, as they both appear in the
_Sparing Discovery_ in Latin, and not in English? Did the Jesuits
publish a work containing such statements? or are we to accept them as
their opinions only on the authority of so bitter an opponent as Watson?

James Bliss.

"_Rapido contrarius orbi_" (Vol. ii., p. 120.) is in one of the finest
passages in Ovid:

  "Nitor in adversum nec me qui caetera vincit
  Impetus, et rapido contrarius evehor orbi."

C.B.

_"Isabel" and "Elizabeth."_--At pages 439. and 488. of Vol. i., "Notes
and Queries," are questions and answers on the names of "Isabel" and
"Elizabeth."

The following, from the _Epigrammaton Joannis Dunbari_, Lond. 1616, may
amuse some of your readers:

  "AD. FREDERICUM PRINCIPEM PALATIN. RH.

  "Selectam Elector sibi quando elegit Elisam:
  Vere Electoris nomine dignus erat."

  "AD ELISHABETHAM EIUS SPONSAM.

  "El Deus est, ish vir, requiem Beth denique donat:
  Hine merito Elisabeth nobile nomen habet.
  Scilicet illa Deo est motore, et Principe primo,
  Principis una sui lausque, quiesque viri."

Scotus.

_Hanap_ (Vol. i., p. 477.).--"A cup raised on a stem, either with or
without a cover." (_Arch. Journ._ vol. ii. 1846, p. 263., where may be
found an interesting account of old drinking vessels, &c., many of them
curiously named.)

Jarltzberg.

_Cold Harbour_ (Vol. ii., p. 60.).--There is a place bearing that
designation at Gosport, running along side of Portsmouth harbour,
between the town of Gosport and the Royal Clarence Victualling-yard. I
am at present aware of none other.

J.R. Fox.

       *       *       *       *       *


MISCELLANEOUS

NOTES ON BOOKS, SALES, CATALOGUES, ETC.

The "Percy Society" has just issued _The Anglo-Saxon Passion of St.
George_, from a manuscript in the Cambridge University Library. It is a
work highly creditable to the Society; and in the interesting
Introduction prefixed to it by the Editor, the Rev. C. Hardwick, M.A.,
Fellow of St. Catharine's Hall, he has gratified our national prejudices
by showing the favour which the Saint from whom we take

    "Our ancient word of courage, fair Saint George"

enjoyed in England before the Norman Conquest. Mr. Hardwick's brief
notice of the Anglo-Saxon allusions to Saint George is complete and most
satisfactory.

Messrs. Puttick and Simpson, of 191. Piccadilly, will sell, on Tuesday
and Wednesday next, the Miscellaneous Collections of the late Rev. J.
Sundius Stamp, including several thousand Autograph Letters of ever
period and class. We need scarcely add that the autographs are classed
and catalogued with Messrs. P. and S.'s usual tact.

We have received the following catalogues:--Bernard Quaritch's (16.
Castle Street, Leicester Square) Catalogue of Italian and French Books;
William Brown's (130. and 131. Old Street, St. Luke's) Catalogue of
Books connected with Wesleyan Methodism.

       *       *       *       *       *

BOOKS AND ODD VOLUMES

WANTED TO PURCHASE.

THE NEWE LIFE OF VIRGINEA, DECLARING THE FORMER SUCCESSE AND PRESENT
STATE OF THAT PLANTATION; being the Second Part of Nova Britannia.
Published by the Authoritie of His Majestie's Councell of Virginea.
London; imprinted by Felix Kyngston, for William Welby, dwelling at the
Signe of the Swan in Paul's Churchyard. 1612.

[A liberal price will be given for a copy in good condition.]

Letters, stating particulars and lowest price, _carriage free_, to be
sent to Mr. Bell, Publisher of "NOTES AND QUERIES," 186. Fleet Street.

       *       *       *       *       *

Notices to Correspondents

Volume the First of Notes and Queries, _with Title-page and very copious
Index, is now ready, price 9s. 6d., bound in cloth, and may be had, by
order, of all Booksellers and Newsmen_.

_The Monthly Part for July, being the second of Vol. II., is also now
ready, price 1s_.

_Our valued Correspondent at Cambridge is assured that we could afford
some a satisfactory explanation of the several points referred to in his
friendly remonstrance._

       *       *       *       *       *

CAMBRIAN ARCHAEOLOGICAL ASSOCIATION.

THE FOURTH ANNUAL MEETING will be held at DOLGELLAU, August 26th to
31st, 1850.

_President_.--W.W.E. Wynne, Esq., F.S.A. John Williams, Llanymowddwy,
Mallwyd, W. Basil Jones, Gwynfryn, Machynileth, _General Secretaries_.

       *       *       *       *       *

ROCHEFOUCAULD'S MAXIMS, WITH NOTES.

Just published, in Fcp. 8vo. Price 4s. 6d. cloth.

MORAL REFLECTIONS, SENTENCES, AND MAXIMS of Francis Duc de la
Rochefoucald. Newly translated from the French. With an Introduction and
Notes.

London: Longman, Brown, Green, and Longmans.

       *       *       *       *       *{160}

THE GENTLEMAN'S MAGAZINE
AND
HISTORICAL REVIEW.

An Historical Magazine has long been the great desideratum of our
literature. Amongst many periodical publications, each appealing to some
peculiar or exclusive class, no one has given special attention to that
branch of knowledge which engages the feelings of all classes.

The Gentleman's Magazine has stepped forward to occupy this vacant post.
Arrangements have been effected to secure for its pages contributions
from gentlemen eminently conversant with the various branches of
historical study, and every endeavour is made to render it a WORTHY
ORGAN AND REPRESENTATIVE OF HISTORICAL AS WELL AS OF ARCHAEOLOGICAL
LITERATURE. In its ORIGINAL ARTICLES, historical questions are
considered and discussed; in its REVIEWS, prominent attention is given
to all historical books; its HISTORICAL CHRONICLE and NOTES OF THE MONTH
contain a record of such recent events as are worthy of being kept in
remembrance; its OBITUARY is a faithful memorial of all persons of
eminence lately deceased; and these divisions of the Magazine are so
treated and blended together as to render the whole attractive and
interesting to all classes of readers.

Every Number is illustrated by several Plates and Vignettes.

Seven Numbers of the new undertaking are before the public, and present
a fair example of what the work will henceforth be.

The following important subjects have been treated of in some of the
recent articles:

History of the first appearance of the Gypsies in Europe.
Curious Deductions from the History of our most common English
  Words, as illustrative of the Social Conditions of our Anglo-Saxon
  and Anglo-Norman forefathers.
Recovery of the long lost Accusation of High Treason made by
  Bishop Bonner against Sir Thomas Wyatt the poet.
Unpublished Letters of Archbishop Land, illustrative of the
  Condition of England in 1640.
Inquiry into the Genuineness of the Letters of Logan of Restalrig,
  on which depends the Historical Question of the reality of the
  Gowrie Conspiracy.
Alleged Confession of Sir Walter Raleigh of his intention to
  retrieve his fortune by Piracy.
Three Papers containing New Facts relating to the Life and
  Writings of Sir Philip Sidney
The Authorship of the fabricated English Mercurie, 1588, long
  esteemed to be the earliest English Newspaper.
Chronicle of Queen Jane.
The Maids of Taunton--Mr. Macaulay and William Penn.
The Banquet of the Dead--Funeral of Francis I.
Two Papers on Windsor Castle in the time of Queen Elizabeth,
  with illustrative Plates.
Documents relating to the Execution of James Duke of Monmouth.
Account of the Funeral of Amy Robsart.
The Price paid to Charles II. for Dunkirk.
Expenses of the Commissioners at the Treaty of Uxbridge.
Unpublished Letters of Dr. Johnson, and of the Man of Ross;
  and Letters of Pope and Lady Wortley Montague.
Notices of the Society of Gregorians alluded to by Pope.
Who wrote Shakspeare's Henry VIII.?
Inaccuracy of the Common Division into Acts of King Lear, Much
  Ado About Nothing, and Twelfth Night.
The Christian Iconography and Legendary Art of the Middle
  Ages; with especial regard to the Nimbus and Representations
  of the Divinity; with many illustrations.
Facts for a New Biographia Britannica, consisting of unpublished
  Documents relating to John Locke, Anne Duchess of Albemarle,
  Nat. Lee, Captain Douglas, Sir S. Morland, Dr.
  Harvey, Dr. A. Johnstone, Betterton, Rowe, Arbuthnot, Dennis,
  and Gilbert West.
Unknown Poem by Drayton.
Minutes of the Battle of Trafalgar.
Memoirs of Jaques L. S. Vincent, a celebrated French Protestant
  writer, of Vincent de Paul, and of Paul Louis Courier.
The Coins of Caractacus.
Memoir of Inigo Jones as Court-Dramatist of James I. and
  Charles I.; with illustations.
Original Letter of Princess Elizabeth to George IV. relating to
  the Duke of Cambridge at Hanover.
History of Rambouillet.
Mediaeval Literature of Spain.
Savitri, an Historical Poem from the Sanscrit.
Injustice of Southey to Mrs. Barbauld.
The Lives of Dr. Chalmers, Southey, Chantrey, Mahomet, Tasso,
  Ochlenschlaeger, Plumer Ward, and Dr. A. Combe.
The Report of the Commissioners on the British Museum and
  the present state of the Library Catalogue.
On Prisons and Prison Discipline.
On the Copyright of Foreigners and Translators.
On the Primeval Antiquities of Denmark; with illustrations.
On the Discovery of a singular Roman Temple at the source of
  the Seine.
History of Pottery; with engravings.
Villa and Tomb of a Female Gallo-Roman Artist.
Full Reviews of Lord Campbell's Chief Justices; Boutell's Christian
  Monuments in England, with illustrations; Green's Lives
  of the Princesses; the Historical Memoirs of Cardinal Pacca;
  Inkersley's Romanesque and Pointed Architecture in France;
  Cutt's Monumental Slabs and Crosses, with illustrations;
  Garbett's Principles of Design in Architecture; Merivale's
  History of the Romans; Col. Mure's Language and Literature
  of Greece; Recollections of Lord Cloncurry; Evelyn's Diary;
  Townsend's State Trials; and shorter Reviews of many other
  important books.
Every Number contains Notes of the Month, or comments upon
  all passing literary events; Reports of Archaeological Societies;
  and Historical Chronicle.
The well-known Obituary includes, in the last seven numbers,
  Memoirs of H.R.H. the Duke of Cambridge; the Rt. Hon. Sir
  Robert Peel; the Earls of Carnarvon, Macclesfield, and Roscommon;
  the Lords Alvanley, Aylmer, Colville, Godolphin,
  and Lord Jeffrey; Bishops Coleridge and Tottenham; Hon.
  John Simpson; Adm. Sir C. Hamilton, Bart.; Hon. and Rev.
  Sir Henry Leslie, Bart.; Sir Felix Booth, Bart.; Sir James
  Gibson Craig, Bart.; Sir G. Chetwynd, Bart.; Sir Charles
  Forbes, Bart.; Sir Thomas Cartwright, G.C.H.; Lieut.-Gens.
  Sir John Macdonald, Sir James Bathurst, and Sir James
  Buchan; Major-Gen. Sir Archibald Galloway; General Craven;
  Col. Weare; Sir M. I. Brunel; Admirals Sir J. C. Coghill,
  Schomberg, and Hills; the Deans of Salisbury, Hereford,
  and Bristol; the Rev. Canon Bowles; Rev. W. Kirby, F.R.S.;
  Rev. Doctor Byrth; Revs. E. Bickersteth, T. S. Grimshawe,
  and J. Ford; Mr. Serjeant Lewes; William Roche, Esq.;
  John Mirehouse, Esq.; W. C. Townsend, Esq., Q.C.; Thomas
  Stapleton, Esq.; T. F. Dukes, Esq.; J. P. Deering, Esq. R.A.;
  Wordsworth; Ebenezer Elliott; J. C. Calhoun, Esq.; Colonel
  Sawbridge; Lieut. Waghorn; Miss Jane Porter; Mrs. Bartley;
  Madame Dulcken; Thomas Martin, of Liverpool; C. R.
  Forrester (Alfred Crowquill); M. Gay Lussac; Mr. John
  Thom; Mr. John Glover; Mr. R. J. Wyatt; Madame Tussaud.

THE MAGAZINE FOR AUGUST,

Being the Second Number of the New Volume,

_Was Published on the 1st of the Month, price 2s. 6d._

       *       *       *       *       *

NICHOLS AND SON, 25. PARLIAMENT STREET.

       *       *       *       *       *

Printed by Thomas Clark Shaw, of No. 8. New Street Square, at No. 5. New
Street Square, in the Parish of St. Bride, in the City of London; and
published by George Bell, of No. 186. Fleet Street, in the Parish of St.
Dunstan in the West, in the City of London, Publisher, at No. 186. Fleet
Street aforesaid.--Saturday, August 3. 1850.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Notes & Queries, No. 40, Saturday,
August 3, 1850, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NOTES & QUERIES, NO. 40, ***

***** This file should be named 13389.txt or 13389.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/1/3/3/8/13389/

Produced by Jon Ingram, David King, the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team, and The Internet Library of Early Journals,


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
