The Project Gutenberg EBook of Notes and Queries, Number 48, Saturday,
September 28, 1850, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Notes and Queries, Number 48, Saturday, September 28, 1850

Author: Various

Release Date: September 15, 2004 [EBook #13463]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NOTES AND QUERIES ***




Produced by The Internet Library of Early Journals, Jon Ingram, David
King, and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team





NOTES AND QUERIES:

A MEDIUM OF INTER-COMMUNICATION FOR LITERARY MEN, ARTISTS, ANTIQUARIES,
GENEALOGISTS, ETC.

       *       *       *       *       *

"When found, make a note of."--CAPTAIN CUTTLE.

       *       *       *       *       *

No. 48.] SATURDAY, SEPTEMBER 28, 1850 [Price Threepence. Stamped Edition 4d.

       *       *       *       *       * {273}


CONTENTS.

NOTES:--
  Riots in London. 273
  Satirical Poems on William III. 275
  Shakspeare's Grief and Frenzy, by C. Forbes. 275
  Etymological Notes. 276
  Mistakes in Gibbon. by Rev. J.E.B. Mayor. 276
  Minor Notes. History of Saracens--Hippopotamus--America--Pascal's
  Letters--Parson's Epigram. 277

QUERIES:--
  "Orkneyinga Saga". 278
  Minor Queries:--Incumbents of Church Livings--York
    Buildings Company--Saying ascribed to Montaigne--"Modum
    Promissionis"--Roman Catholic Theology--Wife of Edward
    the Outlaw--Conde's "Arabs in Spain". 278

REPLIES:--
  Cave's Historia Literaria, by Rev. Dr. Maitland. 279
  Sir Garamer Vans. 280
  Collar of SS., by Dr. Rock. 280
  Joachin, the French Ambassador, by S.W. Singer. 280
  Remains of James II. 281
  Handfasting. 282
  Adam of Bremen's Julin, by Dr. Bell. 282
  Replies to Minor Queries:--Bess of Hardwick--Bishop
    Andrewes--The Sun Feminine--Carpatio--Character
    "&"--Walrond Family--Blackguard--Scala Coeli--Sitting
    during the Lessons--Aerostation--Pole Money--Wormwood
    Wine--Darvon Gatherall--Angels' Visits--Antiquity of
    Smoking--"Noli me tangere"--Partrige Family--City
    Offices--Harvey and the Circulation of the Blood. 283

MISCELLANEOUS:--
  Notes on Books, Sales, Catalogues, &c. 287
  Books and Odd Volumes Wanted. 287
  Notices to Correspondents. 287
  Advertisements. 288

       *       *       *       *       *


NOTES.

RIOTS OF LONDON.

Seventy years having passed away since the riots of London, there cannot
be many living who remember them, and still fewer who were personally in
contact with the tumultuous throng. Under such circumstances, I venture
to offer for introduction into your useful and entertaining miscellany
some incidents connected with that event in which I was either
personally an actor or spectator--things not in themselves important,
yet which may be to some of your readers acceptable and interesting as
records of bygone days.

The events of 1780, in themselves so terrific, were well adapted to be
written indelibly on the memory of a young, and ardent boy. At any age
they would have been engraved as with an iron pen; but their occurrence
at the first age of my early boyhood, when no previous event had claimed
particular attention, fixed them as a lasting memorial.

The awful conflagrations had not taken place when I arrived in London
from a large school in one of the midland counties in England, for the
Midsummer vacation. So many of my school-fellows resided in the
metropolis, or in a part of the country requiring a passage through
London, that three or four closely-packed post-chaises were necessary;
and to accomplish the journey in good time for the youngsters to be met
by their friends, the journey was begun as near to four o'clock A.M. as
was possible.

The chaises, well crowned with boxes, and filled with joyous youth, were
received at the Castle and Falcon, then kept by a Mr. Dupont, a
celebrated wine merchant, and the friend of our estimable tutor. The
whole of my schoolmates had been met by their respective friends, and my
brother and I alone remained at the inn, when at length my mother
arrived in a hackney-coach to fetch us, and from her we learned that the
streets were so crowded that she could hardly make her way to us. No
time was lost, and we were soon on our way homewards. We passed through
Newgate Street and the Old Bailey without interruption or delay; but
when we came into Ludgate Hill the case was far different; the street
was full and the people noisy, permitting no carriage to pass unless the
coachman took off his hat and acknowledged his respect for them and the
object for which they had congregated. "Hat off, coachee!" was their
cry. Our coachman would not obey their noisy calls, and there we were
fixed. Long might we have remained in that unpleasant predicament had
not my foreseeing parent sagaciously provided herself with a piece of
ribbon of the popular colour, which she used to good effect by making it
up into a bow with a long, streamer and pinning it to a white
handkerchief, which she courageously flourished out of the window of the
hackney-coach. Huzzas {274} and "Go on, coachee!" were shouted from the
crowd and with no other obstruction than the full streets presented, we
reached Beaufort Buildings, in the Strand, the street in which we
resided.

There a new scene presented itself, which was very impressive to our
young minds. The street was full of soldiers, and the coachman said to
my mother, "I cannot go down." A soldier addressed my mother: "No one,
ma'am, can go down this street:" to whom my mother replied, "I live
here, and am going to my own home." An officer then gave permission for
us, and the coachman with our box, to proceed, and we were soon at our
own door. The coachman, ignorant of the passport which the handkerchief
and ribbon had proved, said, on setting the box down, "You see, ma'am,
we got on without my taking off my hat: for who would take off his hat
to such a set of fellows? I would rather have sat there all the day
long."

The assembling of the military in this street was to defend the
dwellings of Mr. Kitchener and Mr. Heron, both these gentlemen being
Roman Catholics. Mr. Kitchener (who was the father of Dr. Kitchener, the
author of the _Cook's Oracle_) was an eminent coal merchant, whose wharf
was by the river-side southward, behind Beaufort Buildings, then called
Worcester Grounds[1], as the lane leading to it was called Worcester
Lane: but Mr. Kitchener, or his successor Mr. Cox, endeavoured to change
it by having "Beaufort Wharf" painted on their wagons. Thus the name
"Worcester Grounds" got lost; but the lane which bore the same name got
no advantage by the change, for it received the appropriate title of
"Dirty Lane," used only for carts and horses, foot passengers reaching
the wharf by the steps at the bottom of Fountain Court and Beaufort
Buildings.

But to return to my narrative. My parents soon removed us out of this
scene of public confusion, to the house of a relative residing at St.
Pancras: and well do I remember the painful interest with which, as soon
as it got dark, the whole family of my uncle used to go on the roof of
the house and count the number of fires, guessing the place of each. The
alarm was so great, though at a distance, that it was always late before
the family retired to rest. I remained at St. Pancras until the riots
had been subdued and peace restored; and now, though very many matters
crowd my mind, as report after report then reached us, I will leave them
to record only what I personally saw and heard.

Before the vacation was ended, the trials of the prisoners had
proceeded, and I went to a friend's house to see some condemned ones
pass to execution. The house from which I had this painful view has been
removed; the site is now the road to Waterloo Bridge. I believe it was
because a lad was to be executed that I was allowed to go. The mournful
procession passed up St. Catherine's Street, and from the distance I
was, I could only see that the lad in height did not reach above the
shoulders of the two men between whom he sat, who, with him, were to be
executed in Russell Street. Universal and deep was the sympathy
expressed towards the youth from the throng of people, which was
considerable. As it was long before the street was sufficiently cleared
to allow us to return home, the report came that the execution was over,
and that the boy was so light that the executioner jumped on him to
break his neck: and such was the effect of previous sympathy, that a
feeling of horror was excited at the brutality (as they called it) of
the action; but, viewing it calmly, it was wise, and intended kindly to
shorten the time of suffering. While thus waiting, I heard an account of
this boy's trial. A censure was expressed on the government for hanging
one so young, when it was stated that this boy was the only one
executed, though so many were guilty, as an example, as the proof of his
guilt was unquestionable. A witness against him on the trial said, "I
will swear that I have seen that boy actively engaged at several
conflagrations." He was rebuked for thus positively speaking by the
opposite counsel, when he said, "I am quite sure it is the active boy I
have seen so often for I was so impressed with his flagrant conduct that
I cut a piece out of his clothes:" and putting his hand into his pocket,
he pulled out the piece which he had cut off, which exactly fitted to
the boy's jacket. This decided his execution: yet justice was not
vindictive, for very few persons were executed.

I will trespass yet further on your pages to recite one other incident
of the riots that occurred in connexion with the attack on the King's
Bench prison, and the death of Allen, which made a great stir at the
time. The incident I refer to happened thus:--At the gate of the prison
two sentinels were placed. One of these was a fine-built young man, full
six feet high: he had been servant to my father. On the day Allen was
shot, or a day or two after, he came to my father for protection: my
father having a high opinion of his veracity and moral goodness, took
him in and sheltered him until quiet was restored. His name was M'Phin,
or some such name; but as he was always called "Mac" by us, I do not
remember his name perfectly. He stated that he and his fellow-soldier,
while standing as sentries at the prison, were attacked by an uproarious
mob, and were assailed with stones and brickbats;--that his companion
called loudly to the mob, and said, "I will not fire until I see and
mark a man that throws at us, and then he shall die. I don't want to
kill the innocent, {275} or any one; but he that flings at us shall
surely die." Young Allen threw a brick-bat, and ran off; but Mac said,
his fellow-soldier had seen it, and marked him. The crowd gave way; off
went Allen and the soldier after him. Young Allen ran on, the soldier
pursuing him, till he entered his father's premises, who was a
cow-keeper, and _there_ the soldier shot him. Popular fury turned upon
poor Mac; and so completely was he thought to be the "murderer" of young
Allen that 500l. was offered by the mob for his discovery. But my good
father was faithful to honest Mac, and he lay secure in one of our upper
rooms until the excitement was over.

Allen's funeral was attended by myriads, and a monument was erected to
his memory (which yet remains, I believe) in Newington churchyard,
speaking lies in the face of the sun. If it were important enough, it
deserves erasure as much as the false inscription on London's monument.

As soon as the public blood was cool, "Mac" surrendered himself, was
tried at the Old Bailey, and acquitted.

Should it be in the power of any of the readers of your interesting
miscellany, by reference to the Session Papers, to give me the actual
name of poor "Mac," I shall feel obliged.

SENEX.

September 9. 1850.

[Footnote 1: Mr. Cunningham, vol. i. p. 69., gives an interesting
quotation from Strype respecting Worcester House, which gave the name of
"Worcester Grounds" to Mr. Kitchener's property.]

       *       *       *       *       *

SATIRICAL POEMS ON WILLIAM III.

Some years since I copied from a MS. vol., compiled before 1708, the
following effusions of a Jacobite poet, who seems to have been "a good
hater" of King William. I have made ineffectual efforts to discover the
witty author, or to ascertain if these compositions have ever been
printed. My friend, in whose waste-book I found them,--a beneficed
clergyman in Worcestershire, who has been several years dead,--obtained
them from a college friend during the last century.

  "UPON KING WILLIAM'S TWO FIRST CAMPAGNES.

  "'Twill puzzle much the author's brains,
     That is to write your story,
   To know in which of these campagnes
     You have acquired most glory:
   For when you march'd the foe to fight,
     Like Heroe, nothing fearing,
   Namur was taken in your sight,
     And Mons within your hearing."


  "ON THE OBSERVING THE 30TH OF JANUARY, 1691.

   "Cease, Hippocrites, to trouble heaven
    How can ye think to be forgiven
      The dismall deed you've done?
    When to the martyr's sacred blood,
    This very moment, if you could,
      You'd sacrifice his son."


  "ON KING WILLIAM'S RETURN OUT OF FLANDERS.

   "Rejoice, yee fops, yo'r idoll's come agen
    To pick yo'r pocketts, and to slay yo'r men;
    Give him yo'r millions, and his Dutch yo'r lands:
    Don't ring yo'r bells, yee fools, but wring yo'r hands."

GRENDON.

       *       *       *       *       *

SHAKSPEARE'S GRIEF AND FRENZY.

I have looked into many an edition of Shakspeare, but I have not found
one that traced the connexion that I fancy exists between the lines--

  _Cassius._ "I did not think you could have been so angry."

  _Brutus._  "O Cassius! I am sick of many griefs."

or between

  _Brutus._  "No man bears sorrow better.--Portia is dead."

  _Cassius._ "How 'scaped I killing when I crossed you so!"

  _Julius Caesar_, Act iv. Sc. 3.

which will perhaps better suit the object that I have in view. The
editors whose notes I have examined probably thought the connexion so
self-evident or insignificant as not to require either notice or
explanation. If so, I differ from them, and I therefore offer the
following remarks for the _amusement_ rather than for the _instruction_
of those who, like myself, are not at all ashamed to confess that they
cannot read Shakspeare's music "_at sight_." I believe that both
_Replies_ contain an allusion to the fact that _Anger, grafted on
sorrow, almost invariably assumes the form of frenzy; that it is in
every sense of the word "Madness," when the mind is unhinged, and
reason, as it were, totters from the effects of grief_.

Cassius had but just mildly rebuked Brutus for making no better use of
his philosophy, and now--startled by the sudden sight of his bleeding,
mangled heart--"Portia is--Dead!" pays involuntary homage to the very
philosophy he had so rashly underrated by the exclamation--

  "How 'scaped I _killing_ when I crossed you so!"

I wish, if possible, to support this view of the case by the following
passages:--

  I.  Romeo's address to Balthasar.
      "But if thou ... roaring sea."

  II. His address to Paris.
      "I beseech thee youth ... away!"

  _Romeo and Juliet_, Act v. Sc. 3.

    III. "The poor father was ready to fall down dead; but he
    grasped the broken oar which was before him, jumped up, and
    called in a faltering voice,--'Arrigozzo! Arrigozzo!' This was
    but for a moment. Receiving no answer, he ran to the top of the
    rock; looked at all around, ran his eye over all who were safe,
    one by one, but could not find his son among them. Then seeing
    the count, who had so lately been finding fault {276} with his
    son's name, he roared out,--'Dog, are you here?' And,
    brandishing the broken oar, he rushed forward to strike him on
    the head. Bice uttered a cry, Ottorino was quick in warding off
    the blow; in a minute, Lupo, the falconer, and the boatmen,
    disarmed the frantic man; who, striking his forehead with both
    hands, gave a spring, and threw himself into the lake.

    "He was seen fighting with the angry waves, overcoming them with
    a strength and a courage which desperation alone can
    give."--_Marco Viconti_, vol. i. chap. 5.

IV. A passage that has probably already occurred to the mind of the
reader, Mucklebackit mending the cable in which his son had been lost:

    "'There is a curse either on me or on this auld black bitch of a
    boat, that I have hauled up high and dry, and pitched and
    clouted sae mony years, that she might drown my poor Steenie at
    the end of them, an' be d----d to her!' And he flung his hammer
    against the boat, as if she had been the intentional cause of
    his misfortune"--_Antiquary_, vol. ii. chap. 13. Cadell, 1829.

    V. "Giton praecipue, _ex dolore in rabiem efferatus_, tollit
    clamorem, me, utraque manu impulsum, praecipitat super
    lectum."--Petron. _Arb. Sat._ cap. 94.

The classical reader will at once recognise the force of the words
"rabiem," "efferatus," "praecipitat," in this passage. The expression
"utraque manu" may not at first sight arrest his attention. It seems
always used to express the most intense eagerness; see

    "Ijecit utramque laciniae manum."--Pet. _Arb. Sat._ 14.

    "Utraque manu Deorum beneficia tractat."--Ib. 140.

    "Upon which Menedemus, incensed at his insolence,
    answered,--'Nothing is more necessary than the preservation of
    Lucullus;' and thrust him back _with both hands_."--Plutarch,
    _Life of Lucullus_.

    "Women have a sort of natural tendency to cross their husbands:
    they lay hold _with both hands_ [a deux mains] on all occasions
    to contradict and oppose them, and the first excuse serves for a
    plenary justification."--Montaigne, _Essays_, book 2. chap. 8.

    "Marmout, deceived by the seemingly careless winter attitude of
    the allies, left Ciudad Rodrigo unprotected within their reach
    and Wellington jumped _with both feet_ upon the devoted fortress
    of Napier," _Pen. War_, vol. iv. p. 374.

Any apology for the unwarrantable length of this discursive despatch,
would, of course, only make matters worse.

C. FORBES.

Temple.

       *       *       *       *       *

ETYMOLOGICAL NOTES.

1. _Gnatch._--"The covetous man dares not gnatch" (Hammond's
_Catechism_). From this, and the examples in Halliwell's _Dictionary_,
the sense seems to be "to move." Is it related to "gnake?"

2. _Pert._--I lately met with an instance of the use of this word in the
etymological sense _peritus_: "I beant peart at making button-holes,"
said a needlewoman.

3. _Rococo._--A far-fetched etymology suggests itself. A wealthy noble
from the north might express his admiration for the luxuries of Paris by
the Russian word [Cyrillic: roskosha], or Polish _roskosz_. A Frenchman,
catching the sound, might apply it to anything extravagant enough to
astonish a barbarian.

4. _Cad._--The letters from Scotland ascribed to a Captain Burtt,
employed in surveying the forfeited estates, give an account of the
"cawdies," or errand boys, of Edinburgh.

5. _Fun_, perhaps Irish, _fonamhad_, jeering, mockery (Lhuyd,
_Archaeologia Britannica_).

6. _Bumbailiff._--The French have _pousse-cul_, for the follower or
assistant to the sergeant.

7. Epergne, perhaps _epargne_, a save-all or hold-all. Here seems no
more difficulty in the transfer of the name than in that of chiffonier,
from a rag-basket to a piece of ornamental furniture.

8. _Doggrel._--Has the word any connexion with _sdrucciolo_?

9. _Derrick._--A spar arranged to form an extempore crane. I think
Derrick was the name of an executioner.

10. _Mece_, A.-S., a knife. The word is found in the Sclavonic and
Tartar dialects. I thinly I remember some years ago reading in a
newspaper of rioters armed with "pea makes." I do not remember any other
instance of its use in English.

F.Q.

       *       *       *       *       *

MISTAKES IN GIBBON.

The following references may be of use to a future editor of Gibbon; Mr.
Milman has not, I believe, rectified any of the mistakes pointed out by
the authors cited.

    In the Netherlands ... 50,000 in less than fifty years were ...
    sacrificed to the intolerance of popery. (Fra Paolo, _Sarpi
    Conc. Trid._ 1. i. p. 422. ed. sec. Grotius, in his _Annal.
    Belq._ 1. v. pp. 1G, 17. duod., including _all_ the persecutions
    of Charles V, makes the number 100,000. The supposed
    contradiction between these two historians supplied Mr. Gibbon
    with an argument by which he satisfied himself that be had
    completely demolished the whole credibility of Eusebius's
    history. See conclusion of his 16th book.) [Mendham's _Life of
    Pius V._, p. 303. and note; compare p. 252., where Gibbon's
    attack on Eusebius is discussed.]

In Forster's _Mahometanism Unveiled_, several of Gibbon's statements are
questioned. I have not the book at hand, and did not think the
corrections very important when I read it some time {277} back. The
reader who has it may see pp. 339. 385. 461-2. 472. 483. 498. of the
second volume.

In Dr. Maitland's _Dark Ages_, p. 229. seq. note, a gross blunder is
pointed out.

See too the _Gentlemans Magazine_, July, 1839, p. 49.

Dr. Maitland, in his _Facts and Documents relating to the ancient
Albigenses and Waldenses_, p. 217. note, corrects an error respecting
the _Book of Sentences_.

    "Gibbon, speaking of this _Book of Sentences_, in a note on his
    54th chapter, says, 'Of a list of criminals which fills nineteen
    folio pages, only _fifteen_ men and _four_ women were delivered
    to the secular arm.' Vol. v. p. 535. I believe he should have
    said _thirty-two_ men and _eight_ women; and imagine that he was
    misled by the fact that the index-maker most commonly (but by no
    means always) states the nature of the sentence passed on each
    person. From the book, however, it appears that forty persons
    were so delivered, viz., twenty-nine Albigenses, seven
    Waldenses, and four Beguins."

The following mistake was pointed out by the learned Cork correspondent
of the _Gentleman's Magazine_, I think in 1838; it has misled the writer
of the article "Anicius", in Smith's _Dictionary of Ancient Biography_,
and is not corrected by Mr. Milman (Gibbon, chap. xxxi. note 14 and
text):--

    "During the first five ages, the name of the Anicians was
    unknown. The earliest date in the annals of Pighius is that of
    M. Anicius Gallus, Tr. Plebis A.U.C. 506. Another Tribune, Q.
    Anicius, A.U.C. 508, is distinguished by the epithet
    Praenestinus."

We learn from Pliny, _H.N._ xxxiii. 6., that Q. Anicius Praenestinus was
the colleague as curule aedile of Flavius, the famous _scriba_ of Appius
Caecus, B.C. 304, A.U.C. 450. (See Fischer, _Roem. Zeittafeln_, p. 61-2.)
Pliny's words are--

    "[Flavius] tantam gratiam plebis adeptus est ... ut aedilis
    curulis crearetur cum Q. Anicio Praenestino."

Gibbon's chapter on Mahomet seems to be particularly superficial; it is
to be hoped that a future editor will correct it by the aid of Von
Hammer's labours.

J.E.B. MAYOR.

Marlborough College.

       *       *       *       *       *

MINOR NOTES

_"Ockley's History of the Saracens," and unauthentic Works._--At the end
of a late edition of Washington Irving's _Life of Mahomet_, those "who
feel inclined to peruse further details of the life of Mahomet, or to
pursue the course of Saracenic history," are referred to _Ockley_.
Students should be aware of the character of the histories they peruse.
And it appears, from a note in Hallam's _Middle Ages_ (vol. ii. p.
168.), that Wakidi, from whom Ockley translated his work, was a "mere
fabulist," as Reiske observes, in his preface to Abulfeda.

Query, Would it not be well, if some of your more learned correspondents
would communicate to students, through the medium of "NOTES AND
QUERIES," a list of such books as are genuine but not authentic; and
authentic but not genuine, or altogether spurious? or would point out
the sources from which such information can be obtained?

P.H.F.


_The Hippopotamus._--Your correspondent L. (Vol. ii., p. 35.) says,
"None of the Greek writers appear to have seen a live hippopotamus:" and
again, "The hippopotamus, being an inhabitant of the Upper Nile, was
imperfectly known to the ancients." Herodotus says (ii. 71.) that this
animal was held sacred by the Nomos of Papremis, but not by the other
Egyptians. The city of Papremis is fixed by Baehr in the west of the
Delta (ad ii. 63.); and Mannert conjectured it to be the same as the
later Xois, lying between the Sebennytic and Canopic branches, but
nearer to the former. Sir Gardner Wilkinson says, several
representations of the hippopotamus were found at Thebes, one of which
he gives (_Egyptians_, vol. iii. pl. xv.). Herodotus' way of speaking
would seem to show that he was describing from his own observation: he
used Hecataeus, no doubt, but did not blindly copy him. Hence, I think,
we may infer that Herodotus himself saw the hippopotamus, and that this
animal was found, in his day, even as far north as the Delta: and also,
that the species is gradually dying out, as the aurochs is nearly gone,
and the dodo quite. The crocodile is no longer found in the Delta.

E.S. JACKSON


_America._--The probability of a short western passage to India is
mentioned in _Aristotle de Coelo_, ii., near the end.

F.Q.


_Pascal's Lettres Provinciales._--I take the liberty of forwarding to
you the following "Note," suggested by two curious blunders which fell
under my notice some time ago.

In Mr. Stamp's reprint of the Rev. C. Elliott's _Delineation of
Romanism_ (London, 8vo. 1844), I find (p. 471., in note) a long
paragraph on Pascal's _Lettres Provinciales_:--

    "This exquisite production," says the English editor, "_is
    accompanied, in some editions of it, with the learned and
    judicious observations of Nicole_, who, under the fictitious
    name of Guillaume Wendrock, has fully demonstrated the truths of
    those facts which Pascal had advanced without quoting his
    authorities; and has placed, in a full and striking light,
    several interesting circumstances which that great man had
    treated with perhaps too much brevity. _These letters ... were
    translated into Latin by Ruchelius_."

From Mr. Stamp's remarks the reader is led to conclude that the _text_
of the _Lettres Provinciales_ {278} is accompanied in some editions by
observations of Wendrock (Nicole), likewise in the French language. Now
such an assertion merely proves how carelessly some annotators will
study the subjects they attempt to elucidate. Nicole _translated_ into
Latin the _Provincial Letters_; and the masterly disquisitions which he
added to the volume were, in their turn, "made French" by Mademoiselle
de Joncoux, and annexed to the editions of 1700, 1712, 1735.

As for Rachelius, if Mr. Stamp had taken the trouble to refer to
Placcius' _Theatr. Anonym. et Pseud._, he night have seen (Art. 2,883.)
that this worthy was merely a German _editor_, not a translator of
Pascal cum Wendrock.

The second blunder I have to notice has been perpetrated by the writer
of an otherwise excellent article on Pascal in the last number of the
_British Quarterly Review_ (No. 20. August). He mentions Bossuet's
edition of the _Pensees_, speaks of "_the prelate_," and evidently
ascribes to the famous Bishop of Meaux, _who died in_ 1704, the edition
of Pascal's _Thoughts, published in_ 1779 _by Bossuet_. (See pp. 140.
142.)

GUSTAVE MASSON.


_Porson's Epigram._--I made the following Note many years ago:--

    "The late Professor Porson's own account of his academic visits
    to the Continent:--

    "'I went to Frankfort, and got drunk With that most learn'd
    professor--Brunck: I went to Worts, and got more drunken, With
    that more learn'd professor Ruhncken.'"

But I do not remember where or from whom I got it. Is anything known
about it, or its authenticity?

P.H.F.

       *       *       *       *       *


QUERIES.

"ORKNEYINGA SAGA."

In the introduction to Lord Ellesmere's _Guide to Northern Archaeology_,
p. xi., is mentioned the intended publication by the Royal Society of
Northern Antiquaries, Copenhagen, of a volume of historical antiquities
to be called _Antiquitates Britannicae et Hibernicae_. In the contents of
this volume is noticed the _Orkneyinga Saga_, a history of the Orkney
and Zetland Isles from A.D. 865 to 1234, of which there is only the
edition Copenhagen, 1780, "chiefly printed," it is said, "from a modern
paper manuscript, and by no means from the celebrated Codex Flateyensis
written on parchment in the fourteenth century." This would show that
the Codex Flateyensis was the most valuable manuscript of the work
published under the name of the _Orkneyinga Saga_, of which its editor,
Jonas Jonaeus, in his introductory address to the reader, says its author
and age are equally unknown: "auctor incertus incerto aeque tempore
scripsit." The _Orkneyinga Saga_ concludes with the burning of Adam
Bishop, of Caithness, by the mob at Thurso while John was Earl of
Orkney, and according to Dalrymple's _Annals_ in A.D. 1222; but in the
narrative given by the historian Torfaeus, in his _Orcades_, of Haco,
King of Norway's expedition against the western coast of Scotland in
1263, which terminated in the defeat of the invaders by the Scots at
Largs, in Ayrshire, and the death of King Haco on his return back in the
palace of the bishop of Orkney at Kirkwall, reference is made to the
Codex Flateyensis as to the burial of King Haco in the city of Bergen,
in Norway, where his remains were finally deposited, after lying some
months before the shrine of the patron saint in the cathedral of Saint
Magnus, at Kirkwall. There is not a syllable of King Haco or his
expedition in the _Orkneyinga Saga_; and as I cannot reconcile this
reference of Torfaeus (2nd edition, 1715, book ii. p. 170.) with the
_Saga_, the favour of information is desired from some of your
antiquarian correspondents. The Codex Flateyensis has been ascribed to a
pensioner of the king of Norway resident in Flottay, one of the southern
isles of Orkney, but with more probability can be attributed to some of
the monks of the monastery built on the small island of Flatey, lying in
Breida Fiord, a gulf on the west coast of Iceland.

W.H.F.

       *       *       *       *       *

MINOR QUERIES.

_Incumbents of Church Livings in Kent._--I have by me the following MS.
note:--"A list of B.A.'s graduated at Cambridge from 1500 to 1735 may be
found in 'Additional MSS. British Museum, No. 5,585.'" Will any of your
correspondents inform me if this reference is correct, and if the list
can be examined?

Is there in the British Museum or elsewhere a list of incumbents of
church livings in Kent (with name and birthplace) from 1600 to 1660?

BRANBRIDGES.


_York Buildings Company._--This company existed about the middle of the
last century. I shall be glad to be informed where the papers connected
with it are to be met with, and may be referred to.

WDN.


_Saying ascribed to Montaigne._--The saying, "I have here only made a
nosegay of culled flowers, and have brought nothing of my own but the
thread that ties them," is usually ascribed to Montaigne. In what part
of his works are these words to be found? I heard doubts expressed of
their genuineness some years ago by a reader of the _Essays_; and my own
search for them has also proved hitherto unsuccessful.

C. FORBES. {279}


"_Modum promissionis_."--Will any of your readers help to interpret the
following expression in a mediaeval author:--

    "(Ut vulgo loquitur) modum promissionis ostendit?"

I have reason to think that _modum promissionis_ means "a provisional
arrangement:" but by whom, and in what common parlance, was this
expression used?

C.W.B.


_Roman Catholic Theology._--Is there any work containing a list of Roman
Catholic theological works published in the English language from the
year 1558 to 1700?

M.Y.A.H.


_Wife of Edward the Outlaw._--Can any of your correspondents inform me
who was the wife of Edward the Outlaw, and consequently mother of
Margaret of Scotland, and ancestress of the kings of England?

The account adopted by most historians is that Canute, in 1017, sent the
two sons of Edmund Ironside to the king of Denmark, whence they were
transferred to Solomon, king of Hungary, who gave his sister to the
eldest; and, on his death without issue, married the second Edward to
Agatha, daughter of the Emperor Henry II. (or, in some accounts, Henry
III., or even, in Grafton's _Chronicles_, called Henry IV.), and sister
to his own queen.

That Edward the Outlaw returned to England in 1057, having had five
children, of whom three survived: Edgar; Margaret, who in 1067 married
King Malcolm of Scotland, and another daughter.

Now this account is manifestly incorrect. The Emperor Henry II. died
childless: when on his death-bed he restored his wife to her parents,
declaring that both he and she had kept their vows of chastity.

Solomon did not ascend the throne of Hungary until 1063, in which year
he had also married Sophia, daughter of the Emperor Henry III.; but this
monarch (who was born in October, 1017, married his first wife in 1036,
who died, leaving one child, in 1038 and his second wife in November
1043) could not be the grandfather of the five children of Edward the
Outlaw, born prior to 1057.

The _Saxon Chronicle_ says, that Edward married Agatha the emperor's
cousin.

E.H.Y.


_Conde's "Arabs in Spain"_.--In Professor de Vericour's _Historical
Analysis of Christian Civilisation_, just published, it is stated (p.
499.) that Conde's _Arabs in Spain_ has been translated into English. I
have never met with a translation, and fancy that the Professor has made
a mistake. Can any of your correspondents decide? I know that a year or
two ago, Messrs. Whittaker announced that a translation would form part
of their _Popular Library_; but for some reason (probably insufficient
support) it never appeared. Query, Might not Mr. Bohn with advantage
include this work in his _Standard Library_?

IOTA.

       *       *       *       *       *


REPLIES.

CAVE'S HISTORIA LITERARIA.

I do not know whether the notices respecting Cave's _Historia Literaria_
(Vol. ii., pp. 230. 255.) hold out any prospect of a new edition. It is
much to be desired; and as it may be done at some time or other, you
will perhaps allow me to make a Note of a circumstance which
accidentally came to my knowledge, and should be known to any future
editor. It is simply this: in the second volume of the Oxford edition of
1740, after the three dissertations, &c., there are fifteen pages, with
a fresh pagination of their own, entitled, "Notae MSS. et Accessiones
_Anonymi_ ad Cavei Historiam Literariam, Codicis Margini adscriptae, in
Bibliotheca Lambethana. Manus est plane Reverendiss. _Thomae Tenison_,
Cantuariensis Archiepiscopi." Not to occupy more of your valuable space
than is necessary, I will merely observe that the "Anonymus" was not
Archbishop Tenison, but Henry Wharton. There can be no doubt in the mind
of any person acquainted with the handwriting of the parties; and to
those to whom such a notice is likely to be of any use at all, it is
unnecessary to say that the difference is important. I need scarcely
add, that if ever a new edition is undertaken, Wharton's books and
papers, and other things in the Lambeth collection of MSS., should be
examined.

S.R. MAITLAND.


_Cave's Historia Literaria_ (Vol ii., p. 230.).--

1. London, 1688-1698, 2 vols. folio. This was the first edition. A
curious letter from Cave to Abp. Tenison respecting the assistance which
H. Wharton furnished to this work is printed in Chalmers' _Biog. Dict._,
vol. xxxi. p. 343.

2. Geneva, 1693, folio.

3. ------, 1694, folio.

4. ------, 1705, folio.

5. Coloniae Allobrogum, 1720, folio.

6. Oxon. 1740-43, 2 vols. folio. Dr. Waterland rendered important aid in
bringing out this edition, which Bp. Marsh pronounces "the best." It
seems from some letters of Waterland's to John Loveday, Esq. (works by
Van Mildert, 1843, vol. vi. p. 423-436.), that Chapman, a petty canon of
Windsor, was the editor.

7. Basil, 1741-5, 2 vols. folio. This is said to be an exact reprint
from the Oxford edition.

Watt and Dr. Clarke mention an edition, 1749, 2 vols. folio; but I
cannot trace any copy of such edition.

JOHN I. DREDGE.

       *       *       *       *       * {280}

SIR GAMMER VANS.

In reply to C.'s inquiry (Vol. ii., p. 89.) as to a comic story about
one _Sir Gammer Vans_, I have pleasure in communicating what little
information I have on the subject. Some years ago, when I was quite a
boy, the story was told me by an Irish clergyman, since deceased. He
spoke of it as an old Irish tradition, but did not give his authority
for saying so. The story, as he gave it, contained no allusion to an
"aunt" or "mother." I do not know whether it will be worthy of
publication: but here it is, and you can make what use of it you like:--

    "Last Sunday morning at six o'clock in the evening, as I was
    sailing over the tops of the mountains in my little boat, I met
    two men on horseback riding on one mare: so I asked them 'Could
    they tell me whether the little old woman was dead yet, who was
    hanged last Saturday week for drowning herself in a shower of
    feathers?' They said they could not positively inform me, but if
    I went to Sir Gammar Vans he could tell me all about it. 'But
    how am I to know the house?' said I. 'Ho, 'tis easy enough,'
    said they, 'for it's a brick house, built entirely of flints,
    standing alone by itself in the middle of sixty or seventy
    others just like it.' 'Oh, nothing in the world is easier,' said
    I. 'Nothing _can_ be easier,' said they: so I went on my way.
    Now this Sir G. Vans was a giant, and bottlemaker. And as all
    giants, who _are_ bottlemakers, usually pop out of a little
    thumb bottle from behind the door, so did Sir G. Vans. 'How d'ye
    do?' says he. 'Very well, thank you,' says I. 'Have some
    breakfast with me?' 'With all my heart,' says I. So he gave me a
    slice of beer, and a cup of cold veal; and there was a little
    dog under the table that picked up all the crumbs. 'Hang him,'
    says I. 'No, don't hang him,' says he; 'for he killed a hare
    yesterday. And if you don't believe me, I'll show you the hare
    alive in a basket.' So he took me into his garden to show me the
    curiosities. In one corner there was a fox hatching eagle's
    eggs; in another there was an iron apple tree, entirely covered
    with pears and lead; in the third there was the hare which the
    dog killed yesterday alive in the basket; and in the fourth
    there were twenty-four _hipper switches_ threshing tobacco, and
    at the sight of me they threshed so hard that they drove the
    plug through the wall, and through a little dog that was passing
    by on the other side. I, hearing the dog howl, jumped over the
    wall; and turned it as neatly inside out as possible, when it
    ran away as if it had not an hour to live. Then he took me into
    the park to show me his deer: and I remembered that I had a
    warrant in my pocket to shoot venison for his majesty's dinner.
    So I set fire to my bow, poised my arrow, and shot amongst them.
    I broke seventeen ribs on one side, and twenty-one and a half on
    the other: but my arrow passed clean through without ever
    touching it, and the worst was I lost my arrow; however, I found
    it again in the hollow of a tree. I felt it: it felt clammy. I
    smelt it; it smelt honey. 'Oh, ho!' said I, 'here's a bee's
    nest,' when out sprung a covey of partridges. I shot at them;
    some say I killed eighteen, but I am sure I killed thirty-six,
    besides a dead salmon which was flying over the bridge, of which
    I made the best apple pie I ever tasted."

Such is the story: I can answer for its general accuracy. I am quite at
sea as to the meaning and orthography of "hipper switches,"--having
heard, not seen, the story.

S.G.

Corpus Christi College, Cambridge.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE COLLAR OF SS.

(Vol. ii., pp. 89. 194. 248.)

The Collar of SS. "is to this day a mystery to the most learned and
indefatigable antiquaries," according to Mr. Planche, in his valuable
little work on _The History of British Costume_: what has appeared in
"NOTES AND QUERIES" certainly has not cleared away the obscurity.
ARMIGER tells us (Vol. ii., p. 195.): "As to the derivation of the name
of the collar from _Soverayne_; from St. Simplicius; from the martyrs of
Soissons (viz. St. Crespin and St. Crespinian, upon whose anniversary
the battle of Agincourt was fought); from the Countess of Salisbury;
from the word _Souvenez_; and, lastly, from Seneschallus or Steward,
(which latter is MR. NICHOLS' notion)--they may be regarded as mere
monkish (?) or heraldic gossip." If the monastic writers had spoken
anything on the matter, a doubt never would have existed: but none of
them has even hinted at it. Never having seen the articles in the
_Gentleman's Magazine_, I do not know MR. NICHOLS' reasons for supposing
"Seneschallus or Steward" could have furnished an origin of the SS.; but
I am at loss to think of any grounds upon which such a guess could rest.
From the searches I have made upon this question, it seems to me that
these SS. are taken as a short way of expressing the "SANCTUS, SANCTUS,
SANCTUS" of the Salisbury liturgy and ritual. I hope soon to be able to
lay before the public the documents out of which I draw this opinion, in
a note to the third and forthcoming volume of _The Church of our
Fathers_.

D. ROCK.

_Collar of SS._--To your list of persons _now_ privileged to wear these
collars, I beg to add her Majesty's serjeant trumpeter, Thomas Lister
Parker, Esq., to whom a silver collar of SS. has been granted. It is
always worn by him or his deputy on state occasions.

THOMAS LEWIS,

Acting Serjeant Trumpeter.
34. Mount Street.

       *       *       *       *       *

JOACHIN, THE FRENCH AMBASSADOR.
(Vol. ii., p. 229.)

Your correspondent AMICUS will I fear find very little information about
this mysterious person in the writers of French history of the time.
{281} He is thus mentioned in Cavendish's _Life of Wolsey_ (ed. 1825,
vol. i. p. 73.):--

    "The French king lying in his camp, sent secretly into England a
    privy person, a very witty man, to entreat of a peace between
    him and the king our sovereign lord, whose name was John
    Joachin; he was kept as secret as might be, that no man had
    intelligence of his repair; for he was no Frenchman, but an
    Italian born, a man before of no estimation in France, or known
    to be in favour with his master, but to be a merchant; and for
    his subtle wit, elected to entreat of such affairs as the king
    had commanded him by embassy. This Joachin, after his arrival
    here in England, was secretly conveyed unto the king's manor of
    Richmond, and there remained until Whitsuntide; at which time
    the cardinal resorted thither, and kept there the said feast
    very solemnly. In which season my lord caused this Joachin
    divers times to dine with him, whose talk and behaviour seemed
    to be witty, sober, and wondrous discreet."

My note on this passage says:--

    "The name of this person was Giovanni Joacchino Passano, a
    Genoese; he was afterwards called Seigneur de Vaux. The emperor,
    it appears, was informed of his being in England, and for what
    purpose. The cardinal stated that Joacchino came over as a
    merchant; and that as soon as he discovered himself to be sent
    by the lady regent of France, he made De Praet (the emperor's
    ambassador) privy thereto, and likewise of the answer given to
    her proposals. The air of mystery which attached to this mission
    naturally created suspicion; and, after a few months, De Praet,
    in his letters to the emperor, and to Margaret, governess of the
    Netherlands, expressed his surmise that all was not right,
    alleging his reasons. His letters were intercepted by the
    cardinal, and read before the council. Charles and Margaret
    complained of the insult, and the cardinal explained as well as
    he could: at the same time protesting against the
    misinterpretation of De Praet, and assuring them that nothing
    could be further from his wish than that any disunion should
    arise between the king his master and the emperor; and
    notwithstanding the suspicious aspect of this transaction, his
    dispatches, both before and after this fracas, strongly
    corroborate his assertions. Wolsey suspected that the Pope was
    inclined toward the cause of Francis, and reminded him of his
    obligations to Henry and Charles. The Pope had already taken the
    alarm, and had made terms with the French king, but had
    industriously concealed it from Wolsey, and at length urged in
    his excuse that he had no alternative. Joacchino was again in
    England upon a different mission, and was an eye-witness of the
    melancholy condition of the cardinal when his fortunes were
    reversed. He sympathised with him, and interested himself for
    him with Francis and the queen dowager, as appears by his
    letters published in _Legrand, Histoire du Divorce de Henry
    VIII_."

I think it is from this interesting book, which throws much light upon
many of the intricate passages of the history of the times, that I
derived my information. It is in all respects a work worth consulting.

S.W. SINGER.


REMAINS OF JAMES II.
(Vol. ii., p. 243.).

The following passage is transcribed from a communication relative to
the Scotch College at Paris, made by the Rev. H. Longueville Jones to
the _Collectanea Topographica et Genealogica_, 1841, vol. vii. p. 33.:--

    "The king left his brains to this college; and, it used to be
    said, other parts, but this is more doubtful, to the Irish and
    English colleges at Paris. His heart was bequeathed to the Dames
    de St. Marie at Chaillot, and his entrails were buried at St.
    Germain-en-Laye, where a handsome monument has been erected to
    his memory by order of George IV.; but the body itself was
    interred in the monastery of English Benedictine Monks that once
    existed in the Rue du Faubourg St. Jacques, close to the Val de
    Grace. In this latter house, previous to the Revolution, the
    following simple inscription marked where the monarch's body
    lay:--

    "'CI GIST JACQUES II. ROI DE LA GRANDE BRETAGNE.'"

A monument to the king still exists in the chapel of the Scotch College
(which is now leased to a private school), and the inscription, in
Latin, written by James, Duke of Perth, is printed in the same volume of
_Collectanea_, p. 35., followed by all the other inscriptions to James's
adherents now remaining in that chapel.

In a subsequent communication respecting the Irish College at Paris,
made by the same gentleman, and printed in the same volume, at p. 113.
are these remarks:--

    "It is not uninteresting to add, that the body of James II. was
    brought to this college after the destruction of the English
    Benedictine Monastery adjoining the Val de Grace; and remained
    for some years in a temporary tomb in one of the lecture halls,
    then used as the chapel. It was afterwards removed; by whose
    authority, and to what place, is not exactly known: but it is
    considered not improbable that it was transported to the church
    of St. Germain-en-Laye, and there buried under the monument
    erected by George IV. Some additional light will probably be
    thrown on this subject, in a work on the Stuarts now in course
    of compilation."

Has this work since appeared?

J.G.N.


_Interment of James II._--I remember reading in the French papers, in
the year 1823 or 1824, a long account of the then recent exhumation and
re-interment in another spot of the remains of James II. I was but a boy
at the time, and neglected to make a "Note", which might now be valuable
to you. I have not the least doubt, however, that the fact will be
discovered on reference to a file of the _Etoile_, or any other of the
Paris papers of one or other of the years above named.

There is a marble monument erected in memory of James, in the chapel of
the old Scotch College, in the Rue des Fosses Saint Victor. An urn of
bronze, gilt, containing the king's brains, formerly {282} stood on the
crown of this monument. The urn was smashed and the contents scattered
over the ground, during the French Revolution. A much more important
loss to posterity was incurred by the destruction of the manuscripts
entrusted by James to the keeping of the brotherhood he loved. The trust
is alluded to with mingled pride and affection in the noble and touching
inscription on the royal monument.

J.D.

Earl's Court, Kensington.

       *       *       *       *       *

HANDFASTING.
(Vol. ii., p. 151.)

Your correspondent J.M.G. has brought forward a curious subject, and one
well deserving attention and illustration. A fair is said to have been
held at the meeting of the Black and White Esks, at the foot of
Eskdalemuir, in Dumfriesshire, when the singular custom of _Handfasting_
was observed. The old statistical account of the parish says:

    "At that fair it was the custom for unmarried persons of both
    sexes to choose a companion according to their liking, whom they
    were to live with till _that time next year_. This was called
    _handfasting_, or hand-in-fist. If they were pleased with each
    other at that time, then they continued together for life; if
    not, they separated, and were free to make another choice as at
    the first."

John Maxwell, Esq., of Broomholm, in a letter (dated April 15th, 1796)
to the Rev. Wm. Brown, D.D., of Eskdalemuir, says, in reference to this
custom:

    "No account can be given of the period at which the custom of
    _handfasting_ commenced; but I was told by an old man, John
    Murray, who died at the farm of Irvine (as you go from Langholm
    to Canobie), and had formerly been a proprietor in Eskdaldemuir,
    that he was acquainted with, or at least had seen an old man, I
    think his name was Beattie, who was grandson to a couple who had
    been handfasted. You perhaps know that _the children born under
    the handfasting engagement were reckoned lawful children, and
    not bastards_, though the parents did afterwards resile. This
    custom of handfasting does not seem to have been peculiar to
    your parish. Mention is made in some histories of Scotland that
    Robert II. was _handfasted_ to Elizabeth More before he married
    Euphemia Ross, daughter of Hugh, Earl of that name, by both of
    whom he had children; his eldest son John, by Elizabeth More,
    viz., King Robert III., commonly called Jock Ferngyear,
    succeeded to the throne in preference to the sons of Euphemia,
    his married wife. Indeed, after Euphemia's death, he married his
    former handfasted wife Elizabeth."

Sir J. Chardin observes that contracts for temporary wives are frequent
in the East, which contracts are made before the Cadi with the formality
of a measure of corn, mentioned over and above the stipulated sum of
money.

Baron du Tott's account of "Marriages by Capin," corroborated by Eastern
travellers, corresponds with the custom of _Handfasting_. He says:

    "There is another kind of marriage which, stipulating the return
    to be made, fixes likewise the time when the divorce is to take
    place. This contract is called _capin_: and, properly speaking,
    is only an agreement between the parties to live together _for
    such a price, during such a time_."

This contract is a regular form of marriage, and is so regarded
generally in the East.

The Jews seem to have had a similar custom, which perhaps they borrowed
from the neighbouring nations; at least the connexion formed by the
prophet Hosea (chap. iii. 2.) bears a strong resemblance to
_Handfasting_ and _Capin_.

JARLTZBERG.

       *       *       *       *       *

ADAM OF BREMEN'S JULIN.

In reply to V. from Belgravia (Vol. ii., p. 230.), I am partially at a
loss to know the exact bearing of his Query. Adam of Bremen's account of
Julin is no _legend_, nor does he mention it at all as a _doomed city_.
On the contrary, his description is that of a flourishing emporium of
commerce, for which purpose he selects very strong superlatives, as in
the following account (_De Situ Damae_, lib. ii. cap. ii.):

    "Ultra Leuticos qui alio nomine Welzi dicuntur Oddera Flumen
    occurrit; amnis dilectissimus Slavonicae regionis. In cujus
    ostro, qui Scythicas alludet paludes, nobilissima civitas
    Julinum celeberrimam Barbaris et Graecis qui in circuitu praestet
    stationem. De cujus praeconio quia magna et vix credibilia
    recitantur, volupe arbitror pauca inserere digna relata. Est
    sane maxime omnium quas Europa claudit civitatum, quam incolunt
    Slavi cum aliis gentibus Graecis et Barbaris. Nam et advenae
    Saxones parem cohabitandi legem acceperunt, si tamen
    Christianitatis titulum ibi morantes non publicaverint. Omnes
    enim adhuc paganicis ritibus aberrant, ceterum moribus et
    hospitalitate nulla gens honestior aut benignior poterit
    inveniri. Urbs illa mercibus omnium septentrionalium nationum
    locuples nihil non habet jucundi et rari."

As Adam is supposed to have been a native and a priest at Magdeburg,
whence he was translated by Archbishop Adalbert to a benefice in the
cathedral of Bremen, he must, from his comparative proximity to the
spot, be supposed a competent witness; and there is not reason to
suppose why he should not have been also a creditable one. He died about
1072, and the _legends_, if any, concerning this famous place, here
described as the most extensive in Europe, must have been subsequently
framed.

For about one hundred years later (1184) we have from Helmold, the
parish priest of Boesan, a small village on the eastern confines of
Holstein, a repetition of Adam's words, for a place which he calls {283}
"Veneta," but always in the past tense as, "quondam fuit nobilissima
civitas," etc.; so that it is plain from that and his expression
"excidium civitatis;" as well as, "Hanc civitatem opulentissimam quidam
Danorum rex, maxima classe stipatus, fundetus evertisse refertur." The
great question is, Where was this great city? and, are the _Julin_ of
Adam and the _Veneta_ of Helmold identical? Both questions have given
rise to endless discussions amongst German archaeologists. The published
maps, as late at least as the end of the last century, had a note at a
place in the Baltic, opposite to the small town of Demmin, in
Pomerania:--"Hic Veneta emporium olim celeberr. aequar. aestu absorpt."
Many, perhaps the majority, of recent writers contend for the town of
Wallin, which gives its name to one of the islands by which the Stettin
Haff is formed,--though the slight verbal conformity seems to be their
principal ground; for no _rudera_, no vestiges of ancient grandeur now
mark the spot, not even a tradition of former greatness: whilst Veneta,
which can only be taken to mean the _civitas_ of the Veneti, a nation
placed by Tacitus on this part of the coast, has a long unbroken chain
of oral evidence in its favour, as close to Rugen; and, if authentic
records are to be credited, ships have been wrecked in the last century
on ancient moles or bulwarks, which then rose nearly to the surface from
the submerged ruins. But the subject is much too comprehensive for the
compressed notices of your miscellany. I hope to have shortly an
opportunity of treating the subject at large in reference to the
Schiringsheal which Othere described to King Alfred, about two hundred
years earlier.

An edition of Adam and Helmold is very desirable in England, even in a
translations as a part of Bohn's _Antiquarian Series_.

WILLIAM BELL, PH. D.

       *       *       *       *       *

REPLIES TO MINOR QUERIES.

_Bess of Hardwick_ (Vol. i., p. 276.).--The following particulars in
answer to this Query will, I hope, elicit some further information from
other quarters. I have, in my answer, attempted to be as brief as
possible.

John, the fifth recorded Hardwick, of Hardwick, left issue, by Elizabeth
Leake, six children: of whom JAMES (or John) was thrice married, and
died _sine prole_, and DOROTHY died an infant: the four remaining
daughters became coheiresses.

Of these MARY HARDWICK married (his first wife) Richard Wingfield, of
Wantisden, seventh son of Sir Anthony Wingfield, of Letheringham, co.
Suffolk, K.G. His will was proved in London 14th August, 1591. Their
eldest son _Henry_ was of Crowfield, co. Suffolk. His great-grandson,
_Harbottle Wingfield_, of Crowfield, was living 1644, and his
descendants, if any, may quarter Hardwick. Their second son, _Anthony
Wingfield_, was the well-known Greek reader to Queen Elizabeth; and
their third son, _Sir John Wingfield_, married Susan Bertie, Countess
Dowager of Kent, and left _Peregrin Wingfield_, of whom nothing is
recorded.

JANE HARDWICK, next daughter, married Godfrey Bosvile of Gunthwaite and
Beighton, co. Ebor. His will is dated 22nd July, 1580. Their eldest
child, _Francis Bosvile_, left only daughter, Grace Bosvile, who died
young. His three sisters became coheirs, but the estate of Gunthwaite
went to an uncle, ancestor of the present Godfrey Bosvile, Lord
Macdonald. Of these sisters, _Frances Bosvile_ married John Savile;
_Dorothy Bosvile_, John Lacy; and _Elizabeth Bosvile_, John Copley:
either they had no children, or these died young. _Mary Bosvile_, the
second daughter and coheir, married Richard Burdett, of Derby, living
1612. Their son, _George Burdett_, had by his first wife a son, whose
issue failed; and by his second wife two daughters, eventually coheirs.

Of these. _Mary Burdett_ married, first, Richard Pilkington, and second,
Sir T. Beaumont, of Whitby: and _another sister_ married--Ramsden. No
issue of either are recorded. The third sister, _Elizabeth Burdett_,
married, at Hoyland, 6th Feb., 1636, the Rev. Daniel Clark, A.M., and
died 27th Aug., 1679, at Fenney-Compton. Their great-grandson and sole
male representative was the late _Joseph Clark_ of Northampton, whose
descendants also quarter Hardwick.

ELIZABETH HARDWICK, the next daughter, was the celebrated Countess of
Shrewsbury. Her _representatives_ are all noble, and their pedigrees may
be found in the Peerages. They are--

1. _The Duke of Devonshire_, representing Wm. Cavendish, first earl.

Certain descendants of Sir Charles Cavendish, of Welbeck Abbey, or
rather of his grandson, Henry, second Duke of Newcastle, namely,

2. The _Duke of Portland_, representing Margaret Pelham, the Duke's
eldest coheir;

3. The _Marquis of Salisbury_ from Catherine, and second coheir;

4. The _Earl De la Warr_; and

5. The _Earl of Aboyne_, are the coheirs of Sir Charles Cope, Baronet,
of Orton; who represented Arabella, Countess of Sunderland, third
coheir. These five all quarter Hardwick.

ALICE HARDWICK, next daughter, married Francis Hercy, according to some
pedigrees. No issue recorded.

There are therefore descendants certainly known of only two of the
children of John Hardwick. Possibly some of your correspondents can
supply those of Wingfield and Hercy.

The crest and arms of the Hardwicks may be found in Edmondson. They only
quartered Pynchbeke. I am not aware of any motto. {284}

Miss Costello, and other biographers of the Countess of Shrewsbury, have
quite overlooked all the descendants of her sisters. Possibly, should
these lines meet the eye of the Duke of Devonshire, who possesses the
estates and papers of the Hardwicks, it may lead to more particulars
concerning the family being made public.

ERMINE.

Torquay.


_Quotations in Bishop Andrewes_ (Vol. ii., p. 245.).--

  "Minutuli et patellares Dei."

is from Plautus:

  "Di me omnes magni minutique et patellarii."
  _Cistell._ II. 1. 46.

and

  "Sed quae de septem totum circumspicit orbem
  Collibus, imperii Roma Deumque locus."

is from Ovid (_Trist_. I. 5. 69.).

J.E.B MAYOR.

Marlborough College.


_The Sun Feminine in English_ (Vol. ii., p. 21).--MR. COX may perhaps be
pleased to learn _why_ the northern nations made the sun feminine. The
ancient Germans and Saxons--

    "When they discovered how the sun by his heat and influence
    excited venereal love in creatures subserviant to his dominion,
    they then varied his sex, and painted him like a woman, because
    in them that passion is most impotent, and yet impetuous; on her
    head they placed a myrtle crown or garland to denote her
    dominion, and that love should be alwaies verdant as the myrtle;
    in one hand she supported the world, and in the other three
    golden apples, to represent that the world and its wealth are
    both sustained by love. The three golden apples signified the
    threefold beauty of the sun, exemplified in the morning,
    meridian, and evening; on her breast was lodged a burning torch,
    to insinuate to us the violence of the flame of love which
    scorches humane hearts."--_Philipot's Brief and Historical
    Discourse of the Original and Growth of Heraldry_, pp. 12, 13.
    London, 1672.

T.H. KERSLEY

King William's College, Isle of Man.

_Carpatio_ (Vol. ii., p. 247.).--Your Querist must be little versed in
early Italian art, not to know that Vittore Carpaccio (such is the
correct spelling) was one of the morning stars of the Venetian school;
and his search must have been somewhat careless, as Carpaccio and his
works are fully described in Kugler's _Handbook_, p. 149., and in Lanzi.
Some exquisite figures of his, of which Mrs. Jameson has given a St.
Stephen in her _Legendary Art_, exist in the Brera at Milan. He is a
painter not sufficiently known in England, but one whom it may be hoped
the Arundel Society will introduce by their engravings. I cannot assist
J.G.N. in explaining the subject of his engraving. May _Cornubioe_ be by
error for _Cordubioe_?

CLERICUS.


_The Character_ "&".--This character your correspondent will at once see
is only the Latin word "et", written in a flourishing form; as we find
it repeated in the abbreviation "&c.," for "et cetera". Its adoption as
a contraction for the English word "and", arose, no doubt, from the
facility of its formation; and the name it acquired was "and-per
se-and", "and by itself and," which is easily susceptible of the
corruptions noticed by MR. LOWER.

[Greek: PHI].


_Walrond Family_ (Vol. ii., p. 206.).--Burke, in his _History of the
Commoners_, only gives the name of George, _one_ of the sons of Colonel
Humphry Walrond. He also states that the colonel married _Elizabeth_,
daughter of Nathaniel Napier, Esq., of More Critchel. Now Colonel
Walrond appears from his petition (Royalist Comp. Papers, State Paper
Office) dated 12th February, 1648, addressed to the Commissioners for
Compounding with Delinquents, to have had _nine_ other children then
living. He states: "Thus his eldest sonne George Walrond did absente
himselfe for a short time from his father's house, and went into the
king's army, where he unfortunately lost his right arme. That he having
no estate at present, and but little in expectancy after his father's
death, _he having ten_ children, and all _nine_ to be provided for out
of y'e petitioner's small estate." In a similar petition, dated about
two years later, from "_Grace_, the wife of Humphry Walrond, of Sea, in
the county of Somerset, Esquire," she states "herself to be weake woman,
and _having_ TEN children (whereof many are infants) to maintain." That
he was married to this _Grace_, and _not to Elizabeth_ (as stated by
Burke), as early as 1634, is clear from a licence to alienate certain
lands at Ilminster, 10 Ch. I. (_Pat. Rolls_.)

That they were both living in 1668 is proved by a petition in the State
Paper Office (Read in Council, Ap. 8, 1688. Trade Papers, Verginia, No.
I. A.):--"To the King's most excellent Ma'tie and the rt. hon'ble the
Lords of his Maj. most hon'ble Privy Councel," from "Grace, the wife of
Humphry Walrond, Esq." In this petition she states that her husband had
been very severely prosecuted by Lord Willoughby, whose sub-governor he
had been in Barbadoes. "He had contracted many debts by reason of his
loyalty and suffering in the late troubles, to the loss of at least
thirty thousand pounds." "That his loyalty and sufferings are
notoriously known, both in this kingdom and the Barbadoes, where he was
banished for proclaiming your Ma'tie after the murder of your royal
father." Colonel Walrond is mentioned by Clarendon, Rushworth,
Whitelock, &c.; but of the date of his death, the maiden name of his
wife, and the Christian names of all his ten children, I can find no
account.

The arms S.S.S. inquires about on the monument {285} of Humphry Walrond,
Esq., in Ilminster Church, are those of the family of Brokehampton.
Humphry Walrond (who died 1580) married Elizabeth, daughter and coheir
of John Brokehampton., of Sea, and so obtained that estate.

W. DOWNING BRUCE.

Middle Temple.


_Blackguard_ (Vol. ii., p. 134.).--An early instance of the use of this
word occurs in a letter from Richard Topcliffe (Aug. 30, 1578), printed
in Lodge's _Illustrations_, vol. ii. p. 188. I quote from Mr. Jardine's
_Criminal Trials_, vol. ii. p. 13.: "His house, Euston, far unmeet for
her Highness, but fitter for the _Black Guard_."

It also occurs in Fuller's _Church History_ (Book ix. cent. xvi. sect.
vii. Sec. 35. vol. v. p. 160. ed. Brewer):--"For who can otherwise conceive
but such a prince-principal of darkness must be proportionably attended
with a _black guard_ of monstrous opinions?"

J.E.B. MAYOR.


_Scala Coeli_ (Vol. i., pp. 366. 402. 455.).--Maundrell mentions, "at
the coming out of Pilate's house, a descent, where was anciently the
_Scala Sancta_." (_Journey from Aleppo to Jerusalem_, p. 107.) This holy
or heavenly stair was that by which the Redeemer was led down, by order
of Pilate, according to the legend, and afterwards was, among other
relics, carried to Rome. It is now in the Church of St. John Lateran,
whither it is said to have been brought by St. Helena from Jerusalem.
Pope Alexander Vl., and his successor Julius, granted to the Chapel of
St. Mary built by King Henry VII., in Westminster Abbey--

    "Easdem indulgencias et peccatorum remissiones ... quas
    Celebrantes pro Defunctis in Capella _Scala Coeli_ nuncupata in
    Ecclesia Trium Fontium extra muros Urbis Cisterciensis Ordinis
    ... consequuntur."

This indulgence of Pope Julius was dated in the year 1504; and its
intention of drawing thither pilgrims and offerings was fully realised,
we may believe: for in the year 1519 we find the brotherhood of St. Mary
of Rouncevall by Charing Cross paying:--

    "To the keper of Scala Celi in the Abby ... vjd."

(See Rymer's _Foedera_, tom. v. pt. iv.; and Dugdale's _Monasticon_,
vol. i. p. 320.)

MACKENZIE WALCOTT, M.A. Oxon.


_Sitting during the Lessons_ (Vol. ii., p. 46.).--With respect to L.'s
Query respecting sitting during the Lessons, I can venture no remarks;
but the custom of standing during the reading of the Gospel is very
ancient. In the mass of St. Chrysostom the priest exclaims, "Stand up,
let us hear the holy Gospel." (Goar, _Rituale Graecorum_, p. 69.) The
same custom appears in the Latin Liturgy of St. Basil:--"Cumque
interpres Evangelii dicit 'State cum timore Dei' convertitur Sacerdos ad
occidentem," etc. (_Renaudot_, vol. i. p. 7. Vide also "Liturgy of St.
Mark," _Ren_. vol. i. p. 126.) The edition of Renaudot's _Liturgies_ is
the reprint in 1847.

N.E.R. (a subscriber).


_Sitting during the Lessons._--There is no doubt, I believe, that in
former times the people stood when the minister read the Lessons, to
show their reverence. It is recorded in Nehemiah, viii. 5.:

    "And Ezra opened the Book in the sight of all the people (for he
    was above all the people), and when he opened it all the people
    _stood_ up."

Why this practice should have been altered, or why our Rubric should be
silent on this head, does not appear quite clear, though I find in
Wheatley (_On the Book of Common Prayer_, chap. vi. sec. vi.) that which
seems to me to be a very sufficient reason, if not for the sitting
during the Lessons, certainly for the standing during the reading of the
Gospel, and sitting during the Epistle:--

    "In St. Augustine's time the people always stood when the
    lessons were read, to show their reverence to God's holy word:
    but afterwards, when this was thought too great a burden, they
    were allowed to sit down at the lessons, and were only obliged
    to _stand_ at the reading of the Gospel; which always contains
    something that Our Lord did speak, or suffered in His own
    person. By which gesture they showed they had a greater respect
    to the Son of God himself than they had to any other inspired
    person, though speaking the word of God, and by God's
    authority."

WALTER MONTAGUE


_Aerostation, Works on_ (Vol. ii., p. 199.).--To the numerous list of
works on Aerostation which will no doubt be communicated to you in
answer to the inquiry of C.B.M., I beg to add the following small
contribution:--

"Saggio Aereonautico di Giuseppe Donini Tifernate," 8vo. pp. 92. With
four large folding Plates. Firenze 1819.

Signor Donini also published in 1823 (in Citta di Castello per il
Donati) the following pamphlet:--

"Circolare Areonautico (sic) Guiseppe Dolini d Citta di Castello a tutti
i dotti, e ricchi nazionali, stranieri. 8vo." pp. 16. Oxford.

J.M.


_Aerostation._--Your correspondent C.B.M. (Vol. ii., p. 199.) will find
some curious matter of _aerostation_ in poor Colonel Maceroni's
_Autobiography_, 2 vols. 8vo.

W.C.


_Pole Money_ (Vol. ii., p. 231.).--The "pole money" alluded to in the
extracts given by T.N.I., was doubtless the poll tax, which was revived
in the reign of Charles II. Every one {286} knows that at an earlier
period of our history it gave rise to Wat Tyler's insurrection. The tax
was reimposed several times during the reign of William III. and it
appears from a statement of the Lords in a conference which took place
with the Commons on the subject in the first of William's reign, that
the tax, previously to that time, was last imposed in the 29th of
Charles II.

C. ROSS.


_Wormwood Wine_ (Vol. ii., p. 242.).--If, as MR. SINGER supposes,
"Eisell was absynthites, or wormwood wine, a nauseously bitter
medicament then much in use," Pepys' friends must have had a very
singular taste, for he records, on the 24th November, 1660,--

    "Creed and Shepley, and I, to the Rhonish wine house, and there
    I did give them two quarts of wormwood wine."

Perhaps the beverage was doctored for the English market, and rendered
more palatable than it had been in the days of Stuckius.

BRAYBROOKE.


_Darvon Gatherall_ (Vol. ii., p. 199.).--Dervel Gadarn (vulgarly
miscalled Darvel Gatheren) was son or grandson of Hywel or Hoel, son to
Emyr of Britany. He was the founder of Llan-dervel Church, in Merioneth,
and lived early in the sixth century. The destruction of his image is
mentioned in the _Letters on the Suppression of Monasteries_, Nos. 95.
and 101. Some account of it also exists in Lord Herbert's _Henry VIII._,
which I cannot refer to. I was not aware his name had ever undergone
such gross and barbarous corruption as _Darvon Gatherall_.

A.N.


_Darvon Gatherall_ (Vol. ii., p. 199.), or _Darvel Gatheren_, is spoken
of in Sir H. Ellis's _Original Letters_, Series III., Letter 330. Hall's
_Chronicle_, p. 826. ed. 1809.

J.E.B. MAYOR.


_Darvon Gatherall._--I send you an extract from Southey's _Common-place
Book_, which refers to Darvon Gatherall. Southey had copied it from
Wordworth's _Ecclesiastical Biography_, where it is given as quotation
from Michael Wodde, who wrote in 1554. He says:--

    "Who could, twenty years agone, say the Lord's Prayer in
    English?... If we were sick of the pestilence, we ran to St.
    Rooke: if of the ague, to St. Pernel, or Master John Shorne. If
    men were in prison, they prayed to St. Leonard. If the Welshman
    would have a purse, he prayed to _Darvel Gathorne_. If a wife
    were weary of a husband, she offered oats at Poules; at London,
    to St. Uncumber."

Can any of your readers inform me who St. Uncumber was?

PWCCA.


    [Poules is St. Paul's. The passage from Michael Wodde is quoted
    in Ellis' _Brand_, vol. i. p. 202. edit. 1841.]


_Angels' Visits_ (Vol. i., p. 102.).--WICCAMECUS will find in Norris's
_Miscellanies_, in a poem "To the Memory of my dear Neece, M.C." (Stanza
X. p. 10. ed. 1692), the following lines:--

  "No wonder such a noble mind
  Her way to heaven so soon could find:
  Angels, as 'tis but seldom they appear,
  So neither do they make long stay;
  They do but visit, and away."

Mr. Montgomery (_Christian Poet_) long ago compared this passage with
those cited by WICCAMECUS.

J.E.B. MAYOR.


_Antiquity of Smoking_ (Vol. ii., pp. 41. 216.).--On that interesting
subject, "The Antiquity of Smoking," I beg to contribute the following
"Note," which I made some years ego, but unfortunately without a
reference to the author:--

    "Some fern was evidently in use among the ancients: for
    Athenaeus, in his first book, quotes from the Greek poet,
    Crobylus, these words:--

      [Greek:
      'Kai ton larung haedista purio temachiois
      Kaminos, ouk anthropos.']

      'And I will sweetly burn my throat with cuttings:
      A chimney, not a man!'

    "Now as, in a preceding line, the smoker boasts of his 'Idaean
    fingers,' it is plain that every man rolled up his sharoot for
    himself."

H.G.


_Antiquity of Smoking_ (Vol. ii., p. 216.).--_Herod_. lib. i. sec. 36.
is referred to for some illustration, I suppose, of smoking through
tubes. _Herodotus_ supplies nothing: perhaps _Herodian_ may be meant,
though not very likely. Herb smoking was probably in use in Europe long
before tobacco. But direct authority seems sadly wanting.

SANDVICENSIS.


"_Noli me tangere_" (Vol. ii., pp. 153. 219. 250.).--In a New Testament
published by the Portusian Bible Society is a small ill-executed print,
called "Christ appearing to Mary," copied from a picture by C. Ciguani.

WEDSECNARF.


_Partrige Family_ (Vol. ii., p. 230.).--Mr. Partrige's reference to
Strype's _Ecclesiastical Memorials_ is quite unintelligible to those who
have not access to the Oxford _reprint_ of that work. The reprint (I
wish that in all other reprints a similar course was adopted) gives the
paging of the original folio edition. I submit, therefore, that Mr.
Partrige should have stated that the note he has made is from Strype's
_Ecclesiastical Memorials_, vol. ii. p. 310.

The grant to which Mr. Partrige refers is, I dare say, on the Patent
Roll, 7 Edw. VI., which may be inspected at the Public Record Office,
Rolls Chapel, on payment of a fee of 1s., with liberty to take a copy or
extract in pencil gratuitously or a plain copy may be obtained at the
rate of 6d. a folio.

The act of 1 Mary, for the restitution in blood of the heirs of Sir
Miles Partrige, if not given in the {287} large edition of the Statutes,
printed by the Record Commissioners, may no doubt be seen at the
Parliament Office, near the House of Lords, on payment of the fee of 5s.

I believe I am correct in saying that no debates of that session are
extant; but the proceedings on the various bills may probably be traced
in the journals of the two Houses of Parliament, which are printed and
deposited in most of our great public libraries.

C.H. Cooper.

Cambridge, Sept. 7, 1850


_City Offices._--The best account of the different public offices of the
city of London, with their duties, etc., that I know of, your
correspondent A CITIZEN (Vol. ii., p. 216.) will find in the _Reports of
the Municipal Corporation Commissioners_.

W.C.


_Harvey and the Circulation of the Blood_ (Vol. ii., p. 266.).--The
claim set up on behalf of Father Paul to the honour of Harvey's
discovery, which is noticed by your correspondent W.W.B., is
satisfactorily disposed of in the life of Harvey in the _Biographia
Britannica_, iv. 2548., note C. Harvey gave a copy of his treatise _De
Motu Cordis_ to the Venetian ambassador in England. On his return home
the ambassador lent the book to Father Paul, who made some extracts from
it. After Father Paul's death, he was thought to be the author of these
extracts and hence the story which your correspondent quotes. It might
occasionally be convenient if your correspondents could make _a little_
inquiry before they send off their letters to you.

Beruchino.

       *       *       *       *       *


MISCELLANEOUS.

NOTES ON BOOKS, SALES, CATALOGUES, ETC.

All who love the shady side of Pall Mall, and agree with Dr. Johnson
that the tide of human enjoyment flows higher at Charing Cross than in
any other part of the globe, will gladly welcome Mr. Jesse's recently
published volumes entitled _London and its Celebrities_. They are
pleasant, gossiping and suggestive, and as the reader turns over page
after page of the historical recollections and personal anecdotes which
are associated with the various localities described by Mr. Jesse, he
will doubtless be well content to trust the accuracy of a guide whom he
finds so fluent and so intelligent, and approve rather than lament the
absence of those references to original authorities which are looked for
in graver histories. The work is written after the style of Saint Foix'
_Rues de Paris_, which Walpole once intended to imitate; and is executed
with a tact which will no doubt render it very acceptable to those for
whom it has been written, namely those persons whose avocations of
business or pleasure lead them to traverse the thoroughfares of the
great metropolis; and to whom it points out in a manner which we have
correctly designated gossiping, pleasant, and suggestive, "such sites
and edifices as have been rendered classical by the romantic or literary
associations of past times."

Messrs. Williams and Norgate have forwarded to us a Catalog of an
extensive Collection of Books, the property of a distinguished
physician, which are to be sold by auction in Berlin on the 21st of
October. The library, which was forty years in forming, is remarkable
for containing, besides numerous rare works in Spanish, Italian, French,
and English Literature, a curious series of works connected with the
American aborigines; and a most extensive collection of works on the
subjects of Prison Discipline, Poor Laws, and those other great social
questions which are now exciting such universal attention.

We have received the following Catalogues: J. Miller's (43. Chandos
Street, Trafalgar Square) Catalogue No. 11, for 1850 of Books Old and
New, including a large Number of scarce and curious Works on Ireland,
its Antiquities, Topography, and History; W. Heath's (29-1/2. Lincoln's
Inn Fields) Catalogue No. 5. for 1850 of Valuable Second-hand Books in
all Departments of Literature.

       *       *       *       *       *

BOOKS AND ODD VOLUMES

WANTED TO PURCHASE

TRANSLATION OF THE FRENCH LETTERS IN THE APPENDIX TO FOX'S HISTORY OF
JAMES II. 4to. 1808 HUTTON'S (W.) ROMAN WALL, 8vo. 1801

---- BARBERS, a Poem. 8vo. 1793 (Genuine edition, not the facsimile
copy.)

---- EDGAR AND ELPRIDA, 8vo. 1794

Odd Volumes.

BEYAN'S DICTIONARY OF PAINTERS AND ENGRAVERS, 4to. London, 1816. Vol. I.

SULLY'S MEMOIRS, Eight Volumes in French. London, 1763. Vol. II LES
AVENTURES DE GIL BLAS. London, 1749. Vols. I and II.

Letters, stating particulars and lowest prices, _carriage free_, to be
sent to Mr. Dell, Publisher of "NOTES AND QUERIES," 186 Fleet Street.

       *       *       *       *       *

NOTICES TO CORRESPONDENTS.

_Volume the First of Notes and Queries, with Title-page and very copius
Index, is now ready, price 9s. 6d., bound in cloth, and may be had, by
order, of all Booksellers and newsmen._

_The Monthly Part for September, being the Fourth of Vol. II, is also
now ready, price 1s._

_Notes and Queries may be procured by the Trade at noon on Friday: so
that our country Subscribers ought to experience no difficulty in
receiving it regularly. Many of the country Booksellers are probably not
yet aware of this arrangement, which enables them to receive Copies in
their Saturday parcels._

_S.G. (C.C. Coll., Camb.), who writes respecting the History of Edward
II., is refered to our First Volume, pp. 59. 91. 220._

A Student of History. _The Oxford Chronological Tables published by
Talboys, and now to be had of Bohn, Henrietta Street, Covent Garden, at
the reduced price of One Guinea, is, we believe, the best work of the
kind referred to by our correspondent._

S.S. _The Query respecting Pope's lines_,--"Welcome the coming, speed
the parting guest," _has been answered. See_ No. 42. p. 188.

       *       *       *       *       * {288}

ARCHAEOLOGICAL INSTITUTE OF GREAT BRITAIN AND IRELAND.

26. Suffolk Street, Pall Mall, Sept. 23, 1850.

At an ordinary meeting of the Central Committee of the Archaeological
Institute, the President in the chair, it was unanimously
"Resolved--That the Committee, having taken into consideration the
Resolution of the British Archaeological Association, passed at their
congress at Manchester, and also that of their Council of the 4th of
September, and communicated by the President of the Association to the
President of the Institute, are of opinion that the position and
prospects of the Institute are such as to render inexpedient any
essential modifications of it's existing rules and managements.

"The Committee disclaim all unfriendly feeling towards the Association:
they are of opinion that the field of Archaeology is sufficiently wide
for the operations of several societies without discord; but if the
members of the Archaeological Association should be disposed to unite
with the Institute, the Central Committee will cordially receive them on
the terms announced in their advertisement of September 9th, which was
intended to be conciliatory, feeling assured that such a course cannot
fail to meet with the entire approbation of the members of the
Institute."

By order of the Central Committee,

H. BOWYER LANE, _Secretary_.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE QUARTERLY REVIEW,

No. CLXXIV., will be published on Wednesday, October 2nd.

CONTENTS:

I.    TICKNOR'S HISTORY OF SPANISH LITERATURE.
II.   CHURCH AND EDUCATION IN WALES.
III.  FORMS OF SALUTATION.
IV.   SILURIA AND CALIFORNIA.
V.    MORE ON THE LITERATURE OF GREECE.
VI.   METROPOLITAN WATER SUPPLY.
VII.  ANECDOTES OF THE PROVISIONAL GOVERNMENT.
VIII. COCHRANE'S YOUNG ITALY.
IX.   LAST DAYS OF LOUIS PHILIPPE.

JOHN MURRAY, Albemarle Street.

       *       *       *       *       *

Will be published on the 1st of November, 1850, with the other
Almanacks,

THE LITERARY AND SCIENTIFIC REGISTER AND ALMANACK for 1850. Price 3s.
6d.

Dedicated by especial permission to H.R.H. Prince Albert, by J.W.G.
GUTCH, M.R.C.S L., F.L.S.;

Containing a condensed mass of scientific and useful information alike
valuable to the student and man of science.

Tenth Yearly issue.

Published by D. Bogue, Fleet Street, London.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE GENTLEMAN'S MAGAZINE for OCTOBER will contain the following
articles:--

The Antiquities of Richborough, Reculver, and Lymne (with
Engravings)--Original Letters of Miss Jane Porter and Count
Suwarrow--Facts for a new Biographia Britannica--Origin of Newspapers in
Germany--Memoir of Vauvanargues--Coronation Stone at
Kingston-upon-Thames (with an Engraving)--The Burkes not concerned in
Junius--Works of the Van Liugs in Painted Glass--Dr. Chalmers at
Glasgow--Great Literary Piracy in the Prayer-book of the Ecclesiastical
History Society--The new One-Hundred-and-fifty-three-Volume Catalogue of
the British Museum. With Notes of the Month, Literary and Antiquarian
Intelligence, Historical Chronicle, and Obituary, including Memoirs of
Louis Philippe, Viscount Newark, Rt. Hon. C. Arbuthnot, Dr. Prout Dr.
Bromet, John Roby, Esq., John Brumell, Esq., &c., &c. Price 2s. 6d.

NICHOLS AND SON, 25. Parliament-street.

       *       *       *       *       *

Now Ready, 8vo., 3s.,

AN EXAMINATION OF THE CENTURY QUESTION: to which is added, A Letter to
the Author of "Outlines of Astronomy," respecting a certain peculiarity
of the Gregorian System of Bissextile compensation.

  "Judicio perpende: et si tibi vera videntur,
   DEDE MANUS."                       Lucret.

GEORGE BELL, 186. Fleet Street.

       *       *       *       *       *

Lately Published, 8vo., price 12s.

SYNOPSIS Of the DOCTRINE of BAPTISM, REGENERATION, CONVERSION, &c. From
the Fathers and other Writers, to the End of the Fourth Century by J.A.
WICKHAM, Esq. With a PREFACE, by the Rev. H.D. WICKHAM, M.A., late of
Exeter College, Oxford.

"Without saying that such an elaborate Collection is necessary, we may
remark on its great utility, and express our hope that Mr. Wickham's
labours will be appreciated by the public. It is curious that he should
have begun, sixteen years ago, a compilation whose publication is so
very appropriate to the present moment."--_Guardian_.

"As an editor Mr. Wickham has shown much good taste, patience, and
discernment. Further, he has written a very sensible introductory
chapter on the use and authority of the Fathers".--_Church and State
Gazette_.

GEORGE BELL, 186. Fleet Street.

       *       *       *       *       *

On the 1st of October, No. I., price 2s. 6d.

DETAILS Of GOTHIC ARCHITECTURE,

measured and drawn from existing Examples, by J.K. COLLING, Architect.
The work is intended to illustrate those features which have not been
given in Messrs. Brandon's "Analysis:" it will be uniform with that
work, and also the "Gothic Ornaments". Each Number will contain five
4to. Plates, and be continued monthly.

D. BOGUE, Fleet Street: sold also by G. BELL, Fleet Street.

       *       *       *       *       *

Preparing for Publication, in 2 vols. small 8vo.

THE FOLK-LORE Of ENGLAND. By WILLIAM J. THOMS, F.S.A., Secretary of the
Camden Society, Editor of "Early Prose Romances", "Lays and Legends of
all Nations," &c. One object of the present work is to furnish new
contributions to the History of our National Folk-Lore, and especially
some of the more striking Illustrations of the subject to be found in
the Writings of Jacob Grimm and other Continental Antiquaries.

Communications of inedited Legends, Notices of remarkable Customs and
Popular Observances, Rhyming Charms, &c. are earnestly solicited, and
will be thankfully acknowledged by the Editor. They may be addressed to
the care of Mr. BELL, Office of "NOTES AND QUERIES," 186. Fleet Street.

       *       *       *       *       *

Edited by W.F. HOOK, D.D.--Now ready, Third and Cheaper Edition, price
3s. cloth, 6s. 6d. morocco,

VERSES FOR HOLY SEASONS. BY C.F.H., Author of "The Baron's Little
Daughters," "Moral Songs and Hymns for Little Children."

"An unpretending and highly useful book, suggestive of right thoughts at
the right season."--_English Journal of Education_.

R. SLOCOMBE, Leeds; GEORGE BELL, London.

       *       *       *       *       *

Just published, 3s. each plain; 4s. tinted. Parts 15. and 16. of

RELIQUES OF ANCIENT ENGLISH ARCHITECTURE, from Drawings by JOHN JOHNSON
Architect, F.S.A. Lithographed by Alfred Newman.

Contents:--

Hedon Church, Yorkshire; Desborough, Northamptonshire; Molton,
Lincolnshire; Bingham, Notts; Billingborough, Lincolnshire; St. John
Devizes, Wiltshire; Aumsby, Lincolnshire; Terrington St. Clements,
Norfolk.

To be completed in Twenty Parts.

GEORGE BELL, 186. Fleet Street.

       *       *       *       *       *

Printed by THOMAS CLARK STRAW, Of NO. 8. New Street Square, at No. 5.
New Street Square, in the Parish of St. Bride in the City of London; and
published by GEORGE BELL,, of No. 186. Fleet Street, in the Parish of
St. Dunstan in the West, in the City of London, Publisher, at No. 186.
Fleet Street aforesaid.--Saturday, September 28. 1850.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Notes and Queries, Number 48,
Saturday, September 28, 1850, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NOTES AND QUERIES ***

***** This file should be named 13463.txt or 13463.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/1/3/4/6/13463/

Produced by The Internet Library of Early Journals, Jon Ingram, David
King, and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

