The Project Gutenberg eBook, Waysiders, by Seumas O'Kelly


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net





Title: Waysiders

Author: Seumas O'Kelly

Release Date: September 15, 2004  [eBook #13472]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WAYSIDERS***


E-text prepared by Ted Garvin, Michael Punch, and the Project Gutenberg
Online Distributed Proofreading Team



WAYSIDERS

Stories of Connacht

by

SEUMAS O'KELLY

Author of "The Shuiler's Child," "The Lady of Deerpark,"
"The Bribe," &c.

New York

MCMXVIII







Contents


The Can with the Diamond Notch

Both Sides of the Pond

The White Goat

The Sick Call

The Shoemaker

The Rector

The Home-Coming

A Wayside Burial

The Gray Lake

The Building




THE CAN WITH THE DIAMOND NOTCH

I

[Illustration: _Festus Clasby_]


The name stood out in chaste white letters from the black background of
the signboard. Indeed the name might be said to spring from the
landscape, for this shop jumped from its rural setting with an air of
aggression. It was a commercial oasis on a desert of grass. It
proclaimed the clash of two civilisations. There were the hills, pitched
round it like the galleries of some vast amphitheatre, rising tier upon
tier to the blue of the sky. There was the yellow road, fantastic in its
frolic down to the valley. And at one of its wayward curves was the
shop, the shop of Festus Clasby, a foreign growth upon the landscape,
its one long window crowded with sombre merchandise, its air that of
established, cob-web respectability.

Inside the shop was Festus Clasby himself, like some great masterpiece
in its ancient frame. He was the product of the two civilisations, a
charioteer who drove the two fiery steeds of Agricolo and Trade with a
hand of authority. He was a man of lands and of shops. His dark face,
framed in darker hair and beard, was massive and square. Behind the
luxurious growth of hair the rich blood glowed on the clear skin. His
chest had breadth, his limbs were great, showing girth at the hips and
power at the calves. His eyes were large and dark, smouldering in soft
velvety tones. The nose was long, the nostrils expressive of a certain
animalism, the mouth looked eloquent. His voice was low, of an agreeable
even quality, floating over the boxes and barrels of his shop like a
chant. His words never jarred, his views were vaguely comforting, based
on accepted conventions, expressed in round, soft, lulling platitudes.
His manner was serious, his movements deliberate, the great bulk of the
shoulders looming up in unconscious but dramatic poses in the curiously
uneven lighting of the shop. His hands gave the impression of slowness
and a moderate skill; they could make up a parcel on the counter without
leaving ugly laps; they could perform a minor surgical operation on a
beast in the fields without degenerating to butchery; and they would
always be doing something, even if it were only rolling up a ball of
twine. His clothes exuded a faint suggestion of cinnamon, nutmeg and
caraway seeds.

Festus Clasby would have looked the part in any notorious position in
life; his shoulders would have carried with dignity the golden chain of
office of the mayoralty of a considerable city; he would have looked a
perfect chairman of a jury at a Coroner's inquest; as the Head of a
pious Guild in a church he might almost be confused with the figures of
the stained glass windows; marching at the head of a brass band he would
symbolise the conquering hero; as an undertaker he would have reconciled
one to death. There was no technical trust which men would not have
reposed in him, so perfectly was he wrought as a human casket. As it
was, Festus Clasby filled the most fatal of all occupations to dignity
without losing his tremendous illusion of respectability. The hands
which cut the bacon and the tobacco, turned the taps over pint measures,
scooped bran and flour into scales, took herrings out of their barrels,
rolled up sugarsticks in shreds of paper for children, were hands whose
movements the eyes of no saucy customer dared follow with a gleam of
suspicion. Not once in a lifetime was that casket tarnished; the nearest
he ever went to it was when he bought up--very cheaply, as was his
custom--a broken man's insurance policy a day after the law made such a
practice illegal. There was no haggling at Festus Clasby's counter.
There was only conversation, agreeable conversation about things which
Festus Clasby did not sell, such as the weather, the diseases of
animals, the results of races, and the scandals of the Royal Families of
Europe. These conversations were not hurried or yet protracted. They
came to a happy ending at much the same moment as Festus Clasby made the
knot on the twine of your parcel. But to stand in the devotional lights
in front of his counter, wedged in between divisions and subdivisions of
his boxes and barrels, and to scent the good scents which exhaled from
his shelves, and to get served by Festus Clasby in person, was to feel
that you had been indeed served.

The small farmers and herds and the hardy little dark mountainy men had
this reverential feeling about the good man and his shop. They
approached the establishment as holy pilgrims might approach a shrine.
They stood at his counter with the air of devotees. Festus Clasby
waited on them with patience and benignity. He might be some
warm-blooded god handing gifts out over the counter. When he brought
forth his great account book and entered up their purchases with a
carpenter's pencil--having first moistened the tip of it with his
flexible lips--they had strongly, deep down in their souls, the
conviction that they were then and for all time debtors to Festus
Clasby. Which, indeed and in truth, they were. From year's end to year's
end their accounts remained in that book; in the course of their lives
various figures rose and faded after their names, recording the ups and
downs of their financial histories. It was only when Festus Clasby had
supplied the materials for their wakes that the great pencil, with one
mighty stroke of terrible finality, ran like a sword through their
names, wiping their very memories from the hillsides. All purchases were
entered up in Festus Clasby's mighty record without vulgar discussions
as to price. The business of the establishment was conducted on the
basis of a belief in the man who sold and acquiescence in that belief on
the part of the man who purchased. The customers of Festus Clasby would
as soon have thought of questioning his prices as they would of
questioning the right of the earth to revolve round the sun. Festus
Clasby was the planet around which this constellation of small farmers,
herds, and hardy little dark mountainy men revolved; from his shop they
drew the light and heat and food which kept them going. Their very
emotions were registered at his counter. To the man with a religious
turn he was able, at a price, to hand down from his shelves the _Key of
Heaven_; the other side of the box he comforted the man who came panting
to his taps to drown the memory of some chronic impertinence. He gave a
very long credit, and a very long credit, in his philosophy, justified a
very, very long profit. As to security, if Festus Clasby's customers had
not a great deal of money they had grass which grew every year, and the
beasts which Festus Clasby fattened and sold at the fairs had sometimes
to eat his debtors out of his book. If his bullocks were not able to do
even this, then Festus Clasby talked to the small farmer about a
mortgage on the land, so that now and again small farmers became herds
for Festus Clasby. In this way was he able to maintain his position with
his back to the hills and his toes in the valley, striding his territory
like a Colossus. When you saw his name on the signboard standing stark
from the landscape, and when you saw Festus Clasby behind his counter,
you knew instinctively that both had always stood for at least twenty
shillings in the pound.


II

Now, it came to pass that on a certain day Festus Clasby was passing
through the outskirts of the nearest country town on his homeward
journey, his cart laden with provisions. At the same moment the spare
figure of a tinker whose name was Mac-an-Ward, the Son of the Bard,
veered around the corner of a street with a new tin can under his arm.
It was the Can with the Diamond Notch.

Mac-an-Ward approached Festus Clasby, who pulled up his cart.

"Well, my good man?" queried Festus Clasby, a phrase usually addressed
across his counter, his hands outspread, to longstanding customers.

"The last of a rare lot," said Mac-an-Ward, deftly poising the tin can
on the top of his fingers, so that it stood level with Festus Clasby's
great face. Festus Clasby took this as a business proposition, and the
soul of the trader revolved within him. Why not buy the tin can from
this tinker and sell it at a profit across his counter, even as he
would sell the flitches of bacon that were wrapped in sacking upon his
cart? He was in mellow mood, and laid down the reins in the cart beside
him.

"And so she is the last?" he said, eyeing the tin can.

"She is the Can with the Diamond Notch."

"Odds and ends go cheap," said Festus Clasby.

"She is the last, but the flower of the flock."

"Remnants must go as bargains or else remain as remnants."

"My wallet!" protested Mac-an-Ward, "you wound me. Don't speak as if I
picked it off a scrap heap."

"I will not, but I will say that, being a tail end and an odd one, it
must go at a sacrifice."

The Son of the Bard tapped the side of the can gently with his
knuckles.

"Listen to him, the hard man from the country! He has no regard for my
feelings. I had the soldering iron in my hand in face of it before the
larks stirred this morning. I had my back to the East, but through the
bottom of that can there I saw the sun rise in its glory. The brightness
of it is as the harvest moon."

"I don't want it for its brightness."

"Dear heart, listen to the man who would not have brightness. He would
pluck the light from the moon, quench the heat in the heart of the sun.
He would draw a screen across the aurora borealis and paint out the
rainbow with lamp black. He might do such things, but he cannot deny the
brightness of this can. Look upon it! When the world is coming to an end
it will shine up at the sky and it will say: 'Ah, where are all the
great stars now that made a boast of their brightness?' And there will
be no star left to answer. They will all be dead things in the heaven,
buried in the forgotten graves of the skies."

"Don't mind the skies. Let me see if there may not be a leakage in it."
Festus Clasby held up the can between his handsome face and the bright
sky.

"Leakages!" exclaimed Mac-an-Ward. "A leakage in a can that I soldered
as if with my own heart's blood. Holy Kilcock, what a mind has this man
from the country! He sees no value in its brightness; now he will tell
me that there is no virtue in its music."

"I like music," said Festus Clasby. "No fiddler has ever stood at my
door but had the good word to say of me. Not one of them could ever say
that he went thirsty from my counter."

Said the Son of the Bard: "Fiddlers, what are fiddlers? What sound have
they like the music of the sweet milk going into that can from the
yellow teats of the red cow? Morning and evening there will be a hymn
played upon it in the haggard. Was not the finest song ever made called
_Cailin deas cruidhte na mbo_? Music! Do you think that the water in the
holy well will not improve in its sparkle to have such a can as this
dipped into it? It will be welcome everywhere for its clearness and its
cleanness. Heavenly Father, look at the manner in which I rounded the
edge of that can with the clippers! Cut clean and clever, soldered at
the dawn of day, the dew falling upon the hands that moulded it, the
parings scattered about my feet like jewels. And now you would bargain
over it. I will not sell it to you at all. I will put it in a holy
shrine."

Festus Clasby turned the can over in his hands, a little bewildered. "It
looks an ordinary can enough," he said.

"It is the Can with the Diamond Notch," declared Mac-an-Ward.

"Would it be worth a shilling now?"

"He puts a price upon it! It is blasphemy. The man has no religion; he
will lose his soul. The devils will have him by the heels. They will
tear his red soul through the roof. Give me the can; don't hold it in
those hands any longer. They are coarse; the hair is standing about the
purple knuckles like stubbles in an ill-cut meadow. That can was made
for the hands of a delicate woman or for the angels that carry water to
the Court of Heaven. I saw it in a vision the night before I made it; it
was on the head of a maiden with golden hair. Her feet were bare and
like shells. She walked across a field where daisies rose out of young
grass; she had the can resting on her head like one coming from the
milking. So I rose up then and said, 'Now, I will make a can fit for
this maiden's head.' And I made it out of the rising sun and the
falling dew. And now you ask me if it is worth a shilling."

"For all your talk, it is only made of tin, and not such good tin."

"Not good tin! I held it in my hand in the piece before ever the
clippers was laid upon it. I bent it and it curved, supple as a young
snake. I shook it, and the ripples ran down the length of it like silver
waves in a little lake. The strength of the ages was in its voice. It
has gathered its power in the womb of the earth. It was smelted from the
precious metal taken from the mines of the Peninsula of Malacca, and it
will have its gleam when the sparkle of the diamond is spent."

"I'll give you a shilling for it, and hold your tongue."

"No! I will not have it on my conscience. God is my judge, I will break
it up first. I will cut it into pieces. From one of them will yet be
made a breastplate, and in time to come it will be nailed to your own
coffin, with your name and your age and the date of your death painted
upon it. And when the paint is faded upon it it will shine over the
dust of the bone of your breast. It will be dug up and preserved when
all graveyards are abolished. They will say, 'We will keep this
breastplate, for who knows but that it bore the name of the man who
refused to buy the Can with the Diamond Notch.'"

"How much will you take for it?"

"Now you are respectful. Let me put a price upon it, for it was I who
fashioned it into this shape. It will hold three gallons and a half from
now until the time that swallows wear shoes. But for all that I will
part with it, because I am poor and hungry and have a delicate wife. It
breaks my heart to say it, but pay into my hands two shillings and it is
yours. Pay quickly or I may repent. It galls me to part with it; in your
charity pay quickly and begone."

"I will not. I will give you one-and-six."

"Assassin! You stab me. What a mind you have! Look at the greed of your
eyes; they would devour the grass of the fields from this place up to
the Devil's Bit. You would lock up the air and sell it in gasping
breaths. You are disgusting. But give me the one-and-six and to Connacht
with you! I am damning my soul standing beside you and your cart,
smelling its contents. How can a man talk with the smell of fat bacon
going between him and the wind? One-and-six and the dew that fell at the
making hardly dry upon my hands yet. Farewell, a long farewell, my
Shining One; we may never meet again."

The shawl of Mac-an-Ward's wife had been blowing around the near-by
corner while this discussion had been in progress. It flapped against
the wall in the wind like a loose sail in the rigging. The head of the
woman herself came gradually into view, one eye spying around the
masonry, half-closing as it measured the comfortable proportions of
Festus Clasby seated upon his cart. As the one-and-six was counted out
penny by penny into the palm of the brown hand of the Son of the Bard,
the figure of his wife floated out on the open road, tossing and tacking
and undecided in its direction to the eye of those who understood not
the language of gestures and motions. By a series of giddy evolutions
she arrived at the cart as the last of the coppers was counted out.

"I have parted with my inheritance," said Mac-an-Ward. "I have sold my
soul and the angels have folded their wings, weeping."

"In other words, I have bought a tin can," said Festus Clasby, and his
frame and the entire cart shook with his chuckling.

The tinker's wife chuckled with him in harmony. Then she reached out her
hand with a gesture that claimed a sympathetic examination of the
purchase. Festus Clasby hesitated, looking into the eyes of the woman.
Was she to be trusted? Her eyes were clear, grey, and open, almost
babyish in their rounded innocence. Festus Clasby handed her the tin
can, and she examined it slowly.

"Who sold you the Can with the Diamond Notch?" she asked.

"The man standing by your side."

"He has wronged you. The can is not his."

"He says he made it."

"Liar! He never curved it in the piece."

"I don't much care whether he did or not. It is mine now, anyhow."

"It is my brother's can. No other hand made it. Look! Do you see this
notch on the piece of sheet iron where the handle is fastened to the
sides?"

"I do."

"Is it not shaped like a diamond?"

"It is."

"By that mark I identify it. My brother cuts that diamond-shaped notch
in all the work he puts out from his hands. It is his private mark. The
shopkeepers have knowledge of it. There is a value on the cans with that
notch shaped like a diamond. This man here makes cans when he is not
drunk, but the notch to them is square. The shopkeepers have knowledge
of them, too, for they do not last. The handles fall out of them. He has
never given his time to the art, and so does not know how to rivet
them."

"She vilifies me," said Mac-an-Ward, _sotto voce_.

"Then I am glad he has not sold me one of his own," said Festus Clasby.
"I have a fancy for the lasting article."

"You may be able to buy it yet," said the woman. "My brother is lying
sick of the fever, and I have his right to sell the Cans with the
Diamond Notch on the handles where they are riveted."

"But I have bought it already."

"This man," said the damsel, in a tone which discounted the husband,
"had no right to sell it. If it is not his property, but the property of
my brother, won't you say that he nor no other man has a right to sell
it?"

Festus Clasby felt puzzled. He was unaccustomed to dealing with people
who raised questions of title. His black brows knit.

"How can a man who doesn't own a thing sell a thing?" she persisted. "Is
it a habit of yours to sell that which you do not own?"

"It is not," Festus Clasby said, feeling that an assault had been
wantonly made on his integrity as a trader. "No one could ever say that
of me. Honest value was ever my motto."

"And the motto of my brother who is sick with the fever. I will go to
him and say, 'I met the most respectable-looking man in all Europe, who
put a value on your can because of the diamond notch.' I will pay into
his hands the one-and-six which is its price."

Festus Clasby had, when taken out of his own peculiar province, a heavy
mind, and the type of mind that will range along side-issues and get
lost in them if they are raised often enough and long enough. The
diamond notch on the handle, the brother who was sick of the fever, the
alleged non-title of Mac-an-Ward, the interposition of the woman, the
cans with the handles which fall out, and the cans with the handles
which do not fall out, the equity of selling that which does not belong
to you--all these things chased each other across Festus Clasby's mind.
The Son of the Bard stood silent by the cart, looking away down the road
with a pensive look on his long, narrow face.

"Pay me the one-and-six to put into the hands of my brother," the woman
said.

Festus Clasby's mind was brought back at once to his pocket. "No," he
said, "but this man can give you my money to pay into the hand of your
brother."

"This man," she said airily, "has no interest for me. Whatever took
place between the two of you in regard to my brother's can I will have
nothing to say to."

"Then if you won't," said Festus Clasby, "I will have nothing to do with
you. If he had no right to the can you can put the police on to him;
that's what police are for."

"And upon you," the woman added. "The police are also for that."

"Upon me?" Festus Clasby exclaimed, his chest swelling. "My name has
never crossed the mind of a policeman, except, maybe, for what he might
owe me at the end of the month for pigs' heads. I never stood in the
shadow of the law. And to this man standing by your side I have nothing
to say."

"You have. You bought from him that which did not belong to him. You
received, and the receiver is as bad as the rogue. So the law has it.
The shadow of the law is great."

Festus Clasby came down from his cart, his face troubled. "I am not
used to this," he said.

"You are a handsome man, a man thought well of. You have great
provisions upon your cart. This man has nothing but the unwashed shirt
which hangs on his slack back. It will not become you to march
handcuffed with his like, going between two policemen to the bridewell."

"What are you saying of me, woman?"

"It will be no token of business to see your cart and the provisions it
contains driven into the yard of the barracks. All the people of this
town will see it, for they have many eyes. The people of trade will be
coming to their doors, speaking of it. 'A man's property was molested,'
they will say. 'What property?' will be asked. 'The Can with the Diamond
Notch,' they will answer; 'the man of substance conspired with the thief
to make away with it.' These are the words that will be spoken in the
streets."

Festus Clasby set great store on his name, the name he had got painted
for the eye of the country over his door.

"I will be known to the police as one extensive in my dealings," he
said. "They will not couple me with this man who is known as one living
outside of the law."

"It is not for the Peelers to put the honest man on one side and the
thief on the other. That will be for the court. You will stand with him
upon my charge. The Peelers will say to you, 'We know you to be a man of
great worth, and the law will uphold you.' But the law is slow, and a
man's good name goes fast.'"

Festus Clasby fingered his money in his pocket, and the touch of it made
him struggle. "The can may be this man's for all I know. You have no
brother, and I believe you to be a fraud."

"That, too, will be for the law to decide. If I have a brother, the law
will produce him when his fever is ended. If I have no brother the law
will so declare it. If my brother makes a Can with the Diamond Notch,
the law will hear of its value. If my brother does not make a Can with
the Diamond Notch you will know me as one deficient in truth. There is
no point under the stars that the law cannot be got to declare upon. But
as is right, the law is slow, and will wait for a man to come out of
his fever. Before it can decide, another man's good name, like a little
cloud riding across the sky, is gone from the memory of the people and
will not come riding back upon the crest of any wind."

"It will be a great price to be paying for a tin can," said Festus
Clasby. He was turning around with his fingers the coins in his pocket.

The woman put the can on her arm, then covered it up with her shawl,
like a hen taking a chick under the protection of her wing.

"I have given you many words," she said, "because you are a man sizeable
and good to the eye of a foolish woman. If I had not a sick brother I
might be induced to let slip his right in the Can with the Diamond Notch
for the pleasure I have found in the look of your face. When I saw you
on the cart I said, 'There is the build of a man which is to my fancy.'
When I heard your voice I said, 'That is good music to the ear of a
woman.' When I saw your eye I said, 'There is danger to the heart of a
woman.' When I saw your beard I said, 'There is a great growth from the
strength of a man.' When you spoke to me and gave me your laugh I said,
'Ah, what a place that would be for a woman to be seated, driving the
roads of the country on a cart laden with provisions beside one so much
to the female liking.' But my sick brother waits, and now I go to do
that which may make away with the goodness of your name. I must seek
those who will throw the shadow of the law over many."

She moved away, sighing a quick sigh, as one might who was setting out
on a disagreeable mission. Festus Clasby called to her and she came
back, her eyes pained as they sought his face. Festus Clasby paid the
money, a bright shilling and two threepenny bits, into her hand,
wondering vaguely, but virtuously, as he did so, what hardy little dark
mountainy man he would later charge up the can to at the double price.

"Now," said the wife of Mac-an-Ward, putting the money away, "you have
paid me for my brother's can and you would be within your right in
getting back your one-and-six from this bad man." She hitched her shawl
contemptuously in the direction of Mac-an-Ward.

Festus Clasby looked at the Son of the Bard with his velvety soft eyes.
"Come, sir," said he, his tone a little nervous. "My money!"

Mac-an-Ward hitched his trousers at the hips like a sailor, spat through
his teeth, end eyed Festus Clasby through a slit in his half-closed
eyes. There was a little patter of the feet on the road on the part of
Mac-an-Ward, and Festus Clasby knew enough of the world and its ways to
gather that these were scientific movements invented to throw a man in a
struggle. He did not like the look of the Son of the Bard.

"I will go home and leave him to God," he said. "Hand me the can and I
will be shortening my road."

At this moment three small boys, ragged, eager, their faces hard and
weather-beaten, bounded up to the cart. They were breathless as they
stood about the woman.

"Mother!" they cried in chorus. "The man in the big shop! He is looking
for a can."

"What can?" cried the woman.

The three young voices rose like a great cry: "The Can with the Diamond
Notch."

The woman caught her face in her hands as if some terrible thing had
been said. She stared at the youngsters intently.

"He wants one more to make up an order," they chanted. "He says he will
pay--"

The woman shrank from them with a cry. "How much?" she asked.

"Half-a-crown!"

The wife of Mac-an-Ward threw out her arms in a wild gesture of despair.
"My God!" she cried. "I sold it. I wronged my sick brother."

"Where did you sell it, mother?"

"Here, to this handsome dark man."

"How much did he pay?"

"Eighteen-pence."

The three youngsters raised their hard faces to the sky and raised a
long howl, like beagles who had lost their quarry.

Suddenly the woman's face brightened. She looked eagerly at Festus
Clasby, then laid the hand of friendship, of appeal, on his arm.

"I have it!" she cried, joyfully.

"Have what?" asked Festus Clasby.

"A way out of the trouble," she said. "A means of saving my brother from
wrong. A way of bringing him his own for the Can with the Diamond
Notch."

"What way might that be?" asked Festus Clasby, his manner growing
sceptical.

"I will go to the shopman with it and get the half-crown. Having got the
half-crown I will hurry back here--or you can come with me--and I will
pay you back your one-and-six. In that way I will make another shilling
and do you no wrong. Is that agreed?"

"It is not agreed," said Festus Clasby. "Give me out the tin can. I am
done with you now."

"It's robbery!" cried the woman, her eyes full of a blazing sudden
anger.

"What is robbery?" asked Festus Clasby.

"Doing me out of a shilling. Wronging my sick brother out of his
earnings. A man worth hundreds, maybe thousands, to stand between a poor
woman and a shilling. I am deceived in you."

"Out with the can," said Festus Clasby.

"Let the woman earn her shilling," said Mac-an-Ward. His voice came from
behind Festus Clasby.

"Our mother must get her shilling," cried the three youngsters.

Festus Clasby turned about to Mac-an-Ward, and as he did so he noticed
that two men had come and set their backs against a wall hard by; they
leaned limply, casually, against it, but they were, he noticed, of the
same tribe as the Mac-an-Wards.

"It was always lucky, the Can with the Diamond Notch," said the woman.
"This offer of the man in the big shop is a sign of it. I will not allow
you to break my brother's luck and he lying in his fever."

"By heaven!" cried Festus Clasby. "I will have you all arrested. I will
have the law of you now."

He wheeled about the horse and cart, setting his face for the police
barrack, which could be seen shining in the distance in the plumage of
a magpie. The two men who stood by came over, and from the other side
another man and three old women. With Mac-an-Ward, Mrs. Mac-an-Ward, and
the three young Mac-an-Wards, they grouped themselves around Festus
Clasby, and he was vaguely conscious that they were grouped with some
military art. A low murmur of a dispute arose among them, rising
steadily. He could only hear snatches of their words: 'Give it back to
him,' 'He won't get it,' 'How can he be travelling without the Can with
the Diamond Notch?' 'Is it the Can with the Diamond Notch?' 'No,' 'Maybe
it is, maybe it is not,' 'Who knows that?' 'I say yes,' 'Hold your
tongue,' 'Be off, you slut,' 'Rattle away.'

People from the town were attracted to the place. Festus Clasby, the
dispute stirring something in his own blood, shook his fist in the long
narrow face of Mac-an-Ward. As he did so he got a tip on the heels and a
pressure upon the chest sent him staggering a few steps back. One of the
old women held him up in her arms and another old woman stood before
him, striking her breast. Festus Clasby saw the wisps of hair hanging
about the bony face and froth at the corners of her mouth. Vaguely he
saw the working of the bones of her wasted neck, and below it a long
V-shaped gleam of the yellow tanned breast, which she thumped with her
fist. Afterwards the memory of this ugly old trollop remained with him.
The youngsters were shooting in and out through the group, sending up
unearthly shrieks. Two of the men peeled off their coats and were
sparring at each other wickedly, shouting all the time, while
Mac-an-Ward was making a tumultuous peace. The commotion and the strife,
or the illusion of strife, increased. "Oh," an onlooker cried, "the
tinkers are murdering each other!"

The patient horse at last raised its head with a toss and a snort over
the rabble, and then wheeled about to break away. With the instinct of
his kind, Festus Clasby rushed to the animal's head and held him. As he
did so the striped petticoats and the tossing shawls of the women
flashed about the shafts and the body of the cart. The men raised a
hoarse roar.

A neighbour of Festus Clasby, driving up the street at this moment, was
amazed to see the great man of lands and shops in the midst of the
wrangling tinkers. He pulled up, marvelling, then went to him.

"What is this, Festus?" he asked.

"They have robbed me," cried Festus Clasby.

"Robbed you?"

"Ay, of money and of property."

"Good God! How much money?"

"I don't rightly know--I forget--some shillings, maybe."

"Oh! And of property?"

"No matter. It is only one article, but property."

"Come home, Festus; in the name of God get out of this," advised the
good neighbour.

But Festus Clasby was strangely moved. He was behaving like a man who
had drink taken. Something had happened wounding to his soul. "I will
not go," he cried. "I must have back my money."

The tinkers had now ceased disputing among themselves. They were grouped
about the two men as if they were only spectators of an interesting
dispute.

"Back I must have my money!" cried Festus Clasby, his great hand going
up in a mighty threat. The tinkers clicked their tongues on the roofs of
their mouths in a sound of amazement, as much as to say, "What a
terrible thing! What a wonderful and a mighty man!"

"I advise you to come," persuaded his neighbour.

"Never! God is my judge, never!" cried Festus Clasby.

Again the tinkers clicked their tongues, looked at each other in wonder.

"You will be thankful you brought your life out of this," said the
neighbour. "Let it not be said of you on the countryside that you were
seen wrangling with the tinkers in this town."

"Shame! Shame! Shame!" broke out like a shocked murmur among the
attentive tinkers.

Festus Clasby faced his audience in all his splendid proportions. Never
was he seen so moved. Never had such a great passion seized him. The
soft tones of his eyes were no longer soft. They shone in fiery wroth.
"I will at least have that which I bought twice over!" he cried. "I will
have my tin can!"

Immediately the group of tinkers broke up in the greatest disorder.
Hoarse cries broke out among them. They behaved like people upon whom
some fearful doom had been suddenly pronounced. The old women threw
themselves about, racked with pain and terror. They beat their hands
together, threw wild arms in despairing gestures to the sky, raising a
harrowing lamentation. The men growled in sullen gutturals. The
youngsters knelt on the road, giving out the wild beagle-like howl.
Voices cried above the uproar: "Where is it? Where is the Can with the
Diamond Notch? Get him the Can with the Diamond Notch! He must have the
can with the Diamond Notch! How can he travel without the Can with the
Diamond Notch? He'll die without the Can with the Diamond Notch!"

Festus Clasby was endeavouring to deliver his soul of impassioned
protests when his neighbour, assisted by a bystander or two, forcibly
hoisted him up on his cart and he was driven away amid a great howling
from the tinkers.

[Illustration: _Festus Clasby_]

It was twilight when he reached his place among the hills, and the good
white letters under the thatch showed clear to his eyes. Pulling himself
together he drove with an air about the gable and into the wide open
yard at the back, fowls clearing out of his way, a sheep-dog coming to
welcome him, a calf mewing mournfully over the half-door of a stable.
Festus Clasby was soothed by this homely, this worshipful, environment,
and got off the cart with a sigh. Inside the kitchen he could hear the
faithful women trotting about preparing the great master's meal. He made
ready to carry the provisions into the shop. When he unwrapped the
sacking from the bacon, something like a sudden stab went through his
breast. Perspiration came out on his forehead. Several large long slices
had been cut off in jagged slashes from the flitches. They lay like
wounded things on the body of the cart. He pulled down the other
purchases feverishly, horror in his face. How many loaves had been torn
off his batch of bread? Where were all the packets of tea and sugar, the
currants and raisins, the flour, the tobacco, the cream-of-tartar, the
caraway seeds, the nutmeg, the lemon peel, the hair oil, the--

Festus Clasby wiped the perspiration from his forehead. He stumbled out
of the yard, sat up on a ditch, and looked across the silent, peaceful,
innocent country. How good it was! How lovely were the beasts grazing,
fattening, in the fields! His soft velvety eyes were suddenly flooded
with a bitter emotion and he wept.

The loaves of bread were under the shawl of the woman who had supported
Festus Clasby when he stumbled; the bacon was under another bright
shawl; the tobacco and flour fell to the lot of her whose yellow breast
showed the play of much sun and many winds; the tea and sugar and the
nutmeg and caraway seeds were under the wing of the wife of the Son of
the Bard in the Can with the Diamond Notch.




BOTH SIDES OF THE POND

I


Mrs. Donohoe marked the clearness of the sky, the number and brightness
of the stars.

"There will be a share of frost to-night, Denis," she said.

Denis Donohoe, her son, adjusted a primitive bolt on the stable door,
then sniffed at the air, his broad nostrils quivering sensitively as he
raised his head.

"There is ice in the wind," he said.

"Make a start with the turf to the market to-morrow," his mother
advised. "People in town will be wanting fires now."

Denis Donohoe walked over to the dim stack of brown turf piled at the
back of the stable. It was there since the early fall, the dry earth cut
from the bog, the turf that would make bright and pleasant fires in the
open grates of Connacht for the winter months. Away from it spread the
level bogland, a sweep of country that had, they said, in the infancy of
the earth been a great oak forest, across which in later times had roved
packs of hungry wolves, and which could at this day claim the most
primitive form of industry in Western Europe. Out into this bogland in
the summer had come from their cabins the peasantry, men and women,
Denis Donohoe among them; they had dug up slices of the spongy, wet sod,
cut it into pieces rather larger than bricks, licked it into shape by
stamping upon it with their bare feet, stacked it about in little rows
to dry in the sun, one sod leaning against the other, looking in the
moonlight like a great host of wee brown fairies grouped in couples for
a midnight dance on the carpet of purple heather. Now the time had come
to convert it into such money as it would fetch.

Denis Donohoe whistled merrily that night as he piled the donkey cart,
or "creel," with the sods of turf. Long before daybreak next morning he
was about, his movements quick like one who had great business on hands.
The kitchen of the cabin was illuminated by a rushlight, the rays of
which did not go much beyond a small deal table, scrubbed white, where
he sat at his breakfast, an unusually good repast, for he had tea,
home-made bread and a boiled egg. His mother moved about the dim
kitchen, waiting on him, her bare feet almost noiseless on the black
earthen floor. He ate heartily and silently, making the Sign of the
Cross when he had finished. His mother followed him out on the dark road
to bid him good luck, standing beside the creel of turf.

"There should be a brisk demand now that the winter is upon us," she
said hopefully. "God be with you."

"God and Mary be with you, mother," Denis Donohoe made answer as he took
the donkey by the head and led him along the dark road. The little
animal drew his burden very slowly, the cart creaking and rocking
noisily over the uneven road. Now and then Denis Donohoe spoke to him
encouragingly, softly, his gaze at the same time going to the east,
searching the blank sky for a hint of the dawn to come.

But they had gone rocking and swaying along the winding road for a long
time before the day dawned. Denis Donohoe marked the spread of the
light, the slow looming up of a range of hills, the sweep of brown
patches of bog, then grey and green fields, broken by the glimmer of
blue fakes, slopes of brown furze making for them a dull frame.

"Now that we have the blessed light we won't feel the journey at all,"
Denis Donohoe said to the donkey.

The ass drew the creel of turf more briskly, shook his winkers and
swished his tail. When they struck very sharp hills Denis Donohoe got to
the back of the cart, put his hands to the shafts, and, lowering his
head, helped to push up the load, the muscles springing taut at the back
of his thick limbs as he pressed hard against the bright frosty ground.

As they came down from the hills he already felt very hungry, his
fingers tenderly fondling the slices of oaten bread he had put away in
the pocket of his grey homespun coat. But he checked the impulse to eat,
the long jaw of his swarthy face set, his strong teeth tight together
awaiting the right hour to play their eager part. If he ate all the
oaten bread now--splendid, dry, hard stuff, made of oat meal and water,
baked on a gridiron--it would leave too long a fast afterwards. Denis
Donohoe had been brought up to practise caution in these matters, to
subject his stomach to a rigorous discipline, for life on the verge of a
bog is an exacting business. Instead of obeying the impulse to eat Denis
Donohoe blew warm breaths into his purple hands, beat his arms about his
body to deaden the bitter cold, whistled, took some steps of an odd
dance along the road, and went on talking to the donkey as if he were
making pleasant conversation to a companion. The only sign of life to be
seen on earth or air was a thin line of wild duck high up in the sky,
one group making wide circles over a vivid mountain lake.

Half way on his journey to the country town Denis Donohoe pulled up his
little establishment. It was outside a lonely cottage exactly like his
own home. There was the same brown thatch on the roof, a garland of
verdant wild creepers drooping from a spot at the gable, the same two
small windows without any sashes in the front wall, the same narrow
rutty pathway from the road, the same sort of yellow hen cackling
heatedly, her legs quivering as she clutched the drab half door, the
same scent of decayed cabbage leaves in the air. Denis Donohoe took a
sack of hay from the top of the creel of turf, and spread some of it on
the side of the road for the donkey. While he did so a woman who wore a
white cap, a grey bodice, a thick woollen red petticoat, under which her
bare lean legs showed, came to the door, waving the yellow hen off her
perch.

"Good day to you, Mrs. Deely," Denis Donohoe said, showing his strong
teeth.

"Welcome, Denis. Won't you step in and warm yourself at the fire, for
the day is sharp, and you are early on the road?"

Denis Donohoe sat with the woman by the fire for some time, their
exchange of family gossip quiet and agreeable. The young man was,
however, uneasy, glancing about the house now and then like one who
missed something. The woman, dropping her calm eyes on him, divined his
thoughts.

"Agnes is not about," she said. "She started off for the Cappa Post
Office an hour gone, for we had tidings that a letter is there for us
from Sydney."

"A letter from her sister?"

"Yes, Mary is married there and doing well."

Denis Donohoe resumed his journey.

At the appointed spot he ravenously devoured the oaten bread, then
stretched himself on his stomach on the ground and took some draughts of
water from a roadside stream, drawing it up with a slow sucking noise,
his teeth chattering, his eyes on the bright pebbles that glittered
between some green cress at the bottom. When he had finished the donkey
also laved his thirst at the spot.

He reached the market town while it was yet morning. He led the creel of
turf through the straggling streets, where some people with the sleep in
their eyes were moving about. The only sound he made was a low word of
encouragement to the donkey.

"How much for the creel?" a man asked, standing at his shop door.

"Six shilling," Denis Donohoe replied, and waited, for it was above the
business of a decent turf-seller to praise his wares or press for a
sale.

"Good luck to you, son," said the merchant, "I hope you'll get it." He
smiled, folded his hands one over the other, and retired to his shop.

Denis Donohoe moved on, saying in an undertone to the donkey, "Gee-up,
Patsy. That old fellow is no good."

There were other inquiries, but nobody purchased. They said that money
was very scarce. Denis Donohoe said nothing; money was too remote a
thing for him to imagine how it could be ever anything else except
scarce. He grew tired of going up and down past shops where there was no
sign of business, so he drew the side streets and laneways, places where
children screamed about the road, where there was a scent of soapy
water, where women came to their doors and looked at him with eyes that
expressed a slow resentment, their arms bare above the elbows, their
hair hanging dankly about their ears, their voices, when they spoke,
monotonous, and always sounding a note of tired complaint.

On the rise of a little bridge Denis Donohoe met a red-haired woman, a
family of children skirmishing about her; there was a battle light in
her wolfish eyes, her idle hands were folded over her stomach.

"How much, gossoon?" she asked.

"Six shilling."

"Six devils!" She walked over to the creel, handling some of the sods of
turf Denis Donohoe knew she was searching a constitutionally abusive
mind for some word contemptuous of his wares. She found it at last, for
she smacked her lips. It was in the Gaelic. "_Spairteach!_" she cried--a
word that was eloquent of bad turf, stuff dug from the first layer of
the bog, a mere covering for the correct vein beneath it.

"It's good stone turf," Denis Donohoe protested, a little nettled.

The woman was joined by some people who were hanging about, anxious to
take part in bargaining which involved no personal liability. They
argued, made jokes, shouted, and finally began to bully Denis Donohoe,
the woman leading, her voice half a scream, her stomach heaving, her
eyes dancing with excitement, a yellow froth gathering at the corners
of her angry mouth, her hand gripping a sod of the turf, for the only
dissipation life now offered her was this haggling with and shouting
down of turf sellers. Denis Donohoe stood immovable beside his cart,
patient as his donkey, his swarthy face stolid under the shadow of his
broad-brimmed black hat, his intelligent eyes quietly measuring his
noisy antagonists. When the woman's anger had quite spent itself the
turf was purchased for five shillings.

Denis Donohoe carried the sods in his arms to the kitchen of the
purchaser's house. It entailed a great many journeys in and out, the
sods being piled up on his hooked left arm with a certain skill. His
route lay through a small shop, down a semi-dark hallway, across a
kitchen, the sods being stowed under a stairway where cockroaches
scampered from the thudding of the falling sods.

Women were moving about the kitchen, talking incessantly, fumbling about
tables, always appearing to search for something that had been lost, one
crooning over a cradle that she rocked before the fire. The smell of
cooking, the sound of something fatty hissing on a pan, brought a sense
of faintness to Denis Donohoe, for he was ravenously hungry again.

He stumbled awkwardly in and out of the place with his armfuls of brown
sods The women moved with reluctance out of his way. Once a servant girl
raised the most melancholy pair of wide brown eyes he had ever seen,
saying to him, "It always goes through me to hear the turf falling in
the stair-hole. It reminds me of the day I heard the clay falling on me
father's coffin, God be with him and forgive him, for he died in the
horrors."

By the time Denis Donohoe had delivered the cartload of turf the little
donkey had eaten all the hay in the sack. In the small shop Denis
purchased some bacon, flour and tea, so that he had only some coppers to
bring home with him. After some hesitation he handed back one penny for
some biscuits, and these he ate as soon as he set out on the return
journey.

The little donkey went over the road through the hills on the way back
with spirit, for donkeys are good homers. Denis Donohoe sat up on the
front of the cart, his legs dangling down beside the shaft. The donkey
trotted down the slopes gayly, the harness rattling, the cart swaying,
jolting, making an amazing noise.

The donkey cocked his ears, flecked his tail, even indulged in one or
two buck-jumps, as he rattled down the hilly roads. Denis Donohoe once
or twice leaned out over the shaft, and brought his open hand down on
the haunch of the donkey, but it was more a caress than a whack.

The light began to fade, the landscape to grow more obscure. Suddenly
Denis Donohoe broke into song. They were going over a level stretch of
ground. The donkey walked quietly. The quivering voice rang out over the
darkening landscape, gaining in quality and in steadiness, a clear light
voice, the notes coming with the instinctive intonation, the perfect
order of the born folk singer. It was some old Gaelic song, a refrain
that had been preserved like the trunks of the primeval oaks in the
bogs, such a refrain as might claim kinship with the Dresden _Amen_,
sung by generations of German peasants until at last it reached the ears
of Richard Wagner, giving birth to a classic. As he sang Denis Donohoe
raised his swarthy face, his profile sharp against the pale sky, his
eyes, half in rapture like all folk singers, ranging over the hills, his
long throat palpitating, swelling and slackening like the throat of a
bird quivering in song. Then a light from the sash-less windows of Mrs.
Deely's cabin shone faintly and silence again brooded over the place.
When he reached the cabin Denis Donohoe dismounted and walked into the
kitchen, his eyes bright, his steps so eager that he became conscious of
it and pulled up at once.

Mrs. Deely was sitting by the fire, her knitting needles busy. Denis
Donohoe sat down beside her. While they were speaking a young girl came
from the only room in the house, and, crossing the kitchen, stood beside
the open fireplace.

"Agnes had great news from Australia from Mary," Mrs. Deely said. "She
enclosed the price of the passage from this place to Sydney."

"I will be making the voyage the end of this month," the girl herself
added.

There was an awkward silence, during which Mrs. Deely carefully piloted
one of her needles through an intricate turn in the heel of the sock.

"Well, I wish you luck, Agnes," Denis Donohoe said at last, and then
gave a queer odd little laugh, a little laugh that made Mrs. Deely
regard him quickly and seriously. She noticed that he had his eyes fixed
on the ground.

"It will be a great change from this place," the girl said, fingering
something on the mantelpiece. "Mary says Sydney is a wonderful big
city."

Denis Donohoe slowly lifted his eyes, taking in the shape of the girl
from the bare feet to the bright ribbon that was tied in her hair. What
he saw was a slim girl, her limbs showing faintly in the folds of a
cheap, thin skirt, a loose, small shawl resting on the shoulders, her
bosom heaving gently where the shawl did not meet, her profile delicate
and faint in the light of the fire, her eyes, suddenly turned upon him,
being the eyes of a girl conscious of his eyes, her low breath the sweet
breath of a girl stepping into her womanhood.

"Well, God prosper you, Agnes Deely," Denis Donohoe said after some
time, and rose from his seat.

The two women came out on the road to see him off. He did not dally,
jumped on to the front of the cart and rattled away.

Overhead the sky was winter clear, the stars merry, eternal, the whole
heaven brilliant in its silent, stupendous song, its perpetual
_Magnificat_; but Denis Donohoe made the rest of the journey in a black
silence, gloom in the rigid figure, the stooping shoulders, the dangling
legs; and the hills seemed to draw their grim shadows around his tragic
ride to the lonely light in his mother's cabin on the verge of the dead
brown bog.


II

There was a continuous clatter of conversation that rose and fell and
broke like the waves on the beach, there was the dull shuffling of
uneasy feet on the ground, the tinkling of glasses, the rattle of
bottles, and over it all the half hysterical laugh of a tipsy woman.
Above the racket a penetrating, quivering voice was raised in song.

Now and again bleary eyes were raised to, the stage, shadowy in a fog
of tobacco smoke. The figure on the boards strutted about, made some
fantastic steps, the face pallid in the streaky light, the mouth scarlet
as a tulip for a moment as it opened wide, the muscles about the lips
wiry and distinct from much practice, the words of the song coming in a
vehement nasal falsetto and in a brogue acquired in the Bowery. The
white face of the man who accompanied the singer on the piano was raised
for a moment in a tired gesture that was also a protest; in the eyes of
the singer as they met those of the accompanist was an expression of
cynical Celtic humour; in the smouldering gaze of the pianist was the
patient, stubborn soul of the Slav. The look between these entertainers,
one from Connacht the other from Poland, was a little act of mutual
commiseration and a mutual expression of contempt for the noisy
descendants of the Lost Tribes who made merry in the place.

A Cockney who had exchanged Houndsditch for the Bowery leered up broadly
at the Celt prancing about the stage. He turned to the companion who sat
drinking with him, a tall, bony half-caste, her black eyes dancing in a
head that quivered from an ague acquired in Illinois.

"'E's all ryght, is Paddy," said the voice from Houndsditch. He pointed
a thumb that was a certificate of villainy in the direction of the
stage.

"Sure," said the coloured lady, whose ancestry rambled back away
Alabama. She looked up at the stage with her bold eyes.

"I know him," she said, thoughtfully. "And I like him," she added
grinning. "We all like him. He's one of the boys."

"Wot price me?" said the Houndsditch man.

"Oh, you're good, too," said the coloured lady. "Blow in another
cocktail, honey." She struck her breast where the uneasy bone showed
through the dusky skin. "I've a fearful thirst right there."

Little puckers gathered about the small, humorous eyes of the Cockney as
he looked at her. "My," he said, "you 'ave got a thirst and a capacity,
Ole Sahara!"

The coloured lady raised the cocktail to her fat lips, and as she did so
there was a sudden racket, men shouting, women clapping their hands,
the voice of the tipsy woman dominant in its hysteria over the uproar.
The singer was bowing profuse acknowledgments from the stage, his eyes,
sly in their cynical humour, upon the face of the Slav at the piano, his
head thrown back, the pallor of his face ghastly.

The lady from Alabama joined in the tribute to the singer.

"'Core, 'core," cried Ole Sahara, raising her glass in the dim vapour.
"Here's to Denis Donohoe!"




THE WHITE GOAT

I


The white goat stood in a little clearing closed in by a ring of whins
on the hillside. Her head swayed from side to side like the slow motion
of the pendulum of a great clock. The legs were a little spread, the
knees bent, the sides slack, the snout grey and dry, the udder limp.

The Herd knew the white goat was in great agony. She had refused the
share of bran he had brought her, had turned away from the armful of
fresh ivy leaves his little daughter held out to her. He had desisted
from the milking, she had moaned so continuously.

Some days before the Herd had found the animal injured on the hill; the
previous night he had heard the labourers making a noise, shouting and
singing, as they crossed from the tillage fields. He knew what had
happened when he had seen the marks of their hob-nailed boots on her
body. She was always a sensitive brute, of a breed that came from the
lowlands. The sombre eyes of the Herd glowed in a smouldering passion as
he stood helplessly by while the white goat swung her head from side to
side.

He gathered some dry bracken and spread a bed of it near the white goat.
It would be unkind to allow her to lie on the wet grass when the time
came that she could no longer stand. He looked up at the sky and marked
the direction of the wind. It had gone round to the west. Clouds were
beginning to move across the sky. There was a vivid light behind the
mountains. The air was still. It would rain in the night. He had
thought for the white goat standing there in the darkness, swaying her
head in agony, the bracken growing sodden at her feet, the rain beating
into her eyes. It was a cold place and wind-swept. Whenever the white
goat had broken her tether she had flown from it to the lowlands. He
remembered how, while leading her across a field once, she had drawn
back in some terror when they had come to a pool of water.

The Herd looked at his little daughter. The child had drawn some
distance away, the ivy leaves fallen from her bare arms. He was
conscious that some fear had made her eyes round and bright. What was it
that the child feared? He guessed, and marvelled that a child should
understand the strange thing that was about to happen up there on the
hill. The knowledge of Death was shining instinctively in the child's
eyes. She was part of the stillness and greyness that was creeping over
the hillside.

"We will take the white goat to the shelter of the stable," the Herd
said.

The child nodded, the fear still lingering in her eyes. He untied the
tether and laid his hand on the horn of the goat. She answered to the
touch, walking patiently but unsteadily beside him.

After a while the child followed, taking the other horn, gently, like
her father, for she had all his understanding of and nearness to the
dumb animals of the fields. They came slowly and silently. The light
failed rapidly as they came down the hill. Everything was merged in a
shadowy vagueness, the colour of the white goat between the two dim
figures alone proclaiming itself. A kid bleated somewhere in the
distance. It was the cry of a young thing for its suckle, and the Herd
saw that for a moment the white goat raised her head, the instinct of
her nature moving her. Then she tottered down the hill in the darkness.

When they reached the front of the stable the white goat backed
painfully from the place. The Herd was puzzled for a moment. Then he saw
the little pool of water in a faint glimmer before their feet. He
brought the animal to one side, avoiding it, and she followed the
pressure of his directing hand.

He took down a lantern that swung from the rafters of the stable and
lighted it. In a corner he made a bed of fresh straw. The animal leaned
over a little against the wall, and they knew she was grateful for the
shelter and the support. Then the head began to sway in a weary rhythm
from side to side as if the pain drove it on. Her breath quickened,
broke into little pants. He noted the thin vapour that steamed from
about her body. The Herd laid his hand on her snout. It was dry and red
hot. He turned away leading the child by the hand, the lantern swinging
from the other, throwing long yellow streaks of light about the gloom of
the stable. He closed the door softly behind him.


II

It was late that night when the Herd got back from his rounds of the
pastures. His boots soaked in the wet ground and the clothes clung to
his limbs, for the rain had come down heavily. A rumble of thunder
sounded over the hills as he raised the latch of his door. He felt glad
he had not left the white goat tethered in the whins on the hill.

His little daughter had gone to sleep. His wife told him the child on
being put to bed had wept bitterly, but refused to confess the cause of
her grief. The Herd said nothing, but he knew the child had wept for the
white goat. The thought of the child's emotion moved him, and he turned
out of the house again, standing in the darkness and the rain. Why had
they attacked the poor brute? He asked the question over and over
again, but only the rain beat in his face and around him was darkness,
mystery. Then he heard the voices higher up on the side of the hill,
first a laugh, then some shouts and cries. A thick voice raised the
refrain of a song, and it came booming through the murky atmosphere. The
Herd could hear the words:

  _Where are the legs with which you run?
          Hurroo! Hurroo!
  Where are the legs with which you run?
          Hurroo! Hurroo!
  Where are the legs with which you run
  When first you went to carry a gun?
  Indeed, your dancing days are done!
      Och, Johnny, I hardly knew ye!_

And then came the chorus like a roar down the hills:

  _With drums and guns, and, guns and drum
  The enemy nearly slew ye;
  My darling dear, you look so queer,
      Och, Johnny, I hardly knew ye!_

The voices of the labourers passing from the tillage fields died away,
and the rumble of thunder came down more frequently from the hills. The
Herd crossed his garden, his boots sinking in the soft ground. Half way
across he paused, for a loud cry had dominated the fury of the breaking
storm. His ears were quick for the cries of animals in distress. He went
on rapidly toward the stable.

The ground grew more sloppy and a thin stream of water came from the rim
of his soft black hat, streaming down his face. He noted the flashes of
lightning overhead. Through it all the cry of the white goat sounded,
with that weird, vibrating "mag-gag" that was the traditional note of
her race. It had a powerful appeal for the Herd. It stirred a feeling of
passion within him as he hurried through the rain.

How they must have lacerated her, a poor brute chained to the sod, at
the mercy of their abuse! The red row of marks along her gams, raw and
terrible, sprang to his sight out of the darkness. Vengeance, vengeance!
He gripped his powerful hands, opening and closing the fists. Then he
was conscious of something in the storm and the darkness that robbed him
of his craving for personal vengeance. All that belonged to the
primitive man welled up in him. He knew that in the heart of the future
there lurked a reckoning--something, somebody--that would count the
tally at the appointed time. Then he had turned round the gable of the
stable. He saw the ghostly white thing, shadowy in the blackness, lying
prostrate before the door. He stood still, his breath drawn inward.

There was a movement in the white shape. He could discern the blurred
outline of the head of the animal as she raised it up a little. There
was a low moan followed by a great cry. The Herd stood still, terror in
his heart. For he interpreted that cry in all the terrible inarticulate
consciousness of his own being. That cry sounded in his ears like an
appeal to all the generations of wronged dumb things that had ever come
under the lash of the tyranny of men. It was the protest of the brute
creation against humanity, and to the Herd it was a judgment. Then his
eyes caught a murky gleam beside the fallen white shape, and the
physical sense of things jumped back to his mind.

He remembered that in wet weather a pool of water always gathered before
the stable door. He remembered that there was a glimmer of it there when
he had led the white goat into the stable. He remembered how she had
shown fear of it.

He stooped down over the white goat where she lay. Thin wisps of her
hair floated about looking like dim wraiths against the blackness of the
pool. He caught a look of the brown eyes and was aware that the udder
and teats bulged up from the water. He sank down beside her, the water
making a splash as his knees dropped into the place. The animal raised
her head a little and with pain, for the horns seemed to weigh like
lead. But it was an acknowledgment that she was conscious of his
presence; then the head fell back, a gurgle sounding over one of the
ears.

The Herd knew what had happened, and it was all very tragical to his
mind. His wife had come out to the stable for something, and had left
the door open behind her. The white goat, goaded by the growing pain,
had staggered out the door, perhaps feeling some desire for the open
fields in her agony. Then she had seen before the threshold of the door
that which had always been a horror to her--a pool of water. The Herd
could see her tottering and swaying and then falling into it with a cry,
fulfilling her destiny. He wondered if he himself had the same instinct
for the things that would prove fatal to him? Why was he always so
nervous when he stooped to or lay upon the ground? Why did it always
give him a feeling that he would be trampled under the hooves of
stampeding cattle rounded up for treatment for the warble fly? He
trembled as he heard the beat of hooves on the ground behind him. He
peered about and for a while did not recognise the shape that moved
restlessly about in the darkness. He heard the neigh of the brood mare.
He knew then she had been hovering about the stable afraid to go in out
of the storm. She was afraid to go in because of the thing that lay
before the stable door. He heard the answering call of the young foal
in the stable, and he knew that it, too, was afraid to come out even at
the call of its dam. Death was about in that night of storm, and all
things seemed conscious of it.

He stooped down over the white goat and worked his hands under her
shoulders. He lifted her up and felt the strain all over his frame, the
muscles springing tense on his arms. She was a dead weight, and he had
always prided on her size. His knees dug into the puddle in the bottom
of the pool as he felt the pressure on his haunches. He strained hard as
he got one of his feet under him. With a quick effort he got the other
foot into position and rose slowly, lifting the white form out of the
pool. The shaggy hair hung from the white goat, limp and reeking,
numerous thin streams of water making a little ripple as they fell. The
limbs of the Herd quivered under the weight, he staggered back, his
heavy boots grinding in the gravel; then he set his teeth, the limbs
steadied themselves, he swayed uncertainly for a moment, then staggered
across the stable door, conscious of the hammer strokes of the heart of
the white goat beating against his own heart. He laid her down in the
bed of straw and heard the young foal bounding out of the stable in
terror. The Herd stood in the place, the sweat breaking out on his
forehead, then dropping in great beads.

The white goat began to moan. The Herd was aware from the rustling of
the straw that her limbs were working convulsively. He knew from the
nature of her wounds that her death would be prolonged, her agonies
extreme. What if he put her out of pain? It would be all over in a
moment. His hand went to his pocket, feeling it on the outside. He made
out the shape of the knife, but hesitated.

One of the hooves of the white goat struck him on the ankle as her limbs
worked convulsively. His hand went into his pocket and closed around the
weapon. He would need to be quick and sure, to have a steady hand, to
make a swift movement. He allowed himself some moments to decide. Then
the blade of the knife shot back with a snap.

The sound seemed to reach the white goat in all its grim significance.
She struggled to her feet, moaning more loudly. The Herd began to
breathe hard. He was afraid she would cry out even as she had cried out
as she lay in the pool before the stable door. The terror of the things
that made up that cry broke in upon the Herd. He shook with fear of it.
Then he stooped swiftly, his fingers nervously feeling over the delicate
course of the throat of the white goat. His hands moved a little
backwards and forwards in the darkness. He felt the hot stream on his
hands, then the animal fell without a sound, her horns striking against
the wall. He stood over her for a moment and was conscious that his
hands were wet. Then he remembered with a shudder that the whole tragedy
of the night had been one of rains and pools and water and clinging damp
things, of puddles and sweats and blood. Even now the knife he held in
his fingers was dripping. He let it fall. It fell with a queer thud,
sounding of flesh, of a dead body. It had fallen on the dead body of the
white goat. He turned with a groan and made his way uncertainly for the
stable door.

At the door he stood, thoughts crowding in upon him, questions beating
upon his brain and giving no time for answer. Around him was darkness,
mystery, Death. What right had he to thrust his hand blindly into the
heart of this mystery? Who had given him the power to hasten the end, to
summon Death before its time? Had not Nature her own way for counting
out the hours and the minutes? Had not she, or some other power,
appointed an hour for the white goat to die? She would live, even in
agony, until they could bear her up no longer; and having died Nature
would pass her through whatever channel her laws had ordained. Had not
the white goat made her last protest against his interference when she
had risen to her feet in her death agony? And if the white goat, dumb
beast that she was, had suffered wrong at the hands of man, then there
was, the Herd now knew, a Power deliberate and inexorable, scrupulous in
its delicate adjustment of right and wrong, that would balance the
account at the appointed audit.

He had an inarticulate understanding of these things as he moved from
the stable door. He tripped over a barrow unseen in the darkness and
fell forward on his face into the field. As he lay there he heard the
thudding of hooves on the ground. He rose, dizzy and unnerved, to see
the dim shapes of some cattle that had gathered down about the place
from the upland. He felt the rain beating upon his face, the clothes
hung dank and clammy to his limbs. His boots soaked and slopped when he
stepped. A boom of thunder sounded overhead and a vivid flash of
lightning lit up for an instant a great elm tree. He saw all its
branches shining with water, drops glistening along a thousand stray
twigs. Then the voices of the labourers returning over the hills broke
in upon his ears. He heard their shouts, the snatches of their songs,
their noise, all the ribaldry of men merry in their drink.

The Herd groped through the darkness for his house like a half-blind
man, his arms out before him, and a sudden gust of wind that swept the
hillside shrieked about the blood of the white goat that was still wet
upon his hands.




THE SICK CALL


A man wearing the grey frieze coat and the soft black hat of the
peasantry rode up to the Monastery gate on a wiry, long-tailed nag. When
he rang the bell at the hall-door there was a clatter of sandals on a
flagged hall inside.

The door was opened by a lay Brother in a brown habit, a girdle about
the waist from which a great Rosary beads was suspended. The peasant
turned a soft black hat nervously in his hands as he delivered his
message. The Friar who visited ailing people was, he said, wanted. A
young man was lying very ill away up on the hills. Nothing that had been
done for him was of any account. He was now very low, and his people
were troubled. Maybe the Friar would come and raise his holy hands over
Kevin Hooban?

The peasant gave some account of how the place might be reached. Half an
hour later the Spanish Friar was on a side-car on his way to the
mountain. I was on the other side of the car. The Spanish Friar spoke
English badly. The peasantry--most of whom had what they called _Bearla
briste_ (broken English)--could understand only an occasional word of
what he said. At moments of complete deadlock I, a Mass server, acted as
a sort of interpreter. For this, and for whatever poor companionship I
afforded, I found myself on the sick call.

The road brought us by a lake which gave a chilly air to the landscape
in the winter day, then past a strip of country meagrely wooded. We
turned into a narrow road that struck the hills at once, skirting a
sloping place covered with scrub and quite dark, like a black patch on
the landscape. After that it was a barren pasture, prolific only in
bleached boulders of rocks, of bracken that lay wasted, of broom that
was sere. It was a very still afternoon, not a breath of wind stirring.
Sheep looking bulky in their heavy fleeces lay about in the grass, so
motionless that they might be the work of a vigorous sculptor. The
branches of the trees were so still, so delicate in their outlines
against the pale sky, that they made one uneasy; they seemed to have
lost the art of waving, as if leaves should never again flutter upon
them. A net-work of low stone walls put loosely together, marking off
the absurdly small fields, straggled over the face of the landscape,
looking in the curious evening light like a great grey web fantastically
spun by some humorous spider. The brown figure of a shepherd with a
sheep crook in his hand rose up on a distant hill. He might be a sacred
figure in the red chancel of the western sky. In a moment he was gone,
leaving one doubtful if he had not been an illusion. A long army of
starlings trailed rapidly across the horizon, a wriggling motion marking
their course like the motion in the body of a gigantic snake. Everything
on the hills seemed, as the light reddened and failed, to grow vast,
grotesque. The silence which reigned over it all was oppressive.

Stray cabins skirted the roadside. Some people moved about them, leaving
one the impression of a remoteness that was melancholy. The women in
their bare feet made little curtesies to the Friar. Children in long
dresses ran into the cabins at sight of the strangers, like rabbits
scuttling back to their burrows. Having found refuge they looked out
over the half-doors as the car passed, their eyes sparkling, humorous,
full of an alert inquisitiveness, their faces fresh as the wind.

A group of people swung along the road, speaking volubly in Irish,
giving one the impression that they had made a great journey across the
range of hills. They gave us a salutation that was also a blessing. We
pulled up the car and they gathered about the Friar, looking up at him
from under their broad-brimmed black hats, the countenances for the most
part dark and primitive, the type more of Firbolg than Milesian origin.

When the Friar spoke to them they paused, shuffled, looked at each
other, puzzled. Half unconsciously I repeated the priest's words for
them.

"Oh, you are heading for the house where Kevin Hooban is lying sick?"

"Yes."

"The priest is going to read over him?"

"Yes."

"And maybe they are expecting him?"

"Yes."

"We heard it said he is very low, a strangeness coming over him."

"Is the house far?"

"No, not too far when you are once a-past the demesne wall, with the ivy
upon it. Keep on the straight road. You will come to a stream and a
gullet and a road clipping into the hills from it to the right; go past
that road. West of that you will see two poplar trees. Beyond them you
will come to a boreen. Turn down that boreen; it is very narrow, and you
had best turn up one side of the car and both sit together, or maybe the
thorny hedges would be slashing you on the face in the darkness of the
place. At the end of the boreen you will come to a shallow river, and it
having a shingle bottom. Put the mare to it and across with you. Will
you be able to remember all that?"

"Yes, thanks."

"Very well. Listen now. When you are across the river with the shingly
bottom draw up on the back meadow. You will see a light shining to the
north. Let one bawl out of you and Patch Keetly will be at hand to take
the mare by the head. He will bring you to the house where Kevin Hooban
is lying in his trouble. And God grant, Father, that you will be able to
reach out a helping hand to him, and to put your strength in holy words
between him and them that has a hold of him; he is a fine young man
without fault or blemish, and the grandest maker of music that ever put
a lip to the fideog. Keep an eye out for the poplar trees."

"Very good. God be with you."

"God speed you kindly."

We drove on. As we did so we tried to piece the directions together. The
two poplar trees appeared to touch some curious strain of humour in the
Spanish Friar. But it all came to pass as the prophet had spoken. We
came to the ivy wall, to the stream, the gullet, the road that clipped
into the hills to the right, and a long way beyond it the two poplar
trees, tall, shadowy, great in their loneliness on the hills, sentinels
that appeared to guard some mountain frontier. The light had rapidly
gone. The whole landscape had swooned away into a vague, dark chaos.
Overhead the stars began to show, the air was cutting; it bit with
frost. And then we turned down the dark boreen, the mare venturing into
it with some misgiving. I think the Friar was praying in an undertone in
his native Basque as we passed through the narrow mountain boreen. At
the end of it we came to the shallow river with the shingly bottom.
Again the mare required some persuasion before she ventured in, the
wheels crunching on the gravel, her fetlocks splashing the slow-moving,
chocolate-coloured water. On the opposite bank we reached a sort of
plateau, seen vaguely in the light. I "let a bawl out of me." It was
like the cry of some lonely, lost bird on the wing. The Friar shook with
laughter. I could feel the little rock of his body on the springs of the
car. A figure came suddenly out of the darkness and silently took the
mare by the head. The car moved on across the vague back meadow. Patch
Keetly was piloting us to a light that shone in the north.

People were standing about the front of the long, low-thatched house.
Lights shone in all the windows, the door stood open. The people did
not speak or draw near as we got down from the car. There was a fearful
silence about the place. The grouping of the people expressed mystery.
They eyed us from their curiously aloof angles. They seemed as much a
part of the atmosphere of the hills, as fixed in the landscape as the
little clumps of furze or the two lonely poplars that mounted guard over
the mouth of the boreen.

"Won't the holy Father be going into the house?" Patch Keetly asked. "I
will unyoke the mare and give her a share of oats in the stable."

The Friar spoke to me in an undertone, and we crossed to the open door
of the house.

The door led directly into the kitchen. Two women were standing well
back from the door, something respectful, a little mysterious and a
little fearful in their attitude. Their eyes were upon the Friar, and
from their expressions they might have expected some sort of apparition
to cross the threshold. They made a curtesy to him, dipping their bodies
in a little sudden jerk. Nobody else was in the kitchen, and, despite
the almost oppressive formality of their attitude, they somehow
conveyed a sense of the power of women in the household in time of
crisis. They were in supreme command, the men all outside, when a life
had to be battled for. The elder of the women came forward and spoke to
the priest, bidding him welcome. The reception looked as if it had been
rehearsed, both women painfully anxious to do what was right.

There appeared some little misunderstanding, and I was too dazed with
the cold--which I had only fully felt when I got off the car and found
my legs cramped--to come to the rescue as interpreter. The Spanish Friar
was accustomed to these little embarrassments, and he had a manner of
meeting them with a smile. The misunderstanding and the embarrassment
seemed to thaw the formality of the reception. The women looked
relieved. They were obviously not expected to say anything, and they had
no fear now that they would be put to the ordeal of meeting a possibly
superior person, one who might patronise them, make a flutter in their
home, appal them by expecting a great deal of attention, in short, be
"very Englified." The Spanish Friar had very quick intuitions and some
subtle way of his own for conveying his emotions and his requirements.
He was in spirit nearer to the peasantry than many of the Friars who
themselves came from the flesh of the peasantry. And these two peasant
women, very quick in both their intuitions and their intelligence,
seemed at the very moment of the breakdown of the first attempt at
conversation to understand him and he to understand them. The elder of
the women led the priest into a room off the kitchen where I knew Kevin
Hooban lay ill.

The younger woman put a chair before the fire and invited me to sit
there. While I sat before the fire I could hear the quick but quiet step
of her feet about the kitchen, the little swish of her garments.
Presently she drew near to the fire and held out a glass. It contained
what looked like discoloured water, very like the water in the shallow
river with the shingly bottom. I must have expressed some little
surprise, even doubt, in my face, for she held the glass closer, as if
reassuring me. There was something that inspired confidence in her
manner. I took the glass and sipped the liquid. It left a half-burned,
peaty taste in the mouth, and somehow smacked very native in its
flavour. I thought of the hills, the lonely bushes, the slow movement of
the chocolate-coloured river, the men with the primitive dark faces
under the broad-brimmed hats, their mysterious, even dramatic way of
grouping themselves around the lighted house. The peaty liquid seemed a
brew out of the same atmosphere. I knew it was poteen. And in a moment I
felt it coursing through my body, warming my blood. The young woman
stood by the fire, half in shadow, half in the yellow flame of the turf
fire, her attitude quiet but tense, very alert for any movement in the
sick room.

The door of the room stood slightly open, and the low murmur of the
Friar's voice reciting a prayer in Latin could be heard. The young woman
sighed, her bosom rising and falling in a quick breath of pain. Then she
made the sign of the Cross.

"My brother is very low," she said, sitting down by the fire after a
time. Her eyes were upon the fire. Her face was less hard than the
faces I had seen on the hills. She looked good-natured.

"Is he long ill?"

"This long while. But to look at him you would conceit he was as sound
as a trout. First he was moody, moping about the place, and no way
wishful for company. Hours he would spend below at the butt of the
meadow, nearby the water, sitting under the thorn bush and he playing
upon the fideog. Then he began to lose the use of his limbs, and crying
he used to be within in the room. Some of the people who have knowledge
say he is lying under a certain influence. He cannot speak now. The holy
Friar will know what is best to be done."

When the Friar came out of the room he was divesting himself of the
embroidered stole he had put over his shoulders.

The white-capped old woman had excitement in her face as she followed
him.

"Kevin spoke," she said to the other. "He looked up at the blessed man
and he made an offer to cross himself. I could not hear the words he
was speaking, that soft they come from his lips."

"Kevin will live," said the younger woman, catching some of the
excitement of her mother. She stood tensely, drawn up near the fire,
gazing vacantly but intently across the kitchen, as if she would will it
so passionately that Kevin should live that he would live. She moved
suddenly, swiftly, noiselessly across the floor and disappeared into the
room.

The priest sat by the fire for some time, the old woman standing by,
respectful, but her eyes riveted upon him as if she would pluck from him
all the secrets of existence. The priest was conscious, a little uneasy,
and a little amused, at this abnormal scrutiny. Some shuffling sounded
outside the house as if a drove of shy animals had come down from the
mountain and approached the dwelling. Presently the door creaked. I
looked at it uneasily. The atmosphere of the place, the fumes of the
poteen in my head, the heat of the fire, had given me a more powerful
impression of the mysterious, the weird. Nothing showed at the door for
some time, but I kept my eye upon it. I was rewarded. A cluster of heads
and shoulders of men, swarthy, gloomy, some awful foreboding in the
expression of their faces, hung round the door and peered silently down
at the Friar seated at the fire. Again I had the sense that they would
not be surprised to see any sort of apparition. The heads disappeared,
and there was more shuffling outside the windows as if shy animals were
hovering around the house. The door creaked again, and another bunch of
heads and shoulders made a cluster about it. They looked, as far as I
could see them, the same group of heads, but I had the feeling that they
were fresh spectators. They were taking their view in turn.

The priest ventured some conversation with the woman of the house.

"Do you think will Kevin live, Father?"

"He should have more courage," the Friar said.

"We will all have more courage now that you have read over him."

"Keep the faith. It is all in the hands of God. It is only what is
pleasing to Him that will come to pass."

"Blessed be His Holy Name." The woman inclined her head as she spoke
the words. The priest rose to go.

The young girl came out of the room. "Kevin will live," she said. "He
spoke to me." Her eyes were shining as she gazed at her mother.

"Could you tell what words he spoke?"

"I could. He said, 'In the month of April, when the water runs clear in
the river, I will be playing the fideog.' That is what Kevin said."

"When the river is clear--playing the fideog," the elder woman repeated,
some look of trouble, almost terror, in her face. "The cross of Christ
between him and that fideog!"

The priest was moving to the door and I followed. As I did so I got a
glimpse, through the partly open room door, of the invalid. I saw the
long, pallid, nervous-looking face of a young man on the pillow. A light
fell on his brow, and I thought it had the height, and the arch, the
good shape sloping backward to the long head, of a musician. The eyes
were shining with an unnatural brightness. It was the face of an artist,
an idealist, intensified, idealised, by illness, by suffering, by
excitement, and I wondered if the vision which Kevin Hooban had of
playing the fideog by the river, when it ran clear in April, were a
vision of his heaven or his earth.

We left the house. Patch Keetly was taking the loop from a trace as he
harnessed the mare in the yellow light of a stable lantern. We mounted
the car. The groups of men drew about us, their movements again sounding
like the shuffling of shy animals on the sod, and they broke silence for
the first time.

There was more said about Kevin Hooban. From various allusions, vague
and unsubstantial, little touches in the kind, musical voices, I
gathered that they believed him to be under the influence of the Good
People. The sense of mystery and ill-omen came back to me, and I carried
away a memory of the dark figures of the people grouped about the lonely
lighted house, standing there in sorrow for the flute-player, the grass
at their feet sparkling with frost.




THE SHOEMAKER


Obeying a domestic mandate, Padna wrapped a pair of boots in paper and
took them to the shoemaker, who operated behind a window in a quiet
street.

The shoemaker seemed to Padna a melancholy man. He wore great
spectacles, had a white patch of forehead, and two great bumps upon it.
Padna concluded that the bumps had been encouraged by the professional
necessity of constantly hanging his head over his knees.

The shoemaker invited Padna to sit down in his workshop, which he did.
Padna thought it must be very dreary to sit there all day among old and
new boots, pieces of leather, boxes of brass eyelets, awls, knives, and
punchers. No wonder the shoemaker was a melancholy-looking man.

Padna maintained a discreet silence while the shoemaker turned his
critical glasses upon the boots he had brought him for repair. Suddenly
the great glasses were turned upon Padna himself, and the shoemaker
addressed him in a voice of amazing pleasantness.

"When did you hear the cuckoo?" he asked.

Padna, at first startled, pulled himself together. "Yesterday," he
replied.

"Did you look at the sole of your boot when you heard him?" the
shoemaker asked.

"No," said Padna.

"Well," said the shoemaker, "whenever you hear the cuckoo for the first
time in the spring always look at the sole of your right boot. There you
will find a hair. And that hair will tell you the kind of a wife you
will get."

The shoemaker picked a long hair from the sole of Padna's boot and held
it up in the light of the window.

"You'll be married to a brown-haired woman," he said. Padna looked at
the hair without fear, favour, or affection, and said nothing.

The shoemaker took his place on his bench, selected a half-made shoe,
got it between his knees, and began to stitch with great gusto. Padna
admired the skilful manner in which he made the holes with his awl and
drew the wax-end with rapid strokes. Padna abandoned the impression that
the shoemaker was a melancholy man. He thought he never sat near a man
so optimistic, so mentally emancipated, so detached from the indignity
of his occupation.

"These are very small shoes you are stitching," said Padna, making
himself agreeable.

"They are," said the shoemaker. "But do you know who makes the smallest
shoes in the world? You don't? Well, well!... The smallest shoes in the
world are made by the clurichaun, a cousin of the leprechaun. If you
creep up on the west side of a fairy fort after the sun has set and put
your ear to the grass you'll hear the tapping of his hammer. And do you
know who the clurichaun makes shoes for? You don't? Well, well!... He
makes shoes for the swallows. Oh, indeed they do, swallows wear shoes.
Twice a year swallows wear shoes. They wear them in the spring, and
again at the fall of the year. They wear them when they fly from one
world to another. And they cross the Dead Sea. Did you ever hear tell of
the Dead Sea? You did. Well, well!... No bird ever yet flew across the
Dead Sea. Any of them that tried it dropped and sank like a stone. So
the swallows, when they come to the Dead Sea, get down on the bank, and
there the clurichauns have millions of shoes waiting for them. The
swallows put on their shoes and walk across the Dead Sea, stepping on
bright yellow and black stepping-stones that shine across the water like
a lovely carpet. And do you know what the stepping-stones across the
Dead Sea are? They are the backs of sleeping frogs. And when the
swallows are all safe across the frogs waken up and begin to sing, for
then it is known the summer will come. Did you never hear that before?
No? Well, well!"

A cat, friendly as the shoemaker himself, leapt on to Padna's lap. The
shoemaker shifted the shoe he was stitching between his knees, putting
the heel where the toe had been.

"Do you know where they first discovered electricity?" he asked.

"In America," Padna ventured.

"No. In the back of a cat. He was a big buck Chinese cat. Every hair on
him was seven inches long, in colour gold, and thick as copper wire. He
was the only cat who ever looked on the face of the Empress of China
without blinking, and when the Emperor saw that he called him over and
stroked him on the back. No sooner did the Emperor of China stroke the
buck cat than back he fell on his plush throne, as dead as his
ancestors. So they called in seven wise doctors from the seven wise
countries of the East to find out what it was killed the Emperor. And
after seven years they discovered electricity in the backbone of the
cat, and signed a proclamation that it was from the shock of it the
Emperor had died. When the Americans read the proclamation they decided
to do whatever killing had to be done as the cat had killed the Emperor
of China. The Americans are like that--all for imitating royal
families."

"Has this cat any electricity in her?" Padna asked.

"She has," said the shoemaker, drawing his wax-end. "But she's a
civilised cat, not like the vulgar fellow in China, and civilised cats
hide their electricity much as civilised people hide their feelings. But
one day last summer I saw her showing her electricity. A monstrous black
rat came prowling from the brewery, a bald patch on his head and a piece
missing from his left haunch. To see that fellow coming up out of a
gullet and stepping up the street, in the middle of the broad daylight,
you'd imagine he was the county inspector of police."

"And did she fight the rat?" Padna asked.

The shoemaker put the shoe on a last and began to tap with his hammer.
"She did fight him," he said. "She went out to him twirling her
moustaches. He lay down on his back. She lay down on her side. They kept
grinning and sparring at each other like that for half an hour. At last
the monstrous rat got up in a fury and come at her, the fangs stripped.
She swung round the yard, doubled in two, making circles like a
Catherine-wheel about him until the old blackguard was mesmerised. And
if you were to see the bulk of her tail then, all her electricity gone
into it! She caught him with a blow of it under the jowl, and he fell in
a swoon. She stood over him, her back like the bend of a hoop, the tail
beating about her, and a smile on the side of her face. And that was the
end of the monstrous brewery rat."

Padna said nothing, but put the cat down on the floor. When she made
some effort to regain his lap he surreptitiously suggested, with the tip
of his boot, that their entente was at an end.

A few drops of rain beat on the window, and the shoemaker looked up, his
glasses shining, the bumps on his forehead gleaming. "Do you know the
reason God makes it rain?" he asked.

Padna, who had been listening to the conversation of two farmers the
evening before, replied, "I do. To make turnips grow."

"Nonsense!" said the shoemaker, reaching out for an awl. "God makes it
rain to remind us of the Deluge. And I don't mean the Deluge that was
at all at all. I mean the Deluge that is to come. The world will be
drowned again. The belly-band of the sky will give, for that's what the
rainbow is, and it only made of colours. Did you never know until now
what the rainbow was? No? Well, well!... As I was saying, when the
belly-band of the sky bursts the Deluge will come. In one minute all the
valleys of the earth will be filled up. In the second minute the
mountains will be topped. In the third minute the sky will be emptied
and its skin gone, and the earth will be no more. There will be no ark,
no Noah, and no dove. There will be nothing only one great waste of grey
water and in the middle of it one green leaf. The green leaf will be a
sign that God has gone to sleep, the trouble of the world banished from
His mind. So whenever it rains remember my words."

Padna said he would, and then went home.


II

When Padna called on the shoemaker for the boots that had been left for
repair they were almost ready. The tips only remained to be put on the
heels. Padna sat down in the little workshop, and under the agreeable
influence of the place he made bold to ask the shoemaker if he had grown
up to be a shoemaker as the geranium had grown up to be a geranium in
its pot on the window.

"What!" exclaimed the shoemaker. "Did you never hear tell that I was
found in the country under a head of cabbage? No! Well, well! What do
they talk to you at home about at all?"

"The most thing they tell me," said Padna, "is to go to bed and get up
in the morning. What is the name of the place in the country where they
found you?"

"Gobstown," said the shoemaker. "It was the most miserable place within
the ring of Ireland. It lay under the blight of a good landlord, no
better. That was its misfortune, and especially my misfortune. If the
Gobstown landlord was not such a good landlord it's driving on the box
of an empire I would be to-day instead of whacking tips on the heels of
your boots. How could that be? I'll tell you that.

"In Gobstown the tenants rose up and demanded a reduction of rent; the
good landlord gave it to them. They rose up again and demanded another
reduction of rent; he gave it to them. They went on rising up, asking
reductions, and getting them, until there was no rent left for anyone to
reduce. The landlord was as good and as poor as our best.

"And while all this was going on Gobstown was surrounded by estates
where there were the most ferocious landlords--rack-renting, absentee,
evicting landlords, landlords as wild as tigers. And these tiger
landlords were leaping at their tenants and their tenants slashing back
at them as best they could. Nothing, my dear, but blood and the music of
grape-shot and shouts in the night from the jungle. In Gobstown we had
to sit down and look on, pretending, moryah, that we were as happy as
the day was long.

"Not a scalp was ever brought into Gobstown. No man of us ever went out
on an adventure which might bring him home again through the mouth of
the county jail. Not a secret enterprise that might become a great
public excitement was ever hatched, not to speak of being launched. We
had not as much as a fife-and-drum band. We did not know how to play a
tin whistle or beat upon the tintinnabulum. We never waved a green flag.
We had not a branch of any kind of a league. We had no men of skill to
draft a resolution, indite a threatening letter, draw a coffin, skull,
and cross-bones, fight a policeman, or even make a speech. We were never
a delegate at a convention, an envoy to America, a divisional executive,
a deputation, or a demonstration. We were nothing. We wilted under the
blight of our good landlord as the green stalk wilts under the frost of
the black night.... Hand me that knife. The one with the wooden handle.

"In desperation we used rouse ourselves and march into the
demonstrations on other estates. We were a small and an unknown tribe.
The Gobstown contingent always brought up the rear of the procession--a
gawky, straggling, bad-stepping, hay-foot, straw-foot lot! The onlookers
hardly glanced at us. We stood for nothing. We had no name. Once we
rigged up a banner with the words on it, 'Gobstown to the Front!' but
still we were put to the back, and when we walked through this town the
servant girls came out of their kitchens, laughed at us, and called out,
'Gobstown to the Back of the Front!'

"The fighting men came to us, took us aside, and asked us what we were
doing in Gobstown. We had no case to make. We offered to bring forward
our good landlord as a shining example, to lead our lamb forward in
order that he might show up the man-eaters on the other estates. The
organisers were all hostile. They would not allow us into the
processions any more. If we could bring forward some sort of roaring
black devil we would be more than welcome. Shining examples were not in
favour. We were sent home in disgrace and broke up. As the preachers
say, our last state was worse than our first.

"We became sullen and drowsy and fat and dull. We got to hate the sight
of each other, so much so that we began to pay our rents behind each
other's backs, at first the reduced rents, then, gale day by gale day,
we got back to the original rent, and kept on paying it. Our good
landlord took his rents and said nothing. Gobstown became the most
accursed place in all Ireland. Brother could not trust brother. And
there were our neighbours going from one sensation to another. They were
as lively as trout, as enterprising as goats, as intelligent as
Corkmen. They were thin and eager and good-tempered. They ate very
little, drank water, slept well, men with hard knuckles, clean bowels,
and pale eyes. Anything they hit went down. They were always ready to go
to the gallows for each other.

"I had a famous cousin on one of these estates, and I suppose you heard
of him? You didn't! What are they teaching you at school at all? Latin
grammar? Well, well!... My cousin was a clumsy fellow with only a little
of middling kind of brains, but a bit of fight in him. Yet look at the
way he got on, and look at me, shodding little boys like yourself! I was
born under a lucky star but my cousin was born under a lucky landlord--a
ferocious fellow who got into a garret in London and kept roaring across
at Ireland for more and more blood. Every time I thought of that old
skin of a man howling in the London garret I said to myself, 'He'll be
the making of my cousin.' And so, indeed, he was. Three agents were
brought down on my cousin's estate. State trials were running like great
plays in the courthouse. Blood was always up. They had six fife-and-drum
bands and one brass band. They had green and gold banners with harps
and streamers, and mottoes in yellow lettering, that took four hardy men
to carry on a windy day. The heads of the Peelers were hardly ever out
of their helmets. The resident magistrate rose one day in the bosom of
his family, his eyes closed, to say grace before meals, and from dint of
habit he was chanting the Riot Act over the table until his wife flew at
him with, 'How dare you, George! The mutton is quite all right!' Little
boys no bigger than yourself walking along the roads to school in that
splendid estate could jump up on the ditch and make good speeches.

"My cousin's minute books--he was secretary of everything--would stock a
book-shop, and were noted for beautiful expressions. He was the author
of ten styles of resolution construction. An enemy christened him
Resolving Kavanagh. Every time he resolved to stand where he always
stood he revolved. Everybody put up at his house. He was seen in more
torchlight processions than Bryan O'Lynn. A room in his house was
decorated in a beautiful scheme of illuminated addresses with border
designs from the Book of Kells. The homes of the people were full of
the stumps of burned-down candles, the remains of great illuminations
for my cousin whenever he came out of prison. I tell you no lie when I
say that that clumsy cousin of mine became clever and polished, all
through pure practice. He had the best of tutors. The skin of a landlord
in the London garret, his agents, their understrappers, removable
magistrates, judges, Crown solicitors, county inspectors of police,
sergeants, constables, secret service men,--all drove him from fame to
fame until in the end they chased him out the only gap that was left
open to the like of him--the English Parliament. Think of the streak of
that man's career! And there was I, a man of capacity and brains, born
with the golden spoon of talent in my mouth, dead to the world in
Gobstown! I was rotting like a turnip under the best and the most
accursed of landlords. In the end I could not stand it--no man of spirit
could.

"One day I took down my ashplant, spat on my fist, and set out for my
cousin's place. He gave me no welcome. I informed him as to how the land
lay in Gobstown. I said we must be allowed to make a name for ourselves
as the producers of a shining example of a landlord. My cousin let his
head lie over a little to one side and then said, 'In this country
shining examples ought only be used with the greatest moderation.' He
looked out through the window and after some time said, 'That Gobstown
landlord is the most dangerous lunatic in all Ireland.' 'How is that?'
said I. 'Because,' said my famous cousin, 'he has a perfect heart.' He
put his head over to the other side, looked at me and said, 'If Gobstown
does not do something he may be the means of destroying us all.' 'How?'
said I. 'He may become contagious,' said my cousin. 'Only think of his
example being followed and Ireland turned into one vast tract of
Gobstowns! Would not any fate at all be better than that?' I who knew
said, 'God knows it would.'

"My cousin sighed heavily. He turned from me, leaving me standing there
in the kitchen, and I saw him moving with a ladder to the loft overhead.
This he mounted and disappeared in the black rafters. I could hear him
fumbling somewhere under the thatch. Presently down he came the ladder,
a gun in one hand, and a fistful of cartridges in the other. He spoke no
word, and I spoke no word. He came to me and put the gun in my hand and
the handful of cartridges in my pocket. He walked to the fire and stood
there with his back turned. I stood where I was, a Gobstown mohawk, with
the gun in my hand. At last I said, 'What is this for?' and grounded the
gun a little on the floor. My cousin did not answer at once. At last he
said without moving, 'It's for stirring your tea, what else?' I looked
at him and he remained as he was and, the sweat breaking out on the back
of my neck, I left the house and made across the fields for home, the
cartridges rattling in my pocket every ditch I leapt, the feel of the
gun in my hand becoming more familiar and more friendly.

"At last I came to the summit of a little green hill overlooking
Gobstown, and there I sat me down. The sight of Gobstown rose the gorge
in me. Nothing came out of it but weak puffs of turf smoke from the
chimneys--little pallid thin streaks that wobbled in the wind. There,
says I, is the height of Gobstown. And no sound came up out of it
except the cackle of geese, and then the bawl of an old ass in the bog.
There, says I, is the depth of Gobstown. And rising up from the green
hill I made up my mind to save Ireland from Gobstown even if I lost my
own soul. I would put a bullet in the perfect heart of our good
landlord.

"That night I lay behind a certain ditch. The moon shone on the nape of
my neck. The good landlord passed me by on the road, he and his good
wife, chattering and happy as a pair of lovers. I groped for the gun.
The queerest feeling came over me. I did not even raise it. I had no
nerve. I quaked behind the ditch. His footsteps and her footsteps were
like cracks of this hammer on my head. I knew, then, in that minute,
that I was no good, and that Gobstown was for ever lost.... What
happened me? Who can say that for certain? Many a time have I wondered
what came over me in that hour. I can only guess.... Nobody belonging to
me had ever been rack-rented. I had never seen any of my own people
evicted. No great judge of assize had ever looked down on me from his
bench to the dock and addressed to me stern words. I had never heard
the clang behind me of a prison door. No royal hand of an Irish
constabularyman had ever brought a baton down on my head. No carbine had
ever butted the soft places of my body. I had no scars that might redden
with memories. The memories I had and that might give me courage were
not memories of landlords. There was nothing of anger in my heart for
the Gobstown landlord, and he went by. I dragged my legs out of the
ditch and drowned my cousin's gun in a boghole. After it I dropped in
the handful of cartridges. They made a little gurgle in the dark water
like blood in a shot man's throat. And that same night I went home, put
a few things in a red handkerchief, and stole out of Gobstown like a
thief. I walked along the roads until I came to this town, learned my
trade, became a respectable shoemaker, and--tell your mother I never use
anything only the best leather. There are your boots, Padna, tips and
all ... half-a-crown. Thanks, and well wear!"




THE RECTOR


The Rector came round the gable of the church. He walked down the sanded
path that curved to the road. Half-way down he paused, meditated, then
turning gazed at the building. It was square and solid, bulky against
the background of the hills. The Rector hitched up his cuffs as he gazed
at the structure. Critical puckers gathered in little lines across the
preserved, peach-like cheeks. He put his small, nicely-shaped head to
one side. There was a proprietorial, concerned air in his attitude. One
knew that he was thinking of the repairs to the church, anxious about
the gutters, the downpipe, the missing slates on the roof, the painting
of the doors and windows. He struck an attitude as he pondered the
problem of the cracks on the pebble-dashed walls. His umbrella grounded
on the sand with decision. He leaned out a little on it with
deliberation, his lips unconsciously shaping the words of the ultimatum
he should deliver to the Select Vestry. His figure was slight, he looked
old-world, almost funereal, something that had become detached, that
was an outpost, half-forgotten, lonely; a man who had sunk into a parish
where there was nothing to do. He mumbled a little to himself as he came
down to the gate in the high wall that enclosed the church grounds.

A group of peasants was coming along the yellow, lonely road, talking
and laughing. The bare-footed women stepped with great active strides,
bearing themselves with energy. They carried heavy baskets from the
market town, but were not conscious of their weight. The carded-wool
petticoats, dyed a robust red, brought a patch of vividness to the
landscape. The white "bauneens" and soft black hats of the men afforded
a contrast. The Rector's eyes gazed upon the group with a schooled
detachment. It was the look of a man who stood outside of their lives,
who did not expect to be recognised, and who did not feel called upon to
seem conscious of these peasant folk. The eyes of the peasants were
unmoved, uninterested, as they were lifted to the dark figure that stood
at the rusty iron gate leading into the enclosed church grounds. He
gave them no salutation. Their conversation voluble, noisy, dropped for
a moment, half through embarrassment, half through a feeling that
something alive stood by the wayside. A vagueness in expression on both
sides was the outward signal that two conservative forces had met for a
moment and refused to compromise.

One young girl, whose figure and movements would have kindled the eye of
an artist, looked up and appeared as if she would smile. The Rector was
conscious of her vivid face, framed in a fringe of black hair, of a
mischievousness in her beauty, some careless abandon in the swing of her
limbs. But something in the level dark brows of the Rector, something
that was dour, forbade her smile. It died in a little flush of
confusion. The peasants passed and the Rector gave them time to make
some headway before he resumed his walk to the Rectory.

He looked up at the range of hills, great in their extent, mighty in
their rhythm, beautiful in the play of light and mist upon them. But to
the mind of the Rector they expressed something foreign, they were part
of a place that was condemned and lost. He began to think of the young
girl who, in her innocence, had half-smiled at him. Why did she not
smile? Was she afraid? Of what was she afraid? What evil thing had come
between her and that impulse of youth? Some consciousness--of what? The
Rector sighed. He had, he was afraid, knowledge of what it was. And that
knowledge set his thoughts racing over their accustomed course. He ran
over the long tradition of his grievances--grievances that had submerged
him in a life that had not even a place in this wayside countryside. His
mind worked its way down through all the stages of complaint until it
arrived at the _Ne Temere_ decree. The lips of the Rector no longer
formed half-spoken words; they became two straight, tight little thin
lines across the teeth. They would remain that way all the afternoon,
held in position while he read the letters in the _Irish Times_. He
would give himself up to thoughts of politics, of the deeds of wicked
men, of the transactions that go on within and without governments,
doping his mind with the drug of class opiates until it was time to go
to bed.

Meantime he had to pass a man who was breaking stones in a ditch by the
roadside. The hard cracks of the hammer were resounding on the still
air. The man looked up from his work as the Rector came along; the grey
face of the stone-breaker had a melancholy familiarity for him. The
Rector had an impulse--it was seldom he had one. He stood in the centre
of the road. The _Ne Temere_ decree went from his mind.

"Good-day, my man," he said, feeling that he had made another
concession, and that it would be futile as all the others.

"Good-day, sir," the stone-breaker made answer, hitching himself upon
the sack he had put under his haunches, like one very ready for a
conversation.

There was a pause. The Rector did not know very well how to continue. He
should, he knew, speak with some sense of colloquialism if he was to get
on with this stonebreaker, a person for whom he had a certain removed
sympathy. The manner of these people's speech was really a part of the
grievances of the Rector. Their conversation, he often secretly assured
himself, was peppered with Romish propaganda. But the Rector made
another concession.

"It's a fine day, thank God," he said. He spoke like one who was
delivering a message in an unfamiliar language. "Thank God" was local,
and might lend itself to an interpretation that could not be approved.
But the Rector imported something into the words that was a protection,
something that was of the pulpit, that held a solemnity in its
pessimism.

"A fine day, indeed, glory be to God!" the stonebreaker made answer.
There was a freshness in his expression, a cheerfulness in the prayer,
that made of it an optimism.

The Rector was so conscious of the contrast that it gave him pause
again. The peach-like colourings on the cheeks brightened, for a
suspicion occurred to him. Could the fellow have meant anything? Had he
deliberately set up an optimistic Deity in opposition to the pessimistic
Deity of the Rector? The Rector hitched up the white cuffs under his
dark sleeves, swung his umbrella, and resumed his way, his lips
puckered, a little feverish agitation seizing him.

"A strange, down-hearted kind of a man," the stonebreaker said to
himself, as he reached out for a lump of lime-stone and raised his
hammer. A redbreast, perched on an old thorn bush, looking out on the
scene with curious eyes, stretched his wing and his leg, as much as to
say, "Ah, well," sharpened his beak on a twig, and dropped into the
ditch to pick up such gifts as the good earth yielded.

The Rector walked along the road pensive, but steadfast, his eyes upon
the alien hills, his mind travelling over ridges of problems that never
afforded the gleam of solution. He heard a shout of a laugh. Above the
local accents that held a cadence of the Gaelic speech he heard the
sharp clipping Northern accent of his own gardener and general factotum.
He had brought the man with him when he first came to Connacht, half as
a mild form of colonisation, half through a suspicion of local honesty.
He now saw the man's shaggy head over the Rectory garden wall, and
outside it were the peasants.

How was it that the gardener got on with the local people? How was it
that they stood on the road to speak with him, shouting their
extravagant laughter at his keen, dry Northern humour?

When he first came the gardener had been more grimly hostile to the
place than the Rector himself. There had been an ugly row on the road,
and blows had been struck. But that was some years ago. The gardener now
appeared very much merged in the life of the place; the gathering
outside the Rectory garden was friendly, almost a family party. How was
it to be accounted for? Once or twice the Rector found himself
suspecting that at the bottom of the phenomenon there might be all
unconscious among these people a spirit of common country, of a common
democracy, a common humanity, that forced itself to the surface in
course of time. The Rector stood, his lips working, his nicely-shaped
little head quivering with a sudden agitation. For he found himself
thinking along unusual lines, and for that very reason dangerous
lines--frightfully dangerous lines, he told himself, as an ugly
enlightenment broke across his mind, warming it up for a few moments and
no more. As he turned in the gate at the Rectory it was a relief to
him--for his own thoughts were frightening him--to see the peasants
moving away and the head of the gardener disappear behind the wall. He
walked up the path to the Rectory, the lawn dotted over with sombre yew
trees all clipped into the shape of torpedoes, all trained directly upon
the forts of Heaven! The house was large and comfortable, the walls a
faded yellow. Like the church, it was thrown up against the background
of the hills. It had all the sombre exclusiveness that made appeal to
the Rector. The sight of it comforted him at the moment, and his mental
agitation died down. He became normal enough to resume his accustomed
outlook, and before he had reached the end of the path his mind had
become obsessed again by the thought of the _Ne Temere_ decree.
Something should, he felt convinced, be done, and done at once.

He ground his umbrella on the step in front of the Rectory door and
pondered. At last he came to a conclusion, inspiration lighting up his
faded eyes. He tossed his head upwards.

"I must write a letter to the papers," he said. "Ireland is lost."




THE HOME-COMING


Persons:
    Mrs. Ford
    Donagh Ford
    Hugh Deely
    Agnes Deely

  Scene: A farmhouse in Connacht.

Hugh: They'll make short work of the high field. It's half ploughed
already.

Donagh: It was good of the people to gather as they did, giving us their
labour.

Hugh: The people had always a wish for your family, Donagh. Look at the
great name your father left behind him in Carrabane. It would be a fine
sight for him if he had lived to stand at this door now, looking at the
horses bringing the plough over the ground.

Donagh: And if he could move about this house, even in his great age. He
never got accustomed to the smallness of the hut down at Cussmona.

Hugh: When I was a bit of a gosoon I remember the people talking about
the eviction of Donagh Ford. It was terrible work used to be in
Carrabane those times. Your father was the first man to fight, and that
was why the people thought so well of him.

Donagh: He would never speak of it himself, for at home he was a silent,
proud man. But my mother used to be telling me of it many a time.

Hugh: Your mother and yourself have the place back now. And you have
Agnes to think of.

Donagh: Agnes is a good thought to me surely. Was she telling you we
fixed the day of the wedding yesterday at your uncle's?

Hugh: She was not. A girl like her is often shy of speaking about a
thing of that kind to her brother. I'd only be making game of her. (_A
cheer is heard in the distance outside. Hugh goes to look out door._)

Hugh: Here is the car coming up the road with your mother and Agnes.
They're giving her a welcome.

Donagh (_looking out of window_): She'll be very proud of the people,
they to have such a memory of my father.

Hugh: I'll run out and greet her. (_In a sly undertone._) Agnes is
coming up. (_He goes out laughing. Donagh hangs up harness on some pegs.
Agnes Deely, wearing a shawl over her head and carrying a basket on her
arm, comes in._)

Agnes: Donagh, your mother was greatly excited leaving the hut. I think
she doesn't rightly understand what is happening.

Donagh: I was afeard of that. The memory slips on her betimes. She
thinks she's back in the old days again.

Agnes (_going to dresser, taking parcels from the basket._): My father
was saying that we should have everything here as much like what it used
to be as we can. That's why he brought up the bin. When they were
evicted he took it up to his own place because it was too big for the
hut.

Donagh: Do you know, Agnes, when I came up here this morning with your
brother, Hugh, I felt the place strange and lonesome. I think an evicted
house is never the same, even when people go back to it. There seemed to
be some sorrow hanging over it.

Agnes (_putting up her shawl_): Now Donagh, that's no way for you to be
speaking. If you were to see how glad all the people were! And you ought
to have the greatest joy.

Donagh: Well, then I thought of you, Agnes, and that changed everything.
I went whistling about the place. (_Going to her._) After coming down
from your uncle's yesterday evening I heard the first cry of the cuckoo
in the wood at Raheen.

Agnes: That was a good omen, Donagh.

Donagh: I took it that way, too, for it was the first greeting I got
after parting from yourself. Did you hear it, Agnes?

Agnes: I did not. I heard only one sound the length of the evening.

Donagh: What sound was that, Agnes?

Agnes: I heard nothing only the singing of one song, a lovely song, all
about Donagh Ford!

Donagh: About me?

Agnes: Yes, indeed. It was no bird and no voice, but the singing I heard
of my own heart.

Donagh: That was a good song to hear, Agnes. It is like a thought that
would often stir in a man's mind and find no word to suit it. It is
often that I thought that way of you and could speak no word.

Agnes: All the same I think I would have an understanding for it,
Donagh.

Donagh: Ah, Agnes, that is just it. That is what gives me the great
comfort in your company. We have a great understanding of each other
surely.

Hugh (_speaking outside_): This is the way, Mrs. Ford. They are waiting
for you within. (_He comes in._) Donagh, here is your mother. (_Mrs.
Ford, leaning on a stick, comes to the door, standing on the threshold
for a little. Hugh and Donagh take off their hats reverently._)

Mrs. Ford: And is that you, Donagh. Well, if it is not the fine high
house you got for Agnes. Eh, pet?

Agnes (_taking shawl from her_): It is your own house Donagh has taken
you back to.

Hugh: Did you not hear the people giving you a welcome, Mrs. Ford?

Donagh: Don't you remember the house, mother?

Mrs. Ford: I have a memory of many a thing, God help me. And I heard the
people cheering. I thought maybe it was some strife was going on in
Carrabane. It was always a place of one struggle or another. (_She looks
helplessly about house, muttering as she hobbles to the bin. She raises
the lid._) Won't you take out a measure of oats to the mare, Donagh? And
they have mislaid the scoop again. I'm tired telling them not to be
leaving it in the barn. Where is that Martin Driscoll and what way is he
doing his business at all? (_She turns to close the bin._)

Hugh (_to Donagh_): Who is Martin Driscoll?

Donagh: A boy who was here long ago. I heard a story of him and a flight
with a girl. He lies in a grave in Australia long years.

Mrs. Ford (_moving from bin, her eyes catching the dresser_): Who put
the dresser there? Was it by my orders? That is a place where it will
come awkward to me.

Agnes (_going to her_): Sit down and rest yourself. You are fatigued
after making the journey.

Mrs. Ford (_as they cross to fire_): Wait until I lay eyes on Martin
Driscoll and on Delia Morrissey of the cross! I tell you I will regulate
them.

Donagh (_to Hugh_): Delia Morrissey--that is the name of the girl I
spoke of. She was lost on the voyage, a girl of great beauty.

Agnes (_to Mrs. Ford_): Did you take no stock of the people as you came
on the car?

Mrs. Ford: In throth I did. It was prime to see them there reddening the
sod and the little rain drops falling from the branches of the trees.

Hugh: They raised a great cheer for you.

Mrs. Ford: Did you say that it was to me they were giving a welcome?

Donagh: Indeed it was, mother.

Mrs. Ford (_laughing a little_): Mind that, Agnes. They are the lively
lads to be taking stock of an old woman the like of me driving the
roads.

Hugh: The people could not but feel some stir to see what they saw this
day. I declare to you, Donagh, when I saw her old stooped dark figure
thrown against the sky on the car it moved something in me.

Mrs. Ford: What are you saying about a stir in the country, Hugh Deely?

Hugh: Was it not something to see the planter going from this place? Was
it not something to see you and Donagh coming from a miserable place in
the bog?

Mrs. Ford (_sharply_): The planter, did you say? (_Clutching her stick
to rise_). Blessed be God! Is Curley the planter gone from Carrabane?
Don't make any lie to me, Hugh Deely.

Hugh: Curley is gone.

Mrs. Ford (_rising with difficulty, her agitation growing_): And his
wife? What about his trollop of a wife?

Donagh: The whole brood and tribe of them went a month back.

Agnes: Did not Donagh tell you that you were back in your own place
again? (_Mrs. Ford moves about, a consciousness of her surroundings
breaking upon her. She goes to room door, pushing it open._)

Hugh: It is all coming back to her again.

Donagh: She was only a little upset in her mind.

Mrs. Ford (_coming from room door_): Agnes, and you, Hugh Deely, come
here until I be telling you a thing of great wonder. It was in this
house Donagh there was born. And it was in that room that we laid out
his little sister, Mary. I remember the March day and the yellow flowers
they put around her in the bed. She had no strength for the rough world.
I crossed her little white hands on the breast where the life died in
her like a flame. Donagh, my son, it was nearly all going from my mind.

Agnes: This is no day for sad thoughts. Think of the great thing it is
for you to be back here again.

Mrs. Ford: Ah, that's the truth, girl. Did the world ever hear of such a
story as an old woman like me to be standing in this place and the
planter gone from Currabane! And if Donagh Ford is gone to his rest his
son is here to answer for him.

Donagh: The world knows I can never be the man my father was.

Mrs. Ford (_raising her stick with a little cry_): Ah-ha, the people saw
the great strength of Donagh Ford. 'They talk of a tenant at will,' he'd
say, 'but who is it that can chain the purpose of a man's mind.' And
they all saw it. There was no great spirit in the country when Donagh
Ford took the courage of his own heart and called the people together.

Hugh: This place was a place of great strife then.

Mrs. Ford: God send, Agnes Deely, that you'll never have the memory of a
bitter eviction burned into your mind.

Donagh: That's all over and done now, mother. There is a new life before
you.

Mrs. Ford: Well, they had their way and put us across the threshold. But
if they did it was on this hearth was kindled a blaze that swept the
townland and wrapped the country. It went from one place to another and
no wave that rose upon the Shannon could hold it back. It was a thing
that no power could check, for it ran in the blood and only wasted in
the vein of the father to leap fresh in the heart of the son. Ah, I will
go on my knees and kiss the threshold of this house for the things it
calls to mind. (_She goes to door, kneeling down and kissing the
threshold._)

Hugh: It is a great hold she has on the old days and a great spirit. (_A
low murmur of voices is heard in the distance outside._)

Donagh: They are turning the ploughs into the second field.

Mrs. Ford: What's that you say about the ploughs?

Donagh (_going to her_): The boys are breaking up the land for us. (_He
and Hugh help her to rise. They are all grouped at the door._)

Agnes: It was they who cheered you on the road.

Mrs. Ford: The sight is failing me.

Donagh. I can only make out little dark spots against the green of the
fields.

Donagh: Those are the people, mother.

Mrs. Ford (_crossing to fireplace_): The people are beginning to gather
behind the ploughs again. Tell me, Donagh, what way is the wind coming?

Donagh: It is coming up from the South.

Mrs. Ford (_speaking more to herself_): Well, I can ask no more now. The
wind is from the South and it will bear that cheer past where HE is
lying in Gurteen-na-Marbh. It is a kind wind and it carries good music.
Take my word for it every sound that goes on the wind is not lost to the
dead.

Hugh: You ought to take her out of these thoughts.

Agnes: Leave her with me for a little while. (_Hugh and Donagh move to
door._)

Mrs. Ford: Where are you going, Donagh?

Donagh: Down to the people breaking the ground. They will be waiting for
word of your home-coming.

Mrs. Ford: Ah, sure you ought to have the people up here, _a mhic_. I'd
like to see all the old neighbours about me and hear the music of their
voices.

Hugh: Very well. I'll step down and bid them up. (_He goes._)

Mrs. Ford: You'll have the anxiety of the farm on your mind from this
out, Donagh.

Donagh: Well, it is not the hut, with the hunger of the bog about it,
that I will be bringing Agnes into now.

Mrs. Ford: Agnes, come here, love, until I look upon the sweetness of
your face. (_Agnes goes to her, kneeling by her side._) You'll be in
this place with Donagh. It is a great inheritance you will have in the
name of Donagh Ford. It is no idle name that will be in this house but
the name of one who knew a great strength. It will be a long line of
generations that the name of the Fords will reach out to, generations
reaching to the time that Ireland herself will rise by the power of her
own will.

Agnes (_rising_): You will only sadden yourself by these thoughts. Think
of what there is in store for you.

Mrs. Ford: I'm an old woman now, child. There can be no fresh life
before me. But I can tell you that I was young and full of courage once.
I was the woman who stood by the side of Donagh Ford, that gave him
support in the day of trial, that was always the strong branch in the
storm and in the calm. Am I saying any word only what is a true word,
Donagh?

Donagh: The truth of that is well known to the people. (_He goes to
door._)

Mrs. Ford: Very well. Gather up all the people now, son. Let them come
in about this place for many of them have a memory of it. Let me hear
the welcome of their voices. They will have good words to say, speaking
on the greatness of Donagh Ford who is dead.

Donagh: They are coming out from the fields with Hugh, mother. I see the
young fellows falling into line. They are wearing their caps and sashes
and they have the band. I can see them carrying the banner to the front
of the crowd. Here they are marching up the road. (_The strains of a
fife and drum band playing a spirited march are heard in the distance.
Mrs. Ford rises slowly, "humouring" the march with her stick, her face
expressing her delight. The band stops._)

Mrs. Ford: That's the spirit of Carrabane. Let the people now look upon
me in this place and let them take pride in my son.

Donagh: I see Stephen Mac Donagh.

Mrs. Ford: Let him be the first across the threshold, for he went to
jail with Donagh Ford. Have beside him Murt Cooney that lost his sight
at the struggle of Ballyadams. Let him lift up his poor blind face till
I see the rapture of it.

Donagh: Murt Cooney is coming, and Francis Kilroy and Brian Mulkearn.

Mrs. Ford: It was they who put a seal of silence on their lips and bore
their punishment to save a friend of the people. Have a place beside me
for the widow of Con Rafferty who hid the smoking revolver the day the
tyrant fell at the cross of Killbrack.

Donagh: All the old neighbours are coming surely.

Mrs. Ford (_crossing slowly to door, Agnes going before her_): Let me
look into their eyes for the things I will see stirring there. I will
reach them out the friendship of my hands and speak to them the words
that lie upon my heart. The rafters of this house will ring again with
the voices that Donagh Ford welcomed and that I loved. Aye, the very
fire on the hearth will leap in memory of the hands that tended it.

Donagh: This will be such a day as will be made a boast of for ever in
Carrabane. (_Agnes goes out door to meet the people._)

Mrs. Ford: Let there be music and the sound of rejoicing and shouts from
the hills. Let those who put their feet in anger upon us and who are
themselves reduced to-day look back upon the strength they held and the
power they lost.

Donagh: I will bid the music play up. (_He goes out._)

Mrs. Ford (_standing alone at the door_): People of Carrabane, gather
about the old house of Donagh Ford. Let the fight for the land in this
place end where it began. Let the courage and the strength that Donagh
Ford knew be in your blood from this day out. Let the spirit be good and
the hand be strong for the work that the heart directs. Raise up your
voices with my voice this day and let us make a great praise on the
name of Ireland. (_She raises her stick, straightening her old figure.
The band strikes up and the people cheer outside as the curtain falls._)




A WAYSIDE BURIAL


The parish priest was in a very great hurry and yet anxious for a talk
on his pet subject. He wanted to speak about the new temperance hall.
Would I mind walking a little way with him while he did so? He had a
great many things to attend to that day.... We made our way along the
street together, left the town behind us, and presently reached that
sinister appendage of all Irish country towns, the workhouse. The priest
turned in the wide gate, and the porter, old, official, spectacled, came
to meet him.

"Has the funeral gone?" asked the priest, a little breathless.

"I'll see, Father." The porter shuffled over the flags, a great door
swung open; there was a vista of whitewashed walls, a chilly, vacant
corridor, and beyond it a hall where old men were seated on forms at a
long, white deal table. They were eating--a silent, grey, bent, beaten
group. Through a glass partition we could see the porter in his office
turning over the leaves of a great register.

"I find," he said, coming out again, speaking as if he were giving
evidence at a sworn inquiry, "that the remains of Martin Quirke,
deceased, were removed at 4.15."

"I am more than half an hour late," said the priest, regarding his watch
with some irritation.

We hurried out and along the road to the country, the priest trailing
his umbrella behind him, speaking of the temperance hall but preoccupied
about the funeral he had missed, my eyes marking the flight of flocks of
starlings making westward.

Less than a mile of ground brought us to the spot where the paupers were
buried. It lay behind a high wall, a narrow strip of ground, cut off
from a great lord's demesne by a wood. The scent of decay was heavy in
the place; it felt as if the spring and the summer had dragged their
steps here, to lie down and die with the paupers. The uncut grass lay
rank and grey and long--Nature's unkempt beard--on the earth. The great
bare chestnuts and oaks threw narrow shadows over the irregular mounds
of earth. Small, rude wooden crosses stood at the heads of some of the
mounds, lopsided, drunken, weather-beaten. No names were inscribed upon
them. All the bones laid down here were anonymous. A robin was singing
at the edge of the wood; overhead the rapid wings of wild pigeons beat
the air.

A stable bell rang impetuously in the distance, dismissing the workmen
on the lord's demesne. By a freshly-made grave two gravediggers were
leaning on their spades. They were paupers, too; men who got some
privilege for their efforts in this dark strip of earth between the wood
and the wall. One of them yawned. A third man stood aloof, a minor
official from the workhouse; he took a pipe from his mouth as the priest
approached.

The three men gave one the feeling that they were rather tired of
waiting, impatient to have their little business through. It was a
weird spot in the gathering gloom of a November evening. The only bright
thing in the place, the only gay spot, the only cheerful patch of
colour, almost exulting in its grim surroundings, was the heap of
freshly thrown up soil from the grave. It was rich in colour as
newly-coined gold. Resting upon it was a clean, white, unpainted coffin.
The only ornament was a tin breastplate on the lid and the inscription
in black letters:

    Martin Quirke,
    Died November 3, 1900.
    R.I.P.

The white coffin on the pile of golden earth was like the altar of some
pagan god. I stood apart as the priest, vesting himself in a black
stole, approached the graveside and began the recital of the burial
service in Latin. The gravediggers, whose own bones would one day be
interred anonymously in the same ground, stood on either side of him
with their spades, two grim acolytes. The minor official from the
workhouse, the symbol of the State, bared a long, narrow head, as white
and as smooth as the coffin on the heap of earth. I stood by a groggy
wooden cross, the eternal observer.

The priest spoke in a low monotone, holding the book close to his eyes
in the uncertain light. And as he read I fell to wondering who our
brother in the white coffin might be. Some merry tramp who knew the pain
and the joy of the road? Some detached soul who had shaken off the
burden of life's conventions, one who loved lightly and took punishment
casually? One who saw crime as a science, or merely a broken reed? Or a
soldier who had carried a knapsack in foreign campaigns? A creature of
empire who had found himself in Africa, or Egypt, or India, or the
Crimea, and come back again to claim his pile of golden earth in the
corner of the lord's demesne? If the men had time, perhaps they would
stick a little wooden cross over the spot where his bones were laid
down....

The priest's voice continued the recitation of the burial service and
the robin sang at the edge of the dim wood. Down the narrow strip of
rank burial ground a low wind cried, and the light, losing its glow in
the western sky, threw a grey pall on the grass. And under the influence
of the moment a little memory of people I had known and forgotten went
across my mind, a memory that seemed to stir in the low wind, a memory
of people who had at the last got their white, clean coffin and their
rest on a pile of golden earth, people who had gone like our brother in
the deal boards.... There was the man, the scholar, who had taught his
school, who had an intelligence, who could talk, who, perhaps, could
have written only--. The wind sobbed down the narrow strip of ground....
He had made his battle, indeed, a long-drawn-out battle, for he had only
given way step by step, gradually but inexorably yielding ground to the
thing that was hunting him out of civilised life. He had gone from his
school, his home, his friends, fleeing from one miserable refuge to
another in the miserable country town. Eventually he had passed in
through the gates of the workhouse. It was all very vivid now--his
attempts to get back to the life he had known, like a man struggling in
the quicksands. There were the little spurts back to the town, the
well-shaped head, the face which still held some remembrance of its
distinction and its manhood erect over the quaking, broken frame; that
splendid head like a noble piece of sculpture on the summit of a
crumbling ruin. Forth he would come, the flicker of resistance, a pallid
battle-light in the eyes, a vessel that had been all but wrecked once
more standing up the harbour to meet the winds that had driven it from
the seas--and after a little battle once more taking in the sheets and
crawling back to the anchorage of the dark workhouse, there to suffer in
the old way, in secret to curse, to pray, to despair, to hope, to
contrive some little repairs to the broken physique in order that there
might be yet another journey into waters that were getting more and more
shadowy. And the day came when the only journey that could be made was a
shuffle to the gate, the haunted eyes staring into a world which was a
nightmare of regrets. How terrible was the pathos of that life, that
struggle, that tragedy, how poignant its memory while the robin sang at
the edge of the dim wood!... And there was that red-haired, defiant
young man with the build of an athlete, the eyes of an animal. How
bravely he could sing up the same road to the dark house! It was to him
as the burrow is to the rabbit. He would come out to nibble at the
regular and lawful intervals, and having nibbled return to sleep and
shout and fight for his "rights" in the dark house. And once, on a
spring day, he had come out with a companion, a pale woman in a thin
shawl and a drab skirt, and they had taken to the roads together,
himself swinging his ashplant, his stride and manner carrying the
illusion of purpose, his eyes on everything and his mind nowhere;
herself trotting over the broken stones in her canvas shoes beside him,
a pale shadow under the fire of his red head. They had gone away into a
road whose milestones were dark houses, himself singing the song of his
own life, a song of mumbled words, without air or music; herself silent,
clutching her thin shawl over her breast, her feet pattering over the
little stones of the road.... The wind whistled down over the graves, by
the wooden crosses.... There was that little woman who at the close of
the day, when the light was charitable in its obscurity, opened her door
and came down from the threshold of her house, painfully as if she were
descending from a great height. Nobody was about. All was quietness in
the quiet street. And she drew the door to, put the key in the lock, her
hand trembled, the lock clicked! The deed was done! Who but herself
could know that the click of the key in the lock was the end, the close,
the dreadful culmination of the best part of a whole century of
struggle, of life? Behind that door she had swept up a bundle of
memories that were now all an agony because the key had clicked in the
lock. Behind the door was the story of her life and the lives of her
children and her children's children. Where was the use, she might have
asked, of blaming any of them now? What was it that they had all gone,
all scattered, leaving her broken there at the last? Had not the key
clicked in the lock? In that click was the end of it all; in the empty
house were the ghosts of her girlhood, her womanhood, her motherhood,
her old age, her struggles, her successes, her skill in running her
little shop, her courage in riding one family squall after another! The
key had clicked in the lock. She moved down the quiet street, sensitive
lest the eye of the neighbours should see her, a tottering, broken thing
going by the vague walls, keeping to the back streets, setting out for
the dark house beyond the town. She had said to them, "I will be no
trouble to you." And, indeed, she was not. They had little more to do
for her than join her hands over her breast.... The wind was plaintive
in the gaunt trees of the dark wood.... Which of us could say he would
never turn a key in the lock of an empty house? How many casual little
twists of the wrist of Fate stand between the best of us and the step
down from the threshold of a broken home? What rags of memories have any
of us to bundle behind the door of the empty house when the hour comes
for us to click the key in the lock?... The wind cried down the narrow
strip of ground where the smell of decay was in the grass.

There was a movement beside the white coffin, the men were lifting it
off the golden pile of earth and lowering it into the dark pit. The
men's feet slipped and shuffled for a foothold in the yielding clay. At
last a low, dull thud sounded up from the mouth of the pit. Our brother
in the white coffin had at last found a lasting tenure in the soil.

The official from the dark house moved over to me. He spoke in whispers,
holding the hat an official inch of respect for the dead above the
narrow white shred of his skull.

"Martin Quirke they are burying," he said.

"Who was he?"

"Didn't you ever hear tell of Martin Quirke?"

"No, never."

"A big man he was one time, with his acres around him and his splendid
place. Very proud people they were--he and his brother--and very hot,
too. The Quirkes of Ballinadee."

"And now--"

I did not finish the sentence. The priest was spraying the coffin in the
grave with the golden earth.

"Ashes to ashes and dust to dust." It fell briskly on the shallow deal
timber.

"'Twas the land agitation, the fight for the land, that brought Martin
Quirke down," said the official as the earth sprayed the pauper's
coffin. "He was one of the first to go out under the Plan of
Campaign--the time of the evictions. They never got back their place.
When the settlement came the Quirkes were broken. Martin lost his spirit
and his heart. Drink it was that got him in the end, and now--"

"Requiem aeternam dona eis, Domine: et lux perpetua luceat eis," the
priest's voice said.

"All the same," said the official, "It was men like Martin Quirke who
broke the back of landlordism. He was strong and he was weak. God rest
him!"

I walked away over the uneven ground, the memory of the land agitation,
its bitterness and its passion, oppressing me. Stories of things such as
this stalked the country like ghosts.

The priest overtook me, and we turned to leave. Down the narrow strip of
the lord's demesne were the little pauper mounds, like narrow boxes
wrapped in the long grey grass. Their pathos was almost vibrant in the
dim November light. And away beyond them were a series of great heaps,
looking like broad billows out to sea. The priest stood for a moment.

"You see the great mounds at the end?" he asked. "They are the Famine
Pits."

"The Famine Pits?"

"Yes; the place where the people were buried in heaps and hundreds, in
thousands, during the Famine of '46 and '47. They died like flies by the
roadside. You see such places in almost every part of Ireland. I hope
the people will never again die like that--die gnawing the gravel on the
roadside."

The rusty iron gate in the demesne wall swung open and we passed out.




THE GRAY LAKE


"I can see every colour in the water except gray," said the lady who was
something of a sceptic.

"That," said the humorist, tilting back his straw hat, "is the very
reason they call it the Gray Lake. The world bristles with misnomers."

"Which explains," said the lady sceptic, "why they call Eamonn a
_seannachie_."

"Hi!" called out the humorist. "Do you hear that, Eamonn?"

"_Cad ta ort?_" asked Eamonn. He had been leaning out over the prow of
the boat, looking vaguely into the water, and now turned round. Eamonn
was always asking people, "_Cad ta ort?_" and before they had time to
answer he was saying, or thinking, something else.

"Why do they call this the Gray Lake?" asked the lady sceptic. "It never
looked really gray, did it?"

"Of course it did," said Eamonn. "The first man who ever saw it beheld
it in the gray light of dawn, and so he called it _Baile Loch Riabhach_,
the Town of the Gray Lough."

"When might that be?" asked the lady sceptic drily.

"The morning after the town was drowned," said Eamonn.

"What town?"

"The town we are now rowing over."

"Good heavens! Is there a town beneath us?"

"_Seadh_", said Eamonn. "Just now I was trying if I could see anything
of the ruins at the bottom of the lake."

"And you did, of course."

"I think so."

"What did you see?"

"Confusion and the vague, glimmering gable of a house or two. Then the
oars splashed and the water became dense."

"But tell us how the town came to be at the bottom of the lake," said
the man who rowed, shipping his oars. The boat rocked in the quick wash
of the waves. The water was warming in vivid colours under the glow of
the sunset. Eamonn leaned back in his seat at the prow of the boat. His
eyes wandered away over the water to the slope of meadows, the rise of
hills.

"_Anois, Eamonn_," said the lady sceptic, still a little drily. "The
story!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Long and long ago, said Eamonn, there was a sleepy old town lying snug
in the dip of a valley. It was famous for seven of the purest springs of
water which ever sparkled in the earth. They called it the Seven
Sisters. Round the springs they built an immense and costly well. Over
the well was a great leaden lid of extraordinary weight, and by a
certain mechanical device this lid was closed on the well every evening
at sundown. The springs became abnormally active between sundown and
sunrise, so that there was always a danger that they might flood the
valley and destroy the people. As security against this the citizens had
built the great well with its monster lid, and each evening the lid was
locked over the well by means of a secret lock and a secret key.

The most famous person in the town of the Seven Sisters was the Keeper
of the Key. He was a man of dignified bearing, important airs, wearing
white silk knee-breeches, a green swallow-tail coat, and a cocked hat.
On the sleeve of his coat was embroidered in gold the image of a key and
seven sprays of water. He had great privileges and authority, and could
condemn or reprieve any sort of criminal except, of course, a sheep
stealer. He lived in a mansion beside the town, and this mansion was
almost as famous as the seven famous springs. People travelled from far
places to see it. A flight of green marble steps led to a broad door of
oak. On the broad oaken door he had fashioned one of the most remarkable
knockers and the most beautiful door knob that were known to Europe.
Both were of beaten gold. The knocker was wrought in the shape of a key.
The door knob was a group of seven water nymphs. A sensation was created
which agitated all Ireland when this work of art was completed by five
of the foremost goldsmiths in the land. The Keeper of the Key of the
Seven Sisters issued a Proclamation declaring that there was a flaw in
the rounding of one of the ankles of the group of seven water nymphs. He
had the five goldsmiths suddenly arrested and put on their trial. "The
Gael," said the Keeper of the Key, "must be pure-blooded in his art. I
am of the Clann Gael, I shall not allow any half-artist to come to my
door, there work under false pretence and go unpunished." The goldsmiths
protested that their work was the work of artists and flawless as the
design. Not another word would they be allowed to speak. Bards and
artists, scholars and men skilled in controversy, flocked from all parts
to see the door knob. A terrible controversy ensued. Sides were taken,
some for, others against, the ankle of the water nymph. They came to be
known as the Ankleites and the anti-Ankleites. And in that tremendous
controversy the Keeper of the Key proved the masterly manner of man he
was. He had the five goldsmiths convicted for failure as supreme
artists, and they were sentenced to banishment from the country. On
their way from the shore to the ship that was to bear them away their
curragh sprang a sudden leak, and they were all drowned. That was the
melancholy end of the five chief goldsmiths of Eirinn.

Every morning at daybreak trumpets were blown outside the mansion of
the Keeper of the Key. The gates of a courtyard swung open and out
marched an armed guard, men in saffron kilts, bearing spears and swords.
They formed up before the flight of marble steps. A second fanfare of
the trumpets, and back swung the great oaken door, disclosing the Keeper
of the Key in his bright silks and cocked hat. Out he would come on the
doorstep, no attendants by him, and pulling to the great door by the
famous knob he would descend the marble steps, the guard would take up
position, and, thus escorted, he would cross the drawbridge of the moat
and enter the town of the Seven Sisters, marching through the streets to
the great well. People would have gathered there even at that early
hour, women bearing vessels to secure their supply of the water, which,
it was said, had an especial virtue when taken at the break of day. No
mortal was allowed nearer than fifty yards to the well while the Keeper
proceeded to unlock the lid. His guard would stand about, and with a
haughty air he would approach the well solus. The people would see him
make some movements, and back would slide the enormous lid. A blow on
the trumpets proclaimed that the well was open, and the people would
approach it, laughing and chattering, and the Keeper of the Key would
march back to his mansion in the same military order, ascend the steps,
push open the great door, and the routine of daily life would ensue. For
the closing of the well at sundown a similar ceremony was observed. The
only additional incident was the marching of a crier through the
streets, beating great wooden clappers, and standing at each street
corner calling out in a loud voice: "Hear ye people that the lock is on
the Seven Sisters. All's well!"

In those days there was a saying among the people which was in common
usage all over Ireland. When a man became possessed of any article or
property to which he had a doubtful title his neighbours said, with a
significant wag of the head, "He got it where the Keeper gets the Key."
This saying arose out of a mysterious thing in the life of the Keeper of
the Key. Nobody ever saw the secret key. It was not in his hands when he
came forth from the mansion morning and evening to fulfil his great
office. He did not carry it in his pockets, for the simple reason that
he had had no pockets. He kept no safe nor secret panel nor any private
drawer in his mansion that the most observant among his retainers could
espy. Yet that there was a secret key, and that it was inserted in a
lock, anybody could see for himself, even at a distance of fifty yards,
twice a day at the well. It was as if at that moment the key came into
his hand out of the air and again vanished into air when the proper
business was over. Indeed, there were people of even those remote and
enlightened days who attributed some wizardy to the Keeper of the Key.
It added to the awe in which he was held and to the sense of security
which the proceedings of his whole life inspired in his fellow-citizens.
Nevertheless had the Keeper of the Key his enemies. A man of distinction
and power can no more tread the paths of his ambitions without stirring
up rivalries and hostilities than can the winds howl across the earth
and leave the dust on the roads undisturbed. The man who assumes power
will always, sooner or later, have his power to hold put to the test. So
it was with the Keeper of the Key. There were people who nursed the
ambition of laying hands on the secret key. That secured, they would be
lords of the town of the Seven Sisters. The reign of the great Keeper
would be over. His instinct told him that these dangers were always
about. He was on the alert. He had discovered treachery even within the
moat of his own keep. His servants and guards had been tampered with.
But all the attempts upon his key and his power had been in vain. He
kept to the grand unbroken simplicity of his masterly routine. He had
crushed his enemies whenever they had arisen. "One who has survived the
passions of Ireland's poets," he would say--for the poets had all been
Ankleites--"is not likely to bow the knee before snivelling little
thieves." A deputation which had come to him proposing that the well
should be managed by a constitutional committee of the citizens was
flogged by the guards across the drawbridge. The leader of this
deputation was a deformed tailor, who soon after planned an audacious
attack on the mansion of the Keeper of the Key. The Keeper, his guards,
servants and retainers were all one night secretly drugged and for
several hours of the night lay unconscious in the mansion. Into it
swarmed the little tailor and his constitutional committee; they pulled
the whole interior to pieces in search of the key. The very pillows
under the head of the Keeper had been stabbed and ransacked. It was
nearing daybreak when the Keeper awoke, groggy from the effects of the
narcotic. The guard was roused. The whole place was in confusion. The
robbers had fled, leaving the great golden knocker on the door hanging
from its position; they were removing it when surprised. The nymphs were
untouched. The voice of the Keeper of the Key was deliberate,
authoritative, commanding, amid the confusion. The legs of the guards
quaked beneath them, their heads swam, and they said to each other, "Now
surely is the key gone!" But their master hurried them to their morning
duty, and they escorted him to the well a little beyond daybreak, and,
lo, at the psychological moment, there was the key and back rolled the
lid from the precious well. "Surely," they said, "this man is blessed,
for the key comes to him as a gift from Heaven. The robbers of the earth
are powerless against him." When the citizens of the Seven Sisters
heard of what had taken place in the evil hours of the night they poured
across the drawbridge from the town and acclaimed the Keeper of the Key
before his mansion. He came out on the watch tower, his daughter by his
side, and with dignified mien acknowledged the acclamations of the
citizens. And before he put the lid on the well that night the deformed
tailor and his pards were all dragged through the streets of the Seven
Sisters and cast into prison.

Never was the popularity of the Keeper at so high a level as after this
episode. They would have declared him the most perfect as the most
powerful of men were it not for one little spot on the bright sun of his
fame. They did not like his domestic habits. The daughter who stood by
his side on the watch tower was a young girl of charm, a fair, frail
maiden, a slender lily under the towering shadow of her dark father. The
citizens did not, perhaps, understand his instincts of paternity; and,
indeed, if they understood them they would not have given them the
sanction of their approval. The people only saw that the young girl, his
only child, was condemned to what they called a life of virtual
imprisonment in the mansion. She was a warm-blooded young creature, and
like all warm-blooded creatures, inclined to gaiety of spirits, to
impulsive friendships to a joyous and engaging frankness. These traits,
the people saw, the father disapproved of and checked, and the young
girl was regarded with great pity. "Ah," they would say, "he is a
wonderful Keeper of the Key, but, alas, how harsh a father!" He would
not allow the girl any individual freedom; she was under eternal escort
when abroad; she was denied the society of those of her years; she was a
flower whose fragrance it was not the privilege of the people to enjoy.
It may be that the people, in murmuring against all this, did not make
sufficient allowance for the circumstances of the life of the Keeper of
the Key. He was alone, he stood apart from all men. His only passion in
life had been the strict guardianship of a trust. In these circumstances
his affections for his only child were direct and crude and, too, maybe
a little unconsciously harsh. His love for his child was the love of the
oyster for its pearl. The people saw nothing but the rough, tight
shells which closed about the treasure in the mansion of the Keeper of
the Key. More than one considerable wooer had approached that mansion,
laying claim to the pearl which it held. All were met with the same
terrible dark scowl and sent about their business. "You, sir," the
Keeper of the Key would say, "come to my door, knock upon my knocker,
lay hands upon my door knob--my golden door knob--and ask for my
daughter's hand! Sir, your audacity is your only excuse. Let it also be
your defence against my wrath. Now, sir, a very good day!" And when the
citizens heard that yet another gallant wooer had come and been
dismissed they would say, "The poor child, the poor child, what a pity!"

The truth was that the daughter of the Keeper of the Key was not in the
least unhappy. She had a tremendous opinion of her father; she lavished
upon him all the warm affection of her young ardour. She reigned like a
young queen within the confines of her home. She was about the gardens
and the grounds all day, as joyous as a bird. Once or twice her
governess gave her some inkling as to the suitors who came to the
mansion requesting her hand, for that is an affair that cannot be kept
from the most jealously-guarded damsel. The governess had a sense of
humour and entertained the girl with accounts of the manner of lovers
who, as she put it, washed up the marble steps of the mansion to the oak
door, like waves on a shore, and were sent back again into the ocean of
rejections. The young girl was much amused and secretly flattered at
these events. "Ah," she would say, in a little burst of rapture, "how
splendid is my father!" The pearl rejoices in the power of the oyster to
shut it away from the world.

Now (continued Eamonn), on the hilly slopes of the country called
Sunnach there was a shepherd boy, and people who saw that he was a rare
boy in looks and intelligence were filled with pity for his unhappy lot.
The bodach for whom he herded was a dour, ill-conditioned fellow, full
of curses and violent threats, but the boy was content in the life of
the hillsides, and troubled very little about the bodach's dour looks.
"Some day," he would say to himself laughingly, "I will compose terrible
verses about his black mouth." One day the shepherd boy drove a little
flock of the bodach's lively sheep to the fair in the town of the Seven
Sisters. As he passed the mansion of the Keeper of the Key he cried out,
"How up! how up! how up!" His voice was clear and full, the notes as
round and sweet as the voice of the cuckoo. The daughter of the Keeper
of the Key was seated by a window painting a little picture when she
heard the "How up!" of the shepherd's voice. "What beautiful calls!" she
exclaimed, and leaned out from the window. At the same moment the
shepherd boy looked up. He was bare-headed and wore his plaids. His head
was a shock of curly straw-coloured hair, his face eager, clear-cut, his
eyes golden-brown and bright as the eyes of a bird. He smiled and the
damsel smiled. "How up! how up! how up!" he sang out joyously to his
flock as he moved down to the fair. The damsel went back to her little
picture and sat there for some time staring at her palette and mixing
the wrong colours.

That evening the Keeper of the Key, as was his custom, escorted his
daughter on his arm, servants before and behind them, through the town
of the Seven Sisters, viewing such sights of the fair as were agreeable
and doing a little shopping. The people, seeing the great man coming,
made way for him on the paths, and bowed and smiled to him as he passed.
He walked with great dignity, and his daughter's beauty made the
bystanders say, "Happy will it be for the lucky man!" Among those they
encountered was the shepherd boy, and he gazed upon the damsel with
rapture in his young eyes. He followed them about the town at a
respectful distance, and back to their mansion. The shepherd boy did not
return to the hilly country called Sunnach that night, nor the next
night, nor for many a long day and night. He remained in the town of the
Seven Sisters, running on errants, driving carts, doing such odd jobs as
came his way, and all because he wanted to gaze upon the daughter of the
Keeper of the Key. In the evening he would go by the mansion singing
out, "How up! how up! how up!" as if he were driving flocks past. And in
the window he would see the wave of a white hand. He would go home,
then, to his little back room in the lodging-house, and there stay up
very late at night, writing, in the candle-light, verses to the damsel.
One Song of the Shepherd Boy to his Lady has survived:

  _Farewell to the sweet reed I tuned on the hill,
  My grief for the rough slopes of Sunnach so still,
  The wind in the fir tree and bleat of the ewe
  Are lost in the wild cry my heart makes for you.
  The brown floors I danced on, the sheds where I lay,
  Are gone from my mind like a wing in the bay:
  Dear lady, I'd herd the wild swans in the skies
  If they knew of lake water as blue as your eyes!_

Well, it was not very long, as you can imagine, until the Keeper of the
Key observed the shepherd boy loitering about the mansion. When he heard
him calling past the house to imaginary flocks a scowl came upon his
face. "Ah-ha!" he said, "another conspiracy! Last time it was a
hunchback tailor. This time they come from the country. They signal by
the cries of shepherds. Well, I shall do the driving for them!" There
and then he had the shepherd boy apprehended, bound, and put in a cell.
In due course he was accused and sentenced, like the famous goldsmiths,
to banishment from Eirinn. When the daughter of the Keeper heard what
had come to pass she was filled with grief. She appeared before her
father for the first time with tears in her eyes and woe in her face. He
was greatly moved, and seated the girl by his side. She knelt by his
knee and confessed to the whole affair with the shepherd boy. The Keeper
of the Key was a little relieved to learn that his suspicions of a fresh
conspiracy were unfounded, but filled with indignation that such a
person as a shepherd should not alone aspire to but win the heart of his
daughter. "What have we come to," he said, "when a wild thing from the
hills of Sunnach comes down and dares to lay his hand on the all but
perfect water nymphs on the golden knob of my door! Justice shall be
done. The order of banishment is set aside. Let this wild hare of the
hills, this mountain rover, be taken and seven times publicly dipped in
the well. I guarantee that will cool him! He shall then have until break
of day to clear out of my town. Let him away back to the swine on the
hills." The girl pleaded that the boy might be spared the frightful
indignity of a public dipping in the well of the Seven Sisters, but her
father was implacable. "Have I not spoken?" he said sternly, and the
damsel was led away by her governess in tears.

The people flocked to the well as they might to a Feis to see the
dipping of the shepherd boy. Cries of merriment arose among them when
the boy, bound in strips of hide, was lowered by the servants of the
Keeper of the Key into the mouth of the great well. It was a cold, dark,
creepy place down in the shaft of the well, the walls reeking, covered
with slimy green lichen, the waters roaring. The shepherd boy closed his
eyes and gave himself up for lost. But the Seven Sisters of the well
kept moving down as fast as the servants told out the rope, until at
last they could not lower him any farther. The servants danced the rope
up and down seven times, and the people screamed and clapped their
hands, crying out, "All those who write love verses come to a bad end!"
But the poet was never yet born who had not a friend greater than all
his enemies. At that moment the spirits of the Seven Sisters rose out of
the water and spoke to the shepherd boy.

"O shepherd boy," they said, "the Keeper of the Key is also our enemy.
We were created for something better than this narrow shaft. We cry out
in bitter pain the long hours of the night."

"Why do you cry out in bitter pain?" asked the shepherd boy.

"Because," said the spirits of the Seven Sisters, "we want to leap out
of this cold place to meet our lover, the moon. Every night he comes
calling to us and we dare not respond. We are locked away under the
heavy lid. We can never gather our full strength to burst our way to
liberty. We dream of the pleasant valley. We want to get out into it,
to make merry about the trees, to sport in the warm places, to lip the
edge of the green meadows, to water pleasant gardens. We want to see the
flowers, to flash in the sun, to dance under the spread of great
branches, to make snug, secret places for the pike and the otter, to
pile up the coloured pebbles, and hear the water-hen splashing in the
rushes. And above all, we want to meet our lover, the moon, to roll
about in his beams, to reach for his kiss in the harvest nights. O
shepherd boy, take us from our prison well!"

"O Seven Sisters," asked the shepherd boy, "how can I do this for you?"

"Secure the secret key," they said. "Open the lid while we are at our
full strength in the night."

"Alas," said the shepherd boy, "that I cannot do. The Keeper has made of
it a magic thing."

"We know his great secret," said the spirits of the Seven Sisters.
"Swear to set us free and we shall tell you the secret of the key."

"And what reward shall I have?" asked the shepherd boy.

"You shall have the hand of the daughter of the Keeper of the Key, the
Lady of your Songs," they said. "Take her back to the hills where you
were so happy. We shall spare you when we are abroad."

"Then," said the shepherd boy, "I swear to release you."

"The Keeper of the Key," said the spirits of the Seven Sisters, "has a
devil lurking behind the fine manners of his body. In secret he laughs
at the people. He has the blood of the five goldsmiths on his hands. It
was by his connivance the curragh sprang a leak, and that they were
drowned. They were true artists, of the spirit of the Gael. But they
alone knew his secret, and he made away with them before they could
speak. His great controversy on the water nymphs was like a spell cast
over the minds of the people to cover his crime."

"What a demon!" cried the shepherd boy.

"The key of the well," said the spirits of the Seven Sisters, "is
concealed in the great golden knob of the oaken door, and upon that has
concentrated the greatest public scrutiny which has ever beaten upon a
door-knob in the story of the whole world. Such has been the craft of
the Keeper of the Key! When he comes out in the morning and evening, and
while drawing the door after him, he puts a finger on the third toe of
the fourth water nymph. This he presses three times, quick as a
pulse-beat, and, lo, a hidden spring is released and shoots the key into
the loose sleeve of his coat. On returning he puts his hand on the
golden knob, presses the second toe of the third water nymph, and the
key slides back into its hidden cavity. This secret was alone known to
the goldsmiths. They went to the bottom of the sea with it. In this way
has the Keeper of the Key held his power and defied his enemies. When
the scholars were making epigrams and the bards warming into great
cadences on the art of the ankle of the water nymph, this Keeper of the
Key would retire to his watch-tower and roll about in secret merriment."

"What a fiend!" cried the shepherd boy.

"He had caused to be painted in his room a scroll surrounded by
illuminated keys and nymphs and tumbling cascades, and bearing the
words, 'Let us praise the art which conceals art; but let us love the
art which conceals power.'"

"What a monster!" cried the shepherd boy.

"In this way," said the spirits of the Seven Sisters, "has he lived. In
this way has he been able to keep us from our freedom, our lover. O
shepherd boy--"

Before another word could be spoken the shepherd boy was drawn up on the
rope. The water rose with him and lapped lightly over his person so that
he might seem as if he had been plunged deeply into the well.

When he was drawn up to the side or the well the shepherd boy lay on the
ground, his eyes closed, feigning great distress. The people again
clapped their hands, and some cried out, "Now little water rat, make us
a new verse!" But others murmured in pity, and an old peasant woman, in
a Breedeen cloak, hobbled to his side and smoothed back his locks. At
the touch of her soft hands the shepherd boy opened his eyes, and he saw
it was the daughter of the Keeper of the Key disguised. With the
connivance of her governess, she had escaped from the mansion as an old
peasant woman in a cloak. The shepherd boy secretly kissed her little
palms and whispered, "I must come to you at midnight. As you value your
life have the guards taken from the outer door, only for two minutes.
Make some pretext. I will give the shepherd's call and then you must
act. Do not fail me."

Before more could be said the servants roughly bundled the old peasant
woman aside, carried the shepherd boy to his lodgings, and there threw
him on his bed. "Remember," they said, "that you remain within the walls
of the town of the Seven Sisters after break of day at your peril."

At midnight the shepherd boy arose and approached the mansion of the
Keeper of the Key. He could see the two grim guards, one each side of
the oaken door. Standing some way off he gave the shepherd's call,
making his voice sound like the hoot of an owl. In a little time he saw
the guards move away from the door; they went to a side entrance in the
courtyard, and presently he could hear them laughing, as if some
entertainment was being provided for them; then measures were passed
through the iron bars of the gate to them, and these they raised to
their lips. At this the shepherd boy ran swiftly up the steps,
approached the door, and pressed three times, quick as a pulse-beat, the
third toe of the fourth water nymph, and immediately from a secret
cavity in the knob a curious little golden key was shot forth. This the
shepherd boy seized, flew down the steps, and scaled over the town wall.
He ran to the great well and stooped over the lid. He could hear the
Seven Sisters twisting and worming and striving beneath it, little cries
of pain breaking from them. Overhead the moon was shining down on the
well.

"O Seven Sisters," said the Shepherd boy, "I have come to give you to
your lover."

He could hear a great cry of joy down in the well. He put the key in the
lock, turned it, and immediately there was the gliding and slipping of
one steel bar after another into an oil bath. The great lid slowly
revolved, moving away from over the well. The Seven Sisters did the
rest. They sprang with a peal of the most delirious laughter--laughter
that was of the underground, the cavern, the deep secret places of the
earth, laughter of elfs and hidden rivers--to the light of the moon. The
shepherd boy could see seven distinct spiral issues of sparkling water
and they took the shape of nymphs, more exquisite than anything he had
ever seen even in his dreams. Something seemed to happen in the very
heavens above; the moon reached down from the sky, swiftly and tenderly,
and was so dazzling that the shepherd boy had to turn his face away. He
knew that in the blue spaces of the firmament overhead the moon was
embracing the Seven Sisters. Then he ran, ran like the wind, for already
the water was shrieking down the streets of the town. As he went he
could see lights begin to jump in dark windows and sleepy people in
their night attire coming to peer out into the strange radiance outside.

As he reached the drawbridge he saw that the men had already lowered it,
and there was a great rustling noise and squealing; and what he took to
be a drift of thick dust driven by the wind was gushing over it, making
from the town. A few more yards and he saw that it was not thick brown
dust, but great squads of rats flying the place. The trumpets were all
blowing loud blasts when he reached the mansion of the Keeper of the
Key, the guards with their spears pressing out under the arch of the
courtyard, and servants coming out the doors. The great oak door flew
open and he saw the Keeper of the Key, a candle in his quaking hand. A
great crying could now be heard coming up from the population of the
town. The water was bursting open the doors of the houses as if they
were cardboard.

"O Keeper of the Key," cried the shepherd boy, "the Seven Sisters are
abroad. I am obeying your command and returning to the swine on the
hills. The despised Sunnach will be in the dreams of many to-night!"

The candle fell from the hand of the Keeper of the Key, and he could be
seen in the moonlight groping for the door-knob, his hand on the figures
of the group of water nymphs. In a moment he gave a low moan and, his
head hanging over his breast, he staggered down the marble steps.
"Alas," cried the guards, "now is the great man broken!" He made for the
drawbridge crying out, "The lid, the lid. Slide it back over the well!"
The guards and servants pressed after him, but not one of them ever got
into the town again. Across the bridge was now pouring a wild rush of
human panic. Carriages, carts, cars, horsemen, mules, donkeys, were
flying from the Seven Sisters laden with men and women and whole
families. Crowds pressed forward on foot. Animals, dogs, cats, pigs,
sheep, cows, came pellmell with them. Drivers stood in their seats
flaying their horses as if driven by madness. The animals rolled their
eyes, snorted steam from their nostrils, strained forward with desperate
zeal. Once or twice the struggling mass jammed, and men fought each
other like beasts. The cries of people being trampled to death broke out
in harrowing protest. For a moment the shepherd boy saw the form of a
priest rise up, bearing aloft the stark outline of a cross, and then he
disappeared.

Over that night of terror was the unnatural brilliance of the swoollen
moon. All this the shepherd boy saw in a few eternal moments. Then he
cried out, "How up! how up! how up!" and immediately the damsel tripped
down the broad staircase of the mansion, dressed in white robes, her
hair loose about her shoulders. Never had she looked so frail and
beautiful, the lily of the valley! The shepherd boy told her what had
come to pass. She cried out for her father. "I am the daughter of the
Keeper of the Key," she said. "I shall stand by his side at the well in
this great hour."

"I am now the master of the town of the Seven Sisters," said the
shepherd boy. "I am the Keeper of the Key." And he held up the secret
key.

The damsel, seeing this, and catching sight of what was taking place at
the drawbridge, fell back in a swoon on the carpet of the hall. The
shepherd boy raised her in his arms and fled for the hills. Along the
road was the wild stampede of the people, all straining for the hills,
pouring in a mad rush from the valley and the town. Behind them were the
still madder, swifter, more terrible waters, coming in sudden thuds, in
furious drives, eddying and sculping and rearing in an orgy or
remorseless and heartrending destruction. Down before that roaring
avalanche went walls and trees and buildings. The shepherd boy saw men
give up the struggle for escape, cowering by the roadside, and women,
turning from the race to the hills, rushed back to meet the oncoming
waters with arms outspread and insanity in their wild eyes.

Not a human creature escaped that night of wroth except the shepherd boy
and the damsel he carried in his arms. Every time the waters reached his
heels they reared up like great white horses and fell back, thus sparing
him. Three times did he look back at happenings in the town of the Seven
Sisters. The first time he looked back the water was up to the last
windows of houses that were three storeys high. All the belongings of
the householders were floating about, and people were sinking through
the water, their lives going out as swiftly as twinkling bubbles. In an
attic window he saw a young girl loosen her hair, she was singing a
song, preparing to meet death as if she were making ready for a lover. A
man at the top of a ladder was gulping whiskey from a bottle, and when
the water sprang at his throat he went down with a mad defiant cry. A
child ran out an open window, golden locks dancing about its pretty
head, as if it were running into a garden. There was another little
bubble in the moonlight.... The second time the shepherd boy looked back
the swallows were flying from their nests under the eaves of the houses,
for the water was now lapping them. An old woman was hobbling across a
roof on crutches. Men were drawing their bodies out of the chimney-pots.
A raft on which the Keeper's guard had put out slowly, like a live thing
lazily yawning and turning over on its side, sent them all into the
common doom. A man with a bag of gold clutched in his hand, stood
dizzily on the high gable of a bank, then, with a scream, tottered and
fell.... The third time the shepherd boy looked back nothing was to be
seen above the face of the water except the pinnacle of the watch tower
of the mansion, and standing upon it was the Keeper of the Key, his arms
outspread, his face upturned to the moon, and the seven water nymphs
leaping about him in a silver dance.

After that the shepherd boy drew up on the hills with the damsel. He was
quite exhausted, and he noticed that the activity of the waters
gradually calmed down as daybreak approached, like things spent after a
night of wild passion. When at last the day quivered into life on the
eastern sky he called the damsel to his side, and standing there
together they looked out over the spread of water. The town of the
Seven Sisters was no more.

"Look," cried the shepherd boy, "at Loch Riabhach!" And drawing back he
cast out into the far water the secret key. There it still lies under a
rock, somewhere in the lake over which our boat is now drifting. And the
shepherd boy and the damsel there and then founded a new town beside the
lake, and all who are of the old families of Baile Loch Riabhach, like
myself, are their descendants. That, concluded Eamonn, is the story of
the Gray Lake.




THE BUILDING

I


Martin Cosgrave walked up steadily to his holding after Ellen Miscal had
read to him the American letter. He had spoken no word to the woman. It
was not every day that he had to battle with a whirl of thoughts. A
quiet man of the fields, he only felt conscious of a strong impulse to
get back to his holding up on the hill. He had no clear idea of what he
would do or what he would think when he got back to his holding. But the
fields seemed to cry out to him, to call him back to their
companionship, while all the wonders of the resurrection were breaking
in fresh upon his life.

Martin Cosgrave walked his fields and put his flock of sheep scurrying
out of a gap with a whistle. His holding and the things of his holding
were never so precious to his sight. He walked his fields with his hands
in his pockets and an easy, solid step upon the sod. He felt a bracing
sense of security.

Then he sat up on the mearing.

The day was waning. It seemed to close in about his holding with a new
protection. The mood grew upon him as the shadows deepened. A great
peace came over him. The breeze stirring the grass spread out at his
feet seemed to whisper of the strange unexpected thing that had broken
in upon his life. He felt the splendid companionship of the fields for
the master.

Suddenly Martin Cosgrave looked down at his cabin. Something snapped as
his eyes remained riveted upon it. He leapt from the mearing and walked
out into the field, his hands this time gripping the lapels of his coat,
a cloud settling upon his brow. In the centre of the field he stood, his
eyes still upon the cabin. What a mean, pokey, ugly little dirty hovel
it was! The thatch was getting scraggy over the gables and sagging at
the back. In the front it was sodden. A rainy brown streak reached down
to the little window looking like the claw of a great bird upon the
walls. He had been letting everything go to the bad. That might not
signify in the past. But now--

"Rose Dempsey would never stand the like," he said to himself. "She will
be used to grand big houses."

He turned his back upon the cabin near the boreen and looked up to the
belt of beech trees swaying in the wind on the crest of the hill. How
did he live there most of his life and never see that it was a place
fashioned by the hand of Nature for a house? Was it not the height of
nonsense to have trees there making music all the long hours of the
night without a house beside them and people sleeping within it? In a
few minutes the thought had taken hold of his mind. Limestone--beautiful
limestone--ready at hand in the quarry not a quarter of a mile down the
road. Sand from the pit at the back of his own cabin. Lime from the kiln
beyond the road. And his own two hands! He ran his fingers along the
muscles of his arms. Then he walked up the hill.

Martin Cosgrave, as he walked up the hill, felt himself wondering for
the first time in his life if he had really been foolish to have run
away from his father's cabin when he had been young. Up to this he had
always accepted the verdict of the people about him that he had been a
foolish boy "to go wandering in strange places." He had walked along the
roads to many far towns. Then he had struck his friend, the building
contractor. He had been a useful worker about a building house. At first
he had carried hods of mortar and cement up ladders to the masons. The
business of the masons he had mastered quickly. But he had always had a
longing to hold a chisel in one hand and a mallet in the other at work
upon stone. He had drifted into a quarry, thence to a stone-cutting
yard. After a little while he could not conceal his impatience with the
mere dressing of coping stones or the chiselling out of tombstones to a
pattern. Then he saw the man killed in the quarry. He was standing
quite near to him. The chain of the windlass went and the poor man had
no escape. Martin Cosgrave had heard the crunch of the skull on the
boulder, and some of the blood was spattered upon his boots. He was a
man of tense nerves. The sight of blood sickened him. He put on his
coat, left the quarry, and went walking along the road.

It was while he walked along the road that the longing for his home came
upon him. He tramped back to his home above Kilbeg. His father had been
long dead, but by his return he had glorified the closing days of his
mother's life. He took up the little farm and cut himself off from his
wandering life when he had fetched the tools from his lodgings in the
town beside the quarries.

By the time Martin Cosgrave had reached the top of the hill he had
concluded that he had not, after all, been a foolish boy to work in far
places. "The hand of God was in it," he said reverently with his eyes on
the beech trees that made music on the crest of the hill.

He made a rapid survey of the place with his keen eyes. Then he mapped
out the foundation of the building by driving the heel of his boot into
the green sod. He stepped back among the beech trees and looked out at
the outlined site of the building. He saw it all growing up in his
mind's eye, at first a rough block, a mere shell, a little uncertain and
unsatisfactory. Then the uncertainties were lopped off, the building
took shape, touch after touch was added. Long shadows spread out from
the trees and wrapped the fields. Stars came out in the sky. But Martin
Cosgrave never noticed these things. The building was growing all the
time. There was a firm grasp of the general scheme, a realisation of
what the building would evolve that no other building ever evolved, what
it would proclaim for all time. The passing of the day and the stealth
of the night could not claim attention from a man who was living over a
dream that was fashioning itself in his mind, abandoning himself to the
joy or his creation, dwelling longingly upon the details of the
building, going over and, as it were, feeling it in every fibre, jealous
of the effect of every stone, tracing the trend and subtlety of every
curve, seeing how one touch fitted in and enhanced the other and how all
carried on the meaning of the whole.

When he came down from the hill there was a spring in Martin Cosgrave's
step. He swung his arms. The blood was coursing fast through his veins.
His eyes were glowing. He would need to make a map of the building. It
was all burned clearly into his brain.

From under the bed of his cabin he pulled out the wooden box. It had not
been opened since he had fetched it from the far town. He held his
breath as he threw open the lid. There they lay, the half-forgotten
symbols of his old life. Worn mallets, chisels, the head of a broken hod
with the plaster still caked into it, a short broad shovel for mixing
mortar, a trowel, a spirit level, a plumb, all wrapped loosely in a worn
leather apron. He took the mallets in his hand and turned them about
with the quick little jerks that came so naturally to him. Strength for
the work had come into his arms. All the old ambitions which he thought
had been stifled with his early manhood sprang to life again.

As he lay in his bed that night Martin Cosgrave felt himself turning
over and over again the words in the letter which Rose Dempsey had sent
to her aunt, Ellen Miscal, from America. "Tell Martin Cosgrave," the
letter read, "that I will be back home in Kilbeg by the end of the
spring. If he has no wish for any other girl I am willing to settle
down." Beyond the announcement that her sister Sheela would be with her
for a holiday, the letter "brought no other account." But what an
account it had brought to Martin Cosgrave! The fields understood--the
building would proclaim.

Early in the morning Martin Cosgrave went down to Ellen Miscal to tell
her what to put in the letter that was going back to Rose Dempsey in
America. Martin Cosgrave walked heavily into the house and stood with
his back against the dresser. He turned the soft black hat about in his
hands nervously and talked like one who was speaking sacred words.

"Tell her," he said, "that Martin Cosgrave had no thought for any other
person beyond herself. Tell her to be coming back to Kilbeg. Tell her
not to come until the late harvest."

Ellen Miscal, who sat over the sheet of writing paper on the table,
looked up quickly as he spoke the words. As she did so she was conscious
of the new animation that vivified the idealistic face of Martin
Cosgrave. But he did not give her time to question him.

"I have my own reasons for asking her to wait until the harvest," he
said, with some irritation.

He stayed at the dresser until Ellen Miscal had written the letter. He
carried it down to the village and posted it with his own hand, and he
went and came as gravely as if he had been taking part in some solemn
ritual.


II

That day the building was begun. Martin Cosgrave tackled the donkey and
drew a few loads of limestone from the nearby quarry. Some of the
neighbours who came his way found him a changed man, a silent man with
his eager face set, a man in whose eyes a new light shone, a quiet man
of the fields into whose mind a set purpose had come. He struggled up
the road with his donkey-cart, his hand gripping the shaft to hasten the
steps of the slow brute, his limbs bent to the hill, his head down at
the work. By the end of the week a pile of grey-blue stones was heaped
up on the crest of the hill. The walls of the fields had been broken
down to make a carway. Late into the night when the donkey had been fed
and tethered the neighbours would see Martin Cosgrave moving about the
pile of grey-blue stones, sorting and picking, arranging in little
groups to have ready to his hands. "A house he is going to put up on the
hill," they would say, lost in wonder.

The spring came, and with it all the strenuous work on the land. But
Martin Cosgrave went on with the building. The neighbours shook their
heads at the sight of neglect that was gathering about his holding; they
said it was flying in the face of Providence when Martin Cosgrave weaned
all the lambs from the ewes one day, long before their time, and sold
them at the fair to the first bidder that came his way. Martin Cosgrave
did so because he wanted money and was in a hurry to get back to his
building.

"What call has a man to be destroying himself like that?" the neighbours
asked each other.

Martin Cosgrave knew what the neighbours were saying about him. But what
did he care? What thought had any of them for the heart of a builder?
What did any of them know beyond putting a spade in the clay and waiting
for the seasons to send up growing things from the seed they scattered
by their hands? What did they know about the feel of the rough stone in
the hand and the shaping of it to fit into the building, the building
that day after day you saw rising up from the ground by the skill of
your hand and the art of your mind? What could they in Kilbeg know of
the ship that would plough the ocean in the harvest bearing Rose Dempsey
home to him? For all their ploughing and their sowing, what sort of a
place had any of them led a woman into? They might talk away. The joy of
the builder was his. The beech trees that made music all day beside the
building he was putting up to the sight of all the world had more
understanding of him than all the people of the parish.

Martin Cosgrave had no help. He kept to his work from such an early hour
in the morning until such a late hour of the night that the people
marvelled at his endurance. But as the work went on the people would
talk about Martin Cosgrave's building in the fields and tell strangers
of it at the markets. They said that the like of it had never been seen
in the countryside. It was to be "full of little turrets and the finest
of fancy porches and a regular sight of bulging windows." One day that
Martin Cosgrave heard a neighbour speaking about the "bulging windows"
he laughed a half-bitter, half-mocking laugh.

"Tell them," he said, "that they are cut-stone tracery windows to fit in
with the carved doors." These cut-stone windows and carved doors cost
Martin Cosgrave such a length of time that they provoked the patience of
the people. Out of big slabs of stone he had worked them, and sometimes
he would ask the neighbours to give him a hand in the shifting of these
slabs. But he was quick to resent any interference. One day a
stone-cutter from the quarry went up on the scaffold, and when Martin
Cosgrave saw him he went white to the lips and cursed so bitterly that
those standing about walked away.

When the shell of the building had been finished Martin Cosgrave hired a
carpenter to do all the woodwork. The woodwork cost money. Martin
Cosgrave did not hesitate. He sold some of his sheep, sold them
hurriedly, and as all men who sell their sheep hurriedly, he sold them
badly. When the carpentry had been finished, the roofing cost more
money. One day the neighbours discovered that all the sheep had been
sold. "He's beggared now," they said.

The farmer who turned the sod a few fields away laboured in the damp
atmosphere of growing things, his mind filled with thoughts of bursting
seeds and teeming barns. He shook his head at sight of Martin Cosgrave
above on the hill bent all day over hard stones; whenever he looked up
he only caught the glint of a trowel, or heard the harsh grind of a
chisel. But Martin Cosgrave took no stock of the men reddening the soil
beneath him. Whenever his eyes travelled down the hillside he only saw
the flock of crows that hung over the head of the digger. The study of
the veins of limestone that he turned in his hands, the slow moulding of
the crude shapes to their place in the building, the rhythm and swing of
the mallet in his arm, the zest with which he felt the impact of the
chisel on the stone, the ring of forging steel, the consciousness of
mastery over the work that lay to his hands--these were the things that
seemed to him to give life a purpose and man a destiny. He would whistle
a tune as he mixed the mortar with the broad shovel, for it gave him a
feeling of the knitting of the building with the ages. He pitied the
farmer who looked helplessly upon his corn as it was beaten to the
ground by the first storm that blew from the sea; he was upon a work
that would withstand the storms of centuries. The scent of lime and
mortar greeted his nostrils. When he moved about the splinters crunched
under his feet. Everything around him was hard and stubborn, but he was
the master of it all. In his dreams in the night he would reach out his
hands for the feel of the hard stone, a burning desire in his breast to
put it into shape, to give it nobility in the scheme of a building.

It was while Martin Cosgrave walked through the building that Ellen
Miscal came to him with the second letter from America. The carpenter
was hammering at something below. The letter said that Rose Dempsey and
her sister, Sheela, would be home in the late harvest. "With all I saw
since I left Kilbeg," Rose Dempsey wrote, "I never saw one that I
thought as much of as Martin Cosgrave."

When Ellen Miscal left him, Martin Cosgrave stood very quietly looking
through the cut-stone tracery window. The beech trees were swaying
slowly outside. Their music was in his ears.

Then he remembered that he was standing in the room where he would take
Rose Dempsey in his arms. It was here he would tell her of all the
bitter things he had locked up in his heart when she had gone away from
him. It was here he would tell her of the day of resurrection, when all
the bitter thoughts had burst into flower at the few words that told of
her return. It was that day of great tumult within him that thought of
the building had come into his mind.

When Martin Cosgrave walked out of the room the carpenter and a
neighbour boy were arguing about something at the foot of the stairs.

"It's too steep, I'm telling you," the boy was saying.

"What do you know about it?"

"I know this much about it, that if a little child came running down
that stairs he'd be apt to fall and break his neck."

Then the two men went out, still arguing.

Martin Cosgrave sat down on one of the steps of the stairs. A child
running down the steps! His child! A child bearing his name! He would be
prattling about the building. He would run across that landing, swaying
and tottering. His little voice would fill the building. Arms would be
reaching out to him. They would be the soft white arms of Rose Dempsey,
or maybe, they would be the arms that raised up the building--his own
strong arms. Or it might be that he would be carrying down the child
and handing him over the rails there into the outspread arms of Rose
Dempsey. She would be reaching out for the child with the newly-kindled
light of motherhood in her eyes, the passion of a young mother in her
welcoming voice. A child with his very name--a child that would grow up
to be a man and hand down the name to another, and so on during the
generations. And with the name would go down the building, the building
that would endure, that would live, that was immortal. Did it all come
to him as a sudden revelation, springing from the idle talk of a
neighbour boy brought up to work from one season to another? Or was it
the same thing that was behind the forces that had fired him while he
had worked at the building? Had it not all come into his life the
evening he stood among his fields with his eyes on the crest of the
hill?

Ah, there had been a great building surely, a building standing up on
the hill, a great, a splendid building raised up to the sight of all the
world, and with it a greater building, a building raised up from the
sight of all men, the building of a name, the moulding of hearts that
would beat while Time was, a building of immortal souls, a building into
which God would breathe His breath, a building which would be heard of
in Heaven, among the angels, through all the eternities, a building
living on when all the light was gone out of the sun, when oceans were
as if they had never been, a name, a building, living when the story of
all the worlds and all the generations would be held written upon a
scroll in the lap of God.... The face of the dreamer as he abandoned
himself to his thoughts was pallid with a half-fanatical emotion.

The neighbours were more awed than shocked at the change they saw
increasing in Martin Cosgrave. He had grown paler and thinner, but his
eyes were more tense, had in them, some of the neighbours said, the
colour of the limestone. He was more and more removed from the old life.
He walked his fields without seeing the things that made up the old
companionship. His whole attitude was one of detachment from everything
that did not savour of the crunch of stone, the ring of steel on the
walls of a building. He only talked rationally when the neighbours spoke
to him of the building. They had heard that he had gone to the
money-lender, and mortgaged every perch of his land. "It was easy to
know how work of the like would end," they said.

One day a stranger was driving by on his car, and when he saw the
building he got down, walked up the hill, and made a long study of it.
On his way down he met Martin Cosgrave.

"Who built the house on the hill?" he asked.

"A simple man in the neighbourhood," Martin Cosgrave made answer, after
a little pause.

"A simple man!" the stranger exclaimed, looking at Martin Cosgrave with
some disapproval. "Well, he has attempted something anyway. He may not
have, succeeded, but the artist is in him somewhere. He has created a
sort of--well, lyric--in stone on that hill. Extraordinary!"

The stranger hesitated before he hit on the word lyric. He got up on his
car and drove away muttering something under his breath.

Martin Cosgrave could have run up the hill and shouted. He could have
called all the neighbours together and told them of the strange man who
had praised the building.

But he did none of these things. He had work waiting to his hand. A
hunger was upon him to feel his pulse beating to the throb of steel on
stone. From the road he made a sweep of a drive up to the building. The
neighbours looked open-mouthed at the work for the days it went on.
"Well, that finishes Martin Cosgrave anyway," they said.

Martin Cosgrave rushed the making of the drive; he took all the help he
could get. The boys would come up after their day's work and give him a
hand. While they worked he was busy with his chisel upon the boulders of
limestone which he had set up on either side of the entrance gate. Once
more he felt the glamour of life--the impact of forging steel on stone
was thrilling through his arms, the stone was being moulded to the
direction of his exulting mind.

When he had finished with the boulders at the entrance gate the people
marvelled. The gate had a glory of its own, and yet it was connected
with the scheme of the building on the hill palpably enough for even
their minds to grasp it. When the people looked upon it they forgot to
make complaint of the good land that was given to ruin. One of them had
expressed the general vague sentiment when he said, "Well, the kite has
got its tail."

In the late harvest Martin Cosgrave carried up all the little sticks of
furniture from his cabin and put it in the building. Then he sent for
Ellen Miscal. When the woman came she looked about the place in
amazement.

"Well, of all the sights in the world!" she exclaimed.

Martin Cosgrave was irritated at the woman's attitude.

"We'll have to make the best of it," he said, looking at the furniture.
"I will be marrying Rose Dempsey in the town some days after she lands."

"Rose would never like the suddenness of that," her aunt protested. "She
can be staying with me and marrying from my house.

"I saw the priest about it," Martin Cosgrave said impatiently. "I will
have my way, Ellen Miscal. Rose Dempsey will come up to Kilbeg my wife.
We will come in the gate together, we will walk in to the building
together. I will have my way."

Martin Cosgrave spoke of having his way in the impassioned voice of the
fanatic, of his home-coming with his bride in the half-dreamy voice of
the visionary.

"Have your way, Martin, have your way," the woman said. "And," she
added, rising, "I will be bringing up a few things to put into your
house."


III

Martin Cosgrave spent three days in the town waiting the arrival of Rose
Dempsey. The boat was late. He haunted the railway station, with hungry
eyes scanned the passengers as each train steamed in. His blood was on
fire in his veins for those three days. What peace could a man have who
was waiting to get back to his building and to have Rose Dempsey going
back with him, his wife?

Sometimes he would sit down on the railway bench on the platform,
staring down at the ground, smiling to himself. What a surprise he had
in store for Rose! What would he say to her first? Would he say anything
of the building? No, he would say nothing at all of the building until
they drove across the bridge and right up to the gate! "Rose," he would
then say, "do you remember the hill--the place under the beech trees?"
She was sure to remember that place. It was there they had spent so much
time, there he had first found her lips, there they had quarrelled! And
Rose would look up to that old place and see the building! What would
she think? Would she feel about it as he felt himself? She would, she
would! What sort of look would come into her face? And what would he be
able to tell her about it at all?... He would say nothing at all about
it; that would be the best way! They would say nothing to each other,
but walk in the gate and up the drive across the hill, the hill they
often ran across in the old days! They would be quite silent, and walk
into the house silently. The building, too, would be silent, and he
would take her from one room to another in silence, and when she had
seen everything he would look into her eyes and say, "Well?" It would be
all so like a wonderful story, a day of magic!... Martin Cosgrave sprang
from the bench and went to the edge of the platform, staring down the
long level road, with its two rails tapering almost together in the
distance. Not a sign of a train. Would it never come in? Had anything
happened the boat? He walked up and down with energy, holding the lapel
of his coat, saying to himself, "I must not be thinking of things like
this. It is foolishness. Whatever is to happen will happen, and that's
all about it. I am quite at ease, quite cool!"

At last it came, steaming and blowing. Windows were lowered, carriage
doors flew open, people ran up and down. Martin Cosgrave stood a little
away, tense, drawn, his eyes sweeping down the people. Suddenly
something shot through him; an old sensation, an old thrill, made his
whole being tingle, his mind exult, and then there was the most
exquisite relaxation. How long it was since he felt like this before!
His eyes were burning upon a familiar figure that had come from a
carriage, the figure of a girl in a navy blue coat and skirt, her back
turned, struggling with parcels, helped by the hands of invisible people
from within the carriage. Martin Cosgrave strode down the platform,
eagerness, joy, sense of proprietorship, already in his stride.

"Rose!" he exclaimed while the girl's back was still turned to him.

His voice shook in spite of him. The woman turned about sharply.

Martin Cosgrave gave a little start back. It was not Rose Dempsey, but
her sister, Sheela. How like Rose she had grown!

"Martin!" she exclaimed, putting out her hand. He gave it a hurried
shake and then searched the railway carriage with burning eyes. The
people he saw there were all strangers, tired-looking travellers. When
he turned from the railway carriage Sheela Dempsey was rushing with her
parcels into a waiting-room. He strode after her. He looked at the girl.
How unlike Rose she was after all! Nobody--nobody--could ever be like
Rose Dempsey!

"Where is Rose?" he asked.

Sheela Dempsey looked up into the face of Martin Cosgrave and saw there
what she had half-dreaded to see.

"Martin," she said, "Rose is not coming home."

Martin Cosgrave gripped the door of the waiting-room. The train whistled
outside and glided from the station. He heard a woman's cheerful voice
cry out a conventional "good-bye, good-bye," and through the window he
saw the flutter of a dainty handkerchief. A truck was wheeled past the
waiting-room. There was the crack of a whip and some cars rattled away
over the road. Then there was silence.

Sheela Dempsey walked over to him and laid a hand upon his shoulder.
When she spoke her voice was full of an understanding womanly sympathy.

"Don't be troubling over it, Martin," she said, "Rose is not worth it."
She spoke her sister's name with some bitterness.

Vaguely Martin Cosgrave looked into the girl's eyes. He read there in a
dim way what the girl could not say of her sister.

It was all so strange! The waiting-room was so bare, so cold, so grey,
so like a sepulchre. What could Sheela Dempsey with all her womanly
understanding, with all her quick intuition, know of the things that
happened beside her? How could she have ears for the crashing down of
the pillars of the building that Martin Cosgrave had raised up in his
soul? How could she have eyes for the wreck of the structure that was to
go on through all the generations? What thought had she of the wiping
out of a name that would have lived in the nation and continued for all
time in the eternities, a tangible thing in Heaven among the Immortals
when the stars had all been burned out in the sky?

Martin Cosgrave drove home from the railway station with Sheela Dempsey.
He sat without a word, not really conscious of his surroundings as they
covered the miles. The girl reached across the side-car, touching him
lightly on the shoulder.

"Look!" she exclaimed.

Martin Cosgrave looked up. The building stood in the moonlight on the
crest of the hill. He bade the driver pull up, and then got down from
the car.

"Who owns the house?" Sheela Dempsey asked.

"I do. I put it up on the hill for Rose."

There was silence for some time.

"How did you get it built, Martin?" Sheela Dempsey asked, awe in her
tone.

"I built it myself," he answered. "I wonder has Rose as good a place?
What sort of a building is she in to-night?"

Martin Cosgrave did not notice the sudden quiver in the girl's body as
he put the question. But she made no reply, and the car drove on,
leaving Martin Cosgrave standing alone at the gate of the building.

The faint sweep of the drive lay before him. It led his eyes up to the
crest of the hill. There it was standing shadowy against the sky, every
delicate outline clear to his vision. The beech trees were swaying
beside it, reaching out like great shapeless arms in the night, blurred
and beckoning and ghostly. A little vein of their music sounded in his
ears. How often had he listened to that music and the things it had sung
to him! It made him conscious of all the emotion he had felt while he
had put up the building on the hill.

The joy of the builder swept over him like a wave. He was within the
rising walls again, his hands among the grey-blue shapes, the measured
stroke of the mallet swinging for the shifting chisel, the throb of
steel going through his arms, the grind of stone was under his hands,
the stone dust dry upon his lips, his eyes quick and keen, his arms
bared, the shirt at his breast open, his whole body tense, tuned, to the
desire of the conscious builder.... Once more he moved about the carpet
of splinters, the grateful crunch beneath his feet, his world a world of
stubborn things, rejoicing in his power of direction and mastery over it
all. And always at the back of his mind and blending itself with the
work was the thought of a ship forging through the water at the harvest,
a ship with white sails spread to the winds. Had not thought for the
building come into his mind when dead things sprang to life in the
resurrection of his hopes?

Martin Cosgrave turned away from the gate. He walked down where the
shadow of the mearing was faint upon the road. He turned up the boreen
closed in by the still hedges. He stumbled over the ruts. He stood at
the cabin door and looked up at the sky with soulless eyes. The
animation, the inspiration, that had vivified his face since the
building had been begun had died. The face no longer expressed the
idealist, the visionary. His eyes swept the sky for a purpose. It was
the look of the man of the fields, the man who had thought for his
crops, who was near to the soil.

He had not looked a final and anxious, a peasant look, at the sky from
his cabin-door in the night since he had embarked upon the building. He
was conscious of that fact after a little. He wondered if it was a vague
stirring in his heart that made him do it, a vague craving for the old
companionship of the fields this night of bitterness. They were the
fields, the sod, the territory of his forefathers, the inheritance of
his blood. Who was he that he should put up a great building on the
hill? What if he had risen for a little on his wings above the common
flock?

The night air was heavy with the scent of the late dry harvest and all
that the late dry harvest meant to the man nurtured on the side of a wet
hill. The sheaves of corn were stooked in his neighbour's fields.
Yesterday he had sacrificed the land to the building; to-morrow he would
sacrifice the building to the land. Martin Cosgrave knew, the stars
seemed to know, that a message, a voice, a command, would come like a
wave through the generations of his blood sweeping him back to a common
tradition. The cry for service on the land was beginning to stir
somewhere. It would come to him in a word, a word sanctified upon the
land by the memory of a thousand sacrifices and a thousand struggles,
the only word that held magic for his race, the one word--Redemption! He
looked up at the building, made a vague motion of his hand that was like
an act of renunciation, and laughed a laugh of terrible bitterness.

"Look," he cried, "at the building Martin Cosgrave put up on the hill!"

He moved to the cabin-door, his feet heavy upon the uneven ground as the
feet of any of the generations of men who had ever gone that way before.
He pressed the cabin-door with his fist. With a groan it went back
shakily over the worn stone threshold, sticking when it was only a
little way open. All was quiet, black, damp, terrible as chaos, inside.
Martin Cosgrave hitched forward his left shoulder, went in sideways, and
closed the crazy door against the pale world of moonlight outside.



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WAYSIDERS***


******* This file should be named 13472.txt or 13472.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.net/1/3/4/7/13472



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

