The Project Gutenberg EBook of Notes and Queries, Number 49, Saturday,
Oct. 5, 1850, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Notes and Queries, Number 49, Saturday, Oct. 5, 1850

Author: Various

Release Date: September 16, 2004 [EBook #13480]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NOTES AND QUERIES ***




Produced by The Internet Library of Early Journals, Jon Ingram, David
King, and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team.





NOTES AND QUERIES:

A MEDIUM OF INTER-COMMUNICATION FOR LITERARY MEN, ARTISTS, ANTIQUARIES,
GENEALOGISTS, ETC.

       *       *       *       *       *

"When found, make a note of."--CAPTAIN CUTTLE.

       *       *       *       *       *

No. 49.] SATURDAY, OCTOBER 5, 1850 [Price Threepence. Stamped Edition 4d.

       *       *       *       *       * {289}


CONTENTS.

NOTES:--Page
  Stray Notes on Cunningham's London. 289
  Satirical Song upon Villiers Duke of Buckingham, by Dr. Rimbault. 291
  Baker's Notes on Author of "Whole Duty of Man," by Rev. J.E.B. Mayor. 292
  Mistake about George Wither, by Dr. Rimbault. 293
  Useful _v._ Useless Learning. 293
  Minor Notes:--Numerals--Junius and Sir P. Francis--Jews under the
    Commonwealth--"Is any thing but," &c.--Fastitocalon. 294

QUERIES:--
  Bishop Cosin's Conference. 295
  Engleman's "Bibliotheca Scriptorum Classicorum," by Professor De
    Morgan. 296
  Minor Queries:--Portrait of Sir P. Sidney--Confession--Scotch
    Prisoners at Worcester--Adamson's Edward II.--Sir Thomas
    Moore--Dr. E. Cleaver--Gwyan's London--Coronet--Cinderella--Judas'
    Bell--Dozen of Bread--Kings Skuggsia--Coins of
    Gandophares--Satirical Medals. 296

REPLIES:--
  Gaudentio di Lucca. 298
  On a Passage in the Tempest, by J. Payne Collier. 299
  Gray's Elegy. 300
  Bishops and their Precedence. 301
  Replies to Minor Queries:--Leicester and the reputed Poisoners of
    his Time--What is the correct Prefix of Mayors--Marks of Cadency. 302

MISCELLANEOUS:--
  Notes on Books, Sales, Catalogues, &c. 303
  Books and Odd Volumes Wanted. 303
  Notices to Correspondents. 303
  Advertisments. 304

       *       *       *       *       *


NOTES.

STRAY NOTES ON CUNNINGHAM'S LONDON.

The following notes are so trivial, that I should have scrupled to send
them on any other ground than that so well-conceived and
labouriously-executed a work should have its most minute and unimportant
details as correct as possible. This, in such a work, can only be
effected by each reader pointing out the circumstances that he has
reason to believe are not quite correctly or completely given in it.

Page 24. _Astronomical Society._--The library has been recently
augmented by the incorporation with it of the books and documents (as
well as the members) of the _Mathematical Society of London_
(Spitalfields). It contains the most complete collection of the English
mathematical works of the last century known to exist. A friend, who has
examined them with some care, specifies particularly some of the tracts
published in the controversy raised by Bishop Berkeley respecting "the
ghosts of departed quantities," of which he did before know the
existence.

The instruments to which Mr. Cunningham refers as bequeathed to the
Society, are not used there, nor yet allowed to lie unused. They are
placed in the care of active practical observers, according as the
special character of the instruments and the special subjects to which
each observer more immediately devotes his attention, shall render the
assignment of the instrument expedient. The instruments, however, still
remain the property of the Society.

P. 37. _Bath House._--Date omitted.

P. 143.--Evan's Hotel, Covent Garden, is described as having been once
the residence of "James West, the great collector of books, &c., and
_President of the Royal Society_." There has certainly never been a
President, or even a Secretary, of that name. However, it is just
possible that there might have been a Vice-president so named (as these
are chosen by the President from the members of the council, and the
council has not always been composed of men of science): but even this
is somewhat doubtful.

P. 143. _Covent Garden Theatre._--No future account of this theatre will
be complete without the facts connected with the ill-starred Delafield;
just as, into the Olympic, the history of the defaulter Watts, of the
Globe Assurance Office, must also enter.

P. 143. near top of col. 2. "Heigho! says Kemble."--Before this period,
a variation of the _rigmarole_ upon which this is founded had become
poplular, from the humour of Liston's singing at Sadler's Wells. I have
a copy of the music and the words; altogether identical with those in
the music. Of these, with other matters connected with the {290} amorous
frog, I shall have something more to say hereafter. This notice is to be
considered incidental, rather than as referring expressly to Mr.
Cunningham's valuable book.

P. 153. _Deans Yard, Westminster._--Several of the annual budgets of
abuse, obscenity, and impudent imposture, bearing on their title-pages
various names, but written by "John Gadbury, Student in Physic and
Astrology," were dated from "my house, Brick Court, Dean's Yard,
Westminster;" or this slightly varied, occasionally being, "Brick Court,
_near_ the Dean's Yard," &c. I have not seen a complete series of
Gadbury's _Almanacks_, but those I refer to range from 1688 to 1694
(incomplete). His burial in St. Margaret's, Westminster, in 1704, is
noticed by Mr. Cunningham, at p. 313. As brick was then only used in the
more costly class of domestic buildings, this would seem to indicate
that _prophecy_ was then a lucrative trade; and that the successor and
pupil of the "arch-rogue, William Lilly" was quite as fortunate in his
speculations as his master had been. It is a truth as old as society
itself, that "knaves grow rich while honest men starve." Whilst Gadbury
was "wallowing in plenty," the author of _Hudibras_ was perishing for
want of a crust!

P. 153. _Denzil Street._--Here, about the middle of the street, on the
south side, lived Theophilus Holdred, a jobbing watchmaker, whose name
will always hold a place in one department of mathematical history. He
discovered a method of approximating to the roots of numerical
equations, of considerable ingenuity. He, however, lost in his day and
generation the reputation that was really due to him for it, by his
laying claim to more than he had effected, and seeking to deprive other
and more gifted men of the reputation due to a more perfect solution of
the same problem. He was, indeed, brought before the public as the tool
of a faction; and, as the tools of faction generally are, he was
sacrificed by his own supporters when he was no longer of any use to
them.

I once called upon him, in company with Professor Leyburn, of the Royal
Military College, but I forget whether in 1829 or 1830. We found him at
his bench--a plain, elderly, and heavy-looking personage. He seemed to
have become "shy" of our class, and some time and some address were
requisite to get him to speak with any freedom: but ultimately we placed
him at his ease, and he spoke freely. We left him with the conviction
that he was the _bona fide_ discoverer of his own method; and that he
had no distinct conception, even then, of the principle of the methods
which he had been led by his friends to claim, of having _also_
discovered _Horner's_ process before Horner himself had published it. He
did not (ten years after the publication of Horner's method) even then
understand it. He understood his own perfectly, and I have not the
slightest doubt of the correctness of his own statement, of its having
been discovered by him fifty years before.

P. 166. _Dulwich Gallery._--This is amongst the unfortunate consequences
of taking lists upon trust. Poor Tom Hurst[1] has not been in the
churchyard these last eight years--except the three last in his grave.
The last five years of his life were spent in a comfortable asylum, as
"a poor brother of the Charterhouse." He was one of the victims of the
"panic of 1825;" and though the spirit of speculation never left him, he
always failed to recover his position. He is referred to here, however,
to call Mr. Cunningham's attention to the necessity, in a _Hand-book_
especially, of referring his readers correctly to the places at which
_tickets_ are to be obtained for any purpose whatever. It discourages
the visitor to London when he is thus "sent upon a fool's errand;" and
the Cockney himself is not in quite so good a humour with the author for
being sent a few steps out of his way.

P. 190. _Rogers_--a Cockney by inference. I {291} should like to see
this more decidedly established. I am aware that it is distinctly so
stated by Chambers and by Wilkinson; but a remark once made to me by
Mrs. Glendinning (the wife of Glendinning, the printer, of Hatton
Garden) still leads me to press the inquiry.

P. 191.--_The Free Trade Club_ was dissolved before the publication of
this edition of the _Handbook_.

P. 192.--And to Sir John Herschel, on his return from the Cape of Good
Hope.

P. 210. _Royal Society._--From a letter of Dr. Charles Hutton, in the
_Newcastle Magazine_ (vol. i. 2nd series), it appears that at the time
of Dr. Dodd's execution the Fellows were in the habit of adjourning,
after the meetings, to Slaughter's Coffee House, "to eat oysters," &c.
The celebrated John Hunter, who had attempted to resuscitate the
ill-fated Doctor, was one of them. "The Royal Society Club" was
instituted by Sir Joseph Banks.

P. 221. _Hanover Square._--Blank date.

P. 337. _Millbank Prison._--It was designed, not by "Jeremy Bentham,"
but by his brother, the great mechanist, Sir Samuel Bentham. In passing,
it may be remarked that the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich, is
constructed on the same principle, and, as was stated in the _Mechanics'
Magazine_, on authority, a year or two ago, by the same engineer.
General rumour has, however, attributed the design to his gracious
Majesty George III; and its being so closely in keeping with the known
spirit of _espionage_ of that monarch certainly gave countenance to the
rumour. It may be as well to state, however, that, so designed and so
built, it has never yet been so used.

P. 428.--_Benbow_, not a native of Wapping, but of Shrewsbury. A life of
him was published nearly forty years ago, by that veteran of local and
county history, Mr. Charles Hulbert, in the _Salopian Magazine_.

P. 499. _Whitfield._--Certainly not the founder of the Methodists, in
the ordinary or recognised acceptation of the term. John Wesley was at
the head of that movement from the very first, and George Whitfield and
Charles Wesley were altogether subordinate to him. Wesley and Whitfield
parted company on the ground of Arminianism _versus_ Calvinism. For a
while the two sects kept the titles of "Arminian Methodists" and
"Calvinistic Methodists." The latter made but little ground afterwards,
and the distinctive adjective was dropped by the Wesleyans when the
Whitfieldites had ceased to be a prominent body.

P. 515. _Doctor Dodd._--The great interest excited in favour of a
commutation of his sentence, led to the belief at the time, that his
life had not been really sacrificed. Many plausible stories respecting
the Doctor having been subsequently seen alive, were current; and as
they may possibly in some future age be revived, and again pass into
general currency, it may be as well to state that the most positive
evidence to the contrary exists, in a letter of Dr. Hutton's before
referred to. The _attempt to resuscitate him was actually made_, by a no
less distinguished surgeon than John Hunter. He seemed then to attribute
the failure to his having _received the body too late_. Wonderful
effects were at that time expected to result from the discovery of
galvanism; but it would have been wonderful indeed if any restoration
had taken place after more than two hours of suspended animation. John
Hunter, according to the account, does not seem to have been very
communicative on the subject, even to his philosophical friends at
Slaughter's Oyster Rooms.

T.S.D.

Shooter's Hill.

[Footnote 1: It may not be out of place here to mention one fine feature
in the character of "Tom Hurst;" his deep reverence for men of ability,
whether in literature, science, or art. Take one instance:


Fourteen or fifteen years ago, I called one morning at his place of
business (then 65. St. Paul's Church Yard, which has been subsequently
absorbed into the "Religious Tract Depository"); and, as was my custom,
I walked through the shop to his private room. He was "not in;" but a
gentleman, who first looked at me and then at a portrait of me on the
wall, accosted me by my surname as familiarly as an intimate
acquaintance of twenty years would have done. He and Hurst, it appeared,
had been speaking of me, suggested by the picture, before Hurst went
out. The familiar stranger did not keep me long in suspense--he
intimated that I had "probably heard our friend speak of Ben Haydon." Of
course I had; and we soon got into an easy chat. Hurst was naturally a
common subject with us. Amongst the remarks he made were the following,
and in almost the words:--

"When my troubles came on, I owed Hurst a large sum of money; and the
circumstances under which I became his debtor rendered this peculiarly a
debt of honour. He lent it me when he could ill spare it; yet he is the
only one of all my creditors who has not in one way or other persecuted
me to the present hour. When he first knew of my wreck, he called upon
me--_not to reproach but to encourage me_--and he would not leave me
till he felt sure that he had changed the moody current of my thoughts.
If there be any change in him since then, it is in his increased
kindness of manner and his assiduity to serve me. He is now gone out to
try to sell 'a bit of daub' for me."

Hurst came in, and this conversation dropped; but it had been well had
Hurst been by his side on the day his last picture was opened to view at
the Egyptian Hall. The catastrophe of that night might have been
averted, notwithstanding Mr. Barnum and his Tom Thumb show in the
adjoining room.]

       *       *       *       *       *

SATIRICAL SONG UPON GEORGE VILLIERS, DUKE OF BUCKINGHAM.

In turning over some old bundles of papers of the early part of the
seventeenth century, I met with the following satirical effusion upon
"James's infamous prime minister," George Villiers, Duke of Buckingham.
As an echo of the popular feelings of the people at the time it was
written, it merits preservation; and although I have seen other
manuscript copies of the ballad, it has never yet, as far as I can
learn, appeared in print.

It appears to be a parody or paraphrase of a well-known ballad of the
period, the burden of which attracted the notice of the satirist. It
afterwards became a common vehicle of derision during the civil war, as
may be seen by turning over the pages of the collection entitled _Rump
Songs_, and the folio volumes of the king's pamphlets.

The _original_ of these parodies has hitherto eluded my researches. It
is not among the Pepysian, Roxburghe, Wood, or Douce ballads, but
perhaps some of your readers may be able to point it out in some public
or private collection.

  "Come heare, Lady Muses, and help mee to sing,
     Come love mee where I lay;
   Of a duke that deserves to be made a king--
     The cleane contrary way,
     O the cleane contrary way.

  "Our Buckingham Duke is the man that I meane,
     Come love mee where I lay;
   On his shoulders the weale of the kingdome doth leane--
     The cleane contrary way,
     O the cleane contrary way.

  "O happiest kingdome that ever was kind,
     Come love mee where I lay;
   And happie the king that hath such a friend--
     The cleane contrary way,
     O the cleane contrary way. {292}

  "Needs must I extoll his worth and his blood--
     Come love mee where I lay;
   And his sweet disposition soe milde and soe good--
     The cleane contrary way,
     O the cleane contrary way.

  "Those innocent smiles that embelish his face,
     Come love mee where I lay;
   Who sees them not tokens of goodness and grace--
     The cleane contrary way,
     O the cleane contrary way.

  "And what other scholler could ever arise,
     Come love mee where I lay;
   From a master that was soe sincere and wise--
     The cleane contrary way,
     O the cleane contrary way.

  "Who is hee could now from his grave but ascend,
     Come love mee where I lay;
   Would surely the truth of his service commend--
     The cleane contrary way,
     O the cleane contrary way.

  "The king understands how he honors his place,
     Come love me where I lay;
   Which is to his majestie noe little grace--
     The cleane contrary way,
     O the cleane contrary way.

  "And therefore the government justly hath hee,
     Come love mee where I lay;
   Of horse for the land, and shipps for the sea--
     The cleane contrary way,
     O the cleane contrary way.

  "What, though our fleet be our enemies debtor,
     Come love mee where I lay;
   Wee brav'd them once, and wee'l brave them better--
     The cleane contrary way,
     O the cleane contrary way.

  "And should they land heere they should bee disjointed,
     Come love mee where I lay;
   And find both our horse and men bravely appointed--
     The cleane contrary way,
     O the cleane contrary way.

  "Then let us sing all of this nobel duke's praise,
     Come love mee where I lay;
   And pray for the length of his life and his daies--
     The cleane contrary way,
     O the cleane contrary way.

  "And when that death shall close up his eyes,
     Come love mee where I lay;
   God take him up into the skies--
     The cleane contrary way,
     O the cleane contrary way."

EDWARD F. RIMBAULT.

       *       *       *       *       *

"WHOLE DUTY OF MAN," AUTHOR OF.

(From Baker's MSS, vol. xxxv. p. 469-470. Cambridge University Library.)

    "Octo'r 31. 1698. Mr. Thomas Caulton, Vicar of Worksop, &c. [as
    in the note p. xiii. to the editor's Preface, ed. 1842, with
    unimportant variations, such as _Madam Frances Heathcote_, where
    the printed copy has _Mrs. Heathcote_; Baker reads _Madam Ayre
    of Rampton after dinner took_, where the printed copy has, _Mrs.
    Eyre_. After _was dead_, follows in Baker,] and that in that
    Month she had buried her Husband and severall Relations, but
    that her comfort was, that by her Monthly Sacraments she
    participated still with them in the Communion of Saints.

    "Then she went to her Closet, and fetched out a Manuscript, w'ch
    she said was the original of the _Whole Duty of Man_, tied
    together and stitched, in 8'vo, like Sermon notes. She untied
    it, saying, it was Dr. Fell's Correction and that the Author was
    the Lady Packington (her Mother), in whose hand it was written.

    "To prove this, the s'd Mr. Caulton further added that she said,
    she had shewn it to Dr. Covell, Master of Christ's College[2] in
    Cambridge, Dr. Stamford, Preb. of York, and Mr. Banks the
    present Incumbent of the Great Church in Hull. She added,
    withall, that _The Decay of Christian Piety_ was hers (The Lady
    Packington's) also, but disowned any of the rest to be her
    Mother's.

    "This is a true Copy of what I wrote, from Mr. Caulton's Mouth,
   two days before his Decease.

    "Witness my hand,

    "Nov. 15. 98.

    "JOHN HEWYT."

    "Bp. Fell tells us, that all these Tracts were written by the
    excellent Author (whom he makes to be one and the same person)
    at severall times, as y'e exigence of the Church, and the
    benefit of soules directed y'r composures; and that he (the
    Author) did likewise publish them apart, in the same order as
    they were made. The last, it seems (w'ch is _The Lively
    Oracles_), came out in 1678, the very year Dr. Woodhead died.
    Had the Author liv'd longer, we should have had his Tract _Of
    the Government of the Thoughts_, a work he had undertaken; and
    certainly (as Bp. Fell hath told us), had this work been
    finished, 'twould have equall'd, if not excelled, whatever that
    inimitable hand had formerly wrote. Withall it may be observ'd,
    that the Author of these Tracts speaks of the great Pestilence,
    and of the great Fire of London, both w'ch happen'd after the
    Restoration, whereas Bp. Chappell died in 1649. And further, in
    sect. vii. of the _Lively Oracles_, n. 2., are these words, w'ch
    I think cannot agree to Bp. Chappell [and less to Mr. Woodhead].
    _I would not be hasty in charging Idolatry upon the Church of
    Rome, or all in her Communion; but that their Image-Worship is a
    most futall snare, in w'ch vast numbers of unhappy Souls are
    taken, no Man can doubt, who hath with any Regard travailed in
    Popish Countries: I myself, and thousands of others, whom the
    late troubles, or other occasions, sent abroad, are, and have
    been witnesses thereof_. {293} These words seem to have been
    spoke by one that had been at Rome, and was forced into those
    Countries after the troubles broke out here. But as for
    Chappell, he never was at Rome, nor in any of those Countries.

    "As for Archbp. Stern, no Man will believe him to have any just
    Title to any of these Tracts. [The last Passage concerning
    idolatry, will not agree with Mr. Woodhead, nor the rest with
    Lady Packington.]

    "In a letter from Mr. Hearne, dat. Oxon, Mar. 27, 1733, said by
    Dr. Clavering, Bp. of Petr. to be wrote by one Mr. Basket, a
    Clergyman of Worcestershire. See Dr. Hamond's _Letters_
    published by Mr. Peck, et ultra Quaere."

On so disputed a point as the authorship of the _Whole Duty of Man_,
your readers will probably welcome any discussion by one so competent to
form an opinion in such matters as Hearne.

The letter above given was unknown to the editor of Mr. Pickering's
edition.

J.E.B. MAYOR.

Marlborough College.

[Footnote 2: The printed copy has _Trinity_ College.]

       *       *       *       *       *

MISTAKE ABOUT GEORGE WITHER.

In Campbell's _Notices of the British Poets_ (edit. 1848 p. 234.) is the
following, passage from the short memoir of George Wither:--

    "He was even afraid of being put to some mechanical trade, when
    he contrived to get to London, and with great simplicity had
    proposed to try his fortune at court. To his astonishment,
    however, he found that it was necessary to flatter in order to
    be a courtier. To show his independence, he therefore wrote his
    _Abuses Whipt and Stript_, and, instead of rising at court, was
    committed for some months to the Marshalsea."

The author adds a note to this passage, to which Mr. Peter Cunningham
(the editor of the edition to which I refer) appends the remark inclosed
between brackets:--

    "He was imprisoned for his _Abuses Whipt and Stript_; yet this
    could not have been his first offence, as an allusion is made to
    a former accusation. [It was for _The Scourge_ (1615) that his
    first known imprisonment took place.]"

I cannot discover upon any authority sufficient ground for Mr.
Campbell's note resecting a _former_ accusation against Wither. He was
undoubtedly imprisoned for his _Abuses Whipt and Stript_, which first
appeared in print in 1613, but I do not think an _earlier_ offence can
be proved against him. It has been supposed, upon the authority of a
passage in the _Warning Piece to London_, that the first edition of this
curious work appeared in 1611; but I am inclined to think that the
lines,--

  "In sixteen hundred ten and one,
  I notice took of public crimes,"

refers to the period at which the "Satirical Essays" were _composed_.
Mr. Willmott, however (_Lives of the Sacred Poets_, p. 72.), thinks that
they point to an earlier publication. But it is not likely that Wither
would so soon again have committed himself by the publication of the
_Abuses_ in 1613, if he had suffered for his "liberty of speech" so
shortly before.

Mr. Cunningham's addition to Mr. Campbell's note is incorrect. The
_Scourge_ is part of the _Abuses Whipt and Stript_ printed in 1613 (a
copy of which is now before me), to which it forms a postscript. Wood,
who had never seen it, speaks of it as a _separate_ publication; but Mr.
Willmott has corrected this error, although he had only the means of
referring to the edition of the _Abuses_ printed in 1615. Mr.
Cunningham's note, that Wither was imprisoned for the _Scourge_ in 1615,
is a mistake; made, probably, by a too hasty perusal of Mr. Willmott's
charming little volume on our elder sacred poets.

EDWARD F. RIMBAULT.

       *       *       *       *       *

USEFUL VERSUS USELESS LEARNING

A single and practical plan for the formation of a complete and useful
library and _respository_ of _universal_ literary knowledge.

The design which I propose in the following few lines, is one which I
should imagine nearly all the more learned and literary of your readers
would _wish_ to see _already in existence_ and when I show that it might
be effected _with very little trouble and expense_ (indeed _no_ trouble
but such as would be a _pleasure_ to those interested in the work), and
that the greatest advantage would follow from it,--I hope that it may
meet with favourable consideration from some of the numerous, able, and
influential readers and correspondents of your journal.

I am the more induced to hope this from the fact of such a wish having
been partially expressed by some of your contributors, and the excellent
leading articles of Nos. 1 and 2.

What I propose is simply this: the SYSTEMATIC ARRANGEMENT of _all_ the
existing literary knowledge in the world that is considered _of value_
by those best qualified to judge, disposed in such a manner as to answer
these two purposes: 1st, to give a general connected and classified
_view_ of the literary treasures of the whole world, beginning from the
most ancient in each language and department (including only what is
valuable in each); and, 2dly, to afford the greatest possible _facility_
(by means of arrangement, references and _indexes_) to every inquirer
for finding _at once_ the information he is in search of, if it is to be
found _anywhere_ by looking for it.

There are two ways in which this work might be accomplished, both of
which were desirable, though even one only would be much better than
none.

The first and most complete is, to make a real COLLECTION of all those
works, arranged in the {294} most perfect systematic order; and, while
doing so, to make at the same time a corresponding classified
_Catalogue_.

The chief (and almost the only) _difficulty_ in the way of this would
be, to find a _room_ (or suite of rooms) to contain such a library and
repository; but such would probably be found if sought.

The other way in which this object might be attained is by the formation
of a simple CATALOGUE in the same order, such as does already exist and
lies open for public use (though only in manuscript, and not so
accurately classified as might be) in the noble library of the Dublin
University.

This plan would be _far easier_ than (besides forming the best possible
_basis_ for) that so urgently advocated by MR. BOLTON CORNEY (Vol. i.
pp. 9, 42, 43.).

Of course so extensive a design would require to be distributed among
many hundred persons; but so does any great work: while, by each
individual undertaking that department in which he is most interested
and most experienced, the whole might be accomplished easily and
pleasantly.

The great fault of antiquarians is, that they are constantly _beginning
at the wrong end_: they fix on some one piece of information that they
want to get, and devote a world of labour to hunting about in all
directions for anything bearing on the subject; whereas the rational way
obviously is, to have the whole existing mass of (valuable) knowledge
_classified_, and then the inquirer would know _where_ to look for his
purpose.

Of course there will always remain much knowledge of a miscellaneous and
irregular nature which is picked up by accident, and does not come
within the scope of the present design; but this is generally of a
trifling and fugitive kind, and does not at all controvert the principle
above laid down.

In conclusion, I have worked out a tolerably complete series of
arrangements for the above design, showing its practicability as well as
usefulness, which will be much at the service of any one who can use
them for the furtherance of that object.

W. D.

       *       *       *       *       *

MINOR NOTES.

_Numerals._--For the old Indian forms, see Prinsep's _Journal Asiatic
Soc. Bengal_, 1838, p. 348. The prospectus of _Brugsh, Numerorum apud
Egyptios Demoticorum Doctrina_, Berlin, promises to give from papyri and
inscriptions not only the figures, but the forms of operation. Probably
the system assumed its present form by the meeting of the Indian and
Egyptian traders at some emporium near the mouth of the Indus. Peacock
seems to give undue weight to the fact, that the Tibetans have a copious
nomenclature for high numbers: their arithmetic, doubtless, came with
their alphabet, and the Buddhist legends from India.

F.Q.


_Junnius and Sir Philip Francis._--A few years ago, an aged intelligent
person named Garner was living at Belgrave, near Leicester. I have heard
him say that, when he was a farm bailiff to Lord Thanet, at Sevenoaks,
in Kent, Sir Philip Francis was a frequent visitor there, and had a
private room set apart for literary occupation. On one occasion, when he
(Mr. Garner) was riding over the farm with Sir Philip Francis, the
former alluded to one of the replies to Junius, by a clergyman who had
been the subject of the "Great Unknown's" anonymous attacks, adding,
"They say, Sir Philip, you are Junius." Sir Philip did not deny that he
was the man, but simply smiled at the remark. This, and other
circumstances coupled with the fact of Sir Philip's frequent visits to
the house of so noted a politician as Lord Thanet, rendered Mr. Garner a
firm believer in the identity of Sir Philip and Junius to the end of his
days.

JAYTEE.


_Jews under the Commonwealth_ (Vol. i., pp. 401. 474.; vol ii., p.
25.).--There is a confirmation of the story of the Jews being in treaty
for St. Paul's and the Oxford Library in a passage in Carte's _Letters_,
i. 276, April 2, 1649:--

    "They are about demolishing and selling cathedral churches. I
    hear Norwich is designed already, and that the Jews proffer
    600,000l. for Paul's and Oxford Library, and may have them for
    200,000l. more."

CH.


"_Is anything but," &c._--As your work seems adapted, amongst other
subjects, to check the introduction into our language of undesirable
words, phrases, and forms of speech, I would call the attention of your
readers to the modern phrases, "is anything but," and the like, which
have lately crept into use, and will be found, in many (otherwise)
well-written books.

I read the phrase "is anything but," for the first time, in Napier's
_Peninsular War_; where it struck me as being so much beneath the
dignity of historical composition, and at the same time asserting an
impossibility, that I meditated calling the author's attention to it.
The not unfrequent use of the same phrase by other writers, since that
time, has by no means reconciled me to its use.

In the _Edinburgh Review_ for January last (1850) I find the following
sentence:--"But as pains have been taken to fix the blame _upon any one
except_ the parties culpable;" and in the July number of the same
_Review_ (p. 90.) occurs the sentence, "_any impulse rather than_ that of
patriotism," &c.

Now, a "thing," or "person," or "impulse,"--though it may not be the
"thing," or "person," or "impulse" charged as the agent,--must yet be
some _certain_ and _specific_ thing, or party, or impulse, {295} if
existing as an agent at all in the matter; and cannot be "_any_ thing,"
or "_any_ party," or "_any_ impulse," in the _indefinite_ sense intended
in these phrases. Moreover, there seems no difficulty in expressing, in
a simple and direct manner, that the agent was a very different, or
opposite, or dissimilar "thing," or "person," or "impulse" from that
supposed.

I wish some persons of competent authority in the science of our
language (and many such there are who write in your pages) would take up
this subject, with a view to preserve the purity of it; and would also,
for the future, exercise a watchful vigilance over the use, for the
_first_ time, of any incorrect, or low words or phrases, in composition;
and so endeavour to confine them to the vulgar, or to those who ape the
vulgar in their style.

P.H.F.


_Fastitocalon._--_Fastitocalon. Cod. Exon._ fol. 96. b. p. 360. 18. read
[Greek: Aspido ... chelonae]. Tychsen, _Physiologus Syrus_, cap. xxx.:
did the digamma get to Crediton by way of Cricklade?

F.Q.

       *       *       *       *       *


QUERIES

BISHOP COSIN'S CONFERENCE.

Basire in his _Dead Man's Real Speech_ (pp. 59, 60.), amongst other
"notable instances" of Bishop Cosin's zeal and constancy in defence of
the Church of England, mentions

    "A solemn conference both by word and writing betwixt him and
    the Prior of the English Benedictines at Paris, supposed to be
    Robinson. The argument was concerning the validity of the
    ordination of our priests, &c., in the Church of England. The
    issue was, our Doctor had the better so far, that he could never
    get from the Prior any reply to his last answer. This conference
    was undertaken to fix a person of honour then wavering about
    that point; the sum of which conference (as I am informed), was
    written by Dr. Cosin to Dr. Morley, the now Right Reverend Lord
    Bishop of Winchester, in two letters bearing date June 11, July
    11, 1645."

The substance of this conference has been preserved among the Smith
Manuscripts in the Bodleian Library; but it is not in the form of
letters to Dr. Morley. Vol. xl. of this valuable collection of
manuscripts contains (as described in Smith's table of contents):--

    1. "Papers of Bp. Cosins in defence of the Ordination of the
    Church of England against father Prior.

    "The first of these is Bp. Cosin's Review of the Father's
    Letter, &c. [the title-page is placed at p. 77.]

    "Then follows a letter (which is indeed the Bishop's first
    paper, and should be put first) from Bishop Cosin to the Father.

    "After that the Father's Answer to Bishop Cosin's Review at p.
    81.

    "Then come two other papers about the validity of our
    Ordination, with a preface concerning the occasion, p. 89."

    2. "Then, p. 101., A Letter from a _Rom. Cath._ to a Lady about
    communicating in one kind,--with Bishop Cosin's Answer."

    3. "Lastly, in p. 123., is A Letter of Bp. Cosin's to Dr.
    Collins concerning the Sabbath."

The order in which the papers under the first head, about our English
ordination, should fall, appears to be as follows:--

1. There is a note attached to p. 65., evidently written by Dr. Tho.
Smith himself in the following words:

    "Transcript of several papers of Bishop Cosin's sent to me by
    Dr. J. Smith, Prebendary of Durham.--T.S."

2. At p. 77. the title-page is given thus:

    "A Review of a Letter sent from F.P.R. to a Lady (whom he would
    have persuaded to the Rom. party) in Opposition to a former
    paper given him for the defence of the Church of England in the
    Ordination of Priests."

To this are appended the respective forms of ordering priests used in
the Church of England and in the Roman Church.

3. Then, at p. 89., we have the "occasion of this ... Discourse
concerning the Ordination of Priests," &c. This is a kind of preface,
which contains the first paper that was given to the Prior, dated June
14, 1645; also another paper, bearing date July 11, 1645, but ending
abruptly in the middle of a sentence, and having written below it
(probably in Dr. J. Smith's hand) the following note:

    "The rest of this is not yet found, and that which is written
    thus far is not in the Bishop's own hand, but the copy is very
    fair."

However, this second paper (ending thus abruptly) appears to be no more
than the first draft of a long letter from Cosin to the Prior, which
commences at p. 65. of this MS., and which is dated "from the Court of
S. Germains, July 11, 1645;" for not only does this letter bear the same
_date_ as the before-mentioned fragment, but it begins by complaining of
the tone of expression in a letter evidently received from the Prior
after the draft had been prepared, but before it was sent off; and it
concludes with the following note appended as a postscript:

    "Sir,

    "The enclosed (most of it) was prepared for you a fortnight
    since; but now (upon the occasion given by your letter) you have
    it with some advantage from

    "Your servt., J.C.

    "I desire the fav"

    "S. Germ. July 12."

4. The most important part of this MS., however, is contained in the
long letter or treatise {296} placed first in the volume, and bearing
for its title, "A View of F.P.'s Answer to the First Paper."

This is dated from S. Germains, July 25, 1645 and would appear to be
Cosin's last letter. But, if it be really so, Basire must, I think, be
in error, when he says, "Our Doctor ... could never get from the Prior
any reply to his last answer." For at p. 81. of the MS. there is a reply
to the above "Review of a Letter sent by F.R. to a Lady," &c. which,
though copied without either date or signature, was evidently written by
the Prior, whilst it professes to be a reply to a treatise closely
answering to Cosin's letter of July 25, but which letter the writer did
not receive (as he states) before the 26th of September.

I wish yet further to take notice, that Dr. Tho. Smith, in His _Vitae_
(Lond. 1707, praef. pp. vii, viii.), refers to these manuscripts in the
following satisfactory manner:--

    "Cum, post mortem D. Cosini, de pretio et valore schedarum, quas
    reliquit, haeredibus non satis constaret, ... auspieato tandem
    devenit, ut favore, beneficio, et perquam insigni humanitate
    reverendi et doctissimi viri, D. Joannis Smith, Sacrae Theologiae
    Professoris Ecclesiae Dunelmensis Praebendarii, quorum frequens
    hac de re commercium literarum, occasione data, (opportune
    intercedente praenobili et reverendo, D. Georgio Whelero, equite
    aurato, et Ecclesiae Anglicanae Presbytero, ejusdem quoque
    Ecclesiae Cathedralis Prebendario), habui, duos libellos (tanquam
    praetiosas tabulas ab isthoc infami naufragio servatas) a D.
    Cosino, dum in Gallia exularet, Angliee conscriptos jam
    possidieam: quarum unus _Vindicias Ordinatianum Ecclesieae
    Anglicanae_ contra exceptiones et cavillationes cujusdem
    Pontificii sacerdotis e gente nostra, alter _Responsionem ad
    Epistolam_ nobili faeminae Anglae ab alio saccrdote _pro defensione
    communionis sub unica specie administrandae_ inscriptam,
    complectitur," &c.

I should still be glad to add to this long note the followng Queries:--

1. Can any of your readers kindly inform me whether Cosin's two letters
to Dr. Geo. Morley are still in existence, either in MS. or in print?

2. Whether there be any fuller or more authentic account of the
controversy than that in these MS. preserved by the care of Dr. Smith?

3. Whether Cosin wrote any letter to the Prior _later_ than that of July
25?

4. Who was the _lady_ the Prior wished to seduce to the Roman party?

5. Is there any other account of the controversy?

J. SANSOM.

       *       *       *       *       *

ENGELMAN'S BIBILIOTHECA SCRIPTORUM CLASSICORUM.

A little while ago, I ordered Engelman's _Bibliotheca Scriptoram
Classicorum_, purporting to contain all such works published from 1700
to 1846. It was furnished to my bookseller by a foreign bookseller in
_London_ with an English title, having _his own_ name on it as
publisher, and an invitation to purchase the books described in it _from
him_. As the paper and type were German, I objected and received in
consequence a new English title, with the same name upon it, and a
_shorter_ invitation to purchase from him. I was captious enough to
object even to this; and I then received a Leipzig title in German. But
there still remains a difficulty: for this German title has also the
name of a _Parisian_ bookseller upon it, _a la maison duquel on peut
s'adresser, &c._ Now, as Engelman is a bookseller, and would probably
not object to an order out of his own catalogue, of which he is both
author and publisher, the preceding, circumstances naturally raise the
following Queries:

1. What is the real title-page of Engelman's _Catalogue_ 2. Is the
Parisian house accredited by Engelman; or has the former served the
latter as the London house has Served both? 3. Is it not desirable that
literary men should set their faces very decidedly against all and every
the slightest alteration in the genuine description of a book? 4. Would
it not be desirable that every such alteration should forthwith be
communicate to your paper?

The English title-page omits the important fact, that the _Catalogue_
begins at 1700, and describes it as containing _all_ editions, &c., up
to 1846.

A. DE MORGAN.

September 24. 1850.

       *       *       *       *       *

MINOR QUERIES.

_Portrait of Sir P. Sidney, by Paul Veronese._--In the letters of Sir P.
Sidney which I found at Hamburg, and which were published by Pickering,
1845, it is stated that a portrait of Sidney was painted by Paul
Veronese, at Venice, for Herbert Languet. It would be very interesting
to discover the existence of this picture.

Languet had it with him at Prague, _framed_, as he asserts, and hung up
in his room, in the year 1575. He remarks upon it, in one place, that it
represented Sidney as too young (he was nineteen when it was taken); in
another place he says that it has given him too sad an expression. I
should add, that on Languet's death, his property passed into the hands
of his friend Du Plessis.

I am led to write to you on this subject, by having observed, a few days
since, in the collection at Blenheim, two portraits by Paul Veronese, of
persons unknown. There may be many such, and that of Sir Philip Sidney
may yet be identified.

STEUART A. PEARS.

Harrow, Sept. 6.


_Confession._--You would much oblige if you could discover the name of a
Catholic priest, in {297} German history, who submitted to die rather
than reveal a secret committed to him in confession?

U.J.B.


_Scotch Prisoners at Worcester._--In Mr. Walcott's _History of St.
Margaret's Church, Westminster_, I find the following extract from
church wardens' accounts:--

    "1652. P'd to Thos. Wright for 67 loads of soyle laid on the
    graves in Tothill Fields, wherein 1200 Scotch prisoners, taken
    at the fight at Worcester, were buried; and for other pains
    taken with his teeme of horses, about mending the Sanctuary
    Highway, when Gen. Ireton was buried."

I have taken the pains to verify this extract, and find the figures
quite correctly given. I wish to put the Query: Is this abominable
massacre in cold blood mentioned by any of our historians? But for such
unexceptionable evidence, it would appear incredible.

C.F.S.


_Adamson's Reign of Edward II._--

    "The Reigns of King Edward II., and so far of King Edward III.,
    as relates to the Lives and Actions of Piers Gaveston, Hugh de
    Spencer, and Roger Lord Mortimer, with Remarks thereon adapted
    to the present Time: Humbly addressed to all his Majesty's
    Subjects of Great Britain, &c., by _J. Adamson_. Printed for J.
    Millar, near the Horse Guards, 1732, and sold by the Booksellers
    of London and Westminster, price One Shilling."

The above is the title-page of a little work of eighty-six pages in my
possession, which I am inclined to think is scarce. It appears to be a
defence of the Walpole administration from the attacks of the
_Craftsman_, a periodical of the time, conducted by Amhurst, who was
supported by Bolinbroke and Pulteney, the leaders of the opposition. Is
anything known of _J. Adamson_, the author?

H.A.E.


_Sir Thomas Moore._--Can any of your readers give any account of Sir
Thomas Moore, beyond what Victor tells of him in his _History_ of the
Theatre, ii. p. 144., "that he was the author of an absurd tragedy
called _Mangora_ (played in 1717), and was knighted by George I."

In Pope's "Epistle to Arbuthnot," he writes--

  "Arthur, whose giddy son leglects the laws."

on which Warburton notes--

  "_Arthur Moore, Esq._"

Who was _Arthur Moore, Esq._? and who was the "giddy son?" Was the
latter _James Moore Smith_ a gentleman whose family name was, I think,
_Moore_, and who assumed (perhaps for a fortune) the additional name of
_Smith_? This gentleman Pope seems to call indiscriminately _Moore_,
_Moor_, and _More_: and when he says that his good nature towards the
dunces was so great that he had even "rhymed for Moor" (Ib. v. 373.), I
cannot but suspect that the Moor _for_ whom he had _rhymed_, was the
_giddy son_ whom _Arthur_ accused him of seducing from the law to the
Muses. There are many allusions to this Mr. James Moore Smith throughout
Pope's satirical works, but all very obscure; and Warburton, though he
appears to have known him, affords no explanation as to who or what he
was. He was the author of a comedy called _The Rival Modes_.

C.


_Dr. E. Cleaver, Bishop of Cork._--I shall feel much obliged to any of
your correspondents who will furnish me with the particulars of the
consecration of Dr. Euseby Cleaver to the sees of Cork and Ross, in
March, April, or May, 1789. Finding no record of the transaction in the
Diocesan Registry of Cork, and not being able to trace it in any other
part of _Ireland_, I am induced to believe that this consecration may
have taken place in _England_; and shall be very glad to be correctly
informed upon the point.

H. COTTON.

Thurles, Ireland.


_Gwynn's London and Westminster._--Mr. Thomas Frederick Hunt, in his
_Exemplars of Tudor Architecture_, 4to. London, 1830, in a note at p.
23., alludes to _London and Westminster improved, by John Gywnn,
London_, 1766, 4to., and has this remark:

    "It is a singular fact, that in this work John Gwynn pointed out
    almost all the designs for the improvement of London, which have
    been _devised_ by the civil and military architects of the
    present day."

And Mr. Hunt concludes by observing,, that--

    "This discovery was made by the _Literary Gazette_."

Will you permit me, through the medium of your useful publication, to
solicit information of the number and date of the _Literary Gazette_
which recalled public attention to this very remarkable fact?

Sec.N.


_Coronet._--In Newbold Church, in the county of Warwick, is a monument
to the memory of Thomas Boughton of Lawford, and Elizabeth his wife,
representing him in a suit of armour, with sword and spurs, _a coronet
on his head_, and a bear at his feet, chained and muzzled. Query.--Can
any of your readers give an accurate description of this coronet? Or can
any of them mention instances of the monuments of esquires having
similar coronets? The date of his death is not given: his wife died in
the year 1454.

Z.


_Cinderella._--Referring to Vol. ii., p. 214., allow me to ask in what
edition of Perrault's _Fairy Tales_ the misprint of _verre_ from _vair_
first occurs? what is the date of their first publication, as well as
that of the translation under the title of _Mother Goose's Tales_?
whether Perrault was the originator of _Cinderella_, or from what source
he drew the tale? {298} what, moreover, is the authority for identifying
_sable_ with _vair_ for the employment of either in designating the
highest rank of princesses?

SANDVICENSIS.


_Judas' Bell, Judas' Candle_ (Vol. i., pp. 195. 235. 357.).--Some time
since I asked the meaning of a Judas' Bell, and your learned
correspondent CEPHAS replied that it was only a bell so christened after
St. Jude, the apostle. However, it may have been connected with the
Judas' tapers, which, according, to the subjoined entries, were used
with the Paschal candle at Easter. May I trust to his kindness to
explain its purport?

    "_Reading Parish Accompts_.

    "1499. Itm. payed for making leng' Mr. Smyth's molde wt. a Judas
    for the Pascall--vJd."

    "_St. Giles' Parish Accompts_.

    "A.D. 1514. Paid for making a Judas for Pascall iiijd."

    "_Churchwardens' Accompts of S. Martin, Outwich_.

    "1510. Paid to Randolf Merchaunt Wex Chandiler for the Pascall,
    the tapers affore the Rode, the Cross Candelles, and Judas
    Candelles--viiijs. iiijd."

    "_St. Margaret's, Westminster._

    "1524. Item payed for xij. Judacis to stand with the tapers--O
    ijd. O"

MACKENZIE WALCOTT, M.A., Oxon.


_Dozen of Bread; Baker's Dozen._--In the _Chronicle of Queen Jane, and
of Two Years of Queen Mary_, lately printed for the Camden Society
(Appendix iv. p. 112.), it is stated that, amongst other particulars in
the accounts of the Chamberlain of Colchester, at which place Mary was
entertained on her way to London, there is:--"For xxxviii. _dozen of
bread_, xxxixs." In the language of the county from which I write, "a
dozen of bread" was (and I believe is yet) used to express either one
loaf, value twelvepence or two loaves, value sixpence each: and even
when the sizes and price of the loaves varied, it was used to express
the larger loaf, or the two smaller loaves. A dozen of bread was also
divided into six twopenny, or twelve penny loaves.

But in the quotation above, thirty-eight dozen of bread are charged
thirty-nine shillings; whereas the extra one shilling, cannot be divided
into aliquot parts, so as to express the value of each of the
thirty-eight dozen of bread.

What was a dozen of bread in 1553?

What is a _baker's dozen_, and why so called?

P.H.F.


_Kongs skuggsia._--Is anything, precise known of the date and origin of
the Icelandic Kongs skuggsia.

F.Q.


_Coins of Gandophares._--Coins of Gandophares, an Indian prince, are
described by Prinsep, _Jour. Asiatic Soc. Bengal_, and in Wilson's
_Asiana_. The name is met with in the legends of St. Thomas can it be
found elsewhere?

F.Q.


_Satirical Medals._--Is any printed account to be found of a very
elaborately executed series of caricature medals relating to the
revolution of 1688?

F.Q.

       *       *       *       *       *


REPLIES.

GAUDENTIO DI LUCCA.

(Vol. ii., p. 247.)

The work entitled _The Adventures of Sig. Gaudentio di Lucca_ was
published at London in 1737, in 1 vol. 8vo. It purports to be a
translation from the Italian, by E.T. Gent but this is a mere fiction.
The work is evidently an English composition. It belongs to the class of
_Voyages Imaginaires_, and its main object is to describe the
institutions and manners of the Mezoranians, an Utopian community,
supposed to exist in the centre of Africa. Sig. Gaudentio is able, by an
accident, to visit this people, by the way of Egypt, and to return to
Europe; he resides at Bologna, where he falls under the suspicion of the
Inquisition, and having been brought before that tribunal, he describes
his former life, and his adventures in the country of the Mezoranians.

A second London edition of this work, of the date of 1748, is mentioned
in the _Gentleman's Magazine_ for Jan. 1777. There is an edition in
12mo., printed at Edinburgh, 1761. And there is another London edition,
in 8vo., of the year 1786. Copies of the editions of 1737 and 1786 are
in the British Museum.

There are two French translations of the work. One is of the date 1746,
under the title of _Memoires de Gaudentio di Lucca_. The second, of
1754, by M. Dupuy Demportes, speaks of the first having been made by an
Englishman named _Milts_; but the person and name appear to be
fictitious. The first translation is said by Barbier, _Dict. des
Anonymes_, No. 11,409, to have been revised by the Chevalier de Saint
Germain, who made additions to it of his own invention. The second
translation is reprinted in the collection of _Voyages Imaginaires_,
Amsterdam et Paris, 1787, tom. vi.

An anonymous writer in the _Gent. Mag._ for Jan. 1777, vol. xlvii., p.
13., speaking of Bishop Berkeley, says that "the _Adventures of Signor
Gaudentio di Lucca_ have been generally attributed to him." The writer
of the note added to the _Life of Berkeley_ in Kippis's _Biogr. Brit._,
1780, vol. ii. p. 261., quotes this statement, and adds that the work is
ascribed to him by the booksellers in their printed catalogues. This
writer thinks that the authorship of Bp. Berkeley is consistent with the
internal evidence of the book but he furnishes no positive testimony on
the subject. {299}

In a letter from Mr. J.C. Walker to Mr. Pinkerton, of 19 Jan., 1799
(published in Pinkerton's _Literary Correspondence_, vol. ii., p. 41.),
Lord Charlemont is referred to as believing that Gaudentio di Lucca is
founded in fact; that Bishop Berkeley, when he was at Cairo, conversed
with persons who had attended a caravan, and that he learned from them
what he narrated in the account of Gaudentio. This passage is cited in
Southey's _Common-place Book_, p. 204; but the work is manifestly
fictitious, and it does not appear that Berkeley, though he twice
visited the Continent, was ever out of Europe.

The date of the publication of Gaudentio is quite consistent with the
authorship of Berkeley, who died in 1753; but the notice in the
_Gentleman's Magazine_ only proves the existence of a rumour to that
effect; and the authentic _Life of Berkeley_, by Dr. Stock, chiefly
drawn up from materials communicated by Dr. R. Berkeley, brother to the
Bishop, and prefixed to the collected edition of his work (2 vols. 4to.
Lond., 1784), makes no allusion to Gaudentio. There is nothing in the
contents of this work which renders it likely that the authorship should
have been carefully concealed by Bp. Berkeley and his family, if he had
really been the author. The literary execution of Gaudentio is good; and
it is probable that the speculative character of the work, and the fact
that Berkeley had visited Italy, suggested the idea that he had composed
it. The belief that Bishop Berkeley was the author of _Gaudentio di
Lucca_ may therefore be considered as unauthorised.

The copy of the edition of _Gaudentio_ of 1786, which is preserved in
the British Museum, contains in the title-page the following note, in
pencil:

    "Written originally in English by Dr. Swale of Huntingdon. See
    _Gent. Mag._ 1786."

The _Gentleman's Magazine_ for 1786 does not, however, contain any
information about the authorship of _Gaudentio_; and the name of Dr.
Swale appears to be unknown in literary history. At the same time, a
positive entry of this sort, with respect to an obscure person,
doubtless had some foundation. On the authority of this note, Dr. Swale
is registered as the author of Gaudentio in the printed catalogue of the
British Museum Library, whence it has passed into Watt's _Bibl. Brit._
Perhaps some of your correspondents, who are connected with Huntingdon,
may be able to throw some light on Dr. Swale.

Lastly, it should be added, that the writer of the article "Berkeley,"
in the _Biographic Universelle_, adverts to the fact that _Gaudentio di
Lucca_ has been attributed to him: he proceeds, however, to say that--

    "The author of a Life of Berkeley affirms that Berkeley is not
    the author of that book, which he supposes to have been written
    by a Catholic priest imprisoned in the Tower of London."

I have been unable to trace the origin of this statement; nor do I know
what is the _Life of Berkeley_, to which the writer in the _Biogr.
Univ._ refers. The Life published under the direction of his family
makes no allusion to Gaudentio, or to the belief that it was composed by
Bishop Berkeley.

The _Encyclopedie Methodique_, div. "Econ. pol. et dipl." (Paris, 1784),
tom. I. p. 89., mentions the following work:--

    "La Republique des Philosophes, ou l'Histoire des Ajaoiens,
    relation d'un voyage du Chevalier S. van Doelvett en Orient en
    l'an 1674, qui contient la description du Gouvernement, de la
    Religion, et des Moeurs des Ajaoiens."

It is stated that this romance, though composed a century before, had
only been lately published. The editor attributed it to Fontenelle, but
(as the writer in the _Encycl. Meth._ thinks) probably without reason.
The title of Berkeley to the authorship of Gaudentio has doubtless no
better foundation.

L.


[Dunlop, _Hist. Fiction_, iii. 491., speaks of this romance as
"generally, and I believe on good grounds, supposed to be the work of
the celebrated Berkeley;" adding, "we are told, in the life of this
celebrated man, that Plato was his favourite author: and, indeed, of all
English writers Berkeley has most successfully imitated the style and
manner of that philosopher. It is not impossible, therefore, that the
fanciful republic of the Grecian sage may have led Berkeley to write
_Gaudentio di Lucca_, of which the principal object apparently is to
describe a faultless and patriarchal form of governnent." The subject is
a very curious one, and invites the further inquiry of our valued
correspondent.--ED.]

       *       *       *       *       *

ON A PASSAGE IN "THE TEMPEST."

I was indebted to MR. SINGER for one of the best emendations in the
edition of Shakspeare I superintended (vol. vi. p. 559.), and I have too
much respect for his sagacity and learning to pass, without observation,
his remarks in "NOTES AND QUERIES" (Vol. ii., p. 259.), on the
conclusion of the speech of Ferdinand, in "The Tempest," Act iii., Sc.
1.:--

  "But these sweet thoughts do even refresh my labours;
   Most busy, least when I do it."

This is the way in which I ventured to print the passage, depending
mainly upon the old copies. In the folio, 1623, where the play for the
first time appeared, the last line stands:

  "Most busie lest, when I doe it;"

and in that of 1632,

  "Most busie least, when I doe it:" {300}

so that the whole merit I claim that of altering the place of a comma,
thereby, as I apprehend, rendering the meaning of the poet evident. The
principle upon which I proceeded throughout was that of making as little
variation as possible from the ancient authorities: upon that principle
I acted in the instance in question, and I frequently found that this
was the surest mode of removing difficulties. I could not easily adduce
a stronger proof of this position, than the six words on which the doubt
at this time has been raised.

Theobald made an important change in the old text, and his reading has
been that generally adopted:--

  "Most busy-less when I do it."

In restoring the old text I had, therefore, to contend with
prepossession, against which, it seems, the Rev. Mr. Dyce was not proof,
although I only know it from MR. SINGER'S letter, never having looked
into the book in which I suppose, the opinion is advanced.

One reason why I should reject the substitution of "busy-less," even if
I had not a better mode of overcoming the difficulty, is properly
adverted to by MR. SINGER, viz. that the word was not in use in the time
of Shakspeare. The only authority for it, at any period, quoted in
Todd's Johnson, is this very (as I contend) corrupted passage in the
Tempest; I have not met with it at all in any of the older dictionaries
I have been able to consult; and unless the Rev. Mr. Dyce have been more
fortunate, he was a little short-sighted, as well as a little angry,
when he wrote his note upon mine. Had he taken more time to reflect, he
might have found that after all Theobald and I are not so much at odds,
although he arrives at his end by varying from, and I at mine by
adhering to, the ancient authorities. In fact, I gain some confirmation
of what, I believe, is the true meaning of Shakspeare, out of the very
corruption Theobald introduced, and the Rev. Mr. Dyce, to my surprise,
supports. I should have expected him to be the very last man who would
advocate an abandonment of what has been handed down to us in every old
edition of the play.

The key of the whole speech of Ferdinand is contained in its very
outset:--

  "There be some sports are painful, and their labour
  Delight in them sets off;"

and the poet has said nearly the same thing in "Macbeth:"

  "The labour we delight in physics pain."

It is because Ferdinand delights in the labour that he does not feel it
irksome:

  "This my mean task
  Would be as heavy to me as odious; but
  The mistress which I serve quickens what's dead,
  And makes my labours pleasure."

He, therefore, tells us, at the close, that his labours are refreshed by
the sweet thoughts of her; that, in fact, his toil is no toil, and that
when he is "most busy" he "least does it," and suffers least under it.
The delight he takes in his "mean task" renders it none.

Such I take to be the clear meaning of the poet, though somewhat
obscurely and paradoxically expressed--

  "Most busy, least when I do it;"

and when Theobald proposed to substitute

  "Most busy-less when I do it,"

he saw, though perhaps not quite distinctly, that such was the poet's
intention, only, as I have said above, he arrived at it by altering, and
I by adhering to, the poet's language. I may be allowed to add that I
came to my conclusion many years before I was asked to put my name to an
edition of Shakspeare, which interrupted one of the most valuable
friendships I ever formed.

MR. SINGER will see at once that my interpretation (which I consider
quite consistent with the character of Shakspeare's mind, as well as
quite consistent with the expressions he has used throughout the speech
of the hero), steers clear of his proposal to alter "busie lest," or
"busie least," of the folios of 1623 and 1632, to _busyest_ or
_busiest_; although everybody at all acquainted with our old language
will agree with him in thinking, that if Shakspeare had used "busiest"
at all, which he does not in any of his productions, he might have said
_most busiest_ without a violation of the constant practice of his day.

J. PAYNE COLLIER.

September 24. 1850.

       *       *       *       *       *

GRAY'S ELEGY.

Perhaps the HERMIT of HOLYPORT will be satisfied with proofs from GRAY
himself as to the time and manner of the first appearance of the
_Elegy_.

GRAY thus writes to Dr. Wharton, under the date of "Dec. 17, 1750." [I
quote Mason's "Life" of its Author, p. 216.]

    "The stanzas" [which he afterwards called _Elegy_ at the
    suggestion of Mason] "which I now enclose to you have had the
    misfortune, by _Mr._ [Horace] _Walpole's fault_, to be made
    still more public," &c.

The next letter in Mason's publication is a letter from "Mr. Gray to Mr.
Walpole" (p. 217.), and is dated "_Cambridge, Feb._ 11, 1751," which
runs thus:--

    "As you have brought me into a little sort of distress, you must
    assist me, I believe, to get out of it as well as I can.
    Yesterday I had the misfortune of receiving a letter from
    certain gentlemen (as their bookseller expresses it) who have
    taken the Magazine of Magazines into their hands: they tell me
    that an {301} _ingenious_ poem, called 'Reflections in a Country
    Church-yard,' has been communicated to them, which they are
    printing forthwith; that they are informed that the _excellent_
    author of it is I by name, and that they beg not only his
    _indulgence_, but the _honour_ of his correspondence, &c.... I
    therefore am obliged to desire you would make Dodsley print it
    immediately _from your copy_, but without my name, &c. He must
    correct the press himself ... and the title must be 'Elegy
    written in a Country Church-yard.' If he would add a line or two
    to say it came into his hand by accident, I should like it
    better ... If Dodsley do not do this immediately, he may as well
    let it alone."

Dr. Johnson (_Life of Gray_) says:

    "His next production, 1750, was his far-famed _Elegy_," &c.

The Doctor adds:

    "Several of his [Gray's] pieces were published, 1753, with
    designs by Mr. Bentley, and that they might in some form or
    other make a book, only one side of each leaf was printed. I
    believe the poems and the plates recommended each other so well,
    that the whole impression was soon bought."

It contains _six_ poems, one being the _Elegy_. I have before me a copy
of this collection, which is folio. The plates are clever, and very
curious; a copy was sold at the Fonthill sale for 3l. 4s.! The copy,
admirably bound, which I quote, was bought at a bookseller's
front-window stall for 4s. The title of this collection is "_Designs by
Mr._ R. BENTLEY, _for six poems by Mr._ J. GRAY."

According to the title-page, it was "printed for R. DODSLEY, in Pall
Mall, MDCCLIII.," two years previously to the date to which your
correspondent refers. This (1753) collection gives the line,--

  "Save where the beetle wheels his _droning_ flight."

In the _Elegant Extracts_ (verse), ed. 1805, which, it must be needless
to mention, was prepared by the able and indefatigable Dr. Vicesimus
Knox, the accomplished scholar gives the line--

  "Save where the beetle wheels his _drony_ flight."

Dr. Johnson's _Dictionary_ does not insert the word "droning" or
"drony;" but among his Illustrations attached to the verb "to drone,"
there are two from Dryden, each, it may be seen, using the word
"droning." There is no quotation containing the word "drony." Gray's
language is:

  "Save where the beetle wheels his _droning_ flight,
   And drowsy _tinklings_ lull the distant folds."

Johnson's second quotation from Dryden may be worth repeating, as
showing that Gray's language is not wholly different from his
predecessor's:--

          "Melfoil and honeysuckles pound,
  With these alluring savours strew the ground,
  And mix with _tinkling_ brass the cymbal's _droning_ sound."

It is perhaps hardly worth noticing, that there is not uniformity even
in the title. Johnson calls it, _Elegy in the Church-yard_; Dodsley
(1753) styles it, _Elegy written in a Country Church-yard_.

A HERMIT AT HAMPSTEAD.


_Gray's Elegy_ (Vol. ii., p. 264.).--The HERMIT OF HOLYPORT is referred
to the 4to. edit. of the _Works of Gray_, by Thos. Jas. Mathias, in
which, vol. i. at the end of the Elegy, in print, he will find "From the
original in the handwriting of Thos. Gray:

  "'Save where the beetle wheels his _droning_ flight.'"

From the autograph the Elegy appears to have been written in 1750; and
the margin states, published in Feb. 1751, by Dodsley, and went through
four editions in two months; and afterwards a fifth, sixth, seventh and
eighth, ninth and tenth, and eleventh; printed also in 1753, with Mr.
Bentley's designs, of which there is a second edition; and again by
Dodsley in his _Miscellany_, vol. iv.; and in a Scotch collection,
called the _Union_. Translated into Latin by Chr. Anstey, Esq., and the
Rev. Mr. Roberts, and published in 1762; and again in the same year by
Rob. Lloyd, M.A. The original MS. of the above will be found among the
MSS. of Thos. Gray, in the possession of the Masters and Fellows of
Pembroke House, Cambridge.

W.S.

Richmond, Sept 21. 1850

       *       *       *       *       *

BISHOPS AND THEIR PRECEDENCE.
(Vol. ii., p. 254.)

Arun is not right, in reference to this Query, in saying that the
precedence of bishops over the temporal barons is regulated by the
statute of 31 Hen. VIII. The precedence of bishops over the temporal
lords is not regulated by the Act of 31 Hen. VIII. for placing the
lords. They may have originally been summoned to sit in parliament in
right of their succession to certain baronial lands annexed to, or
supposed to be annexed to their episcopal sees; but as some of the
temporal peers were also summoned in right of lands held of the king
_per baroniam_, that is not a satisfactory reason why they should take
precedence of temporal barons.

The precedency must have been regulated by some other laws, rules, or
usage than are presented by the Act of 31 Hen. VIII. The Archbishop of
Canterbury precedes the Lord Chancellor; the Archbishop of York the Lord
President of the Council and the Lord Privy Seal; and all bishops
precede barons. This precedency, however, is not given by the _statute_.
The Act provides only, in reference to the spiritual peers, that the
Vicegerent for good and due ministration of justice, to be had in all
causes and cases touching the ecclesiastical jurisdiction, and for the
godly reformation and redress of all errors, heresies, and abuses in the
{302} Church (and all other persons having grant of the said office),
shall sit and be placed in all parliaments on the _right side_ of the
parliament chamber, and upon the same form that the Archbishop of
Canterbury sitteth on, and above the same archbishop and his successors;
and next to the said Vicegerent shall sit the Archbishop of Canterbury;
and then, next to him, on the same form and side, shall sit the
Archbishop of York; and next to him, on the same form and side, the
Bishop of London; and next to him, on the same side and form, the Bishop
of Durham; and next to him, on the same side and form, the Bishop of
Winchester; and then all the other bishops of both provinces of
Canterbury and York shall sit and be placed on the same side, after
their ancienties, as it hath been accustomed.

There is nothing here to show in what order they are to rank among the
great officers, or other temporal peers; nor is the precedency given to
the Lord Chancellor over the Archbishop of York.

By the Act of Union of Great Britain and Ireland, the archbishops of
that kingdom have rank immediately after the Archbishop of York, and
therefore before the great officers (excepting only the Lord
Chancellor), as well as above dukes; and the Irish bishops immediately
after those of England.

It may be rightly stated that the high spiritual rank of the bishops is
a reason for giving them precedence over the temporal lords sitting as
barons; but has that _reason_ been assigned by any writer of authority,
or even any writer upon precedence?--the Query suggested by E. (Vol.
ii., p. 9.) Lord Coke does not assign that reason, but says, because
they hold their bishopricks of the king _per baroniam_. But the holding
_per baroniam_, as before observed, would equally apply to the temporal
lords holding lands by similar tenures, and sitting by writ, and
receiving summons in ancient times in virtue of such their tenure.

The precedence of bishops over barons was clearly _disputed_ in the
reign of King Henry VI., when Baker says in his _Chronicle_ (p. 204.),
_judgment_ was given for the _lords temporal_; but where the judgment,
or any account of the dispute for precedence, is to be found I cannot
say. That is what your correspondent G. inquired for (Vol. ii., p. 76.).

C.G.


Your correspondent ARUN (Vol. ii., p. 254.) states, on the authority of
Stephen's _Blackstone_, that--

    "Bishops are temporal barons, and sit in the House of Peers in
    right of succession to certain ancient baronies annexed or
    supposed to be annexed to their episcopal lands."

This position, though supported by Lord Coke in more places than one
(see _Coke upon Littleton_, 134. _a, b_; 3 _Inst._ 30.; 4 _Inst._ 44.),
and adopted by most other legal text-writers on his authority, cannot,
it is conceived, be supported. It seems to be clearly ascertained that
bishops sat in the great councils of this and other kingdoms not
_ratione baroniarum_ but _jure ecclesiarum_, by custom, long before the
tenure _per baroniam_ was known. In the preambles to the laws of Ina
(Wilkins' _Leges Ang.-Sax._ f. 14.), of Athelstan (_ib._ 54.), of Edmund
(_ib._ 72.), the bishops are mentioned along with others of the great
council, whilst the tenure _per baroniam_ was not known until after the
Conquest. The truth seems to be that

    "The bishops of the Conqueror's age were entitled to sit in his
    councils by the general custom of Europe and by the common law
    of England, which the conquest did not overturn."--Hallam's
    _Mid. Ag._ 137-8, 9th ed.

Can any of your readers throw any light on the much disputed tenure _per
baroniam_? What was its essential character, what its incidents, and in
what way did it differ from the ordinary tenure _in capite_?

BARO.

       *       *       *       *       *

REPLIES TO MINOR QUERIES.

_Leicester and the reputed Poisoners of his Time_ (Vol. ii., pp. 9.
92.).--This subject receives interesting illustration in the _Memoirs of
Gervas Holles_, who at some length describes the seduction of the Lady
Sheffield, by Leicester, at Belvoir Castle, while attending the Queen on
her Progress. A letter from the Earl to the lady of his love, contained
the suspicious intimation--

    "_That he had not been unmindful in removing that obstacle_
    which hindered the full fruition of their contentments; that he
    had endeavoured one expedient already which had failed, but he
    would lay another which he doubted not would hit more sure."

This letter the Lady Sheffield accidentally dropped from her pocket; and
being picked up and given to the Lord Sheffield by his sister Holles, he
read it with anger and amazement. That night he parted beds, and the
next day houses; meditating in what manner he might take honourable and
just revenge. Having resolved, he posted up to London to effect it; but
the discovery had preceded him to the knowledge of Leicester, who
finding a necessity to be quick, bribed an Italian physician ("whose
name," says Holles, "I have forgotten") in whom Lord Sheffield had great
confidence, to poison him, which was immediately effected after his
arrival in London. Leicester, after cohabiting with the Lady Sheffield
for some time, married the widow of the Earl of Essex, who, it is
thought, says Holles, "_served him in his own kind, every way_."

In the suit afterwards instituted by Sir Robert Dudley, with the view of
establishing his legitimacy, the Lady Sheffield was examined, and swore
{303} to a private marriage with the Earl of Leicester, but that she had
been prevailed on, by threats and pecuniary largesses, to deny the
marriage, as Queen Elizabeth was desirous that Lord Leicester should
marry the widow of the Earl of Essex.

One curious circumstance arises out of the revival of these dark doings.
Are the particular drugs employed by Leicester's Italian physician "in
removing obstacles" now known and in operation? By a remarkable
coincidence, in a case of supposed poisoning at Cheltenham, some time
since, the intended victim escaped with the loss of his hair and his
nails.

H.K.S.C.


_What is the correct Prefix of Mayors?_ (Vol. i., p. 380.)--In Leicester
the usage has always been to designate the chief magistrate "The
worshipful the Mayor," which, I believe, is the style used in
_boroughs_. In _cities_, and places _specially privileged_, "Right
worshipful" are the terms employed.

JAYTEE.


_Marks of Cadency_ (Vol. ii., p. 248.).--The label of the Prince of
Wales has, from the time of Edward III. up to the present time, been of
three points argent, and _not_ charged.

F.E.

       *       *       *       *       *


MISCELLANEOUS.

NOTES ON BOOKS, SALES, CATALOGUES, ETC.

Although we do not usually record in our columns the losses which
literature sustains from time to time, we cannot permit the death of
Thomas Amyot, the learned Director of the Camden Society, and for so
many years the Treasurer of the Society of Antiquaries, to pass without
rendering our grateful tribute to the memory of one of the most
intelligent and kindest-hearted men that ever breathed; from whom we, in
common with so many others, when entering on our literary career,
received the most friendly assistance, and the most encouraging
sympathy.

Every fifty years commences a discussion of the great question when the
current century, or half century, properly begins. We have just seen
this in the numerous Queries, Answers, Replies, and Rejoinders upon the
subject which have appeared in the columns of the daily and weekly
press; the only regular treatise being the essay upon _Ancient and
Modern Usage in Reckoning_, by professor De Morgan, in the _Companion to
the Almanack_ for the present year. This Essay is opposed to the idea of
a "zero year," and one of the advocates of that system of computation
has, therefore, undertaken a defence of the zero principle, which he
pronounces, "when properly understood, is undoubtedly the most correct
basis of reckoning," in a small volume entitled, _An Examination of the
Century Question_, and in which he maintains the point for which he is
contending with considerable learning and ingenuity. All who are
interested in the question at issue, will be at once amused and
instructed by it.

Mr. Charles Knight announces a new edition of his _Pictorial
Shakespeare_ under the title of the National Edition; to contain the
whole of the Notes, Illustrations, &c., thoroughly revised; and which,
while it will be printed in a clear and beautiful type across the page,
and not in double columns, will have the advantage of being much cheaper
than the edition which he originally put forth.

_The Declaration of the Fathers of the Councell of Trent concerning the
going into Churches at such Times as Hereticall Service is said or
Heresy preached, &c._, is a reprint of a very rare tract, which
possesses some present interest, as it bears upon the statement which
has been of late years much insisted on by Mr. Perceval and other
Anglican controversialists, that for the first twelve years of
Elizabeth's reign, and until Pius V.'s celebrated Bull, _Regnans in
Excelsis_, the Roman Catholics of England were in the habit of
frequenting the Reformed worship.

We have received the following Catalogues:--W.S. Lincoln's (Cheltenham
House, Westminster Road) Sixty-first Catalogue of English and Foreign
Second-hand Books; W.D. Reeve's (98. Chancery Lane) Catalogue No. 13. of
Cheap Books, many Rare and Curious; R. Kimpton's (31. Wardour Street,
Soho) Catalogue No. 29. of Second-hand Books in good Condition at very
reduced Prices.

       *       *       *       *       *

BOOKS AND ODD VOLUMES

WANTED TO PURCHASE.

CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY POLL-BOOKS FOR 1780, 1784, 1790, and
  1829.

OXFORD UNIVERSITY POLL-BOOKS for 1750, 1768, 1806.

BEN JONSON by CLIFFORD. 8vo. Vols. II., III., and IV.

Letters, stating particulars and lowest price, _carriage free_, to be
sent to Mr. BELL, Publisher of "NOTES AND QUERIES," 186. Fleet Street.

       *       *       *       *       *

NOTICES TO CORRESPONDENTS.

VOLUME THE FIRST OF NOTES AND QUERIES, _with Title-page and very copious
Index, is now ready, price 9s. 6d., bound in cloth, and may be had, by
order, of all Booksellers and Newsmen._

_We are unavoidably compelled to postpone numerous NOTES, QUERIES, AND
REPLIES: indeed we see no way of clearing off our accumulation of
REPLIES without the publication of an extra Number, to be devoted
exclusively to the numerous Answers which we now have waiting for
insertion._

GUTCH'S Literary and Scientific Regsiter and Almanack, _advertised in
our last No., is for_ 1851 _not_ 1850.

Mr. G.B. RICHARDSON _would oblige us by forwarding the additional verses
of_ "Long Lonkin" _for our correspondent_ SELEUCUS.

A CONSTANT SUBSCRIBER _will find the line_,

  "Music hath charms to soothe the savage breast,"

_in Congreve's_ Mourning Bride.

JANUS DOUSA. _In our next No._

MEDICUS, _who inquires respecting the origin of the proverbial saying,
"Quem Deus vult perdere," is referred to our First Volume_, pp. 347.
351. 421. and 476. _The original line reads "Quem Jupiter vult," and is
Barnes' translation of a fragment of_ Euripides. {304}

       *       *       *       *       *

THE QUARTERLY REVIEW,
No. CLXXIV., is published THIS DAY.

CONTENTS:
   I. TICKNOR'S HISTORY OF SPANISH LITERATURE.
  II. CHURCH AND EDUCATION IN WALES.
 III. FORMS OF SALUTATION.
  IV. SIBERIA AND CALIFORNIA.
   V. MURE ON THE LITERATURE OF GREECE.
  VI. METROPOLITAN WATER SUPPLY.
 VII. ANECDOTES OF THE PROVISIONAL GOVERNMENT.
VIII. COCHRANES'S YOUNG ITALY.
  IX. LAST DAY OF LOUIS-PHILIPPE.

JOHN MURRAY, Albemarle Street.

       *       *       *       *       *

Will be published on the 1st of November, 1850, with the other
Almanacks,

THE LITERARY AND SCIENTIFIC REGISTER AND ALMANACK for 1851. Price 3s.
6d.

Dedicated by especial permission to H.R.H. Prince Albert, by J.W.G.
GUTCH, M.R.C.S.L., F.L.S.;

Containing a condensed mass of scientific and useful information alike
valuable to the student and man of science.

Tenth Yearly issue.

Published by D. BOGUE, Fleet Street, London

       *       *       *       *       *

Shortly will be Published.

THE ARCHITECTURAL QUARTERLY REVIEW. A Literary Periodical devoted to
Works appertaining to the Art and Science of Architecture. Prospectuses
may be obtained from the Publisher. Letters for the Editor, and books,
drawings, models, and specimens, to be addressed to the care of the
Publisher.

GEORGE BELL, 186. Fleet Street.

       *       *       *       *       *

Royal 4to., cloth, price 2l. 2s.

EXAMPLES OF ANCIENT PULPITS EXISTING IN ENGLAND. Selected and drawn from
Sketches and Measurements taken on the Spot, with Descriptive
Letterpress. By FRANCIS T. DOLLMAN, Architect.

This Work contains thirty quarto Plates, three of which are highly
finished in Colours, restored accurately from the existing indications.
The Pulpits delineated are St. Westburga, Chester: SS. Peter and Paul,
Shrewsbury; St. Michael, Coventry; St. Mary, Wendon; St. Mary and All
Saints, Fotheringay; All Saints, North Cerney; Holy Trinity, Nallsea;
St. Peter Winchcombe; St. John Baptist, Cirencester; St. Mary, Totness;
St. Mary, Frampton. Holy Trinity, Old Aston; St. Benedict, Glastonbury;
St. Peter, Wolverhampton: St. Andrew, Cheddar (coloured); St. Andrew,
Banwell; St. George, Brakworth; Holy Trinity, Long Sutton (coloured);
St. Saviour, Dartmouth (coloured); All Saints, Sudbury; All Saints,
Hawstead; St. Mary de Lode, Gloucester; St. Mary, North Petherton.

GEORGE BELL, 186. Fleet Street.

       *       *       *       *       *

To be completed in Four Parts, Parts I. and II., price 5s. each plain;
7s. 6d. coloured.

ANTIQUARIAN GLEANINGS IN THE NORTH OF ENGLAND: being Examples of Antique
Furniture, Plate, Church Decoration, Objects of Historical Interest, &c.
Drawn and etched by W.B. SCOTT.

"A collection of antiquarian relics, chiefly in the decorative branch of
art, preserved in the northern counties, portrayed by a very competent
hand ... All are drawn with that distinctness which makes them available
for the antiquarian, for the artist who is studying costume, and for the
study of decorative art."--_Spectator._

Parts III. and IV., completing the Work, are in preparation, and will be
published shortly.

GEORGE BELL, 186. Fleet Street.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE EDINBURGH REVIEW,
No CLXXXVIII., will be publishd on THURSDAY,
October 10th, 1850.

   I. HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE.
  II. THE UNITED STATES.
 III. BRITISH MUSEUM: CATALOGUE OF PRINTED BOOKS.
  IV. MURE'S CRITICAL HISTORY OF THE LANGUAGE
        AND LITERATURE OF ANTIENT GREECE.
   V. COL. CHESNEY'S EXPEDITION TO THE EUPHRATES AND TIGRIS.
  VI. RECENT CLASSICAL ROMANCES.
VIII. DIFFICULTIES OF REPLUBLICAN FRANCE.
  IX. HORACE AND TASSO.

London: LONGMAN AND CO. Edinburgh: A. and C. BLACK.

       *       *       *       *       *

MR. L.A. LEWIS'S SALES for OCTOBER, 1850, FRIDAY 11TH., and SATURDAY
12th. Valuable Books, Architechural Books, Books of Prints, &c., from
the West of England, including Stuart and Revett's Antiquities of
Athens, 4 vols.; unedited Antiuities of Attica; Piranesi Campus Martius
Antiqua Orbis; Houghton Gallery, 2 vols; Bowyer's Hume's England;
Rogers' Collection of Prints, 2 vols.; Knorr, Deliciae Naturae Selectae, 2
vols.; Tableaux Historiques de la Revolution Francaise, 2 vols.; Stow's
London, by Strype, 2 vols.; Domesday Book, 2 vols.; Edmondson's
Heraldry, 2 vols.; Illustrated London News, 11 vols.; Encyclopaedia
Metropolitana, 29 vols.; Neale's Gentlemen's Seats, 6 vols.; Loddiges'
Botanical Cabinet, 10 vols., large paper; Maund's Botanic Garden, 9
vols.; Sweet's Geraniums, 5 vols.; Beauties of England and Wales, 32
vols.; Hogarth's Works, 3 vols., red morocco; Knight's London, 6 vols.;
Retrospective Review, 14 vols.; Bayle, Dictionnaire Historique, 16
vols.; Lodge's Illustrious Portraits, 10 vols.; Knight's Pictorial
Bible, 3 vols.; Clarke's Commentary on the Bible, 6 vols.; a few
Pictures and Prints, &c.

FRIDAY, 18TH, AND SATURDAY, 19TH.--Books, including the stock of the
late Mr. C. Whiten.

FRIDAY, 25TH,--Pictures, Prints, Books, Stereotype Plates, Copyrights,
Books in Quires, &c.

Mr. C.A. Lewis will have Sales on each Friday in November and December.

125. Fleet Street.

       *       *       *       *       *

Just published, Part 9, price 9s., plain; Tinted, small paper, 10s. 6d.;
Proof, large paper, 12s.

THE CHURCHES OF THE MIDDLE AGES: or, Select Specimens of Early and
Middle Pointed Structures; with a few of the pures; Late Pointed
Examples, Illustrated by Geometric and Perspective Drawings. By HENRY
BOWMAN and J.S. CROWTHER, Architects. Containing Illustrations of St.
Peter's Church, Thrukingham, Norfolk; St. John's, Cley, Norfolk; and St.
Andrew's, Heckington, Lincolnshire.

To be completed in Twenty Parts, each containing Six Plates, Imperial
folio. Issued at intervals of two months.

"Ewerby is a magnficent specimen of a Flowing Middle-Pointed Church. it
is most perfectly measured and described: one can follow the most
rcondite beauties of the construction, mouldings and joints, in these
Plates, almost as well as in the original structure. Such a monograph as
this will be of incalculable value to the architects of our Colonies or
the United States, who have no means of access to ancient churches. The
Plates are on stone, done with remarkable skill and distinctness. Of
Heckington we can only say that the perspective view from the south-east
presents a very vision of beauty; we can hardle conceive anything more
perfect. We heartlily recommend this series to all who are able to
patronize it."--_Ecclesiologist_, Oct. 1849.

"This, if completed in a similar manner to the Parts now out, will be a
beautiful and valuable work. The perspective of St. Andrew's,
Heckington, is a charming specimen of lithography, by Hawkins. We
unhesitatingly recommend Messrs. Bowman and Crowther's work to our
readers, as likely to be useful to them."--_Builder_.

London: GEORGE BELL, 186. Fleet Street.

       *       *       *       *       *

Printed by THOMAS CLARK SHAW, of No. 8. New Street Square, at No. 5. New
Street Square, in the Parish of St. Bride in the City of London; and
published by GEORGE BELL, of No. 186. Fleet Street, in the Parish of St.
Dunstan in the West, in the City of London, Publisher, at No. 186. Fleet
Street aforesaid.--Saturday, October 5. 1850.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Notes and Queries, Number 49,
Saturday, Oct. 5, 1850, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NOTES AND QUERIES ***

***** This file should be named 13480.txt or 13480.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/1/3/4/8/13480/

Produced by The Internet Library of Early Journals, Jon Ingram, David
King, and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team.


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

