The Project Gutenberg EBook of Notes & Queries, No. 53. Saturday, November
2, 1850, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Notes & Queries, No. 53. Saturday, November 2, 1850
       A Medium Of Inter-Communication For Literary Men, Artists,
       Antiquaries, Genealogists, Etc.


Author: Various

Release Date: September 27, 2004 [EBook #13540]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NOTES & QUERIES, NO. 53. ***




Produced by Jon Ingram, David King, the PG Online Distributed
Proofreading Team, and The Internet Library of Early Journals





NOTES AND QUERIES:

A MEDIUM OF INTER-COMMUNICATION FOR LITERARY MEN, ARTISTS, ANTIQUARIES,
GENEALOGISTS, ETC.

       *       *       *       *       *

"When found, make a note of."--CAPTAIN CUTTLE.

       *       *       *       *       *

No. 53.] SATURDAY, NOVEMBER 2, 1850 [Price Threepence. Stamped Edition 4d.

       *       *       *       *       * {369}


CONTENTS.

NOTES:--Page

  Shakspeare and Marlowe, by Samuel Hickson. 369
  A Plan for a Church-History Society. 371
  Burnet as a Historian. 372
  Epigrams from Buchanan. 372
  Mistakes about George Chapman the Poet. 372
  Minor Notes:--Shakspeare and George Herbert--Old
    Dan Tucker--Lord John Townsend--Croker's
    Boswell--Misquotation--Tindal's New Testament--The
    Term "Organ-blower"--"Singular" and "Unique". 373

QUERIES:--
  Early Poetry, &c., Five Bibliographical Queries
      respecting. 374
  Minor Queries:--History of Newspapers--Steele's
      Burial place--Socinian Boast--Descent of Edward IV.--Viscount
      Castlecomer--Judge Cradock, afterwards Newton--Totness
      Church--Meaning of "Harissers"--Ringelbergius: Drinking To
      Excess--Langue Pandras--The Coptic Language--Cheshire
      Cat--Mrs. Partington--Cognation of the Jews and
      Lacedemonians. 375

REPLIES:--
  Fairfax's Translation of Tasso. 377
  Small Words. 377
  Replies to Minor Queries:--Concolinel-Wife of the
      Poet Bilderdijk--Schweickhardt the Artist--Noli me
      tangere--Chimney Money--Passage from Burke--Nicholas
      Assheton's Journal--Scotch Prisoners--Long
      Friday--Bradshaw Family--Julin, the Drowned
      City--Dodsley's Poems--Shunamitis Poema--Jeremy
      Taylor's Works--D[au]ctor Dubitantium--Aerostation--Gwyn's
      London and Westminster--"Regis ad Exemplum totus
      compositur Orbis"--St. Uncumber, &c. 378

MISCELLANEOUS:--
  Notes on Books, Sales, Catalogues, &c. 382
  Books and Odd Volumes Wanted. 382
  Notices to Correspondents. 382
  Advertisements. 383

       *       *       *       *       *


NOTES

SHAKSPEARE AND MARLOWE.

A special use of, a use, indeed, that gives a special value to your
publication, is the communication through its means of facts and
conclusions for the information or assistance of editors or intending
editors. I do not suppose that any gentleman occupying this position
would be guilty of so much disrespect to the many eminent names which
have already appeared in your columns, as would be implied in not giving
all the attention it deserved to any communication you might see fit to
publish; and with this feeling, and under this shelter, I return to the
subject of Marlowe, and his position as a dramatic writer relative to
Shakspeare. I perceive that a re-issue of Mr. Knight's _Shakspeare_ has
commenced, and from the terms of the announcement, independently of
other considerations, I conclude that the editor will take advantage of
this opportunity of referring to doubtful or disputed points that may
have made any advance towards a solution since his previous editions. I
have read also an advertisement of an edition of Shakspeare, to be
superintended by Mr. Halliwell[1], which is to contain the plays of
"doubtful authenticity, or in the composition of which Shakspeare is
supposed only to have taken a part." Neither of these gentlemen can well
avoid expressing an opinion on the subject I have adverted to, and to
them more especially I would address my observations.

I think I have observed that the claims of Marlowe have been maintained
with something very like party spirit. I have seen latterly several
indications of this, unmistakeable, though expressed, perhaps, but by a
single word. Now it is true both Mr. Collier and Mr. Dyce are committed
to a positive opinion on this subject; and it would be unreasonable to
expect either of those gentlemen to change their views, except with the
fullest proof and after the maturest consideration. But who, besides
these, is interested in maintaining the precedence of Marlowe? These
remarks have been called forth by an article in the _Athenaeum_,
containing the following passages:--

    "All Marlowe's works were produced prior, we may safely assert,
    to the appearance of Shakspeare _as a writer for the stage_, or
    as an author, in print.

    "It is now universally admitted among competent critics, that
    Shakspeare commenced his career as a dramatic author, by
    remodelling certain pieces written {370} either separately or
    conjointly by Greene, Marlowe, Lodge, and Peele."

An anonymous writer commits himself to nothing, and I should not have
noticed the above but that they illustrate my position. In the passage
first cited, if the writer mean "as a writer for the stage _in print_,"
it proves nothing; but if the words "in print" are not intended to be so
connected, the assertion cannot be proved, and _many_ "competent
critics" will tell him it is most improbable. The assertion of the
second quotation is simply untrue; Mr. Knight has not admitted what is
stated therein, and if I recollect right, an Edinburgh Reviewer has
concurred with him in judgment. Neither of these, I presume, will be
called incompetent. I cannot suppose that either assertion would have
been made but for the spirit to which I have alluded; for no cause was
ever the better for allegations that could not be maintained.

In some former papers which you did me the honour to publish, I gave it
incidentally as my opinion that Marlowe was the author of the _Taming of
a Shrew_. I have since learned, through Mr. Halliwell, that Mr. Dyce is
confident, from the style, that he was not. Had I the opportunity, I
might ask Mr. Dyce "which style?" That of the passages I cited as being
identical with passages in Marlowe's acknowledged plays will not, I
presume, be disputed; and of that of such scenes as the one between
Sander and the tailor, I am as confident as Mr. Dyce; it is the style
rather of Shakspeare than Marlowe. In other respects, I learn that the
kind of evidence that is considered by Mr. Dyce good to sustain the
claim of Marlowe to the authorship of the _Contention_ and the _True
Tragedy_, is not admissible in support of his claim to the _Taming of a
Shrew_. I shall take another opportunity of showing that the very
passages cited by Mr. Dyce from the two first-named of these plays will
support my view of the case, at least as well as his; doing no more now
than simply recording an _opinion_ that Marlowe was a follower and
imitator of Shakspeare. I do not know that I am at present in a position
to maintain this opinion by argument; but I can, at all events, show on
what exceedingly slight grounds the contrary opinion has been founded.

I have already called attention to the fact, that the impression of
Marlowe's being an earlier writer than Shakspeare, was founded solely
upon the circumstance that his plays were printed at an earlier date.
That nothing could be more fallacious than this conclusion, the fact
that many of Shakspeare's earliest plays were not printed at all until
after his death is sufficient to evince. The motive for withholding
Shakspeare's plays from the press is as easily understood as that for
publishing Marlowe's. Thus stood the question when Mr. Collier
approached the subject. Meanwhile it should be borne in mind, that not a
syllable of evidence has been advanced to show that Shakspeare could not
have written the _First part of the Contention_ and the _True Tragedy_,
if not the later forms of _Henry VI._, _Hamlet_ and _Pericles_ in their
earliest forms, if not _Timon of Athens_, which I think is also an early
play revised, _Love's Labour's Lost_, _The Two Gentlemen of Verona_,
&c., all of which I should place at least seven years distance from
plays which I think were acted about 1594 or 1595. I now proceed to give
the kernel of Mr. Collier's argument, omitting nothing that is really
important to the question:--

    "'Give me the man' (says Nash) 'whose extemporal vein, in any
    humour, will excel our greatest _art masters_' deliberate
    thoughts.'

    "Green, in 1588, says he had been 'had in derision' by 'two
    gentlemen poets' because I could not make my verses get on the
    stage in tragical buskins, every word filling the mouth like the
    faburden of Bow-bell, daring God out of heaven with that atheist
    tamburlane, or blaspheming with the mad priest of the sun.
    Farther on he laughs at the 'prophetical spirits' of those 'who
    set the end of scholarism in an _English blank-verse_.'

    "Marlowe took his degree of _Master of Arts_ in the very year
    when Nash was unable to do so, &c.

    "I thus arrive at the conclusion, that Christopher Marlowe was
    our first poet who used blank-verse in dramatic compositions
    performed in public theatres."--_Hist. of Dramatic Poetry_, vol.
    iii. pp. 110, 111, 112.

This is literally all; and, I ask, can any "conclusion" be much more
inconclusive? Yet Mr. Collier has been so far misled by the deference
paid to him on the strength of his unquestionably great services, and
appears to have been so fully persuaded of the correctness of his
deduction, that he has since referred to as a _proved fact_ what is
really nothing more than an exceedingly _loose conjecture_.

Of the two editors whose names I have mentioned, Mr. Knight's hitherto
expressed opinions in reference to the early stage of Shakspeare's
career in a great measure coincide with mine; and I have no reason to
suppose that it is otherwise than an open question to Mr. Halliwell. For
satisfactory proof in support of my position, time only, I firmly
believe, is required; but the first stage in every case is to remove the
false conclusion that has been drawn, to weaken its impression, and to
reduce it to its true value; and that I have endeavoured to do in the
present paper. In conclusion, I take the opportunity of saying, as the
circumstance in some degree bears upon the present question, that the
evidence in support of the priority of Shakspeare's _Taming of the
Shrew_ to the so-called older play which I withheld, together with what
I have collected since my last paper on the subject, is I think stronger
even than that which I communicated.

SAMUEL HICKSON.

October, 1850.

[Footnote 1: This communication was written and in our hands before the
appearance of Mr. Halliwell's advertisement and letter to _The Times_,
announcing that the edition of Shakspeare advertised as _to be_ edited
by him and published by the Messrs. Tallis, is only a reprint of an
edition, with Notes and Introductions by Mr. Halliwell, which was
commenced at New York some months ago.--ED.]

       *       *       *       *       * {371}

A PLAN FOR A CHURCH-HISTORY SOCIETY.

The formation of a Society, having for its object any special literary
service, is a matter so closely connected with the very purpose for
which this paper was established, that we shall only be carrying out
that purpose by calling the attention of our readers to a small pamphlet
in which our valued correspondent DR. MAITLAND offers a few suggestions
to all who may be interested in the formation of a "CHURCH-HISTORY
SOCIETY, and willing to co-operate in such a design."

DR. MAITLAND'S suggestions are:

1. The collection of a library containing the books particularly
required for the objects of the proposed society: and those who have not
paid attention to the subject will perhaps be surprised to learn that in
DR. MAITLAND'S opinion (and few higher authorities can be found on this
point), "A moderate-sized room would hold such a library, and a very few
hundred pounds would pay for it." On the advantage of this plan to the
editors of the works to be published by the Society, it can scarcely be
necessary to insist; but other benefits would result from the formation
of such a library, for which we may refer, however, to the pamphlet
itself.

The next points treated of are the works to be undertaken by the
Society; which may briefly be described as

2. New and corrected editions of works already known and esteemed;
critical editions, for instance, of such well-known writers as Fox,
Fuller, Burnet, and Strype: and the completion, by way of "posting up,"
of such as have become defective through lapse of time, like Le Neve's
_Fasti_, Godwin's _De Presulibus_, &c.

3. The compilation of such original works as may be considered
desiderata. A General Church-History on such a scale, and so far
entering into details as to interest a reader, is not to be found in our
language; nor has the Church of England any thing like the _Gallia
Christiana_ or _Italia Sacra_. We mention these merely as instances,
referring, of course, for further illustration to the pamphlet itself,
merely quoting the following paragraph:--

    "But on the subject of publication, I must add one thing more,
    which appeals to me to be of vital importance to the
    respectability and efficiency of such a Society. It must not
    build its hopes, and stake its existence, on the cupidity of
    subscribers--it must not live on appeals to their
    covetousness--it must not be, nor act as if it were, a
    joint-stock company formed to undersell the trade. It must not
    rest on the chance of getting subscribers who will shut their
    eyes, and open their mouths, and take what is given them, on a
    mere assurance that it shall be more in quantity for the money,
    than a bookseller can afford to offer."

DR. MAITLAND's fourth section, on the _Discovery of Materials_, tempts
us to further extracts. After remarking that

    "It would be a most important and valuable part of the Society's
    work to discover in various ways--chiefly by the employing fit
    persons to look for, inspect, and make known--such materials for
    Church-History as remain unpublished."

And

    "That no person, not wholly illiterate and ignorant of
    Church-History, could go about the metropolis only, seeking
    after such matters during one month, without gathering into his
    note-book much valuable matter."

The Doctor proceeds:

    "By those who have not been led to consideration or inquiry upon
    the subject, this may be deemed a mere speculation; but those
    who are even slightly acquainted with the real state of things,
    will, I believe agree with me that if men, respectable and in
    earnest and moderately informed, would only set about the
    matter, they would soon be astonished at the ease and rapidity
    with which they would accumulate interesting and valuable
    matter. Transcribing and printing, it is admitted, are expensive
    processes, and little could be effected by them at first; but
    merely to make known to the world by hasty, imperfect, even
    blundering, lists or indexes, that things unsought and unknown
    _exist_, would be an invaluable benefit."

We pass over the section on _Correspondence_, and that on the
establishment of _Provincial Societies_; but from the last, _On the
Privileges of Members_, we quote at even greater length.

    "It is but honest to confess in plain terms, that the chief and
    most obvious privilege of members at first, is likely to be
    little more than a satisfactory belief that they are doing a
    good work, and serving their generation. In a word, the
    nicely-balanced _quid pro quo_ is not offered. It might be
    prudent for the present to confine one's self to a positive
    assurance that the Society will, at the worst, make as good a
    return as several other societies formed for the promotion and
    cultivation of other branches of knowledge. If subscribers will
    only be content to pay as much, and receive as little, as the
    fellows of the Royal and Antiquarian Societies, the
    Church-History Society will thrive. But considering the nature
    and object of the proposed Society, I cannot help expressing my
    confidence that there are many Christian people who will give
    their money freely, and no more wish to have part of it
    returned, than if they had put it into a plate at a
    church-door--let them only be satisfied that it will not be
    embezzled or turned into waste paper.

    "At the same time, the members of the Society might derive some
    legitimate benefits. They would have constantly increasing
    advantages from the use of their library, which would gradually
    become, not only rich in books, but in transcripts, catalogues,
    indexes, notices, &c., not to be found together elsewhere. Of
    all these they would have a right to as much use and advantage
    as joint-proprietors could enjoy without hindrance to each
    other. With regard to works published by the Society, they might
    reasonably expect to be supplied {372} with such as they should
    choose to possess, on the same terms as if they were the
    authors, or the owners of the copyright. These, however, are
    details which, with many others, must be settled by the
    managers; they are not mentioned as matters of primary
    importance or inducement."

DR. MAITLAND concludes by observing, that he should not have ventured to
publish his plan, had he not been encouraged to do so by some whose
judgment he respected; and by inviting all who may approve or sanction
the plan, to make known (either by direct communication to himself, or
in any other way) their willingness to support such a Society, and the
amount of contribution, or annual donation, which, if the design is
carried out, may be expected from them. Of course such expressions of
opinion would be purely conditional, and would not pledge the writers to
support the Society if, when organised, they did not approve of the
arrangements; but it is clear no such arrangements can well be made
until something, is known as to the amount of support which may be
expected.

We have entered at some length upon this _Plan of a Church-History
Society_, and have quoted largely from DR. MAITLAND's pamphlet, because
we believe the subject to be one likely to interest a large body of our
readers, who might otherwise not have their attention called to a
proposal calculated to advance one of the most important branches of
historical learning.

       *       *       *       *       *

BURNET AS A HISTORIAN.

The following extract from Charles Lamb ought to be added to the
_testimonia_ already given by "NOTES AND QUERIES" (Vol. i., pp. 40. 181.
341. 493.):--

    "_Burnet's Own Times._--Did you ever read that garrulous,
    pleasant history? He tells his story like an old man past
    political service, bragging to his sons on winter evenings of
    the part he took in public transactions when his 'old cap was
    new.' Full of scandal, which all true history is. So palliative;
    but all the stark wickedness that actually gives the _momentum_
    to national actors. Quite the prattle of age and outlived
    importance. Truth and sincerity staring out upon you perpetually
    _in alto relievo_. Himself a party-man, he makes you a
    party-man. None of the cursed philosophical Humeian
    indifference, 'so cold and unnatural and inhuman.' None of the
    cursed Gibbonian fine writing, so fine and composite. None of
    Dr. Robertson's periods with three members. None of Mr. Roscoe's
    sage remarks, all so apposite and coming in so clever, lest the
    reader should have had the trouble of drawing an inference.
    Burnet's good old prattle I can bring present to my mind; I can
    make the Revolution present to me."--_Charles Lamb: Letters_.

GUSTAVE MASSON.

Hadley, near Barnet.

_Bishop Burnet_.--An Epigram on the Reverend Mr. Lawrence Eachard's and
Bishop Gilbert Burnet's Histories. By MR. MATTHEW GREEN, of the
Custom-House.

  "Gil's History appears to me
  Political anatomy,
  A case of skeletons well done,
  And malefactors every one.
  His sharp and strong incision pen,
  Historically cuts up men,
  And does with lucid skill impart
  Their inward ails of head and heart.
  Lawrence proceeds another way,
  And well-dressed figures does display:
  His characters are all in flesh,
  Their hands are fair, their faces fresh;
  And from his sweet'ning art derive
  A better scent than when alive;
  He wax-work made to please the sons,
  Whose fathers were Gil's skeletons."

From a _Collection of Poems by several hands_. London: Dodsley, 1748.

J.W.H.

       *       *       *       *       *

EPIGRAMS FROM BUCHANAN.

  A beautiful nymph wish'd Narcissus to pet her;
  But he saw in the fountain one _he_ loved much better.
  Thou hast look'd in his mirror and loved; but they tell us
  No rival will tease thee, so never be jealous.

J.O.W.H.

       *       *       *       *       *

    There's a lie on thy cheek in its roses,
      A lie echo'd back by thy glass,
    Thy necklace on greenhorns imposes,
      And the ring on thy finger is brass.
  Yet thy tongue, I affirm, without giving an inch back,
  Outdates the sham jewels, rouge, mirror and pinchbeck.

J.O.W.H.

       *       *       *       *       *

MISTAKES ABOUT GEORGE CHAPMAN THE POET.

Dr. W. Cooke Taylor, in the introduction to his elegant reprint of
_Chapman's Homer_, says of George Chapman, that "he died on the 12th of
May, 1655, and was buried at the south side of St. Giles's Church." The
date here is an error; for 1655 we should read 1634.

Sir Egerton Brydges, in his edition of Phillip's _Theatrum Poetarum_
(Canterbury, 1800, p. 252.), says of the same poet, "A monument was
erected over his grave by Inigo Jones, which was destroyed with the old
church." Here also is an error. Inigo Jones's altar-tomb to the memory
of his friend is still to be seen in the churchyard, against the south
wall of the church. The inscription, {373} which has been imperfectly
re-cut, is as follows:--

  "Georgius Chapman
        Poeta
        MDCXX
   Ignatius Jones,
  Architectus Regius
     ob honorem
  bonarum Literarum
      familiari
     suo hoe mon
     D.S.P.F.C."

There is no proof that Inigo Jones's tomb now occupies its original
site. The statement that Chapman was studied on the south side of the
church is, I believe, mere conjecture.

EDWARD F. RIMBAULT.

       *       *       *       *       *

MINOR NOTES

_Shakspeare and George Herbert._--Your correspondent D.S. (Vol. ii., p.
263.) has pointed out two illustrations to Shakspeare in George
Herbert's poems. The _parallel passages_ between the two poets are
exceedingly numerous. There are one or two which occur to me on the
instant:--

  _The Church Porch_:

  "In time of service, seal up both thine eyes,
  And send them to thy heart; that, spying sin,
  They may weep out the stains, by them did rise."

  Cf. _Hamlet_, III. 4.:

                "O Hamlet, speak no more;
  Thou turnst mine eyes into my very soul,
  And there I see such black and grained spots
  As will not leave their tinct."

       *       *       *       *       *

  _Gratefulness_:

  "Thou, that hast given so much to me,
  Give one thing more, a grateful heart."

  Cf. _Second Pt. Henry Sixth_, I. i.:

                   "O Lord, that lends me life,
  Lend me a heart replete with thankfulness;
  For Thou hast given me, in this beauteous face,
  A world of earthly blessings to my soul."

       *       *       *       *       *

  _The Answer_:

                  "All the thoughts and ends
  Which my fierce youth did bandy, fall and flow
  Like leaves about me, or like summer friends,
  Flies of estate and sunshine."

  Cf. _Troil. and Cressida_, III. S.:

                         "Men, like butterflies,
  Show not their mealy wings but to the summer;
  And not a man, for being simply man,
  Hath any honour."

  Also, _Third Pt. Henry Sixth_, II. 6.:

  "The common people swarm like summer flies,
  And whither fly the gnats, but to the sun?
  And who shines now, but Henry's enemies?"

S.A.Y.

_Old Dan Tucker._--In a little book entitled _A Thousand Facts in the
Histories of Devon and Cornwall_, p. 50., occurs the following passage:

    "The first governor [of Bermuda] was a Mr. Moore, who was
    succeeded by Captain Daniel Tucker."

Does this throw any light on the popular negro song--

  "Out o' de way, old Dan Tucker," &c.?

H.G.T.


_Lord John Townsend._--I have a copy of the _Rolliad_, with the names of
most of the contributors, taken from a copy belonging to Dr. Lawrence,
the editor of the volume, and author of many of the articles. In the
margin of "Jekyll," lines 73. to 100. are stated to be "inserted by
Tickle;" and lines 156. to the end, as "altered and enlarged by Tickle:"
and at the end is the following note:--

    "There are two or three other lines in different parts of the
    foregoing eclogue, which were altered, or inserted by
    Tickle--chiefly in the connecting parts. The first draft (which
    was wholly Lord John Townsend's) was a closer parody of Virgil's
    18th eclogue; especially in the beginning and conclusion, in the
    latter of which only Jekyll was introduced as 'the poet.'

    "Tickle changed the plan, and made it what it is. The title (as
    indeed the principal subject of the eclogue) was in consequence
    altered from 'Lansdown' to 'Jekyll.' The poetry and satire are
    certainly enriched by Tickle's touches; but I question whether
    the humour was not more terse and classical, and the subject
    more just, as the poem originally stood."--_L_.

Probationary Odes No. XII. is by "Lord John Townsend."

    "Three or four lines in the last stanza, and perhaps one or two
    in some of the former, were inserted by Tickle."--_L._

Dialogue between a certain Personage and his Minister (p. 442. of the
22nd edition) is by "Ld. J.T."

A new ballad, Billy Eden, is by "Ld. J.T., or Tickle."

Ode to Sir Elijah Impey (p. 503.):

    "Anonymous--I believe L'd. J.T."--_L._

Ministerial undoubted Facts (p. 511.):

    "Lord J. Townsend--I believe."--_L._

W.C. TREVELYAN.


_Croker's Boswell_ (Edit. 1847, p. 721.).--Mr. Croker cannot discover
when a good deal of intercourse could have taken place between Dr.
Johnson and the Earl of Shelburne, because "in 1765, when Johnson
engaged in politics with Hamilton, {374} Lord Shelburne was but twenty."
In 1765 Lord Shelburne was twenty-eight. He was born in 1737; was in
Parliament in 1761; and a Privy Councillor in 1763.

L.G.P.


_Misquotation--"He who runs may read_."--No such passage exists in the
Scriptures, though it is constantly quoted as from them. It is usually
the accompaniment of expressions relative to the clearness of meaning or
direction, the supposititious allusion being to an inscription written
in very large characters. The text in the prophet Habakkuk is the
following: "Write the vision and make it plain upon tables, that he may
run that readeth it." (Ch. ii. 2.) Here, plainly, the meaning is, that
every one reading the vision should be alarmed by it, and should fly
from the impending calamity: and although this involves the notion of
legibility and clearness, that notion is the secondary, and not the
primary one, as those persons make it who misquote in the manner stated
above.

MANLEIUS.


_Tindal's New Testament._--The following Bibliographical Note, by the
late Mr. Thomas Rodd, taken from a volume of curious early Latin and
German Tracts, which will be sold by Messrs. Sotheby and Wilkinson on
Friday next, deserves a more permanent record than the Sale Catalogue.

    "I consider the second tract of particular interest and
    curiosity, as it elucidates an important point in English
    literature, viz., the place (Worms) where Tindal printed the
    edition of the New Testament commonly called the first, and
    generally ascribed to the Antwerp Press.

    "This book is printed in a Gothic letter, with woodcuts and
    Initial Letters (in the year 1518).

    "I have carefully examined every book printed at Antwerp, at the
    period, that has fallen in my way; but in no one of them have I
    found the same type or initial letters as are used therein.

    "In the present tract I find the same form of type and woodcuts,
    from the same school; and also, what is more remarkable, an
    initial (D) letter, one of the same alphabet as a P used in the
    Testament. These initial letters were always cut in alphabets,
    and in no other books than these two have I discovered any of
    the letters of this alphabet.

    "The mistake has arisen from the circumstance of there having
    been a piratical reprint of the book at Antwerp in 1525, but of
    which no copy is known to exist."

The following is the title of the tract referred to by Mr. Rodd:--

    "_Eyn wolgeordent und nuetzlich buchlin, wie man Bergwerck suchen
    un finden sol, von allerley Metall, mit seinen figuren, nach
    gelegenheyt dess gebirgs artlich angezeygt mit enhangendon
    Berchnamen den anfahanden_" and the colophon describes it as
    "_Getruckt zu Wormbs bei Peter Schoerfern un volendet am funfften
    tag Aprill_, M.D.XVIII."


_The Term "Organ-blower._"--In an old document preserved among the
archives of the Dean and Chapter of Westminster, is an entry relative to
the celebrated composer and organist HENRY PURCELL, in which he is
styled "our _organ-blower_." What is the meaning of this term? It
certainly does not, in the present case, apply to the person whose
office it was to fill the organ with wind. Purcell, at the time the
entry was made, was in the zenith of his fame, and "organist to the
king." Possibly it may be the old term for an organist, as it will be
remembered that in the fifteenth century the organ was performed upon by
_blows_ from the fist.

At the coronation of James II., and also at that of George I., two of
the king's musicians walked in the procession, clad in scarlet mantles,
playing each on a sackbut, and another, drest in a similar manner,
playing on a double curtal, or bassoon. The "organ-_blower_" had also a
place in these two processions, having on him a short red coat, with a
badge on his left breast, viz. a nightingale of silver, gilt, sitting on
a sprig.

In a weekly paper, entitled the _Westminster Journal_, Dec. 4. 1742, is
a letter subscribed "Ralph Courtevil, _Organ-blower_, Essayist, and
Historiographer." This person was the organist of St. James's Church,
Piccadilly, and the author of the _Gazetteer_, a paper written in
defence of Sir Robert Walpole's administration. By the writers on the
opposite side he was stigmatized with the name of "Court-evil."

At the present time, as I am given to understand, the organist of St.
Andrew's Church, Holborn, is styled in the vestry-books, the
"_organ-blower_."

EDWARD F. RIMBAULT.


"_Singular" and "Unique_."--The word _singular_, originally applied to
that of which there is no other, gradually came to mean extraordinary
only, and "rather singular," "very singular indeed," and such like
phrases, ceased to shock the ear. To supply the vacancy occasioned by
this corruption, the word _unique_ was introduced; which, I am
horror-struck to see, is beginning to follow its predecessor. The
Vauxhall bills lately declared Vauxhall to be the "most _unique_ place
of amusement in the world." Can anything be done to check this ill-fated
word in its career? and, if not, what must we look to for a successor?

M.

       *       *       *       *       *


QUERIES.

EARLY POETRY, ETC., FIVE BIBLIOGRAPHICAL QUERIES RESPECTING.

1. Who was the author of--

    "A Poeme on the King's most excellent maiesties happy progress
    into Scotland and much desired returne. May, 1685. Imprinted at
    London, MDCXXXIII." {375}

It consists of ten leaves, exclusive of title-page, and is signed with
the initials J.R. No copy has been traced in any public or private
library.

2. How many leaves does _Nich. Breton's Fantastiques_ contain? I have a
copy, apparently of a more recent date than the one alluded to in "NOTES
AND QUERIES" (Vol. i., p. 410.), wanting the title, and probably
introductory leaf; the text, however, is quite complete. Where can a
perfect copy be found?

3. There is in my possession a poetical collection, of which I can find
no trace in any library public or private. It is dedicated to "Edmond
Lord Sheffield, Lord President of his Maiesties Council established in
the north parts," and the following is a copy of the title-page:--

    "Northerne Poems congratulating the King's Maiesties most happy
    and peaceable entrance to the crowne of England.

               'Sorrowe was ouer night
                But joy came in the morning.'

                   'Sero, quamvis serio,
                    Sat cito, si sat bene.'

      'These come too late, though they import they love,
       Nay, soone enough, if good enough they prove.'

    Printed at London by John Windet for Edmund Weaver, and are to
    be solde at the Great North doore of Paules, 1604. Small 4to."

Four leaves not numbered, and twenty-two pages numbered.

4. Can any account be given of a sort of autobiography by an individual
whom Lord Orford sneers at in his _Anecdotes of Painting_; it is
entitled:

    "A Manifestation by Sir Balthazar Gerbier, K't. Job. xiii., ver.
    18.; 'Behold now, I have ordered my cause, I know that I shall
    bee justified.' London, Printed for the author, 1651." 12mo. 36
    leaves and title.

This very singular production does not appear to have been published,
and I cannot trace it in any catalogue. It gives the author's descent,
which is noble, and contains many interesting personal details of Sir
Balthazar, which cannot be found elsewhere.

5. In the _Bibliographer's Manual_, by Lowndes, there occurs this entry:
"Life and death of Major Clancie, the grandest cheat in this age," 1680,
and the full catalogue of the Hon. Mr. Nassau is referred to. Can any of
your readers state where a copy of this production may be found? A brief
account of Clancie is contained in the _Memoirs of Gamesters and
Sharpers_, by Theophilus Lucas. He wrote, or there was written, under
this name, various other works not noticed by Lowndes. Can any
information be given as to the assumed or real author of these works?

Lowndes also mentions _Clancie's Cheats, or the Life and Death of Major
Clancie_, 1687. Where can access to this work be obtained?

J. MT.

Edinburgh.

       *       *       *       *       *

MINOR QUERIES.

_History of Newspapers._--

    "The materials for a satisfactory history of newspapers, lie
    scattered in facts known one to this person, and one to that. If
    each London or provincial journalist, each reader, and each
    critic, who has an anecdote and a date, would give it publicity,
    some future volume might be prepared from the combined supply,
    much more complete than any to be fairly expected from a
    comparatively unaided writer who ventures upon an almost
    untrodden ground."

The foregoing extract from the interesting volumes recently published by
Mr. Knight Hunt, under the unpretending title of _The Fourth Estate:
Contributions towards a History of Newspapers, and of the Liberty of the
Press_, has been very kindly recommended to our attention by _The
Examiner_. We gladly avail ourselves of the suggestion, and shall be
pleased to record in our columns any facts of the nature referred to by
Mr. Hunt.


_Steele's Burial-place._--Sir Richard Steele died in the house now the
"Ivy Bush" Inn, at Carmarthen, on the 1st of September, 1729.

Where was he buried?

Is there a monument or inscription to his memory in any church in or
near Carmarthen?

LLEWELLYN.


_Socinian Boast._--In an allocution recently held by Dr. Pusey, to the
London Church Union, in St. Martin's Hall, reported in _The Times_ of
Oct. 17, the following passage occurs:

    "The Socinian boast might be a warning to us against such
    declarations. The Socinian pictured Calvin as carrying on the
    protest against Rome more vigorously than Luther, himself than
    Calvin:

      "Tota jacet Babylon; destruxit tecta Lutherus,
       Calvinus muros, sed fundamenta Socinus."

Query, By what Socinian writer are these two hexameter verses used?

L.


_Descent of Edward IV._--Professor Millar, in his _Historical View of
the English Government_ (ii. 174.), in discussing the claim of Edward
IV. to the English throne, speaks of "a popular though probably a
groundless tradition, that by his mother he was descended from Henry
III. by an elder brother of Edward I., who, on account of his personal
deformity, had been excluded from the succession to the crown." Where
may I find this tradition? or where meet with any information on the
subject?

S.A.Y. {376}


_Viscount Castlecomer._--Sir Christopher Wanderforde, who succeeded poor
Strafford as Lord Deputy of Ireland, in April, 1640, was created,
between that date and his death, which occurred in December of the same
year, Baron Mowbray and Musters, and Viscount Castlecomer. I should be
glad to know the date of the patent of his creation, whether Sir
Christopher himself ever took up the title, and what became of the title
afterwards?

S.A.Y.


_Judge Cradock, afterwards Newton._--MR ELLACOMBE (Vol. ii., p. 249.),
in his notice of a monument in Yatton Church to "Judge Newton, _alias_
Cradock," says, "the arms of Cradock are _Arg._ on chevron _az._ three
garbs _or_." Richard Cradock, he adds, "was the first of his family who
took the name of Newton." Does MR. ELLACOMBE mean that the above arms
were those of the _Cradock family_, or that this Richard Cradock assumed
the coat as well as the name of _Newton_? The above was the bearing of
the family of Newton, of East Newton, in the North Riding of York. The
eldest daughter and coheir of John Newton of East Newton was married to
William Thornton, which family thus became possessed of the estate of
East Newton, and quartered the coat assigned by MR. ELLACOMBE to
Cradock. I should be glad to know the occasion on which Richard Cradock
assumed the name and arms of Newton, as well as the connexion between
these Newtons and those settled at East Newton.

S.A.Y.


_Totness Church._--In Totness Church, the N. angle of the chancel is cut
off in the lower part of the building, in order to allow an arched
passage from one side of the church to the other outside.

The upper part of the building is supported by a very strong buttress or
pier, leaving the diagonal passage between it and the internal wall. Can
any one tell whether this was done merely to afford a gangway for want
of room outside?

The graveyard has been recently enlarged in that direction, for all the
tombstones beyond the line of the chancel appear to be of late date. An
old woman informed me, with an air of solemn authenticity, that this
arched passage was reserved as a place of deposit for the bodies of
persons seized for debt, which lay there till they were redeemed.

H.G.T.


_Meaning of "Harissers_."--It is customary in the county of Dorset,
after carrying a field of corn, to leave behind a sheaf, to intimate to
the rest of the parish that the families of those who reaped the field
are to have the first lease. After these gleaners have finished, the
sheaf is removed, and other parties are admitted, called "barissers." I
have been told that the real title is "arishers," from "arista." I
should feel obliged if any of your correspondents could inform me
whether this name is known in any other county, and what is the
derivation of the word.

CLERICUS RUSTICUS.


_Ringelbergius--Drinking to Excess._--Ringelbergius, in the notes to his
treatise _De Ratione Studii_, speaking of great drinkers, has this
passage:

    "Eos qui magnos crateras haustu uno siccare possunt, qui sic
    crassum illud et porosum corpus vino implent, ut per cutem humor
    erumpat (nam tum se satis inquiunt potasse, cum, positis quinque
    super mensam digitis, _quod ipse aliquando vidi_, totidem guttae
    excidunt) laudant; hos viros esse et homines dicunt."

He says that he himself _has seen this_. Does any reader of the "NOTES
AND QUERIES" know of _any other author_ who says that he _has seen_ such
an exhibition? Or can Ringelbergius's assertion be confirmed from any
source?

J.S.W.

Stockwell, Oct. 15.


_Langue Pandras._--In the Life of Chaucer prefixed to the Aldine edition
of his poetical works, there is published, for the first time, "a very
interesting ballad," "addressed to him by Eustache Deschamps, a
contemporary French poet," of which I beg leave to quote the first
stanza, in order to give me the opportunity of inquiring the meaning of
"_la langue Pandras_," in the ninth line:

  "O Socrates, pleins de philosophie,
  Seneque en moeurs et angles en pratique,
  Ovides grans en ta poeterie,
  Bries en parier, saiges en rethorique,
  Aigles tres haulte qui par ta theorique
  Enlumines le regne d'Eneas
  L'isle aux geans, ceulx de Bruth, et qui as
  Seme les fleurs et plante le rosier
  Aux ignorans de _la langue Pandras_;
  Grant translateur, noble Geoffroy Chaucier."

May I ask, further, whether any particulars are known of this
contemporary and admirer of Chaucer?

I hope I shall not be deemed presumptuous if I add that I should have
doubted of the _genuineness_ of the poem quoted from, if Sir Harris
Nicolas had not stated that it had been communicated to him by "Thomas
Wright, Esq., who received it from M. Paulin Paris," gentlemen in every
way qualified to decide on this point, and being sanctioned by them, I
have no wish to appeal from their judgment.

J.M.B.


_The Coptic Language._--I read in _The Times_ of this morning the
following:

    "The Coptic is an uncultivated and formal tongue, with
    monosyllabic roots and _rude inflexions, totally different_ from
    the neighbouring languages of Syria and Arabia, _totally
    opposite_ to the copious and polished Sanscrit."

Do you think it worth while to try if some Coptic scholar among your
learned correspondents can give us some clearer account of the real
position of that tongue, historically so interesting? {377} The point is
this, Is it _inflected_, or, does it employ _affixes_, or is it
absolutely without inflections and affixes?

If the first, it cannot be "totally opposite" to the Sanscrit: if the
second, it cannot be "totally different" from Syriac and Arabic: if the
third, it cannot have "rude inflections."

J.E.

Oxford, October 23. 1850.


_Cheshire Cat._--Will some of your correspondents explain the origin of
the phrase, "grinning like a Cheshire cat?" The ingenious theory of
somebody, I forget who, that Cheshire is a county palatine, and that the
cats, when they think of it, are so tickled that they can't help
grinning, is not _quite_ satisfactory to

K.I.P.B.T.


_Mrs. Partington._--Where may I find the original Mrs. Partington, whose
maltreatment of the Queen's English maketh the newspapers so witty and
merry in these dull days?

IGNORANS.


_Cognation of the Jews and Lacedemonians._--In the 12th chapter of the
1st Book of Maccabees the letter of Jonathan, the High Priest, to the
Lacedemonians is given, in which he claims their amity. This is followed
by a letter of Arcus, the Spartan king, in answer, and which contains
this assertion:

    "It is found in writing that the Lacedemonians and Jews are
    brethren, and that they are of the stock of Abraham."

Have critics or ethnographers commented on this passage, which, to say
the least, is remarkable?

As I am quoting from the Apocrypha, I may point out the anomaly of these
books being omitted in the great majority of our Bibles, whilst their
instructive lessons are appointed to be read by the Church. Hundreds of
persons who maintain the good custom of reading the proper lessons for
the day, are by this omission deprived, during the present season, of
two chapters out of the four appointed.

MANLEIUS.

       *       *       *       *       *


REPLIES.

FAIRFAX'S TRANSLATION OF TASSO.

On referring to my memoranda, I find that the copy of Fairfax's
translation of the _Gerusalemme Liberata_ of Tasso, containing the
_third_ variation of the first stanza, noticed in my last, has the _two_
earliest pages reprinted, in order that the alteration might be more
complete, and that the substitution, by pasting one stanza over another
(as the book is usually met with) might not be detected. A copy with the
reprinted leaf is, I apprehend, still in the library of the late William
Wordsworth; and during the last twenty years I have never been able to
procure, or even to see, another with the same peculiarity.

The course with the translator was, no doubt, this: he first printed his
book as the stanza appears under the pasted slip; this version he saw
reason to dislike, and then he had the slip printed with the variation,
and pasted over some copies not yet issued. Again he was dissatisfied,
and thinking he could improve, not only upon the first stanza, but upon
"The Argument" by which it was preceded, he procured the two pages to be
reprinted. It is, however, by no means clear to me that, after all,
Fairfax liked his third experiment better than his two others: had he
liked it better, we should, most probably, have found it in more copies
than the single one I have pointed out.

As your readers and contributors may wish to see "The Argument" and
first stanza as they are given in Mr. Wordsworth's exemplar, I
transcribe them from my note-book, because, before I gave the book away,
I took care to copy them exactly:--

  THE ARGUMENT.

  "God sends his angell to Tortosa downe:
  Godfrey to counsell cals the Christian Peeres,
  Where all the Lords and Princes of renowne
  Chuse him their general: he straight appeeres
  Mustring his royall hoast, and in that stowne
  Sends them to Sion, and their hearts upcheeres.
    The aged tyrant, Judaies land that guides,
    In feare and trouble to resist provides.

  "I sing the sacred armies and the knight
  That Christ's great tombe enfranchis'd and set free.
  Much wrought he by his witte, much by his might,
  Much in that glorious conquest suffred hee:
  Hell hindered him in vaine: in vaine to fight
  Asia's and Affrick's people armed bee;
    Heav'n favour'd him: his lords and knights misgone
    Under his ensigne he reduc'd in one."

I own that, to my ear and judgment, this is no improvement upon what we
may consider the author's second attempt, although I think that the slip
pasted over some (if not most) copies is better than the first
experiment.

THE HERMIT OF HOLYPORT.

       *       *       *       *       *

SMALL WORDS.

I stand convicted by the critical acumen of your correspondent [Greek:
Ph]. of having misquoted the line from Pope which heads my "note" at p.
305. I entirely agree with [Greek: Ph]. that the utmost exactness is
desirable in such matters; and as, under such circumstances, I fear I
should be ready enough to accuse others of "just enough of learning to
misquote," I have not a word to say in extenuation of my own
carelessness.

But I entirely dispute [Greek: Ph].'s inference, and am unable to see
that the difference detracts in any substantial degree from the
applicability of my remarks, such as they were. {378}

What does Pope's epithet "low" mean? Is it used for "vulgar" (as I
presume [Greek: ph]. intends us to infer), or simply for "small, petty,
of little size or value"?

To me it appears impossible to read the line without seeing that Pope
had in his mind the latter idea, that of poor, little, shabby,
statureless monosyllables, as opposed to big, bouncing, brave, sonorous
polysyllables, such as Aristophanes called [Greek: hraemata hippokraemna].
After all, however, it would do me very little damage to concede that he
intended the meaning which [Greek: ph]. appears to attribute to the
epithet "low", for _if he did_ mean "_vulgar_" words, it is evident that
he considered vulgarity in such matters inseparable from littleness, as
the "low" words must, if his line is not to lose its point altogether,
have been _ten_ in number, that is, _every one a monosyllable_, a
"small" word.

Take it which way you will, the leading idea is that of "littleness;"
moreover, there is no propriety in the word "creep" as applied to
_merely vulgar_ words, while words petty in size may, with great
justice, be said to "creep" in a "petty pace," requiring no less than
ten steps to walk the length of a line.

Pope was criticising compositions intended to pass as poetry of the best
kind. Will [Greek: ph]. point out in any existing poem of such
profession and character, a single heroic line, consisting of _ten_
words, _all_ which _ten_ words shall be "low" in the sense of "vulgar"?
Can even the Muses of burlesque and slang furnish such an instance?

Has not [Greek: ph]. suffered himself to be carried too far by his
exultation in being "down" (the last-named Muse has kindly supplied me
with the expression) upon a piece of verbal carelessness on the part of

K.I.P.B.T.?

       *       *       *       *       *

REPLIES TO MINOR QUERIES.

_Concolinel_ (Vol. ii., pp. 217. 317.).--As _Calen O Custore me_, after
sorely puzzling the critics, was at length discovered to be an Irish
air, or the burthen of an Irish song, is it not possible that the
equally outlandish-looking "_Concolinel_" may be only a corruption of
"_Coolin_", that "far-famed melody," as Mr. Bunting terms it in his
_last_ collection of _The Ancient Music of Ireland_ (Dublin, 1840),
where it may be found in a style "more Irish than that of the sets
hitherto published?" And truly it is a "sweet air," well fitted to "make
passionate _the_ sense of hearing," and melt the soul of even Don
Adriano de Armado. The transmogrification of "_Coolin_" into
"_Concolinel_", is hardly more strange than that of "_Cailin og astore
mo_" [_chree_] (=my dear young girl, my [heart's] darling) into _Callino
castore me_.

J.M.B.


DR. RIMBAULT'S communication is very interesting, but not quite
satisfactory, not affording me any means of identifying the air. It
would under most circumstances, have given me much pleasure to have lent
DR. R. the MS., for I know no one so likely to make good use of it; but
the fact is, that without pretending to compete with DR. RIMBAULT in the
knowledge of old music, I have also meditated a similar work on the
ballads and music of Shakspeare, and my chief source is the volume which
is said to contain the air of Concolinel. It will be some time before I
can execute the work alluded to, and I would prefer to see the Doctor's
work published first. Whichever first appears will most likely
anticipate much that is in the other, for, although Dr. R. says he has
spent "many years" on the subject, the accidental possession of several
MS. volumes has given me such singular advantages, I am unwilling to
surrender my project. I have the music to nearly twenty jigs, and two
have some of the words, which are curious.

R.


_Wife of the Poet Bilderdijk--Schweickhardt the Artist_ (Vol. ii., pp.
309. 349.).--JANUS DOUSA will find a very sufficient account of
Southey's visit to the Dutch poet Bilderdijk, in vol. v. of the _Life
and Correspondence of Southey_, now publishing by his son. To the
special inquiry of JANUS DOUSA I can say nothing, but I would fain ask
who was Katherine Wilhelmina Schweickhardt? I have in my possession a
series of eight etchings of studies of cattle, by H.W. Schweickhardt,
published in 1786, and dedicated to Benjamin West. My father was very
intimate with Schweickhardt, and I think acted in some sort as his
executor. I do not know when be died but it must be thirty years since I
heard my father speak of his friend, who was then deceased, but whether
recently or not I cannot say. I am rather disposed to think the event
was comparatively a remote one: he left a widow. Was Mrs. Bilderdijk his
daughter? The etchings are exceedingly clever and artistical; my copy
has the artist's name in his own handwriting. If I am not mistaken,
Schweickhardt lived, when my father knew him, at Lambeth, then a
picturesque suburb very unlike the "base, common, and popular" region
which it has since become. B.T. Pouncy, another clever artist of that
day, and a friend of my father's, resided there also. Pouncy published
some etchings which, although not professedly views of Lambeth, were in
reality studies in that locality. When I was a boy I remember my father
pointing out to me the Windmill, which was the subject of one of them.

The Mrs. Bilderdijk who translated Roderick, was, according to Southey,
the second wife of her husband. How did JANUS DOUSA learn that her
maiden name was Schweickhardt?

G.J. DE WILDE. {379}

_Noli me tangere_ (Vol. ii., p. 153.).--In addition to the list of
artists given by J.Z.P. (p. 253.), BR. will find that the subject has
also been treated by--

_Duccio_, in the Duomo at Siena.
_Taddeo Gaddi_, Rinnucini Chapel.
_Titian_, Mr. Roger's Collection.
_Rembrandt_, Queen's Gallery.
_Barroccio_. An altar piece which came to England with the Duke of
Lucca's paintings, but I cannot say where it is now; it is well known by
the engraving from it of Raphael Morgen.

B.N.C.


_Chimney Money_ (Vol. ii., pp. 120. 174. 269. 344.).--There is a church
at Northampton upon which is an inscription recording that the expense
of repairing it was defrayed by a grant of chimney money for, I believe,
seven years, temp. Charles II.

There is also a tombstone in Folkestone churchyard curiously
commemorative of this tax. The inscription runs thus--

  "In memory of
  Rebecca Rogers,
  who died August 29. 1688,
  Aged 44 years.

  "A house she hath, it's made of such good fashion,
  The tenant ne'er shall pay for reparation,
  Nor will her landlord ever raise her rent,
  Or turn her out of doors for non-payment;
  From chimney money, too, this cell is free,
  To such a house, who would not tenant be."

E.B. PRICE.


_Passage from Burke_ (Vol. ii., p. 359.).--Q.(2) will find the passage
he refers to in Prior's _Life of Burke_, vol. i. p. 39. It is extracted
from a letter addressed by Burke to his old schoolfellow Matthew Smith,
describing his first impressions on viewing Westminster Abbey, and other
objects in the metropolis. Mr. Prior deserves our best thanks for giving
us a letter so deeply interesting, and so characteristic of the gifted
writer, then barely of age.

I.H.M.
Bath.

_Nicholas Assheton's Journal_ (Vol. ii., pp. 331-2.).--If T.T. WILKINSON
will turn to pp. 45, 6, 7, of this very amusing journal, published by
the Chetham Society (vol. xiv., 1848), he will find some account of the
Revels introduced before James the First at Hoghton Tower, in the
copious notes of the editor, the Rev. F.R. Raines, M.A., F.S.A.,
elucidating the origin and history of these "coarse and indecorous"
dances--the _Huckler_, _Tom Bedlo_, and the _Cowp Justice of Peace_.

J.G.
Manchester.


_Scotch Prisoners_, 1651 (Vol. ii., pp. 297. 350.).--Heath's _Chronicle_
(p. 301. edit. 1676) briefly notices these unhappy men, "driven like a
herd of swine, through Westminster to Tuthill Fields, and there _sold_
to several merchants, and sent in to the Barbadoes."

The most graphic account, however, is given in _Another Victory in
Lancashire_, &c., 4to. 1651, from which the parts possessing _local_
interest were extracted by me in the _Civil War Tracts of Lancashire_,
printed by the Chetham Society, with references to the _other matters_
noticed, namely, Cromwell's entry into London, and the arrival of the
four thousand "_Scots, Highlands, or Redshanks_."

These lay on Hampstead Heath, and were thence guarded through Highgate,
and behind Islington to Kingsland and Mile End Green, receiving charity
as they went, and having "a cart load or two of biskett behind them."
Thence they proceeded by Aldgate, through Cheapside, Fleetstreet, and
the Strand, and on through Westminster.

    "Many of them brought their wives and berns in with them, yet
    were many of our scotified citizens so pitifull unto them, that
    as they passed through the city, they made them, though
    prisoners at mercy, masters of more money and good white bread
    than some of them ever see in their lives. They marched this
    night [Saturday, Sept. 13.] into Tuttle Fields. Some Irishmen
    are among them, but most of them are habited after that
    fashion."

The contemporary journals in the British Museum would probably state
some epidemic which may have caused the mortality that followed.

GEO. ORMEROD
Sedbury Park, Clepstow.


_Long Friday_ (Vol. ii., p. 323.).--T.E.L.L. is not correct in his
supposition that "Long Friday" is the same as "Great Friday". In Danish,
Good Friday is Langfredag; in Swedish, Laengfredag. I have always
understood the epithet had reference to the length of the services.

COLL. ROYAL SOC.


_The Bradshaw Family_ (Vol. ii., p. 356.).--The president of the
pretended high court of justice, a Cheshire man, had no connexion with
Haigh Hall, in Lancashire. E.C.G. may satisfy himself by referring to
Mr. Ormerod's _History of Cheshire_ (vol. iii. p. 408.) for some
valuable information respecting the regicide and his family, and to
Wotton's _Baronetage_ (vol. iii. P. 2. p. 655.) for the descent of the
loyal race of Bradshaigh.

J.H.M.
Bath.


_Julin, the drowned City_ (Vol. ii., pp. 230. 282.).--I am sorry I did
not state more clearly the inquiry respecting the fate of _Julin_, which
DR. BELL has been so good as to notice. This is partly the printer's
fault. I spoke of the _drowned_, not the _doomed_ city.

The _drowning_ was what I desired some account of. "A flourishing
emporium of commerce", extant {380} in 1072, and now surviving only in
tradition, and in "records" of ships wrecked on its "submerged ruins,"
does not sink into the ocean without exciting wonder and pity. I knew of
the tradition, and presumed there was some probability of the existence
of a legend (_legendum_, something to be _read_) describing a
catastrophe that must have been widely heard of when it happened.

This I conjectured might be found in Adam of Bremen; to whose mention of
Julin DR. BELL referred. But it seems that in his time the city was
still existing, and flourishing ("urbs locuples").

The "excidium civitatis," if the _Veneta_ of Helmold were Julin, must
have taken place, therefore, between 1072 and 1184, when the latter
account was written. If Veneta was Julin, and "aquarum aestu absorpta,"
there must, I suppose, be some account of this great calamity: and as I
have seen in modern German works allusions to the drowning of the great
city, and to the ruins still visible at times under water, I hoped to
find out the _where_ of its site, and the _when_ of its destruction--as
great cities do not often sink into the waves, like exhalations, without
some report of their fate.

V.
Belgravia.


_Dodsley's Poems_ (Vol. ii., pp. 264. 343).--THE HERMIT OF HOLYPORT is
informed that the first edition of Dodsley's _Collection of Poems, by
several Hands_, was published in 1748, 3 vols. 12mo. A fourth volume was
added in 1749, containing pieces by Collins, Garrick, Lyttelton, Pope,
Tickell, Thomson, &c. Those by Garrick and Lyttelton are anonymous. The
four volumes were reprinted uniformly in 1755. The fifth and sixth were
added in 1758.

AMICUS CURIAE.


_Shunamitis Poema_ (Vol. ii., p. 326.).--The titlepage to the volume of
poems inquired after by E.D. is as follows:

    "Latin and English Poems, by a Gentleman of Trinity College,
    Oxford.

    'Nec lusisse pudet sed non incidere ludum.' HOR.

    London: printed for L. Bathurst over against St. Dunstan's
    Church, in Fleet Street, MDCCXLI."

I know not the author; but I suspect either that the title of an Oxford
man was assumed by a Cantab, who might fairly wish not to be suspected
as the author of several of the poems; or that the author, having been
rusticated at Cambridge, vide at p. 84. the ode "Ad Thomam G." (whom I
take to be Thomas Gilbert of Peterhouse), transferred himself and his
somewhat licentious muse to Oxford.

COLL. ROYAL SOC.


_Jeremy Taylor's Works_ (Vol. ii., p. 271.).--It seems desirable that an
advance should occasionally be made in _editing_, beyond the mere
verification of authorities, in seeing, that is, whether the passages
cited are _applicable_ to the point in hand, and properly apprehended.
Bp. Taylor, in his _Liberty of Prophecying_, sect. vi., for instance,
seems incorrect in stating that Leo I., bishop of Rome, _rejected_ the
Council of Chalcedon; whereas his reproofs are directed against
Anatolias, bishop of Constantinople, an unwelcome aspirant to
ecclesiastical supremacy. (See _Concilia Studio Labbei_, tom. iv., col.
844, &c.)

A passage frown Jerome's _Epistle to Evangelus_ is often quoted in works
on church government, as equalising, or nearly so, the office of bishop
and presbyter; but the drift of the argument seems to be, to show that
the _site_ of a bishop's see, be it great or small, important or
otherwise, does not affect the episcopal _office_. Some readers will
perhaps offer an opinion on these two questions.

NOVUS.


_Ductor Dubitantium_.--The Judge alluded to by Jeremy Taylor in the
passage quoted by A.T. (Vol. ii., p. 325.), was Chief-Justice
Richardson; but the place where the outrage was committed was not
Ludlow, as stated by the eloquent divine, but Salisbury, as appears from
the following marginal note in Dyer's _Reports_, p. 1886--a curious
specimen of the legal phraseology of the period:--

    "Richardson, C.J. de C.B. at Assizes at Salisbury in Summer 1631
    fuit assault per Prisoner la condemne pur Felony; que puis son
    condemnation ject un Brickbat a le dit Justice, que narrowly
    mist. Et pur ceo immediately fuit Indictment drawn pur Noy
    envers le Prisoner, et son dexter manus ampute et fixe al
    Gibbet, sur que luy mesme immediatement hange in presence de
    Court."

EDWARD FOSS.


_Aerostation_ (Vol. ii., p. 317.).--The account published by Lunardi of
his aerial voyage, alluded to by M., is, in the copy I have seen,
entitled

    "An Account of the First Aerial Voyage in Britain, in a series
    of letters to his guardian, the Chevalier Gherardo Compagni,
    written under the impressions of the various events that
    affected the undertaking, by Vicent Lunardi, Esq., Secretary to
    the Neapolitan Ambassador. 'A non esse nec fuisse non datur
    argumentum ad non posse.' Second edition, London: printed for
    the Author, and sold at the Panther; also by the Publisher J.
    Bell, at the British Library, Strand, and at Mr. Molini's,
    Woodstock Street, MDCCLXXXIV."

The book contains printed copies of the depositions of witnesses who
beheld Lunardi's descent; and Mr. Baker, who, as a magistrate, took
those depositions on oath, to establish what he thought so wonderful a
fact, erected on the spot where the balloon descended, in a field near
Colliers End, in the parish of Standon, Herts, on the left of the high
road from London to Cambridge, a stone with the following inscription on
a copper plate. It is still {381} legible, though somewhat defaced. It
is engraved in lines of unequal length, but to save your space I have
not adhered to those divisions.

    "Let posterity know, and knowing, be astonished, that on the
    fifteenth day of September, 1784, Vincent Lunardi of Lucca, in
    Tuscany, the first aerial traveller in Britain, mounting from
    the Artillery Ground in London, traversing the regions of the
    air for two hours and fifteen minutes, in this spot revisited
    the earth. On this rude monument for ages be recorded, that
    wondrous enterprise, successfully achieved by the powers of
    chemistry and the fortitude of man, that improvement in science,
    which the great Author of all knowledge, patronising by His
    providence the inventions of mankind, hath graciously permitted
    to their benefit and His own eternal glory."

COLL. ROYAL SOC.


_Gwyn's London and Westminster_ (Vol. ii., p. 297.).--A reference to Mr.
Croker's _Boswell_ (last edit. 1847, p. 181.) may best satisfy Sec. N.
"Gwyn," says Mr. Croker, "proposed the _principle_, and in many
instances the _details_, of the most important improvements which have
been made in the metropolis in our day." Was this copied into the
_Literary Gazette_?

Mr. Sydney Smirke speaks favourably of Gwyn's favourite project, "the
formation of a permanent Board or Commission for superintending and
controlling the architectural embellishments of London." (_Suggestions_,
&c., 8vo. 1834, p. 23.)

J.H.M.
Bath.


_Gwyn's London and Westminster_ (Vol. ii., p. 297.).--Under this head Sec.
N. inquires, "Will you permit me, through your useful publication, to
solicit information of the number and date of the _Literary Gazette_
which recalled public attention to this very remarkable fact:" namely,
that stated by Mr. Thomas Hunt, in his _Exemplars of Tudor Architecture_
(Longmans, 1830), to the effect that the _Literary Gazette_ had referred
to the work entitled _London and Westminster Improved, by John Gwynn_.
London, 1766, 4to., as having "pointed out almost all the designs for
the improvement of London which have been _devised_ by the civil and
military architects of the present day."

In answer to the above, your correspondent will find two articles in the
_Literary Gazette_ on this interesting subject; the first in No. 473.,
Feb. 11. 1826, in which it is mentioned that _Mr. Gwynn_, founding
himself in some degree upon the plan of _Sir C. Wren_, proposed

    "To carry a street from Piccadilly through Coventry Street,
    Sydney's Alley, Leicester Fields, Cranbourn Alley, and so to
    Long Acre, Queen Street, and Lincolns Inn Fields, and thus
    afford an easy access to Holborn; he also recommends _the
    widening the Strand_ in its narrow parts," &c.

I need hardly notice that by the removal of Exeter Change, the
alterations near Charing Cross, and the more recent openings from
Coventry Street, along the line suggested by Mr. Gwynn, his designs have
been so far carried out.

The second paper in the _Literary Gazette_ was rather a long one, No.
532., March 31. 1827. In it Mr. Gwynn's publication is analysed, and all
the leading particulars bearing on the "_old novelties_ of our modern
improvements" are brought to light.

The whole is worth your reprinting, and at your service, if you will
send a copyist to the _Literary Gazette_ office to inspect the volume
for 1827.

W.J., ED.


"_Regis ad Exemplum totus componitur Orbis_" (Vol. ii., p. 267.).--This
hexameter verse, which occurs in collections of Latin apophthegms, is
not to be found in this form, in any classical author. It has been
converted into a single proverbial verse, from the following passage of
Claudian:

  "Componitur orbis
  Regis ad exemplum: nec sic inflictere sensus
  Humanos edicta valent, ut vita regentis."
  _De IV. Consul. Honor_., 299.

L.


_St. Uncumber_ (Vol. ii., pp. 286. 342.).--Sir Thomas More details in
his _Dialoge_, with his usual quaintness, the attributes and merits of
many saints, male and female, highly esteemed in his day, and, amongst
others, makes special mention of _St. Uncumber_, whose proper name, it
appears, was _Wylgeforte_. Of these saints he says--

    "Some serve for the eye onely, and some for a sore breast. _St.
    Germayne_ onely for children, and yet will he not ones loke at
    them, but if the mother bring with them a white lofe and a pot
    of good ale: and yet is he wiser than _St. Wylgeforte_, for she,
    good soule, is, as they say, served and contented with otys.
    Whereof I cannot perceive the reason, but if it be bycause she
    sholde provyde an horse for an evil housebonde to ride to the
    Devyll upon; for that is the thing that she is so sought for, as
    they say. In so much that women hath therefore chaunged her
    name, and in stede of _St. Wylgeforte call her St. Uncumber,
    bycause they reken that for a pecke of otys she will not fayle
    to uncumber theym of theyr housbondys_."--(Quoted in Southey's
    _Colloquies_, vol. i. p. 414.)

_St. Wylgeforte_ is the female saint whom the Jesuit Sautel has
celebrated (in his _Annus Sacer Poeticus_) for her _beard_--a mark of
Divine favour bestowed upon her in answer to her prayers. She was a
beautiful girl, who wished to lead a single life, and that she might be
suffered to do so free from importunity, she prayed earnestly to be
rendered disagreeable to look upon, either by wrinkles, a hump on the
back, or in any other efficacious way. Accordingly the beard was given
her; and it is satisfactory to know that it had the desired {382} effect
to the fullest extent of her wishes. (Vid. Southey's _Omniana_, vol. ii.
p. 54., where Sautel's lines are quoted.)

J.M.B.


_West (James), President of Royal Society_ (Vol. ii., p. 289.).--T.S.D.
states there "has certainly never been a president or even a secretary
of the Royal Society, of the name of James West." Your readers will
remember that West is mentioned by Mr. Cunningham in his _London_, as
having filled the former distinguished office: his statement, which
T.S.D. thus contradicts, is perfectly correct.

Mr. West's election took place 30th of November, 1768, and he filled the
chair until his death in July, 1772.

J.H.M.

[Mr. Cooper, of Cambridge, J.G.N., and other correspondents, have called
our attention to this oversight.]

       *       *       *       *       *


MISCELLANEOUS.

NOTES OF BOOKS, SALES, CATALOGUES, ETC.

The idea of selecting from the _Spectator_ those papers in which the
refined taste of Addison, working on the more imaginative genius of
Steele, has embodied that masterpiece of quiet thorough English humour
which is exhibited in the portrait of Sir Roger de Coverley, is a most
happy one,--so excellent indeed, and when done, it is so obviously well
that it is done, that we can only wonder how it is, that, instead of
having now to thank Messrs. Longman for the quaintly and beautifully got
up volume entitled _Sir Roger de Coverley. By the Spectator. The Notes
and Illustrations by Mr. Henry Wills: the Engravings by Thompson, from
Designs by Fred. Tayler_,--as a literary novelty--such a selection has
not been a stock book for the last century. Excellent, however, as is
the idea of the present volume, it has been as judiciously carried out
as happily conceived. Mr. Tayler's designs exhibit a refined humour
perfectly congenial with his subject, and free from that tendency to
caricature which is the prevailing fault of too many of the comic
illustrators of the present day; while the pleasant gossiping notes of
Mr. Wills furnish an abundance of chatty illustration of the scenes in
which Sir Roger is placed, and the localities he visited, and so enable
us to realise to ourselves, in every respect, Addison's admirable
picture of the worthy knight, "in his habit as he lived." May we add
that, on looking through these amusing notes, we were much gratified to
find Mr. Wills, in his illustration of the passage, "his
great-grandfather was inventor of that famous country-dance called after
him," speaking of "the real sponsor to the joyous conclusion of every
ball" as having "only been recently revealed, after the most vigilant
research," since that revelation, with other information contained in
the same note, was procured by that gentleman through the medium of
"NOTES AND QUERIES."

Messrs. Sotheby and Wilkinson are now selling the last portion of the
Miscellaneous Stock of the late Mr. Thomas Rodd. This sale, which will
occupy eleven days, will close on Friday next: and on Saturday they will
sell the last portion of Mr. Rodd's, books, which will consist entirely
of works relating to Ireland, including several of great curiosity and
rarity.

Messrs. Puttick and Simpson will sell on Monday next a Collection of
Books from the library of the late well-known and able antiquary, Dr.
Bromet, together with his Bookcases, Drawing Materials, &c.

We have received the following Catalogues:--W. Brown's (No. 130. and
131. Old Street) List of English and Foreign Theological Books; W.
Nield's (46. Burlington Arcade) Catalogue, No. 4., of very Cheap Books;
W. Pedder's (18. Holywell Street) Catalogue Part IX., for 1850, of Books
Ancient and Modern; J. Rowwell's (28. Great Queen Street, Lincoln's Inn)
Catalogue, No 39., of a Select Collection of Second-hand Books; W. L.
Lincoln's (Cheltenham House, Westminster Road) Sixty-second Catalogue of
English, Foreign, Classical, and Miscellaneous Books.

       *       *       *       *       *

BOOKS AND ODD VOLUMES WANTED TO PURCHASE.

T. NAOGEONGUS--REGNUM PAPISTICUM. 8vo. 1553.

BARNABE GOOGE'S POPISH KINGDOM. 4to. 1570.

Odd Volumes

BERRY'S HERALDRY, 9 Vols. Supplement.

SHAKSPEARE (Whittingham's Chiswick Edition), Vol. IV. 1814.

Letters, stating particulars and lowest price, _carriage free_, to be
sent to MR. BELL, Publisher of "NOTES AND QUERIES," 186. Fleer Street.

       *       *       *       *       *

NOTICES TO CORRESPONDENTS.

_As we again propose this week to circulate a large number of copies of
"NOTES AND QUERIES" among members of the different provincial Literary
Institutions, we venture, for the purpose of furthering the objects for
which our paper has instituted, to repeat the following passage from our
52nd Number_:--

It is obvious that the use of a paper like "NOTES AND QUERIES," bears a
direct proportion to the extent of its circulation. What it aims at
doing is, to reach the learning which lies scattered not only throughout
every part of our own country but all over the literary world, and to
bring it all to bear upon the pursuits of the scholar; to enable, in
short, men of letters all over the world to give a helping hand to one
another. To a certain extent, we have accomplished this end. Our last
number contains communications not only from all parts of the
metropolis, and from almost every country in England, but also from
Scotland, Ireland, Holland, and even from Demerara. This looks well. It
seems as if we were in a fair way to accomplish our design. But much yet
remains to be done. We have recently been told of whole districts in
England so benighted as never to have heard of "NOTES AND QUERIES;" and
after an interesting question has been discussed for weeks in our
columns, we are informed of some one who could have answered it
immediately if he had seen it. So long as this is the case the advantage
we may confer upon literature and literary men is necessarily imperfect.
We do what we can to make known our {383} existence through the
customary modes of announcement, and we gratefully acknowledge the kind
assistance and encouragement we derive from our brethren of the public
press; but we would respectfully solicit the assistance of our friends
upon this particular point. Our purpose is aided, and our usefulness
increased by every introduction which can be given to our paper, either
to a Book Club, to a Lending Library, or to any other channel of
circulation amongst persons of inquiry and intelligence. By such
introductions scholars help themselves as well as us, for there is no
inquirer throughout the kingdom who is not occasionally able to throw
light upon some of the multifarious objects which are discussed in our
pages.

OXONIENSIS _is thanked. His inclosure shall be made use of_.

_Volume the First of "NOTES AND QUERIES," with very copious Index, price
9s. 6d. bound in cloth, may still be had by order of all Booksellers._

_The Monthly Part for October, being the Fifth of_ Vol. II., _is also
now ready, price_ 1s. 3d.

In the quotation from Jacob Behmen, p. 356., for "Gate of Deep "read
"Gate of _the_ Deep."

       *       *       *       *       *

JOURNAL FRANCAIS, Publie a Londres.--Le COURRIER de l'EUROPE, fonde en
1840, paraissant le Samedi, donne dans chaque numero les nouvelles de la
semaine, les meilleurs articles de tous les journaux de Paris, la
Semaine Dramatique par Th. Gautier ou J. Jauin, la Revue de Paris par
Pierre Durand, et reproduit en entier les romans, nouvelles, etc., en
vogue par les premiers ecrivains de France. Prix 6d. London: JOSEPH
THOMAS, 1. Finch Lane.

       *       *       *       *       *

LIBRARY OF THE LATE WILLIAM BROMET, ESQ.,
M.D., F.S.A., BOOKCASES, ENGRAVINGS, DRAWING
MATERIALS, &c.

PUTTICK AND SIMPSON, Auctioneers of Literary Property, will Sell by
Auction at their Great Room, 191. Piccadilly, on Monday, Nov. 4th, the
Library of the late Wm. Bromet, Esq., M.D., F.S.A., consisting of useful
Works in General Literature, Topographical and Antiquarian, many of
which contain additional illustrations, &c. Catalogues will be sent on
application.

       *       *       *       *       *

On the 1st of November, No. II., price 2s. 6d.

DETAILS of GOTHIC ARCHITECTURE,
measured and drawn from existing Examples, by J.K. COLLING, Architect.
The work is intended to illustrate those features which have not been
given in Messrs. Brandon's "Analysis:" it will be uniform with that
work, and also the "Gothic Ornaments." Each Number will contain five
4to. Plates, and be continued monthly.

D. BOGUE, Fleet Street; sold also by G. BELL, Fleet Street.

       *       *       *       *       *

In Four Volumes, Post 8vo., price 2l. 2s.,

ROMANCE OF THE PEERAGE. By
GEORGE LILLIE CRAIK, M.A. With Portraits.
Vol. IV. will be published on 9th Nov., with a Portrait of the
Duchess of Monmouth and Buccleuch.

HISTORY OF THE EIGHTEENTH
CENTURY, and of the Nineteenth till the Overthrow of the
French Empire. By F.C. SCHLOSSER.
Vol. VII., thick 8vo. 15s. (9th Nov.)

(Vol. VIII., completing the work, with a copious consulting
Index, is preparing for early publication.)

London: CHAPMAN AND HALL, 186. Strand.

       *       *       *       *       *

WEEKLY SALE OF BOOKS, PRINTS, &c.

MR. L.A. LEWIS will Sell at his house, 125. Fleet Street, on Thursday
7th, and Friday 8th November, a Miscellaneous Collection of Books,
including a Circulating Library of 1000 Volumes from the country, Modern
School Books, Framed and Unframed Prints, &c. Mr. L.A. Lewis will have
Sales of Libraries, Parcels of Books, Prints, Pictures, and
Miscellaneous Effects, every Friday during the Months of November and
December. Property sent in on Saturday will be certain to be sold (if
required) on the following Friday.

       *       *       *       *       *

On the 2nd of December will be published, in post 8vo.,
6s. cloth,

THE ANTEDILUVIAN HISTORY, and
NARRATIVE OF THE FLOOD; as set forth in the
early portions of the Book of Genesis; critically examined and
explained. By the Rev. E.D. HENDELL, of Preston.

HODSON, 22. Portugal Street, Lincoln's Inn, London.

       *       *       *       *       *

PROFESSOR DE MORGAN'S WORKS.

ARITHMETICAL BOOKS AND AUTHORS,
from the Invention of Printing to the Present
Time. Royal 12mo., 6s.

ELEMENTS OF ARITHMETIC, Fifth
Edition. Royal 12mo. 5s.

ELEMENTS OF ALGEBRA, Preliminary
to the DIFFERENTIAL CALCULUS. Second Edition. Royal 12mo. 9s.

TRIGONOMETRY AND DOUBLE ALGEBRA.
Royal 12mo. 7s. 6d.

FORMAL LOGIC; or the CALCULUS OF INFERENCE,
NECESSARY and PROBABLE. 8vo. 12s.

London: TAYLOR, WALTON, and MABERLY, Upper Gower Street,
and Ivy Lane, Paternoster Row.

       *       *       *       *       *

NOTICES OF SEPULCHRAL MONUMENTS
IN ENGLISH CHURCHES. With Illustrations,
price 3s. 6d. By W. HESTINGS KELKE, Rector of Drayton
Beauchamp.

C. Cox, 12. King William Street, Strand.

       *       *       *       *       *

Now Ready, 8vo. cloth extra, price 7s. 6d.

GLIMMERINGS IN THE DARK; or,
LIGHTS AND SHADOWS OF THE OLDEN
TIME. By F. SOMNER MERRYWEATHER.

Recently Published, by the same Author, 8vo. cloth, 5s.

BIBLIOMANIA; or, THE LOVE OF
BOOKS IN THE MIDDLE AGES.

SIMPKIN, MARSHALL, AND CO., and all Booksellers.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE GENTLEMAN'S MAGAZINE for
NOVEMBER contains, among other articles: The
Prelude, Wordsworth's Autobiographical Poem; Rejoicings on
the Birth of the Son of James II.; The Castle and Honour of
Clare (with Engravings); Original Letters of Bishop Bedell;
Memoir of Thomas Dodd, author of the "Connoisseur's
Repertorium" (with a Portrait); Chaucer's Monument, and
Spenser's Death, by J. Payne Collier, Esq.; Christian Iconography,
the Heavenly Host, Seraphim, Cherubim, and Thrones,
by J.G. Waller, Esq.; Gothic Windows, by Sharpe and Freeman;
Diary of John, Earl of Egmont, Part II., Memoir of
Andre Chenier; Parker's Introduction to Gothic Architecture;
The British Museum Catalogue and the Edinburgh Review.
With Notes of the Month; Review of New Publications;
Reports of Archaeological Societies; Historical Chronicle; and
OBITUARY, including Memoirs of the Queen of the Belgians, the
Right Hon. C.W.W. Wynn, Vice-Chancellor Shadwell, the
Rev. Dr. Ingram, the Rev. Walter Davies, &c., &c. Price 2s. 6d.

NICHOLS AND SON, 25. Parliament-street.

       *       *       *       *       * {384}

MR. MURRAY'S
ANNOUNCEMENTS OF NEW BOOKS.


I. THE DEFENCELESS STATE OF GREAT BRITAIN. BY SIR FRANCIS B. HEAD, Bart.
Post 8vo. (Ready.)

II. THE COURTS OF LONDON AND VIENNA AT THE END OF THE 17TH CENTURY.
Being Extracts from the Correspondence of LORD LEXINGTON, British
Minister at Vienna, 1694-1698. Edited by the Hon. H. MANNERS SUTTON,
8vo.

III. MILITARY EVENTS IN ITALY, 1848-9. Translated from the German. By
the EARL OF ELLESMERE. Post 8vo.

IV. NAVAL GUNNERY With detailed Descriptions and Explanations of the New
Guns introduced since the War in 1813. By LIEUT. GEN. SIR HOWARD
DOUGLAS, Bart. Third Edition. 8vo.

V. HUMBOLDT'S COSMOS: Third and last Volume. Translated from the German.
By Col. and MRS. SABINE. Post 8vo.


VI. A MANUAL OF ELEMENTARY GEOLOGY; OR, THE ANCIENT CHANGES OF THE EARTH
AND ITS INHABITANTS. By SIR CHARLES LYELL, KF.R.S. Third Edition,
thoroughly revised. Woodcuts. In One Volume. 8vo.

VII. ENGLAND AS IT IS; Political, Social, and Industrial, in the 19th
Century. 2vols. Post 8vo.

VIII. CHRISTIANITY IN CEYLON. Its Introduction and Progress under the
Portuguese, Dutch, British, and American Missions. By SIR JAMES EMERSON
TENNENT. Woodcuts. 8vo.

IX. THE PALACES OF NINEVEH AND PERSEPOLIS RESTORED. Being an Attempt to
explain the Architecture of the Ancient Buildings now remaining in
Assyria and Persia. By JAMES FERGUSSON, Esq. Woodcuts. 8vo.

X. LIFE OF THOMAS STOTHARD, R.A. With Personal Reminiscences. By MRS.
BRAY. With Illustrations. Small 4to.

XI. KUGLER'S HANDBOOK OF ITALIAN PAINTING. Edited by CHARLES LOCK
EASTLAKE, R.A. Revised Edition. With 100 Woodcuts. Post 8vo.

XII. A NEW CLASSICAL DICTIONARY OF BIOGRAPHY, MYTHOLOGY, AND GEOGRAPHY,
FOR YOUNGER STUDENTS. By WILLIAM SMITH, L.L.D. 1 vol. 8vo. (Ready.)

XIII. SALMONIA; OR, DAYS OF FLY-FISHING. By SIR HUMPHRY DAVY. New
Edition. With Woodcuts. Fcap. 8vo.

XIV. CONSOLATIONS IN TRAVEL; OR, THE LAST DAYS OF A PHILOSOPHER. By SIR
HUMPHRY DAVY. New Edition. With Woodcuts. Fcap. 8vo.

XV. SAMUEL T. COLERIDGE'S TABLE-TALK. New Edition. Fcap. 8vo.

XVI. REJECTED ADDRESSES. By JAMES SMITH and HORACE SMITH. New Edition.
Portraits. Fcap. 8vo.

XVII. INDEX TO THE QUARTERLY REVIEW. From Vol. 61 to 79 inclusive. 1
vol. 8vo.

XVIII. MODERN DOMESTIC COOKERY. Founded upon Principles of Economy and
Practical Knowledge, and adapted for the Use of Private Families. By
MRS. RUNMELL. A New Edition, most thoroughly corrected and much
enlarged. By A LADY. With Woodcuts. Fcap.

JOHN MURRAY, ALBEMARLE STREET.

       *       *       *       *       *

Printed by THOMAS CLARK SHAW, of No. 8. New Street Square, at No. 5. New
Street Square, in the Parish of St. Bride in the City of London; and
published by GEORGE BELL, of No. 186. Fleet Street, in the Parish of St.
Dunstan in the West, in the City of London, Publisher, at No. 186. Fleet
Street aforesaid.--Saturday, November 2, 1850.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Notes & Queries, No. 53. Saturday,
November 2, 1850, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NOTES & QUERIES, NO. 53. ***

***** This file should be named 13540.txt or 13540.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/1/3/5/4/13540/

Produced by Jon Ingram, David King, the PG Online Distributed
Proofreading Team, and The Internet Library of Early Journals


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
