The Project Gutenberg EBook of Notes & Queries, No. 18. Saturday, March 2,
1850, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Notes & Queries, No. 18. Saturday, March 2, 1850
       A Medium Of Inter-Communication For Literary Men, Artists,
       Antiquaries, Genealogists, Etc.


Author: Various

Release Date: September 27, 2004 [EBook #13544]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NOTES & QUERIES, NO. 18. ***




Produced by Jon Ingram, David King, the PG Online Distributed
Proofreading Team, and The Internet Library of Early Journals





NOTES AND QUERIES:

A MEDIUM OF INTER-COMMUNICATION FOR LITERARY MEN, ARTISTS, ANTIQUARIES,
GENEALOGISTS, ETC.

       *       *       *       *       *

"When found, make a note of."--CAPTAIN CUTTLE.

       *       *       *       *       *

No. 18.] SATURDAY, MARCH 2, 1850 [Price Threepence. Stamped Edition 4d.

       *       *       *       *       * {273}


CONTENTS.

NOTES:--

Unpublished Letter of Horace Walpole, by S. Hall. 273
Lady Arabella Stuard, by R. Cole. 274
The Name Martel, by W. Robson. 275

QUERIES:--
Query as to Junius, by J. Sudlow, Esq. 275
New Edition of Dr. Owen's Works. 276
Minor Queries:--MS. Book of Hours--Bess of Hardwick--Caesar's
  Wife--Minar's Books of Antiquities--Proverb
  against Physicians--Compendyous Olde
  Treatyse--Topography of Foreign Printing Presses--Cromwell's
  Estates--Depinges. 276

REPLIES:--
Origin of Jew's-harp, by E.F. Rimbault, LL.D. 277
AElfric's Colloquy, by S.W. Singer. 278
Reheting and Rehetours. 278
Arabic Numerals. 279
Fraternity of Christian Doctrine, Chaucer's Night
  Charm, by Rev. D. Rock. 281
Replies to Minor Queries:--By Hook or by Crook, Pokership,
  &c.--Golden Frog--Madoc--Twysden
  MSS.--Royal Genealogies--Astle's MSS.--Dr. Hugh
  Todd's MSS.--Sir W. Ryder--Scole Inn--Killegrew
  Family--Pavoise of the Black Prince--Welsh
  Ambassador--Phoenix. by Lactantius--Catsup--Buckingham
  Motto--Devices of Anglo-Saxons--Purteninae--Pandoxare, &c. 281

MISCELLANIES:--
Use of Monosyllables--To endeavour oneself--Evelyn's
  Sculptura--William Baxter--Derivation of "Avon"--Warton
  and Heinsius, &c. 285

NOTES ON BOOKS, CATALOGUES, SALES, &c.
Books and Odd Volumes wanted. 287
Notices to Correspondents. 287
Advertisements. 288

       *       *       *       *       *


NOTES

UNPUBLISHED LETTER OF HORACE WALPOLE

I have the pleasure of inclosing to you (I believe) an unpublished
letter of Horace Walpole's. It was found among the papers of the late
William Parsons, one of the Della Cruscan poets. That it is genuine I
have no doubt. The handwriting is precisely similar to a note sent with
a copy of the _Mysterious Mother_ to Mr. Parsons, in which Horace
Walpole writes, "he is unwilling to part with a copy without protesting
against his own want of judgment in selecting so disgusting a subject;
the absurdity of which he believes makes many faults of which he is
sensible in the execution overlooked." It is also guaranteed by its
date,--"Paris, July 28. 1771." By reference to his correspondence with
Sir H. Mann (vol. ii. p. 163.), we find a letter dated July 6, 1771, in
which he writes, "I am not gone; I do go to-morrow;" and in his _General
Correspondence_, vol. v. p. 303., writing to John Chute, his letter is
dated from Amiens, July 9. 1771, beginning, "I am got no farther yet;"
and he returned to Arlington Street, September 6. 1771, having arrived
at Paris on the 10th of July, and quitted it on the 2nd of September. I
notice the dates, as they indicate the rate of travelling in some degree
at that period. The Query is, to whom was it addressed? There is nothing
on the original to indicate the person. The letter is of no great
importance, except as it shows that Walpole, under certain conditions of
being, was more earnest and sincere than perhaps was in his nature, or
was generally his wont.

SPENCER HALL.

Athenaeum, Feb. 25. 1850.

"Paris, July 28. 1771.

"Dear S'r.

"I have received no letter from my brother, and consequently have no
answer to make to him. I shall only say that after entering into a
solemn engagement with me, that we should dispose of the places
alternately, I can scarce think him serious, when he tells you he has
made an _entirely_ new arrangement for ALL the places, expects I shoud
concur in it; and after that, is so good as to promise he will dispose
of no more without consulting me. If He is so absolutely master of all,
my concurrence is not necessary, _and I will give none_. If he chuses to
dispose of the places without me, That matter with others _more
important_, must be regulated in another manner,--and it is time they
shoud, when no agreement is kept with me, and I find objections made
which, upon the fullest discussion and after allowance of the force of
my arguments and right, had been given up twenty years ago.

"With regard to your letter, S'r, some parts of it are, I protest,
totally unintelligible to me. Others, which I think I do understand,
require a much fuller answer than I have time to give now, as the post
goes out to-morrow morning. That answer will contain matter not at all
fit for the Post, and which I am sure you woud not wish shoud be handled
there; for which reason I shall defer it, till I can give my answer at
length into your own hands. It will, I believe, surprize both you and my
brother; and show how unkindly I have been {274} treated after doing
everything to accommodate both. As to the conditions which you say, S'r,
you intend to exact from my brother, you will undoubtedly state them to
him himself; and cannot expect I should meddle with them or be party to
them. Neither you nor he can imagine that I am quite so tame an idiot as
to enter into bonds for persons of _his_ recommendation. If the office
is _his_, he must be answerable for it, and for all the persons he
employs in it. I protest against every thing that is not my own act--a
consequence he perhaps did not foresee, when he chose, contrary to his
agreement with me, to engross the whole disposition. I have always known
clearly what is my own right and on what founded; and have acted
strictly according to my right, and am ready to justify every step of my
conduct. I have sufficiently shown my disposition to peace, and appeal
to you yourself, S'r, and to my brother, whether either can charge me
with the least encroachment beyond my right; and whether I have not
acquiesced in every single step that either has desired of me. Your
letter, S'r, and that you quote of my brother, have shown how necessary
it is for me to take the measure I am determined to take. I would have
done any thing to oblige either you or my brother, but I am not to be
threatened out of my right in any shape. I know when it is proper to
yield and when to take my stand. I refused to accept the place for my
own life when it was offered to me: when I declined _that_, it is not
probable that I would hold the place to the wrong of anybody else; it
will and _must_ be seen who claims any part or prerogatives of the place
unjustly; my honour demands to have this ascertained, and I will add,
that when I scorned a favour, I am not likely to be intimidated by a
menace.

"I say all this coolly and deliberately, and my actions will be
conformable. I do not forget my obligations to you, dear S'r, or to your
dead brother, whose memory will ever be most dear to me. Unkind
expressions shall not alter the affection I have for you and your
family, nor am I so unreasonable, so unjust, or so absurd as not to
approve your doing every thing you think right for your own interest and
security and for those of your family. What I have to say hereafter will
prove that these not only are but _ever have been_ my sentiments. I
shall then appeal to your own truth whether it is just in you to have
used some expressions in your letter, but as I mean to act with the
utmost circumspection and without a grain of resentment to _anybody_, I
shall say no more till I have had full time to weigh every word I shall
use, and every step I mean to take. In the meantime I am,

"Dear S'r,

"Yr obliged humble serv't,

"HOR. WALPOLE.

"P.S. My refusal of the patent for my life has shown what value I set
upon it; but _I will_ have justice, especially for my character, which
no consideration upon earth shall prevent my seeking. It must and shall
be known whether I enjoy the place to the wrong of any man living. You
have my free consent, S'r, to show this letter to whom you please; I
have nothing to conceal, and am ready to submit my conduct to the whole
world."

       *       *       *       *       *

LADY ARABELLA STUART.

As a pendant to Mr. P. Cunningham's "New Facts about Lady Arabella
Stuart" (No. 1. p. 10.). I send you a copy of Bishop James' Account and
Quietus in respect of 300l., placed in his hands "for the expences of
dyett and other chardges of the Ladye Arabella Seymour comytted to his
safe kepinge." The original document is in my possession.

ROBT. COLE.
Feb. 11, 1850.

    "_The Accompte of the Lorde Byshopp of Durham for cccli,
    receaved for the chardge of the Ladye Arbella Seymour._

    "The Declaration of the Accompte of the Reverende Father in God
    Will'm James Lorde Bysshoppe of Duresme for the some of Three
    hundreth poundes imprested to him out of the Receipte of the
    Kinges ma^ts Exchequer at Westmynster for the expences of dyett
    and other chardges of the Ladye Arbella Seymour comytted to his
    safe kepinge w^th an inteneon to have caryed into the
    Bysshoprycke of Duresme there to have remayned under his chardge
    duringe the Kynges ma^ts pleasure, viz^t betweene the xiiij^th
    of Marche 1610 in the viij^th year of his highnes raigne and the
    last daye of the same moneth as followeth.

    "_Readye money receaved, viz. of_

    "The Threasorer and vnder threr. of Th'exchequer in Mychas terme
    in the viijth yeare of the Kinges ma'ts raigne by t'handes of
    Thomas Wattson Esquire one of the Tell'rs for the chardges of
    himselfe and his servaunts in his yorney w'th the saide Ladye
    Arbella Seymour by pvie Seale dated the xiij of March 1610 and
    Lves of the Lordes of the Councell ..._cccli_. whereof

    "_Expences of dyett and other chardges of the Ladye Arabella
    Seymour & others attendinge upon her, viz_.

    "_Expences of dyett_

    "At Highgate for sixe dayes begonne the xvth daye of Marche 1610
    and ended the xxjst of the same moneth on w'ch daye her
    Ladyshippe remoued to Barnett. xviij_li._ vs. lijd.

    "At Barnett for xj^en dayes begonne the xxjst of Marche 1610 at
    Supper and ended the firste of Aprill 1611 at breakefaste beinge
    that daye remoued to Eastbarnett. lxxj_li._ vs. viijd.

    "_Chardges of y^e Stable, viz_.

    "Chardges of the Stable for the xvij dayes aboue-menconed, viz.
    at Highgate for vj dayes ix_li._ xvijs. xd. and at Barnett for
    xj dayes with vs. for dressinge one of the lytter horses
    xxviij_li._ xijs. xjd., in all the some of xxxviij_li._ xs. ixd.
    {275}

    "_Lodginge and other necessaries, viz._

    "Lodginge of some of the retinewe of the Lady Arbella and the
    sayde Lorde Bysshoppe, viz. Highgate xxs. and at Barnett viijs.,
    in all xxviijs.

    "Fyer lightes and other nessces with the lodginge of the saide
    Lorde Bysshoppe and some of his servauntes at Highgate and
    Barnett during the xvij dayes aforesaide. xj_li._ xjs.

    "Rydinge and postinge chardges, viz. for posthorses from Lambeth
    to Highgate xxxiiijs. iiijd. and from thence to Barnett
    xxxiiijs. ixd. Mr. Beeston and others for there chardges three
    several tymes to Barnett from London and from Highgate xljs.
    iiijd. the servauntes of the Lorde Bysshoppe of Durham sent at
    several tymes in the Lordes of the Councell and for other
    busynesses concerning this servyce xlvs. vjd. and to Sr. James
    Crofes Knight for the chardges of himselfe his men and horses
    from Monday to Wednesday night attendinge at London for this
    service xlijs. vijd., in all ix_li._ xviijs. vjd.

    "Rewardes to sondrye psons, viz. to messengers sent from the
    Courte duringe the stay of the Lorde Bysshoppe at Highgate and
    Barnett xxxixs. vjd. Dyverse psons whoe tooke paynes at those
    twoe places vij_li._ xijs., vjd., given in the Yune for glasses
    broken and in rewardes to the meaner servauntes at Barnett
    xxxs., given to such an attended about the posthorses vijs. vjd.
    and in rewarde to one of the Tellors Clerkes whoe told and
    delivered the ccc_li._ and came to Durham House for the
    acquittance xxs., in all xij_li._, ixs. vjd.

    "Money payde by the saide Lorde Bysshoppe pte of the ccc_li._ by
    him receaved to Nicholas Paye gen. whoe hath for the same yelded
    his accompte to the Kinges ma'tie. c_li._.--cclxiij_li._ viijs.
    viijd.

    "Aud soe remayneth the some of xxxvj_li._ xjs. iiijd.

    "Whiche some the saide Lorde Bysshoppe of Durham hath payde into
    the Kinges m'ts receipte of Th'excheq'r the vij'th daye of
    Februarie in the nynth yere of his highnes raigne as by the
    tallie thereof remayninge may appeare. And soe here Quyte.

    "EX p FRA GOFTON

    "Auditorem."

       *       *       *       *       *

THE NAME MARTEL.

I must confess that the article in No. 6. p. 86., which deprived Charles
Martel of his long-possessed distinction of "the hammerer" gave me but
little satisfaction. It was one of those old associations that one does
not like to have destroyed. I could not, however, contradict your
correspondents; and remained that very uncomfortable person, "a man
convinced against his will." On turning over my Menagiana, yesterday, I
stumbled upon the name "Martel," and, as the passage combines both your
elements (being a good note, and producing a query) I beg leave to offer
it to you.

    "Dans le ll'me siecle les proces se faisaient aux vassaux par
    leurs Pairs, c'est-a-dire, par leurs convassaux, et toute sorte
    de proces se font encore presentement en Angleterre a toutes
    sortes d'accuses par leurs Pairs, c'est-a-dire, par des
    personnes de leur meme etat et de leur meme condition, a la
    reserve des Bourreaux et des Bouchers, qui, a cause de leur
    cruaute ne sont point juges. _Geoffroi Martel_, Comte d'Anjou,
    fit faire ainsi le proces a Guerin de Craon, qu'il avait fait
    foi et hommage de la Baronnie de Craon a Conan, duc de Bretange.
    Geoffroi fit assembler ses Barons, qui, selon l'ancienne forme
    observee en matiere feodale, firent le proces a Guerin, son
    vassal, et le condamnerent, quoiqu'il fut absent.--Et il est a
    remarquer a ce propos, que le Pape Innocent III., qui
    favourisait Jean _sans-Terre_, parcequ'en 1213 il avait soumis
    son royaume d'Angleterre au Saint Siege au devoir de mille marcs
    d'argent par an, ayant allegue aus Ambassadeurs de Philippe
    Auguste que Jean _sans-Terre_ avait ete condamme absent, et que
    les loix defendent de condamner les accuses sans les ouir; ils
    lui respondirent que l'usage du Royaume de France etait de
    condamner les absents, aussi bien que les presents, lorqu'ils
    avaient ete deuement cites en jugement. Chez les Romains il
    n'etait par permis de condamner les absents: _Non licet civem
    inauditum damnare._"

Now, Sir, this passage shows "_Martel_," as a name, like that of
"sans-Terre," bestowed for some quality or circumstances attached to the
bearer;--and I should like to ask your correspondents if they know how
this Comte d'Anjou, became entitled to it? He appears, from the date, to
be the same Geoffrey who is the ancestor of our Plantagenets, as the
Comte d'Anjou, contemporary with William the Conqueror, was named Fulk.
If it can be proved that this Count received this addition from his
martial prowess, I shall be strongly tempted to return to my creed
regarding Charles Martel.

W. ROBSON.

       *       *       *       *       *

QUERIES AS TO JUNIUS.

Amongst the letters attributed to Junius, and, in the opinion of Dr.
Good, most certainly his production, is one signed "ATTICUS," under date
of the 19th Aug. 1768, which contains an allusion to the private affairs
of the writer, by no means unimportant. It is as follows:--

    "The greatest part of my property having been invested in the
    funds, I could not help paying some attention to rumours or
    events by which my fortune might be affected: yet I never lay in
    wait to take advantage of a sudden fluctuation, much less would
    I make myself a bubble to bulls and bears, or a dupe to the
    pernicious arts practised in the Alley. I thought a prudent man,
    who had any thing to lose, and really meant to do the best for
    himself and his family, ought to consider the state of things at
    large, of the prospect before him, and the probability of public
    events. _A letter which appeared some days ago in the Public
    Advertizer_ revived many serious reflections of this sort in my
    mind, because it seemed to be written with candour and judgment.
    _The effect of those reflections was, that I did not hesitate to
    alter the situation of my property._

    "I owe my thanks to that writer that I am safely {276} _landed_
    from a troubled ocean of fear and anxiety on which I think I
    will venture my fortune and my happiness again," &c. &c.

There is no reason to question the truth of these sentiments. The letter
is believed to be the first which appeared signed "ATTICUS," and was
written many months before the author became known as Junius, and before
any necessity had arisen for the exercise of that habitual caution which
he afterwards evinced in the mention of any circumstance at all likely
to lead to his detection. Would it not, therefore, be worth while to
ascertain the date of the letter in the _Public Advertizer_ which
influenced him, and then to search the names of the transferrors of
stock between that time and the 19th August? Many of the contributors to
the "Notes and Queries" have influence sufficient to obtain permission
from the proper authority for such a search. It is observable, that as
the amount _transferred_ formed the _greatest part_ of his property, it
would be somewhat considerable, and might not be sold in the aggregate,
but pass in various sums to several purchasers.

JNO. SUDLOW.
Manchester.


_Junius and Sir G. Jackson._--I find no one has answered my question
about Sir George Jackson (No. 11. p. 172.). I will therefore put
another. I possess an unpublished letter by Junius to Woodfall, which
once belonged to Sir George Jackson. My Query is, "Is it likely he could
have obtained it from Junius, if he was neither Junius himself nor a
party concerned?" The manner in which Burke evades the question as to
himself being the author of _Junius_ makes me think two or three were
concerned in these _Letters_.

P.

       *       *       *       *       *

NEW EDITION OF REV. DR. OWEN'S WORKS.

I gladly avail myself of the hint thrown out by "R.R." (in No. 17.) to
state that as I am engaged in editing a reprint of the works of the Rev.
Dr. Owen, and as I am exceedingly anxious to ensure accuracy in the
quotations from and references to the Fathers, any suggestions which may
be furnished by those of your learned correspondents who may be
conversant with the works in question, will be very acceptable. I should
wish much to obtain _original editions_ of the leading works, such as
that _On the Person of Christ_; _On the Work of the Spirit_; _On the
Death of Death, in the Death of Christ_. Have any of your correspondents
ever taken the trouble of collating the Greek and Latin quotations with
the authors quoted from, and examined the references made to the Fathers
and other ancient writers? Any communication addressed to the editor of
the works of Owen at Messrs. Johnstone and Hunter, Publishers,
Edinburgh, will be promptly forwarded to me.

J.G.
Dunnichen, Forfarshire.

       *       *       *       *       *

MINOR QUERIES.

_MS. Book of Hours._--In the sale catalogue of the library of John
Bridges, of Lincoln's Inn, February, 1725, is entered Lot 4311:--

    "Missale quondam Henrici VII., regis Angliae, ut ex ipsius
    autographo in codicis initio patet, pulcherrime illuminatum, et
    inconibus fere 80 exornatum. In pergameno, et ornatissime
    compact."

It appears, from Wanley's _Diary_ (MS. Lansd. 772.), that this volume,
which he calls a _Primer_, was purchased for the Earl of Oxford (for
31l. 10s., as I learn from a priced copy of the catalogue), and was
highly valued. To judge from the above description, it must have been a
very beautiful book; and as it does not seem to be at present among the
Harleian collection of MSS. in the British Museum, I should be glad to
learn into whose hands it has fallen. It is _not_ the celebrated volume
of _Hours_ known under the name of the _Bedford Missal_, since that was
purchased by Lord Harley of Lady Worseley, and is now in the possession
of the Rev. Mr. Tobin;--nor is it the book of _Hours_ in the library of
the Duke of Devonshire (described by Dr. Dibbin in the _Bibl.
Decameron_, vol. i. p. 155.), which contains the autograph notes of
Henry VII.;--nor is it the similar volume formerly in the libraries of
George Wilkinson, of Tottenham Green (sold in 1836), and the Rev. Will.
Maskell, and now MS. Add. 17,012. in the British Museum, in which are
seen the autographs of Henry VII. and his Queen, Henry VIII., Catherine
of Aragon, and others;--nor is it the beautiful volume of _Hours_
executed for Rene d'Anjou, and subsequently presented to Henry VII. by
his chaplain George Strangeways, Archdeacon of Coventry (now in the
British Museum, MS. Eg. 1070.);--nor, lastly, is it the book of _Hours_
in the collection of George III. (No. 9.), which contains the autograph
writing of Henry VIII.

F.M.
B.M., Feb. 19. 1850.


_Bess of Hardwick._--Elizabeth, or Bess of Hardwick, celebrated for her
distaste for celibacy, makes a considerable figure in the histories of
the Cavendish family, who in some degree owed their greatness to her
judicious purchases and careful management of their Derbyshire estates.

It appears, from the _Derbyshire Visitations_, that she was one of the
daughters of John Hardwick, of Hardwick co. Derby, by his wife
Elizabeth, daughter of Thomas Leake, of Hasland co. Derby, and that John
Hardwick died 19 Hen. VIII.

Can any of your readers inform me of the pedigree of this John
Hardwick?--what arms, crest, motto and quarterings he made use of?--what
persons now living are descended from him?--and what became of his
estates?

I presume that your typographical arrangements {277} do not admit of the
insertion of a regular pedigree; but the descents may be stated as in
Burke and similar Books.

GULES


_Caesar's Wife._.--"NASO" wishes to know where the proverbial saying,
"Caesar's wife must not even be suspected," first occurs.

_Minar's Books of Antiquities._--Can any one conversant with the works
of Cardinal Nicolas de Cusa inform me what author he quotes as "Minar in
his Books of Antiquities," in what language, and where existing? _De
Docta Ignorantia_, I. i. cap. 7.

A.N.


_Proverb against Physicians._--"M.D." wishes to be informed of the
earliest writer who mentions the proverb "Ubi tres Medici, duo Athei."


_Compendyous Olde Treatyse._--In Ames's _Typographical Antiquities_,
vol. i. p. 405. (ed. Herbert), is described a work, printed by Rycharde
Banckes, some time between 1525 and 1545, entitled, "A compendyous olde
treatyse shewynge howe that we ought to have the Scripture in Englyshe,
with the Auctours." 12mo. 18 leaves. This copy belonged to Herbert
himself, and was probably obtained at the sale of Thomas Granger, in
1732. Any information as to its wherabout at present, or the existence
of any other copy of the above tract, would confer a fabour on the
inquirer.

F.M.


_The Topography of Foreign Printing Presses._--I have often been at a
loss to discover the locality of names which designate the places where
books have been printed at Foreign presses; and "when found" to "make a
note of it." I was therefore pleased to find in No. 16. p. 251., by the
reply of "R.G." to Mr. Jebb, that "_Cosmopolis_ was certainly
Amsterdam," and that "Coloniae" signifies "Amstelaedami." And I will take
the liberty of suggesting that it would be an acceptable service
rendered to young students, if your learned correspondents would
occasionally communicate in the pages of your work, the modern names,
&c. of such places as are not easily gathered from the books themselves.

P.H.F.


_Cromwell's Estates._--In Carlyle's edition of _Cromwell's Letters and
Speeches_, there is a note (p. 75. vol. iv. of the 3rd ed. 1850)
containing a list of the estates which the Protector owned at the time
of his death, as follows; there being, besides Newhall, specified as "in
Essex," five, viz.--

"Dalby,
Broughton,
Burleigh,
Oakham, and
Egleton."

of which the editor has ascertained the localities; and six, viz.--

                     L    s.  d
"Gower, valued at   479   0   0 per an.
Chepstall valued at 549   7   3
Magore valued at    448   0   0
Sydenham valued at 3121   9   6
Woolaston valued at 664  16   6
Chaulton valued at  500   0   0,"

of which, he say, "he knows nothing."

It would surely be a proper, and, one might hope, an attainable object
of inquiry, to search out these unplaced estates of the great Protector,
and give them a local habitation in modern knowledge. This is precisely
one of the kind of queries which your publication seems best fitted to
aid; and I therefore submit it, in the hope of some discoveries, to your
correspondents.

V.
Belgravia, Feb. 18, 1850.


_What are Depinges?_--In the orders made in 1574 for regulating the
fishery at Yarmouth, the Dutch settlers there are "To provide themselves
with twine and _depinges_ in foreign places." What are Depinges?

J.S.B.

       *       *       *       *       *


REPLIES

ORIGIN OF THE JEWS-HARP.

The "Jews-harp," or "Jews-trump," is said by several authors to derive
its name from the nation of the Jews, and is vulgarly believed to be one
of their instruments of music. Dr. Littleton renders Jews-trump by
_Sistrum Judaicum_. But no such musical intrument is spoken of by any of
the old authors that treat of the Jewish music. In fact, the Jews-harp
is a mere boy's plaything, and incapable of in itself of being joined
either with a voice or any other instrument; and its present orthography
is nothing more than a corruption of the French _Jeu-trompe_, literally,
a toy trumpet. It is called _jeu-trompe_ by Bacon, _Jew-trump_ by
Beaumont and Fletcher, and _Jews-harp_ by Hackluyt. In a rare
black-letter volume, entitled _Newes from Scotland_, 1591, there is a
curious story of one Geilles Duncan, a noted performer on the
"Jews-harp," whose performance seems not only to have met with the
approval of a numerous audience of witches, but to have been repeated in
the presence of royalty, and by command of no less a personage than the
"Scottish Solomon," king James VI. Agnes Sampson being brought before
the king's majesty and his council, confessed that

    "Upon the night of All-hallow-even last, shee was accompanied as
    well with the persons aforesaid, as also with a great many other
    witches, to the number of two-hundredth; and that all they
    together went to sea, each one in a riddle or sive, and went
    into the same very substantially, with flaggons of wine, making
    merrie, and drinking by the way, in the same riddle or sives, to
    the Kirk of North Barrick in Lowthian; and that after {278} they
    had landed, tooke handes on the lande and daunced this reill or
    short daunce, singing all with one voice,

      "'Commer goe ye before, commer goe ye:
        Gif ye will not goe before, commer let me.'

    "At which time, she confessed that this Geilles Duncan (a
    servant girl) did goe before them, playing this reill or daunce
    uppon a small _trumpe_ called a _Jews-trumpe_, until they entred
    into the Kirk of North Barrick. These confessions made the King
    in a wonderfull admiration, and sent for the said Geilles
    Duncan, who upon the like _trumpe_ did play the saide daunce
    before the Kinge's Majestie; who in respect of the strangenes of
    these matters tooke great delight to be present at their
    examinations."

It may be as well to mention that in the Belgic or Low Dutch, from
whence come many of our toys, a _tromp_ is a rattle for children.
Another etymon for _Jews-harp_ is _Jaws-harp_, because the place where
it is played upon is between the jaws. To those who wish to learn more
upon the subject, I beg to refer them to Pegge's _Anonymiana_; Dauncy's
_Ancient Scottish Melodies_; and to my edition of Chettle's _Kind-Harts
Dream_ printed by the Percy Society.

Edward F. Rimbault.

    [We are indebted also to Trebor, E.W.D., J.F.M., and F.P. for
    replies to this Query. They will perceive that Dr. Rimbault had
    anticipated the substance of their several communications.]

       *       *       *       *       *

AELFRIC'S COLLOQUY.

I must trouble you and some of your readers with a few words, in reply
to the doubt of "C.W.G." (No. 16. p. 248.) respecting the word _sprote_.
I do not think the point, and the Capital letter to _saliu_ in the Latin
text, conclusive, as nothing of the kind occurs in the A.-S. version,
where the reading is clearly, "_swa hwylce swa_, on watere swymmath
sprote." I have seen the Cottonian MS., which, as Mr. Hampson observes,
is very distinctly written, both in the Saxon and Latin portions; so
much so in the latter, as to make it a matter of surprise that the
doubtful word _saliu_ should ever have been taken for _salu_, or
_casidilia_ for _calidilia_. The omission of the words _sprote_ and
_saliu_, in the St. John's MS., would only be evidence of a more
cautious scribe, who would not copy what he did not understand.

Your correspondent's notion, "that the name of some fish, having been
first interlined, was afterwards inserted at random in the text, and
mis-spelt by a transcriber who did know its meaning," appears to me very
improbable; and the very form of the words (_sprote_, _saliu_, supposing
them substantives), which have not plural terminations, would, in my
mind, render his supposition untenable. For, be it recollected, that
throughout the answers of the Fiscere, the fish are always named in the
_plural_; and it is not to be supposed that there would be an exception
in favour of _sprote_, whether intended for _sprat_ or _salmon_. Indeed,
had the former been a river fish, Hulvet and Palsgrave would have
countenanced the supposition; but then we must have had it in the plural
form, _sprottas_. As for the suggestion of _sprod_ and _salar_, I cannot
think it a happy one; salmon (_leaxus_) had been already mentioned; and
_sprods_ will be found to be a very confined local name for what, in
other places, are called _scurfes_ or _scurves_, and which we, in our
ignorance, designate as salmon trout. In the very scanty A.-S.
ichthyologic nomenclature we possess, there is nothing to lead us to
imagine that our Anglo-Saxon ancestors had any corresponding word for a
salmon trout. I must be excused, therefore, for still clinging to my own
explanation of _sprote_, until something more _specious_ and _ingenious_
shall be advanced, but in full confidence, at the same time, that some
future discovery will elucidate its truth.

S.W. Singer.

Feb. 19. 1850.

       *       *       *       *       *

REHETING AND REHETOURS.

As Dr. Todd's query (no. 10. p. 155.) respecting the meaning of the
words "Reheting" and "Rehetour," used by our early English writers, has
not hitherto been answered, I beg to send him a conjectural explanation,
which, if not conclusive, is certainly probable.

In the royal household of France, there was formerly an officer whose
duty it was to superintend the roasting of the King's meat; he was
called the _Hateur_, apparently in the sense of his "hastening" or
"expediting" that all-important operation. The Fr. _Hater_, "to hasten
or urge forward," would produce the noun-substantive _Hateur_; and also
the similar word _Hatier_, the French name for the roast-jack. If we
consider _Rehateur_ to be the reduplicate of _Hateur_, we have only to
make an allowable permutation of vowels, and the result will be the
expressive old English word "Rehetour," an appropriate name for the
royal turnspit. Wycliffe uses it, I think, in the sense of a superfluous
servant, one whose duties, like the Hateur's, were very light indeed. He
compares the founding of new Orders in an overburthened
Church-establishment to the making of new offices in a household already
crowded with useless (and consequently idle and vicious) servants. The
multitude of fat friars and burly monks charged upon the community were
"the newe rehetours that ete mennes mete," &c.

The term, thus implying an useless "do-nothing," would soon become one
of the myriad of choice epithets in the vulgar vocabulary, as in the
instances from Dunbar and Kennedy.

In a better sense, a verb would be derived, easily; "to rehate," or
"rehete," i.e. "to provide, {279} entertain, or refresh with meat," and
thence, "to feast with words," as used by Chaucer and the old
Romancists.

Mr. Halliwell's authorities for rendering the participle "Rehating" by
"Burning, or smarting," are not given; but if such a meaning existed, it
may have a ready explanation by reference to the Hauteur's fireside
labour, though suggestive of unskilfulness or carelessness on his part.

John Westby Gibson.

5. Queen Square, Aldersgate Street, Feb. 8. 1850.


In answer to Dr. Todd's inquiries, I would say, first of all, the
"rehatours" of Douglas and the other Scots are beside his question, and
a totally different word. Feelings cherished in the mind will recur from
time to time; and those malevolent persons, who thus retain them, were
said to _re-hate_, as they are now said to re-sent.

But the verb really in question is, _per se_, a perfectly plain one, to
re-heat. The difficulty is as to its use. The primary use, of course, is
to _heat again_. The nearest secondary use is "to cherish, cheer, or
comfort, to refocillate;" which is too plain to require more words.
Another secondary meaning is "to re-vive or to re-kindle" in its
metaphoric sense. This may be said well, as of life, health, or hope; or
ill, as of war, hatred, grief; or indifferently, as of love. What
difficulty Mr. Tyrwhitt could find in "the revival of Troilus's bitter
grief" being called "the reheating of his sore sighs," I cannot imagine.
Even literal heat is not wanting to sighs, and is often ascribed to them
by poets: and lovers' sighs are warm in every sense. I think Tyrwhitt
has thrown upon this passage the only darkness that involves it.

Now comes the more difficult point, which alone concerns Dr. Todd in his
highly interesting labours upon Wycliffe. And the method which, until
better advised, I should be inclined to follow with those passages, is
to take the word nearly, though not exactly, in what seems to have been
its most usual sense; not indeed for comforters or cherishers, but for
those who promote comfort and convenience, viz., ministers or servants.
It does not at all follow, because he is blaming the introduction of
these persons as expensive, superfluous, and otherwise evil, that he
describes them by a word expressive of evil. As a ministering angel
would be a reheting angel, so I take a rehetor here to be simply a
minister, one who waits upon your occasions and serves you.

A.N.

       *       *       *       *       *

ARABIC NUMERALS.

The history of the Arabic numerals, as they are generally called, is so
mixed up with that of the use of the decimal scale, that they form, in
fact, but a single inquiry. The mere history of the bare forms of
symbols has, doubtless, its use: but then it is only in the character of
_materiel_ for a philosophical discussion of the question--a discussion
into which the natural progress of the human mind and the urgency of
social wants must enter largely.

It might at first sight appear, from the cognate character of the Hebrew
and Arabic languages, that the idea of using a single symbol for each
number, might originate with either--with one as likely as with the
other. But on reflection it will readily appear that the question rather
resolves itself into one respecting the "hand-cursive" of the Jews and
Saracens, than into one respecting the constitution of the languages. Of
the Jewish we know nothing, or next to nothing, at the period in
question; whilst the Arabic is as well known as even our own present
style of calligraphy. It deserves to be more carefully inquired into
than has yet been done, whether the invention of contracting the written
compound symbols of the digital numbers into single symbols did not
really originate amongst the Jews rather than the Saracens; and even
whether the Arabs themselves did not obtain them from the "Jew
merchants" of the earlier ages of our era. One thing is tolerably
certain:--that the Jew merchant would, as a matter of precaution, keep
all his accounts in some secret notation, or in cipher. Whether this
should be a modified form of the Hebrew notation, or of the Latin, must
in a great degree depend upon the amount of literary acquirement common
amongst that people at the time.

Assuming that the Jews, as a literate people, were upon a par with their
Christian contemporaries, and that their knowledge was mainly confined
to mere commercial notation, an anonymous writer has shown how the
modifications of form could be naturally made, in vol. ii. of the _Bath
and Bristol Magazine_, pp. 393-412.; the motto being _valent quanti
valet_, as well as the title professing it to be wholly "conjectural."
Some of the speculations in it may, however, deserve further
considerations than they have yet received.[1]

The contraction of the compound symbols for the first nine digits into
single "figures," enabled the computer to dispense with the manual
labour of the _abacus_, whilst in his graphic notation he retained its
essential principle of _place_. It seems to be almost invariably
forgotten by writers on {280} the subject, what, without _this
principle_, no improvement in mere notation would have been of material
use in arithmetic; and on the other hand that the main difference
between the arithmetic of the _abacus_ and the arithmetic of the
_slate_, consists in the inevitable consequences of the denotation of
the single digits by single symbols.

The _abacus_, however, in its ordinary form, is essentially a decimal
instrument: but its form was also varied for commercial purposes,
perhaps in different ways. I never heard of the existence of one in any
collection: but there is preserved in the British Museum a picture of
one. This was printed by Mr. Halliwell in his _Rara Mathematica_--not a
fac-simile, but a rule and type representation of it, ciphers being used
by him for the circles in the original. Mr. Halliwell gives it without
note or remark; and evidently had not divined its meaning. This was
done, however, soon after in a review of Mr. Halliwell's book in the
_Philosophical Magazine_. I am not able at this moment to refer to
either, so as to give exact dates: but is was somewhere from 1838 to
1840.

Perhaps, however, I am giving "E.V." information that may be irrelevant
to his purpose; though it may of some use to another class of inquirers.
I proceed, therefore, to one or two notices that seem to have a more
direct bearing on his object:

1. Chasles' _Apercu Historique sur l'Origine et le Developpement de
Methodes en Geometrie_; passim, but especially in note xii.: 4to.,
Bruxelles, 1837.

2. Chasles' several notices in _Comptes Rendus des Seances de l'Acad.
des Sciences._ All subsequent to the "Apercu."

His _Catalogue des Manuscrits de la Bibliotheque de Ville de Chartres_
should also be consulted, if accessible to "E.V." Copies of it, however,
are very rare in the country, as it was privately printed and never
published. If, however, your correspondent have any serious inquiry in
view which should render his consultation of it desirable, I can put it
in his power to do so personally through you.

3. Libri, several notices in the same series of papers.

4. Libri, _Histoire des Sciences Mathematiques en Italie_. Several
places. Bactulica. Paris, 1838-1841. 4 tomes. 8vo.

5. Peacock (Dean of Ely), "Arithmetic," in the _Encyclopaedia
Metropolitana_. This is now, I believe to be had either separately, or
in the volume devoted to pure "Mathematics."

6. De Morgan, _Penny Cyclopaedia_ in loc., and occasionally elsewhere in
the work.

7. Leslie's _Philosophy of Arithmetic_.

8. Humboldt, in a paper which is translated in the _Journal of the Royal
Institution_, vol. xxix.

I believe a good many other references might be made, with little
trouble, to foreign Memoires; and (perhaps still more to your
correspondent's apparent purpose) to some amongst the Memoires that
relate to inscriptions and topography, rather that amongst those
relating directly to science or literature. However, the two parts of
the subject cannot be effectively studied separately from each other;
and I am not without a hope that these straggling notes may be of some
use to "E.V."

Under the view of inscriptions it occurs to my memory that in two or
three places on the church of St. Brelade in Jersey, there are marked
four vertical straight lines, which are interpreted by the natives to
signify the Arabic numerals 1111; as the date MCXI of the building of
the church. The church is evidently a very ancient one, and it is agreed
to be the oldest in the island, and the island historians assign it to
the early part of the 12th century. For these symbols being coeval with
the building I do not vouch: as (though it is difficult to say what may
constitute antiquity in the look of four parallel lines) I confess that
to my eye they had "as modern a look" as four such lines could well
have. The sudden illness of one of my party during our visit (1847),
however, precluded my examining that beautiful spot and its interesting
little church with the care I should have wished.

I may be allowed to suggest the necessity of some degree of caution in
discussing this question: especially not to assume that any Arabic
numerals which appear in ecclesiastical inscriptions are coeval with the
dates they express; but rather inquire whether, from the condition of
the stone bearing the inscription, these numbers may not have been put
there at a later period, during repairs and alterations of the building
itself. It is for many reasons improbable, rather than otherwise, that
the Arabic numerals should have been freely used (if used at all) on
_ecclesiastical structures_ till long after the Reformation: indeed they
are not so even yet.

But more. Even where there is authentic evidence of such symbols being
used in ecclesiastical inscriptions, the forms of them will tell
nothing. For generally in such cases an antique form of symbol would be
assumed, if it were the alteration of a "learned clerk;" or the
arabesque taste of the carver of the inscription would be displayed in
grotesque forms. We would rather look for genuine than coeval symbols of
this kind upon tombs and monuments, and the altar, than upon the
building itself; and these will furnish collateral proofs of the
genuineness of the entire inscriptions rather than any other class of
architectural remains. The evidence of the inscriptions on "Balks and
beams" in old manorial dwellings is especially to be suspected.

T.S.D.

Shooter's Hill, Feb 11, 1850.

    [Footnote 1: In vol. iii. of the same work is another paper by
    the same author, entitled, "Conjectures respecting the Origin of
    Alphabetic writing," pp. 365-384. Reference to these papers is
    principally made, not on the ground of any assumed merit, but
    because _all_ that has been written on any given subject ought,
    if possible, to be brought before the minds of those engaged in
    the prosecution of the inquiry.]


_Arabic Numerals._--If you think the following {281} title will do for
your correspondent "E.V." (No. 15. p. 230.), please to communicate it to
him:

    "Mannert, K., de Numerorum, quos arabicos voc., vera origine
    pythagorico; e. Fig. aen. 8vo. Nuernberg, 1801."

Oscar Heun.

Cambridge, Feb. 11. 1850.


_Arabic Numerals_ (No. 15. p. 230.).--Your correspondent should consult
Peacock's "History of Arithmetic" in the _Encyclopaedia Metropolitana_;
and, if he can get them, the notes to Chasles' _Apercu Historique des
Methodes en Geometric_, and various papers of Mr. Chasles, published in
the _Comptes Rendus_ of the French Institute. He may perhaps find some
information in De Morgan's _Arithmetical Books_, particularly at p. 14.

M.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE FRATERNITY OF CHRISTIAN DOCTRINE--CHAUCER'S NIGHT CHARM.

In a little work by Costanzi, entitled _Le Istituzioni di Pieta che si
esercitano in Roma_, &c., and published A.D. 1825, in Rome, where the
schools under the management of that brotherhood are in great favour,
"C.F.S." will find much to interest him on the subject, though not
exactly in the order in which he has put his queries (No. 14. p. 214.),
nor to their full extent.

Mr. Thoms, to whom English mediaeval literature is so much beholden, asks
very earnestly for some information about "the white Paternoster" and
"seynte Petres soster," (No. 15. p. 229.). Perhaps the following guesses
may not be without use. First, then, about the "white Paternoster:"

Henry Parker, a Carmelite friar of Doncaster, who wrote his admirable
_Compendiouse Treatyse, or Dialogue of Dives and Pauper_, during the
reign of Edward IV., speaking against superstitions, and especially
"craftes and conjurations with holy prayers," says:

    "They that use holy wordes of the gospel, Pater noster, Ave, or
    Crede, or holy prayers in theyr wytchecraftes, for charmes or
    conjurations--they make a full hye sacrifice to the fende. It
    hath oft ben knowen, that wytches, with sayenge of their Pater
    noster and droppynge of the holy candell in a man's steppes that
    they hated, hath done his fete rotton of. Dr. What should the
    Pater noster, and the holy candell do therto? Pau. Ryght nought.
    But for the wytche worshyppeth the fende so highly with the holy
    prayers, and with the holy candell, and used suche holy thinges
    in despyte of God therefore is the fende redy to do the wytche's
    wylle and to fulfyll thinges that they done it for. 'The Fyrst
    Command,' cap. XXXV. Fol. 52. Imprynted by T. Berthelet, 1536.
    12mo."

That the Pater noster used sometimes to be said with the wicked design
of working ill to individuals, and by those who were deemed witches, is
clear form the above extract: may not, then, this "wytche's" Pater
noster be the "white" Pater noster, against which the night-spell in
Chaucer was employed? "Wyche" may easily be imagined to have glided into
"white."

"Seynte Petres soster," I suspect has a reference to St. Petronilla's
legend. St. Petronilla, among our forefathers, was called St. Pernell,
and _The Golden Lengend_ imprinted 1527, by Wynkyn de Word, tells us,
fol. cxxxi. b., that she "was doughter of saynt peter thappostle, whiche
was ryght fayre and bewteous, and by the wyll of her fader she was vexed
with fevers and akes." For a long while she lay bed-ridden. From the
name of this saint, who went through so many years of her life in
sickness, perhaps was borrowed the word "pernell," to mean a person in a
sickly weak state of health, in which sense, Sir Thomas More (_Works_,
London, 1557, p. 893) employs it, while bantering Tindal. St. Peter's
daughter (St. Pernell) came to be looked upon, in this country, as the
symbol of bad health under all its forms. Now, if we suppose that the
poet mistook, and wrote "soster" instead of "doughter," we immediately
understand the drift of the latter part of the spell, which was, not
only to drive away witchcraft, but guard all the folks in that house
from sickness of every kind.

Daniel Rock.

Buckland, Faringdon.

       *       *       *       *       *

REPLIES TO MINOR QUERIES.

_By Hook or by Crook--Pokership--Gib Cat--Emerod._--I regret that very
pressing business has hitherto prevented me from supplying an omission
in my communication relating to the probable derivation of "By Hook or
by Crook;" namely, my authority for saying there was evidence of the
usage I referred to in forest customs. I now beg to supply that
omission, by referring to the numerous claims for fuel wood made by
divers persons at the justice seats held in the reigns of Charles I. and
Charles II. for the New Forest, and which will be found at the Tower and
Chapter House. Among others of these claims, I would mention that made
by the tenant of land in Barnford, No. 112., who claims to have had the
privilege, from _time immemorial_, of going into the king's wood to take
the _dead branches_ off the trees therein, "with a cart, a horse, a
_Hook and a Crook_, and a sail cloth." Verily this necessity for a sail
cloth seems to point very distinctly to his being obliged to collect his
fire-wood "by Hook or by Crook." May I add, that I do not think that any
of the notes I have seen hitherto, with reference to this subject,
invalidate the supposition of the origin being forestal; all that they
{282} appear to me to prove is, that the saying is of long standing.

With reference to the query regarding the word Pokership (No. 12. p.
185.), I would observe, that the word is correctly copied from the
grant, and that it was so spelt in all the previous grants that I have
been able to refer to. As to the meaning of the word, I am of the
opinion that it is intended to express the office of keeping the hogs in
the forest, i.e. Porcarius. Pokership was probably spelt in early times
Pawkership, from Pawn, I apprehend; subsequently it was either spelt or
pronounced Paukership or Pokership. In corroboration of this view, I
would mention, that on referring to the Pipe Roll, 6 John, county of
_Hereford_, the following will be found:--"Hubert de Burgo, Et i libae
const. Parcario de heford, xxxs. vd." If, however, Parkership be deemed
the more correct reading, still it does not of necessity apply to the
custody of a park; it might have denoted the pound-keeper, for, in
matters relating to manors, _parcus_ means a pound.

With respect to the query about Gib Cat, you will find the subject
treated on largely in the _Etymologicon_--I may say, exhausted.

By the bye, there can be no doubt that Emerod means Emerald; formerly
Emerald would be spelt Emeraud, and the transition is natural to
Emerode--Emerod. With regard to the supposed size being an objection to
this reading, it will be found that anciently the _matrix_ of the
Emerald, which is _tinged_ green, went by the name of the more valuable
jewel.

T.R.F.

Spring Gardens, Feb. 1850.


_Golden Frog_ (No. 14. p. 214.).--Sir John Poley's frog may have been a
device alluding to his name; I imagine that Poley is an appelative of
frogs. I find in Halliwell's _Dict. of Archaic Words_, "_Polly_wig," and
in Jamieson's _Scottish Dictionary_, "_Pow_lick," both meaning
_tadpole_, and both _diminutive_ forms; and Rowley _Poley_ is closely
(though not very logically) connected with the _frog_ who would a-wooing
go. The word has probably the same root as _poole_, _puddle_, &c.

R.R.


_Madoc._--In addition to what is stated (No. 4. p. 56.) on this subject,
may be noted, that in the MS. Add. 14,957. British Museum, fol. 149., is
a letter from Dr. David Samwell to the Gwyneddigion Society, dated 23rd
March, 1791, in which he states, that the result of an interview, held
by himself and William Owen with General Bowles, "places the existence
of a race of Welsh Indians beyond all matter of doubt." This race is
identified with _Padongas_ on the Missouri, who are said to be of a
different complexion from the other Indian races, and to have books,
which they were not able to read. Is this information to be depended on
or not?

F.M.


_MSS. of Sir Roger Twysden_ (No. 5. p. 76.).--Twysden's MSS. were
purchased by Sir Thomas Sebright, in or before the year 1715, and in the
Sebright sale at Leigh and Sotheby's, in 1807, appear to be two of the
MSS. inquired after by the Rev. L.B. Larking, namely, Lot 1224., "Vita
et Epistolae Sancti Thomae, Archiepiscopi Cant." (purchased by Heber, and,
at his sale in 1836, resold [Lot 323.] to Sir Thomas Phillipps), and Lot
1225., "Epistolae Beati Anselmi, Archieposcopi Cant.", purchased by
Dardis; but what became of it afterwards I know not.

F.M.


_Royal Genealogies_ (No. 6. p. 92.).--The inquirer will find, probably,
what he requires, in a work by J.F. Dambergen, entitled, "Sechzig
genaealogische auch chronologische und statistische Tabellen, zu
Fuerstentafel und Fuerstenbuch der Europaeischen Staatengeschichte," fol.
Regensburg, 1831, in which the descents are brought down to a recent
period.

F.M.


_Astle's MSS._ (No. 15. p. 230.).--After the death of Astle, in 1803,
his collection of MSS. was purchased, pursuant to his will, for the sum
of 500l., by the Marquess of Buckingham, and they remained at Stowe till
the spring of last year, when they passed, with the rest of that noble
collection, into the hands of the Earl of Ashburnham, for the sum of
8000l.;--a loss to the public much to be regretted.

F.M.


_Dr. Hugh Todd's MSS_. (No. 16. p. 246.).--The first of the five MSS.
mentioned by Mr. Walbran, namely, the Chartulary of Fountains Abbey, is
at present in University College, Oxford, and perhaps some of the other
MSS. may be there also. A catalogue of the MSS. of this College has been
printed, compiled by the Rev. H.O. Coxe, of the Bodleian Library; but I
have not been able to consult a copy of it in London.

F.M.


_Sir William Ryder_ (No. 12. p. 186.),--"H.F." is informed that Sir
William Ryder, Lord Mayor of London in 1660, lived at Bethnal Green,
received the honour of knighthood, 12th March, 1660 or 1661; died 30th
August, 1669; and was buried 9th September following at St. Andrew
Undershaft, London. He had two sons, one of whom was Thomas Ryder, who
was an equerry to King James II., and lord of the manor of Bilsington,
in Kent. He performed some service at the coronation of Queen Anne; and
his son, Sir Barnham Ryder, was knighted at the coronation of her
successor. The other son of Sir William Ryder was William Ryder,
gentleman. Sir William Ryder had five daughters:--1. Elizabeth, who
married Richard, son of Sir Thomas Midleton, of Chirk Castle in
Denbighshire, knight. 2. Priscilla, the wife of Richard Baylie, son of
Dr. Baylie, Dean of {283} Sarum. 3. Mary. 4. Anne. 5. Martha.--_Harl.
MSS._ 5801, 5802.

F.E.


_Scole Inn._--In answer to the query (No. 16. p. 245.) respecting the
Sign and House at Scole Inn, I beg to refer to vol. ii. p. 142., of the
_History of Norfolk_, published by Crouse and Booth of Norwich, in 1781,
in 10 vols. 8vo.

I beg to state that I have impressions of two large prints, one of the
"House," and the other of the "Sign." They were published in
1740.--"Joshua Kirby," del., "John Fossey," sculpt.

I have also a smaller print of the "Sign" taken from the opposite
side--from the larger one--apparently by the same parties, but the names
of the drawer and engraver are cut off.

I think the Sign was not take down till after 1795, as I have a
recollection of having passed _under it_ when a boy, in going from
Norwich to Ipswich.

The sign was large and handsome, and extended across the road.

In _Kirby's Print_, it is stated to have cost Mr. James Peck, who was a
merchant at Norwich, 1057l.

The prints are not very scarce, and may be got at many of the
printsellers in London.

J.B.


About twenty years ago I have seen hanging up on the wall of the
principal entry of this inn, a print of its original front, comprising
the various figure, coats of arms, &c. which adorned it: in this account
the founder Peck was called a citizen of Norwich, and the traveller was
puzzled by this piece of information. "It is called Scole Inn, because
it is at about the same distance from Norwich, Ipswich, and Bury."

M. Prendergast.

7. Serjeant's Inn. Fleet Street, Feb. 19. 1850.


_Killigrew Family and Scole Inn Sign_ (No. 15. p. 231.).--Doubtless
there are pedigrees of the Killigrew family in the _Visitations of
Cornwall_, which would answer Mr. Lower's questions. Many notices of
them also occur in Gilbert's _History of Cornwall_, and Wood's _Athenae
Oxon._, Bliss. ed., and both those works have good indexes.

There is a folded engraving of Scole Inn Sign (No. 16. p. 245.) in
Armstrong's _History of Norfolk_, vol. ii. p. 144., but I never could
learn when or why the sign was removed. The couchant stag in the centre
was the Cornwallis crest.

Braybrooke.

Audley End.


_Pavoise of the Black Prince_ (No. 12. p. 183).--It is very probably
that the _Pavoise_ which "Bolton" mentions as hanging in his time at the
tomb of Edward the Black Prince, was no part of the original collection.

"A quilted coat-armour, with _half-sleeves tabard fashion_," reads oddly
as part of this prince's costume; but we know that sometimes "Coming
events cast their shadows before."

T.W.


_Welsh Ambassador._--The following use of the word "Welsh" _in
metaphor_, may perhaps serve as a clue to, or illustration of, G.'s
query (No. 15. p. 230.):

    _Andrew_. "In tough _Welsh_ parsley, which in our vulgar tongue,
    is Strong hempen altars."--Beaumont and Fletcher, _Elder
    Brother_, Act. 1. ad fin.

Petit Andre

Pleissis-les-Tours, Fevrier, 1850.


_Phoenix--by Lactantius._--"Seleucus" is informed, in answer to his
query in No. 13. p. 203., that he will find the Latin poem of the
_Phoenix_, in hexameters _and pentameters_, in that scarce little
volume, edited by Pithaeus, and published at Paris in 1590 (see Brunet),
_Epigrammata et Poematia Vetera, &c._ (of which I am happy to say I
possess a most beautiful copy), where it is headed "Phoenix, Incerti
Auctoris;" and again at the end of the edition of _Claudian_ by P.
Burmann Secundus Amsterdam, 1760), with the following title,--_Lactantia
Elegia, de Phoenice; vulgo Claudiano ad scripta, &c._, where also
another correspondent, "R.G." (in No. 15. p. 235.), will find much
information as to who was the author of the poem.

C.J.C.

Feb. 9. 1850.


_Catsup_ (no. 8. p. 125.).--"Catsup" is to be found thus spelt in Todd's
_Johnson's Dictionary_ (London, 1818). He describes it as a kind of
Indian pickles imitated by pickled mushrooms; and quotes these two lines
of Swift:

  "And for our home-bred British cheer,
  Botargo, catsup, and cavier."

An eminnet Sanscrit scholar informs me that "kuck-hup" is the
Hindostanee word for Turtle; it is to be met in the Vocabulary attached
to Gilchrist's _East Indian Guide_ (8vo. London, 1820). May not the name
of the sauce take its origin from the use of it in preparing the turtle
for the table? In the _Cuisinier Royal, par Viart_, p. 75., it is
mentioned among the "petites sauces," as ket-chop, "ou Soyac;" and the
receipt for making it ends with "servez le avec le poisson." (Published
at Paris, 1840.)

C.I.R.


_The Buckingham Motto_ (No. 9. p. 138., and No. 16. p. 252.).--On
examining the original manuscript the true reading of this motto appears
to me to be,

  Sovente me sovene,
  Harre Bokynghame.

I should translate it, "souvent me souvenez;" an Anglo-French paraphrase
of "sis memor mei;" or, "Ne m'oubliez pas." I have great doubt {284}
whether the original MS. can be safely assumed to be an _autograph_.

S.

    [Our correspondent "P." writes, "It surprises me your OEdipi
    should be so wide of the mark in this motto. It is simply, 'Oft
    remember me.'"]


_Devices of the Standards of the Anglo-Saxons_ (No. 14. p. 216.).--The
arms, i.e. the standards of the successive rulers of Britain, may be
found in Sir Winston Churchill's curious work, _Divi Britannici_, which
gives (as your correspondent supposes) the White Horse for Kent, the
White Dragon for Wessex, and the Raven for the Danes.

C.


_Prutenicae_ (No. 14. p. 215.).--The work to which your correspondent
alludes is, I presume, _Prutenicae Tabulae Caelestium Motuum, autore Erasmo
Reinholdo_: Tubingae, 1562. This work is dedicated to Albert, Duke of
_Prussia_. In the dedication is the following passage:

    "Ego has tubulas _Prutenicas_ dici volui, ut sciret posteritas
    tua liberalitate, Princeps Alberte, nos adjutos esse, et tibi
    gratiam ab iis, quibus profuturae sunt deberi."

Reinhold therefore called them Prutenie, _i.e. Prussian_ tables, in
compliment to the reigning duke. _Pruteni_ is an ancient name of the
Prussians. Albert (grandson of Albert the Achilles, Margrave of
Brandenburg) was in 1511 elected Grand Master of the Teutonic Knights,
who then held Prussia. He continued the war which his order had for some
time carried on with his uncle, Sigismund I., King of Poland. But he
subsequently embraced the doctrines of Luther, deserted his order,
became reconciled to Sigismund, and for his reward East Prussia was now
first raised into a duchy as a fief of Poland, and made hereditary in
his family. This Albert was the founder of the University of Konigsberg.
(See Puffendorff, Frederick the Great, and Robertson.)

_Pandoxare_ (No. 13. p. 202., No. 15. p. 234.).--There is, or till very
lately was, an officer of Trinity College, Cambridge, called the
Pandoxator. He had the oversight of the college brewhouse, and formerly
of the college bakehouse also. See Monk's _Life of Bentley_, 2nd ed. i.
210. In Dr. Bentley's time the office seems to have been held by a
senior fellow. Of late years junior fellows have held the situation.

C.H. Cooper.

Cambridge, Feb. 11. 1850.


_Gazetteer of Portugal._--In answer to the inquiry of "Northman" (No.
16. p. 246.), P.C.S.S. has to state, that he believes that the most
recent, as it is unquestionably the most copious, work on the topography
of Portugal is the _Diccionario Geografico de Portugal_, published at
Lisbon in 1817, in seventeen volumes, 8vo.

P.C.S.S.


_Dog Latin_ (No. 15, p. 230.).--Many things low and vulgar are marked
with the prefix "dog"; as _dog-rose_, _dog-trick_, _dog-hole_, as also
_dog-gerel_. When the great mortar was set up in St. James's Park, some
one asked "Why the carriage was ornamented with dog's heads?" "To
justify the Latin inscription," said Jekyl.

C.


_Epigram_ (No. 15. p. 233.).--Surely not by Kenrick, if written, as it
seems, about 1721. Kenrick was not heard of for near thirty years later.

C.


_Pallace, Meaning of_ (No. 15. p. 233.).--Put out of all doubt by the
following article in Phillips's _World of Words_. "_Pallacia_, in old
records, 'Pales or paled fences.'"

C.


_Meaning of Pallace_ (No. 13. p. 202., and No. 15. p. 233.).--Bishop
Horsley seems to throw some light on this point by his note on the 9th
verse of the 45th Psalm. The learned prelate says

    "'Out of the ivory palaces whereby they have made thee
    glad,'--rather, from 'cabinets of Armenian ivory they have
    pleasured thee.' From _cabinets_ or _wardrobes_, in which the
    perfumes, or the garments were kept."

This meaning of the word, derived from the Hebrew, corroborates the
sense given to it in Mr. Halliwell's _Dictionary of Archaic, &c. Words_,
viz, a _storehouse_.

Alfred Gatty.

Ecclesfield, Feb. 9.


_AElian._--The querist (No. 15. p. 232.) is informed that AElian's
Treatise _De Animalium Natura_ has been translated into Latin as well as
his other works, by Conrad Gessner, fol. Zurich, 1556; but, it does not
appear that an English translation of it has hitherto been published.

A.W.

Brighton.


_Why Dr. Dee quitted Manchester._--A correspondent (No. 14. p. 216.) of
yours wishes to know the reason why Dr. Dee resigned his wardenship and
left Manchester. I would refer him to the interesting "Life of Dee," by
Dr. Cooke Taylor, in his _Romantic Biography of the Age of Elizabeth_,
who writes:

    "But in his days mathematics were identified with magic, and
    Dee's learned labours only served to strengthen the imputations
    cast upon his character by the Fellows of his College in
    Manchester. He was so annoyed by these reports that he presented
    a petition to King James, requesting to have his conduct
    judicially investigated; but the monarch, on the mere report
    that Dee was a conjuror, refused to show him the slightest
    favor. Indignant at the injurious treatment he continued to
    receive, he quitted Manchester with his family in the month of
    November, 1604: it is uncertain whether he renounced his
    wardenship at the same time, but he seems to have received no
    more of its revenues; for, during the remainder of his life,
    {285} which was passed at Mortlake, he suffered severely from
    the pressure of poverty."

He died in 1608. Dr. Taylor, I suppose, writes on the authority of Dee's
MSS. and Journal, edited by Dr. Isaac Casaubon.

W.M.K.


_Viridis Vallis_ (no. 14. p. 213.).--This is the monastery of
_Groenendael_, situated in the forest of Soignies, near Brussels. In the
_Bibliotheque des Ducs de Bourgoyne_ are preserved several manuscript
volumes relative to its history. (See Marchal's _Catalogue_, vol. ii. p.
84.) Sir Thomas Phillipps has also a Chartulary of this monastery among
his manuscripts.

F.M.


_Recent Novel._--I beg to inform "Adolphus" that the Novel of which he
is in search (No. 15. p. 231.) is _Le Morne au Diable_, by Eugene Sue;
the hero of which is the Duke of Monmouth, who is supposed to have
escaped to Martinique.

J.S.

       *       *       *       *       *

MISCELLANIES.

_Use of Monosyllables._--In Beaumont and Fletcher's _Boadicea_, Act 3.
Sc. 1. (Edinbugh, 1812), I meet with the following lines in Caratach's
Apostrophe to "Divine Andate," and which seem to corroborate Mr. C.
FORBES'S theory (No. 16. p. 228.) on the employment of monosyllables by
Shakspeare, when he wished to express violent and overwhelming emotion:
at least they appear to be used much in the same way by the celebrated
dramatists whom I quote:

  "Give us this day good hearts, good enemies,
  Good blows on both sides, wounds that fear or flight
  Can claim no share in; steel us both with anger,
  And warlike executions fit thy viewing.
  Let Rome put on her best strength, and thy Britain,
  Thy little Britain, but as great in fortune,
  Meet her as strong as she, as proud, as daring!
  And then look on, thou red-eyed God; who does best,
  Reward with honour; who despair makes fly,
  Unarm for ever, and brand with infamy!"

C.I.R.

Feb. 16.


_To endeavour oneself_ (No. 8. p. 125.).--"G.P." thinks that the verb
"endeavour" takes a middle voice form in the collect for the second
Sunday after Easter, in the preface to the Confirmation Service, and in
the Form of Ordering of Priests: but in these instances is it any thing
more than the verb neuter, implying that we should endeavour ourselves
to follow, &c.?

In Shepherd's _Elucidation of the Book of Common Prayer_ (2 vols. 8vo.
Lord. 1817), under the head of the Confirmation Office, it is stated
relative to the persons to be confirmed (vol. ii. p. 312.), "that they
solemnly engage evermore to endeavour faithfully to perform their part
of that covenant."

C.I.R.


_Evelyn's Sculptura._--In a copy of Evelyn's _Sculptura_, 3rd edit.,
with Memoir of the Author's Life, 8vo. London, 1759, I find the
following memorandum, in pencil, prefixed to the Memoirs:

    "By Dr. Warton of Winchester, as he himself informed me in
    1785."

An autograph resembling "J. Chelmar" is on the fly-leaf. As I do not see
this Memoir ascribed to Dr. Warton in any list, to which I have access,
of his writings, perhaps the Memoir is not generally, or at all, known
to be by him, and I therefore send the memorandum to you to be winnowed
in your literary threshing-floor, by those who have better means and
more leisure to ascertain its value.

J.M.

Oxford, Feb. 5.


_William Baxter._--I do not know whether William Baxter is authority for
anything. When you see a word quoted from one of the languages or
dialects which the moderns call Celtic, that word will very commonly be
found not to exist. When at a loss, quote Celtic. If W. Baxter says (see
No. 13. p. 195.) that _buarth papan_ means the sun's ox-stall, or, in
other words, that _papan_ means the sun, I should wish to know where
else such a name for that luminary, for or any thing else, may be met
with? I have not found any such thing.

A.N.


_Derivation of the word "Avon."_--Among the many proofs of the
prevalence of the Gaelic roots in existing names at both ends of the
island, it may be mentioned that there are ten rivers named _Avon_ in
Britain, and _Avon_ is simply the Gaelic word for a river.

J.U.G. Gutch.


_Warton and Heinsius._--A late critic thinks he has discovered that Mr.
Thomas Warton, a contemporary of Mr. Wise, and fellow of the same
college, an antiquary and scholar of whom England may be proud, knew
little of Latin, and less of Greek, because, forsooth, he did not notice
Milton's false quantities, which Heinsius did! As well might it be
argued, that the critic is an immoral man, because he did not notice the
delinquencies of Heinsius in a moral point of view; the said Heinsius
being obliged to resign his secretaryship to the city of Amsterdam in
consequence of a prosecution by a young woman for breach of promise of
marriage, under the faith of which she had lived with him, and borne him
two children. The sentence of _misdaadigheyd_ was pronounced against
him, and confirmed, on appeal, by the supreme court of Holland, in 1662.
So much for the unpatriotic puff of the learned foreigner, to {286} the
disparagement of one of the greatest ornaments of English literature. As
one "note" naturally produces another, I hope your sense of justice, Mr.
Editor, will admit this, in order to counter-balance the effect of the
former one; appearing, as it did, in a periodical of considerable
circulation, which, I am glad to hear, is soon to be very much improved.

J.I.


_Queen's Bagnio_ (No. 13. p. 196.).--The Queen's Bagnio in Long Acre was
on the south side, nearly opposite to the door of Long Acre Chapel. The
Duke's bath I have always heard was in Old Belton Street, now Endell
Street; the fourth house from Castle Street on the west side. It has
been new fronted not long since; but at the time that I frequented the
baths there--the exterior had pilasters, and a handsome cornice in the
style of Inigo Jones,--all being built in dark red brick. Within there
was a large plunging bath, paved and lined with marble, the walls being
covered by small tiles of blue and white, in the Dutch fashion. The
supply of water was from a well on the premises.

There were several apartments for warm-bathing, having the baths and
pavements of marble, and to several of these were attached
dressing-rooms.

The house is now, I believe, occupied by a carpenter; but the baths
remained, though in a dilapidated condition, a short-time since, and
probably are there still.

T.W.


_A Flemish Account._--In illustration of a query in your first number on
the origin of the expression "a Flemish Account," unless you think it
too late for insertion, I send the following extract from an old volume
in the Cathedral Library at Salisbury. It is entitled, "The Accurate
Accomptant or London Merchant, &c.; by Thomas Brown, Accomptant:
composed for the Use and Benefit of the poor Blew-Coat children educated
in Christ's Hospital, &c. London, printed by William Godbid, sen. 1669.
fol."

The book consists almost entirely of examples of the best methods of
keeping accounts, from which I select the following instance:

    "London, August 10th, 1668.

    "To Roger Pace, Factor, &c., for 10 Pieces cont. 746 Ells Fl. at
    10 _S._ Flem. per Ell. is 373 l. Flem. Exchange at 35 _S_ makes
    Sterling Money 213 l. 2s. 10 d."

The above extract strongly confirms the explanations of the expressions
given by your correspondents "Q.Q." and "Mr. Bolton Corney," in No. 5.
p. 74., as it proves both the necessity and early practice of accurately
distinguishing in commercial dealings between English and Flemish
methods of reckoning.

E.A.D.

    [The following is a curious illustration of the use of the
    phrase.

    "A person resident in London is said to have had most of
    Caxton's publications. He sent them to Amsterdam for inspection,
    and, on writing for them, was informed that they had been
    destroyed by accident. 'I am very much afraid,' says Herbert,
    'my kind friend received but _a Flemish account_ of his
    Caxtons.'"--_Typ. Antiq._, p. 1773.]


_La Mer des Histoires._--I find I have a note on that handsome old
French work, _La Mer des Histoires_, which is commonly attributed to
Johannes de Columna, Archbishop of Messina; but upon which Francis
Douce, while taking notice of its being a translation of the _Rudimentum
Noviciorum_ ascribed to Mochartus, observes that it is a different work
from the _Mare Historiarum_ of Johannes de Columna. Douce also informs
us, that there were several works passing under this title. Columna is
mentioned by Genebrard as the author of a book, _Cujus titulus est Mater
Historiarum_. Query? What is known of the work, which is really
Columna's?

John Sansom.

       *       *       *       *       *

On Passages in Milton

  "And every shepherd _tells his tale_
  Under the hawthorn in the dale."

  Milton's _L'Allegro_.

I used to suppose the _tale told_ was a love tale. Now I take it to mean
that each shepherd _tells the tale_, that is, counts the number of his
sheep. Is there any doubt on this point?

Milton (_Paradise Lost_, b. v.), speaks of "silent night with this her
_solemn_ bird;" that is, the nightingale. Most readers take "_solemn_"
to mean "_pensive_;" but I cannot doubt that Milton (who carries
Latinism to excess) used it to express _habitual_, _customary_,
_familiar_, as in its Latin form _sollemnis_.

B.H.K.

       *       *       *       *       *

NOTES ON BOOKS, SALES, CATALOGUES, ETC.

The lovers of accurate and painstaking topography, the students of
genealogical history, and, though last not least, those who like to see
the writings of Shakspeare, illustrated in a congenial spirit, will read
with pleasure the announcement, in our advertising columns, that the
fellow-townsmen of Joseph Hunter, the Historian of "Hallamshire" and
"The Deanery of Doncaster," and the Illustrator of the Life and Writings
of Shakspeare, have opened a Subscription for the purpose of placing a
full-length portrait of that gentleman in the Cutlers' Hall, Sheffield.

When we announced Mr. Archer's projected work, entitled _Vestiges of Old
London, a Series of finished Etchings from Original Drawings, with
Descriptions, Historical Associations, and other References_, we spoke
of it as one likely, we thought, to prove of especial interest. The
appearance of the first Number justifies to the fullest our
anticipation. The pictorial representations are replete {287} with
variety, and the literary illustrations full of a pleasant gossipping
anecdotical character. The first plate shows us _The Old Bulk Shop at
Temple Bar_, occupied by successive generations of fishmongers, and
doubtless well remembered by most of our readers; although no trace of
it any longer exists. _The House of John Dryden_, in Fetter Lane, so
designated on the authority of the late Mr. Upcott, forms the second
plate; and is followed by _The Altar of Diana_, discovered in Foster
Lane, Cheapside, in December, 1830. _The Drapers' Almshouses, Crutched
Friars_, is the next illustration, which again is contrasted by a plate
of _Roman Vestiges_, full of interest to those who like to investigate
the Roman occupation of our metropolis; and this first part concludes
with a view of _The Old Chapel of St. Bartholomew, Kingsland_. The work
is executed in a style to delight London antiquaries, and charm those
who delight to illustrate Pennant.

The approaching _Exhibition of Works of Ancient and Mediaeval Art_ at the
rooms of the Society of Arts in the Adelphi, promises to be one of the
most interesting displays of the kind ever exhibited in this or any
other city. The possessors of objects of beauty and rarity have vied
with each other in placing at the disposal of the Committee their
choicest specimens; and the inhabitants and visitors of the metropolis
will shortly have an opportunity of judging how numerous are the relics
of "barbaric pomp and gold" which are still left to us, and how much of
beauty of design, and "skill in workmanship" were displayed by the
"hard-handed" men of the good old times, to justify the enthusiasm of
the antiquary, and gratify the man of taste.

We have received, but at a moment too late to notice as it deserves, the
Catalogue of very choice Books, and Books printed on vellum, the
property of the late Mr. Rodd, which are to be sold by Messrs. Sotheby,
at their rooms in Wellington Street, on Monday next. As a specimen,
perhaps the most remarkable of this collection, we may point out the set
of the Works of Thomas Aquinas, in 17 folio volumes, bound in 21, and
which is well described as

    "A magnificent set of Books, presenting one of the finest
    specimens, and at the same time the most extensive work, ever
    printed upon vellum. This copy was presented by Pope Pius V. to
    Philip II., king of Spain, and was deposited in the library of
    the Escurial, whence it was taken during the occupation of Spain
    by Bonaparte. The only other copy known is in the National
    Library, Paris. It is the best edition of this author's works."

We have received the following Catalogues:

    "John Petheram's Catalogue of Old and New Books on Sale for Cash
    only at 94. High Holborn. Part CVIII. No. 2. for 1850."

a Catalogue containing some excellent books, which reached us last week,
and was omitted from our last list by accident.

    "Catalogue of Miscellaneous English and Foreign Books in all
    Classes of Literature, selected from the Stock of Nattali and
    Bond, 23. Bedford Street, Covent Garden."

    "Bibliotheca Salisburiensis. A Catalogue of Old and New Books on
    sale by J. Hearn, corner of the Poultry Cross, Salisbury."

       *       *       *       *       *

BOOKS AND ODD VOLUMES

WANTED TO PURCHASE

(_In continuation of Lists in former Nos._)

Life of Colonel Birch.

Odd Volumes.

Goldsmith's Miscellaneous Works. (Cairn's Edition.) 12mo. Edinburgh.
1804. Vol. III.

British Painters, Sculptors, and Architects. Family Library. 1830. Vol.
IV.

Orbis Phaeton, sive de Universis Vitus Linguae. Pars prima, A to K. Mons.
1629.

Political Magazine for 1780. Vol. IX. for 1785. Vol. XII. for 1787.

Hudibras. 18mo. 1716. Vol. I.

Valpy's Delphin Classics. 63 and 64. In the original Boards.

Inchbald's British Theater. 12mo. 1808. Vol. IX.

Chevallier's Epistles of the Apostolic Fathers.

Historical Romances. 7 Vols., or Vol. I. Constable, 1822.

Letters, stating particulars and lowest price, _carriage free_, to be
sent to Mr. Bell, Publisher of "NOTES AND QUERIES," 186. Fleet Street.

       *       *       *       *       *

NOTICES TO CORRESPONDENTS.

_We have again had to indulge in the expensive luxury of a further
reprint; and we have therefore the pleasure of announcing that our_
Second _Monthly Part, which has been out of print, may now be had by
such of our friends as want to complete their sets._

_We are again under the necessity of omitting many communications,
including_ Notes, Queries, _and_ Replies, _which are in type; but we
hope, by enlarging next week's paper to_ 24 _pages, instead of_ 16, _to
find room for inserting many interesting papers which we have been
hitherto compelled to omit for want of room._

_To correspondents inquiring as to the mode of procuring_ "Notes and
Queries," _we have once more to explain, that every bookseller and
newsman will supply it regularly_, if ordered; _and that gentlemen
residing in the country, who may find a difficulty in getting it through
any bookseller in their neighbourhood, may be supplied regularly with
the_ stamped _edition, by giving their orders direct to the publisher_,
Mr. George Bell, 186. _Fleet Street, accompanied by a Post Office order,
for a quarter, 4s. 4d.; a half year, 8s. 8d.; or one year, 17s. 4d._

A.J.V. _will find an answer to his query respecting_ Angels' Visits,
_&c. in No. 7. p. 102.; and respecting the Hudibrastic couplet, in No.
12. p. 179_.

M.X. (Bridport). _The work_ well bound _will only fetch about seven or
eight pounds in a sale room, and may be purchased for about ten._

Errata. No. 9. p. 133. col. 1. l. 51., for "Silent" read "Select;" l.
54., for "imposing" read "composing;" and col. 2. l. 43. after "that"
insert "Simpson's." No. 17. p. 263. col. 1. l. 49., for "Respublicae"
read "Respublica."

       *       *       *       *       * {288}

Exceedingly Choice and Rare Books, and Books printed upon Vellum, the
property of the late eminent bookseller, Mr. Thos. Rodd.

MESSRS. S. LEIGH SOTHEBY and Co., (auctioneers of literary property and
works illustrative of the fine arts,) will SELL by AUCTION in pursuance
of the will of the deceased, at their House, 3. Wellington Street,
Strand, on Monday, March 4. at 1 precisely, a very choice selection of
fine and RARE BOOKS, and Books printed upon Vellum, the property of the
late eminent bookseller, Mr. Thomas Rodd, of Great Newport Street,
London; including among the more valuable books, Aquinatis Opera Omnia,
21 vols., Romae, 1570, a magnificent set of books, printed on vellum,
presented by Pope Pius V. to Philip II, King of Spain; Homer Opera
Graece, editio princeps, fine copy, Florentiae, 1488; Valerius Maximus,
printed on vellum, Moguntiae, 1471; Vivaldus de Veritate Contritionis,
printed on vellum, unique, 1503; Lancelot du Lac, Chevalier de la Table
Ronde, beautiful copy; Ciceronis Epistolae ad Familiares, Venetiis,
Johannes de Spira, 1409; Sancti Hieronymi Epistolae, printed on vellum,
Moguntiae, 1470; a magnificent volume; Pentateuchus Hebraicus et
Chaldaicus, printed on vellum, a beautiful copy, Sabionnettae, 1557; many
beautiful Horae, printed on vellum; Enchiridion Ecclesiae Sarum, printed
on vellum, extremely rare and interesting, Paris. T. Kerver, 1528; La
Collection des Ouvrages, imprimees par Ordre de M. Le Compte d'Artois,
64 vols., printed on vellum, Paris Didot. To be viewed three days prior,
and catalogues had at the place of sale.

       *       *       *       *       *

Preparing for immediate Publication, in 2 vols. small 8vo.

THE FOLK-LORE of ENGLAND. By William J. Thoms, F.S.A., Secretary of the
Camden Society, Editor of "Early Prose Romances," "Lays and Legends of
all Nations." &c. One object of the present work is to furnish new
contributions to the History of our National Folk-Lore; and especially
some of the more striking Illustrations of the subject to be found in
the Writings of Jacob Grimm and other Continental Antiquaries.

Communications of inedited Legends, Notices of remarkable Customs and
Popular Observances, Rhyming Charms &c. are earnestly solicited, and
will be thankfully acknowledged by the Editor. They may be addressed to
the care of Mr. Bell, Office of "Notes and Queries," 186. Fleet Street.

       *       *       *       *       *

TOPOGRAPHY, COUNTY AND FAMILY HISTORY, ETC.--John Gray Bell, Bookseller,
Dealer in Topographical Prints, Portraits, Autographs, and Literary
Curiosities, 10. and 11. Bedford Street, Covent Garden, London, invites
Collectors to examine his Assortment of PRINTS on the above interesting
subjects. Having gathered them with the greatest care and research, at a
vast expenditure of Time and Capital, he flatters himself that his
Collection is the most extensive and best selected extant, and will be
found well worthy of attention.

John Gray Bell's Catalogues are published monthly, and forwarded, free,
by post. Parties desirous of possessing the recent numbers can have them
sent by enclosing their address.

       *       *       *       *       *

Royal 32mo., cloth, 2s.; morocco (Hayday), 7s.

SELDEN'S TABLE TALK.

Royal 32mo., price 2s. 6d. cloth, 7s. 6d. morocco (Hayday).

THE TEMPLE, SACRED POEMS, and PRIVATE EJACULATIONS. BY George Herbert.

Also, by the same Author,

Price 2s. cloth, 7s. morocco (Hayday),

A PRIEST TO THE TEMPLE; or, THE COUNTRY PARSON: his character, and Rule
of Holy Life, &c.

London: George Bell, Fleet Street. Leicester: J.S. Crossley.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE PHILOLOGICAL MUSEUM. Edited by Hare and Thirlwall. 2 thick vols.
8vo. cloth, 14s. E. STIBBS, having purchased the remaining copies of
this esteemed Work, now offers it at the above reduced price, and
respectfully suggests the necessity of early application, as it is
entirely out of print, and but few copies remain for sale.

331. Strand, opposite Somerset House.

       *       *       *       *       *

REV. JOSEPH HUNTER, F.S.A. Public Portrait. The Friends and Admirers of
the learned and respected Historian of "Hallamshire" and the "Deanery of
Doncaster" having resolved to place a full-length Portrait of him in the
Cutlers' Hall, Sheffield, his native town (vide "Gentleman's Magazine,"
Feb. 1850), the Committee beg respectfully to announce that
Subscriptions of One Guinea, in furtherance of their object, will be
received by Thomas Berks, Esq., Mayor, Treasurer; and Mr. Henry Jackson,
Secretary of the Committee, Sheffield.

       *       *       *       *       *

Just published, and may be had postage free, on a remittance of two
stamps.

A CATALOGUE OF ENGLISH and FOREIGN BOOKS, in all Classes of Literature.
Selected from the STOCK of NATTALI and BOND (successors to the late M.A.
Nattali), 23. Bedford Street, Covent Garden.

       *       *       *       *       *

Now ready.

STIBB'S CATALOGUE OF MISCELLANEOUS BOOKS, Part III., containing a very
extensive collection of Books relating to America, also a few choice and
rare old books beautifully bound in morocco; it may be had gratis, and
post free, on application. Also, nearly ready, STIBB'S GENERAL
CATALOGUE, which will be forwarded gratis on receipt of Eight stamps for
the Postage.

331. Strand, opposite Somerset House,

       *       *       *       *       *

Just published, price 3s. 6d. 12mo. cloth, 7s. calf or morocco.

THE ENGLISH GENTLEMAN: his Principles, his Feelings, his Manners, his
Pursuits.

"We like him so well as to wish heartily we might meet many
such."--_Theologian._

"The object of the first of the four essays is to form the principles of
a gentleman on a Christian standard. In the other three subjects, of
feelings, manners, and pursuits, the views, though strict, are of a more
worldly kind."--_Spectator._

George Bell, 186. Fleet Street.

       *       *       *       *       *

8vo. cloth. 7s. 6d.

ORIGINAL LETTERS OF JOHN LOCKE, ALGERNON SIDNEY, AND LORD SHAFTESBURY.
With an Analytical Sketch of the Writings and Opinions of Locke and
other Metaphysicains. By T. Forster, M.B. F.L.S., M.A.S., Corresponding
Member of the Acad. of Natural Science at Philadelphia, &c.

London: George Bell, Fleet Street.

       *       *       *       *       *

In 8vo. price 7s. 6d. cloth.

HISTORY OF THE PARISH AND TOWN OF BAMPTON, with the District and Hamlets
belonging to it. By the Rev. J.A. Giles, D.C.L., late Fellow of Christ's
Ch. Coll. Oxford, Author of "History of the Ancient Britons," &c.

London: George Bell, Fleet Street.

       *       *       *       *       *

Printed by Thomas Clark Shaw, of No. 8 New Street Square, at No. 5 New
Street Square, in the Parish of St. Bride, in the City of London; and
published by George Bell, of No. 186. Fleet Street, in the Parish of St.
Dunstan in the West, in the City of London, Publisher, at No. 186 Fleet
Street aforesaid.--Saturday, March 2. 1850.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Notes & Queries, No. 18. Saturday,
March 2, 1850, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NOTES & QUERIES, NO. 18. ***

***** This file should be named 13544.txt or 13544.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/1/3/5/4/13544/

Produced by Jon Ingram, David King, the PG Online Distributed
Proofreading Team, and The Internet Library of Early Journals


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
