The Project Gutenberg EBook of Notes and Queries, No. 28. Saturday, May
11, 1850, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Notes and Queries, No. 28. Saturday, May 11, 1850

Author: Various

Release Date: October 10, 2004 [EBook #13684]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NOTES AND QUERIES ***




Produced by The Internet Library of Early Journals, Jon Ingram, David
King, and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team





NOTES AND QUERIES:

A MEDIUM OF INTER-COMMUNICATION FOR LITERARY MEN, ARTISTS, ANTIQUARIES,
GENEALOGISTS, ETC.

       *       *       *       *       *

"When found, make a note of."--CAPTAIN CUTTLE.

       *       *       *       *       *

No. 28.] SATURDAY, MAY 11, 1850 [Price Threepence. Stamped Edition 4d.

       *       *       *       *       * {449}

CONTENTS.

NOTES:--
  Etymology of Penniel. 449
  Notes on Cunningham's London, by E.F. Rimbault,
    LL.D. 450
  Original Letter of Peter Le Neve, by E. Hailstone. 451
  Folk Lore:--Superstitions of Middle Counties--Rainbow
    in the Morning. 451
  Error in Johnson's Life of Selden. 451
  Pope and Petronius, by C. Forbes. 452

QUERIES:--
  Purvey of the Apocalypse--Bonner on the Seven Sacraments,
    by Sir F. Madden. 452
  Replies to Minor Queries:--Arrangement of a Monastery--Constantine
    the Artist--Josias Ibach Stada--Worm of Lambton. 452

REPLIES:--
  Luther's Translation, by S.W. Singer. 453
  Lines on London Dissenting Ministers. 454
  Replies to Minor Queries:--Tracts by Dekker and
    Nash--Tureen--English Translations of Erasmus--Court
    of Wards--Scala Coeli--Twm Shawn Cattie--Cheshire
    Round--Horns to a River--Horns--Coal
    Brandy--Howkey or Horkey--Luther's Portrait--Symbolism
    of Flowers, &c.--"Where England's
    Monarch"--Journeyman--Sydenham or Tidenham--J.B.'s
    Treatise on Nature and Art--"A Frog he
    would a-wooing go"--"My Love and I, &c."--Teneber
    Wednesday--Buckingham Motto--Laerig--Zenobia a
    Jewess--Temple Stanyan, &c. 454

MISCELLANIES:--
  Spur Money--Note Books--Lady Rachael Russell--Byron
    and Taritus--Aboriginal Chambers near Tilbury--Sir
    R. Haigh's Letter-Book--A Phonetic Peculiarity. 462

MISCELLANEOUS:--
  Notes on Books, Catalogues, Sales, &c. 463
  Books and Odd Volumes wanted. 463
  Notices to Correspondents. 463

       *       *       *       *       *


NOTES

ETYMOLOGY OF PENNIEL.

Some eighteen years ago, the writer of the following sonnets, by the
kindness of the proprietors of a pleasant house upon the banks of the
Teviot, enjoyed two happy autumns there. The Roman road which runs
between the remains of the camp at Chew Green, in Northumberland, and
the Eildon Hills (the Trimontium of General Roy), passed hard by. The
road is yet distinctly visible in all its course among the Cheviots, and
in the uncultivated tracts; and occasionally also, where the plough has
spared it, among the agricultural inclosures.

The house stands near the base of the hill called Penniel or
Penniel-heugh: and it is hoped that the etymological derivation of that
word now to be hazarded will not imply in the etymologist the credulity
of a Monkbarns. _Pen_, it is known, signifies in the Celtic language "a
hill". And the word _heil_, in the Celto-Scythian, is, in the Latin,
rendered _Sol_. In the Armoric dialect of the Celtic also, _heol_ means
"the sun:" hence, _Penheil_, _Penheol_, or _Penniel_, "the hill of the
sun." Beyond the garden of the abode there stood, and, it is believed,
yet stands, a single stone of a once extensive Druid circle, not many
years ago destroyed by the then proprietor, who used the sacred remains
in building his garden wall. A little farther antiquarian conjecture is
necessary to clothe the country with oak woods. Jedwood or Jedworth
Forest was part of "the forest" which covered Selkirkshire and parts of
the counties around. The Capon Tree, and the King of the Wood, two
venerable oaks yet flourishing on the water of Jed, attest the once
wooded condition of the land; which is farther irresistibly corroborated
by evidence drawn from the interesting volumes of the _Rotuli
Parliamentorum_. The Bishops of Glasgow had a religious establishment in
the neighbouring sunward village of Nether Ancrum. Of their buildings,
of the vicar's house, or of the ancient gardens existing in the memory
of persons living, not a vestige now remains. In the first volume of the
_Rotuli_, p. 472., there is a Petition, of uncertain date, by the Bishop
of Glasgow to Edward I., then in possession of Scotland, in these
terms:--

    "Derechief pry ly dit Evesqe a soen Segur le Roy qe ly plese
    aider &c.... e sur ceo transmettr', sa lettre al vesconte de
    Lanark. E une autre, si ly plest, a ses Forresters de Geddeworth
    de autant de Merin [meremium, meheremium, wood for building]
    pour fere une receite a Allyncrom (Ancrum) desur la marche, ou
    il poet aver recett e entendre a ses ministres qut il le
    voudrent aver."

To which the King's answer is,--

    "Heat Bre Ten' locu R. in Scoc. qd fae'. ei hre meheremiu in
    Foresta de Selkirk et de Maddesleye usq ad numum quinquaginta
    quercu."

Thus, no doubt is left that oak woods abounded in the district; and it
was under the influence of these beliefs that the sonnets were
composed:--

  I.

  "'Twas on this spot some thousand years ago,
  Amid the silence of its hoary wood
  By sound unbroken, save the Teviot's flow,
  The lonely Temple of the Druids stood! {450}
  The conquering Roman when he urged his way,
  That led to triumph, through the neighbouring plain,
  And oped the gloomy grove to glare of day,
  Awe-stricken gazed, and spared the sacred fane!
  One stone of all its circle now remains,
  Saved from the modern Goth's destructive hand;
  And by its side I muse: and Fancy reigns;
  And giant oaks on Pennial waving stand;
  With snowy robe and flowing bears sweep bye
  The aged Druid-train beneath the star-lit sky.

  II.

  "The Druid-train has moved into the wood,
  Oh! draw a veil before the hideous scene!
  For theirs were offerings of human blood,
  With sound of trump and shriek of fear between:
  Their sacred grove is fallen, their creed is gone;
  And record none remains save this gray stone!
  Then come the warlike Saxons; and the years
  Roll on in conflict: and the pirate Dane
  Uprears his Bloody raven; and his spears
  Bristling upon the Broadlaw summit's plain
  Spread terror o'er the vale: and still rude times
  Succeed; and Border feuds with conflagration light
  Nightly, the Teviot's wave, and ceaseless crimes
  Chase from the holy towers their inmates in affright.

  III.

  "Land of the South! Oh, lovely land of song!
  And is my dwelling by thy classic streams;
  And is the fate so fondly wished and long,
  Mine in the fullest measure of my dreams,--
  By thy green hills and sunny glades to roam,
  To live among thy happy shepherd swains
  Where now the peaceful virtues have their home;
  A blissful lot! nor aught of grief remains
  Save for that friend, beloved, bewailed, revered,
  To whom my heart for thrice ten years was bound
  By truest love and gratitude endeared:
  The glory of his land, in whom were found
  Genius unmatched, and mastery of the soul,
  Beyond all human wight, save Shakspeare's own controul."

F.S.A. L. & E.

       *       *       *       *       *

NOTES ON CUNNINGHAM'S HANDBOOK FOR LONDON.

_Soho Square._--Your correspondent "NASO" (p. 244.) has anticipated me
in noticing Mr. Cunningham's mistake about Mrs. Cornellys' house in this
square; but he has left unnoticed some particulars which deserve to be
recorded. Mrs. Cornellys', or _Carlisle House_ as it was called, was
pulled down at the beginning of the present century (1803 or 1804), and
_two_ houses built upon its site, now _Jeffery's Music Warehouse_ and
_Weston's Printing Office_. Some curious old paintings representing
banqueting scenes, formerly in _Carlisle House_ were carefully preserved
until the last few years, in the drawing-room of the corner house, when
they were removed to make room for some needed "elegancies" of the
modern print shops. The Catholic Chapel in Sutton Street was the
banquetting-room of Carlisle House; and the connecting passage between
it and the house in Soho Square was originally the "Chinese bridge."

"Teresa Cornelys, Carlisle House, St. Ann, Soho, dealer" appears in the
bankrupt list of _The London Gazette_ of November, 1772; and in December
of the same year, this temple of festivity, and all its gorgeous
contents, were thus advertised to be sold by public auction:--

    "_Carlisle House, Soho._--At twelve o'clock on Monday the 14th
    instant, by Order of the Assignees, Mr. Marshall will sell by
    Auction on the Premises, in one Lot, All that extensive,
    commodious, and magnificent House in Soho Square, lately
    occupied by Mrs. Cornelys, and used for the Public Assemblies of
    the Nobility and Gentry. Together with all the rich and elegant
    Furniture, Decorations, China, &c., thereunto belonging, too
    well-known and universally admired for their aptness and taste
    to require here any public and extraordinary description
    thereof. Catalogues to be had at the House, and at Mr.
    Marshall's, in St. Martin's Lane. The curiosity of many to see
    the house, to prevent improper crowds, and the great damage that
    might happen therefrom (and the badness of this season) by
    admitting indifferent and disinterested people, must be an
    excuse to the public for the Assignees ordering the Catalogues
    to be sold at 5s. each, which will admit two to see the house,
    &c., from Monday the 7th instant to the time of sale, Sundays
    excepted, from ten in the morning to three in the afternoon, and
    they hope no person or persons will take amiss being refused
    admittance without Catalogues."

In December 1774, the nobility and gentry were informed (by
advertisement), "That the Assemblies at Carlisle House will commence
soon, under the conduct and direction of a _New_ Manager;" but
notwithstanding the efforts of this person, we find that Mrs. Cornellys
resumed her revels here with great spirit in 1776. In 1778, Carlisle
House was again publicly advertised to be sold by private contract, or
"to be hired as usual;" and subsequently, after having been used as a
common exhibition room of "Monstrosities," a "School of Eloquence," and
"An Infant School of Genius," it closed its public career through the
interference of the magistracy in 1797.

A full and particular account of the rise and fall of "Mrs. Cornelys'
Entertainments at Carlisle House, Soho," was privately printed two or
three years ago, by Thomas Mackinlay, Esq., of the firm of Dalmaine and
Co., Soho Square.

_Carlisle Street, Soho Square._--The large house at the end of this
street, looking into the square, was formerly called _Carlisle House_.
In 1770 it was purchased of Lord Delaval by the elder Angelo; who
resided in it many years, and built a large riding-school at the back.
Bach and Abel, of "Concert" notoriety, resided in the adjoining house.
Carlisle Street was then called _King's Square Court_. {451}

_Catherine Street, Strand._--In 1714, a tract was published with the
following title:--_The Maypole's New Year's Gift or Thanks returned to
his Benefactors, humbly inscribed to the Two Corners of_ Catherine
Street, Strand; _written by a Parishioner of St. Mary, Savoy_.

_Maiden Lane, Covent Garden._--The well known "Cider Cellar" in this
lane was opened about 1730. There is a curious tract, entitled
_Adventures under Ground_, 1750, which contains some strange notices of
this "Midnight Concert Room."

_Salisbury Change._--Cibber, in the amusing _Apology for his Life_, has
the following:--

    "Taste and fashion, with us, have always had wings, and fly from
    one public spectacle to another so wantonly, that I have been
    informed by those who remember it, that a famous puppet-show in
    _Salisbury Change_ (then standing where _Cecil Street_ now is),
    so far distressed these two celebrated companies, that they were
    reduced to petition the king for relief against it."

_The New Exchange._--A good description of this once popular mart may be
found in Lodwick Rowzee's _Treatise on the Queene's Welles_, Lond. 1632.
It is as follows:--

    "We went to see the _New Exchange_, which is not far from the
    place of the Common Garden, in the great street called the
    Strand. The building has a facade of stone, built after the
    Gothic style, which has lost its colour from age, and is
    becoming blackish. It contains two long and double galleries,
    one above the other, in which are distributed several rows great
    numbers of very rich shops, of drapers and mercers, filled with
    goods of every kind, and with manufactures of the most beautiful
    description. There are, for the most part, under the care of
    well-dressed women, who are busily employed in work, although
    many are served by young men, called apprentices."

_The Bedford Coffee House, Covent Garden._--In 1763 appeared a small
volume under the title of _Memoirs of the Bedford Coffee House, by
Genius, dedicated to the most Impudent Man alive_.

EDWARD F. RIMBAULT.

       *       *       *       *       *

ORIGINAL LETTER OF PETER LE NEVE.

The following was a letter from Le Neve to a Mr. Admall, a herald
painter at Wakefield, found in a book of arms belonging to the latter,
which came into my possession a few months ago.

E. HAILSTONE.

    "Mr. Admall,

    "I understand by Mr. Mangay, my deputy at Leeds for the West
    Riding, that you contemn my lawfull autority of Norroy King of
    Arms, and have done and will doe as you say, things relating to
    heraldry, contrary to my prohibition, &c.; these are therefore
    to acquaint you, that if you continue in the same mind and will
    usurp on my office, I intend to make you sensible of the wrong
    you doe me in my office, by taking out process against you, and
    making you pay for your transgression. I shall give you no hard
    words, but shal be as good as my word if there is law in England
    to restrain you; so chose whether you will due to me good or
    evill; you shall find me according your friend or open enemy.

    "PETER LA NEVE, Norroy.

    "College of Arms, in London,

    "28th May, 1719."

       *       *       *       *       *

FOLK LORE.

_Superstitions of the Midland Counties._--It is believed a sign of "bad
luck" to meet a white horse, unless the person _spits_ at it, which
action is said to avert the ill consequences of the recontre.

A rainy Friday is believed to be followed as a natural and invariable
consequence, by a wet Sunday; but I am not aware that the contrary is
believed, viz., that fine Friday produces a fine Sunday.

If the fire burns brightly when a person has poked or stirred it up, it
is a sign that the _absent_ lover, wife, or husband (as the case may be)
is in good spirits, and in good humour.

The itching of the right hand palm is said to portend the reception of a
gift; which is rendered more certain if the advice in this distich be
followed:--

  "Rub it 'gainst wood,
  'Tis sure to come good."

Persons with much hair or down upon their arms and hands, will at some
future period enjoy great wealth; or as the common expression has it,
"are born to be rich."

HENRY KERSLEY.

Corp. Chris. Hall, Maidstone.


_A Rainbow in the Morning, &c._--"Mr. THOMS" (No. 26, p. 413.) says that
he believes no one has remarked the philosophy of this proverbial rhyme.
Sir Humphry Davy, however, points it out in his _Salmonia_.

       *       *       *       *       *

ERROR IN JOHNSON'S LIFE OF SELDEN.

In Johnson's (Geo. W.) _Memoirs of John Selden_, London, 1635, 8vo. pp.
128, 129, is a notice of Dr. Sibthorpe's celebrated Sermon preached at
Northampton, and printed in 1627 with the title of _Apostolike
Obedience_. After stating the difficult experienced in obtaining the
necessary sanction for its publication, owing to Abp. Abbot refusing the
requisite _imprimatur_, the author says that ultimately the licence was
"_signed by Land himself_, and published under the title of _Apostolical
Obedience_." A reference at the foot of the page to "Rushworth, p. 444,"
leads me to conclude that it is on his authority Mr. Johnson has made
this statement; but not having access to the "Historical Collections," I
am unable to examine. At any rate, Heylin, in his _Cyprianus Anglicus_,
Lond., 1671 fol. p. 159., may be understood to imply the correctness of
the assertion.

A copy of this now rare sermon before me {452} proves, however, that the
statement is incorrect. At the back of the title is as follows:--

    "I have read over this sermon upon _Rom._ xiii. 7., preached at
    _Northampton_, at the assises for the county, _Feb._ 22, 1626,
    by _Robert Synthorpe_, Doctor of Divinity, Vicar of Brackley,
    and I doe approve it as a sermon learnedly and discreetly
    preached, and agreeable to the _ancient Doctrine_ of the
    _Primitive Church_, both for _Faith_ and _good manners_, and to
    the _Doctrine established_ in the _Church of England_, and,
    therefore, under my hand I give authority for the printing of
    it, May 8. 1627."

    GEO. LONDON.

It was therefore Bishop _Mountague_, and not _Laud_, who licensed the
sermon.

JOHN. J. DREDGE.

       *       *       *       *       *

POPE AND PETRONIUS.

I have read "Mr. RICH'S" letter with great interest, and I willingly
allow that he has combated my charge of plagiarism against Pope, and
discussed the subject generally with equal fairness and ability. "But
yet," I think that he wanders a little from the point when he says, "the
surmise of the plagiarism originates in a misconception of the terms
employed by the Latin author, especially _corcillum_." Now the question,
in my opinion, turns not so much on what _Petronius said_, as on what
_Pope read_; i.e. not on the meaning that _Petronius gave_ to the word
(_corcillum_), but on that which _Pope attributed_ to it. I cannot,
without further proof, give him credit for having read the words as
critically and correctly as "Mr. R." has done. I believe that he looked
on it merely as a simple derivative of _cor_, and therefore rendered it
"worth," i.e. a _moral_, not a _mental_ quality.

C. FORBES.

       *       *       *       *       *


QUERIES.

QUERIES RESPECTING PURVEY ON THE APOCALYPSE, AND BONNER ON THE SEVEN
SACRAMENTS.

I beg leave to make the two following Queries:--

1. In Bayle's very useful work, _Scriptorum Illustrium Majoris Brytanniae
Catalogus_, fol. Bas. 1559, among the writings ascribed to John Purvey,
one of Wycliffe's followers, and (as Walden styles him) _Glossator_, is
mentioned _Commentarius in Apocalypsin_, beginning "Apocalypsis, quasi
diceret;" and Bayle adds:--

    "Praedictus in Apocalypsin Commentarius ex magistri Wielevi
    lectionibus publicis per Joannem Purvaeum collectus, et nunc per
    Martinum Lutherum, _Ante centum annos_ intitularus, anno Domini
    1528, sine authoris nomine, Witembergae fuit excusus. Fuit et
    ipse Author in carcere, ac cathenis insuper chalybeis, cum ea
    Commentaria scripsit, ut ex decimo et undecimo ejus scripti
    capite apparet. Scripsit autem Purvaeus hunc librum anno Domini
    1390, ut ex decimo tertio capite et principio vigesimi apparet."

This account of Bayle (who is mistaken, however, about the _title_ of
the work) is confirmed by Panzer; who, in his _Annales_, vol. ix. p. 87.
enters the volume thus, "_Commentarius in Apolcalypsin ante Centum Annos
aeditus, cum Praefatione Maritini Lutheri_. Wittembergae, 1528. 8vo." Can
any of your readers refer me to a copy of this book in a public library,
or in private hands?

2. In Lewis's _History of the Translations of the Bible_, edit. 1818. p.
25., he quotes a work of Bishop Bonner, "_Of the Seven Sacraments_,
1555," in which a manuscript English Bible is cited by the Bishop, as
then in his possession, "translated out of Latyne in tyme of heresye
almost eight-score years before that tyme, i.e. about 1395, fayre and
truly written in parchment." Lewis proceeds to conjecture, that this MS.
was the same which is preserved in the Bodleian Library under the mark
Fairfax, 2. And in this erroneous supposition he has been followed by
later writers. The copy in question, which belonged to Bonner, is
actually in the Archiepiscopal Library at Lambeth, No. 25., and contains
the Pentateuch in the _earlier_ Wycliffite version (made, no doubt, by
Nicholas Hereford), whilst the rest of the Old and New Testament is in
the _later_ or revised translation by Purvey and his coadjutors. What I
now wish to inquire about, is, where can I meet with a copy of Bonner's
work, _De Septem Sacramentis_, in which the passages occur referred to
by Lewis? They are not in _A Profitable and Necessarye Doctryne, with
certayne Homelies adjoyned_, printed in 1555 by John Carood, although
one of these homilies is on the subject of the seven sacraments.

F. MADDEN.

       *       *       *       *       *

MINOR QUERIES.

_Monastery, Arrangement of One._--Any information and particulars
respecting the extent, arrangement, and uses of the various buildings
for an establishment of fifty Cistercian or Benedictine Monks would be
useful to and gratefully received by

A.P.H.

    [Has our Querist consulted Professor Willis, "Description of the
    Ancient Plan of the Monastery of St. Gall in the Ninth Century,"
    accompanying a copy of the plan, and which he will find in the
    _Archaeological Journal_, vol. v. p. 85.?]


_Constantine the Artist._--Who was "M. Constantine, an Italian architect
to our late Prince Henry," employed in the masque at the Earl of
Somerset's marriage in 1613? and was he the same Constantine de Servi to
whom the Prince assigned a yearly pension of 200l. in July 1612? If so,
where can more be found respecting him? He is not mentioned on Walpole's
_Anecdotes_.

J.G.N.


_Josias Ibach Stada._--Who was the artist whose name occurs inscribed on
the hoof of the horse of King Charles the Second's equestrian statue at
{453} Windsor, as follows:--"1669. Fudit Josias Ibach Stada Bramensis;"
and is Mr. Hewitt, in his recent _Memoir of Tobias Rustat_, correct in
calling him "Stada, an _Italian_ artist?"

J.G.N.


_Worm of Lambton._--Is there any published notice of the "Knight and
Serpent" tradition regarding this family and parish?

A.C.

    [A quarto volume of traditions, gathered in the immediate
    neighbourhood of the scene of action, was privately printed in
    the year 1530, under the title of _The Worm of Lambton_.]

       *       *       *       *       *


REPLIES.

LUTHER'S TRANSLATION OF THE NEW TESTAMENT.

Luther's solemn request that his translation should on no account be
altered, accompanies most of the earlier editions of the N.T. I find it
on the reverse of the title-page of the edition in 8vo. printed at
Wittemberg by Hans Lufft in 1537, thus:--

    "I request all my friends and enemies, my master printer, and
    reader, will let this New Testament be mine; and, if they have
    fault to find with it, that they make one of their own. I know
    well what I do, and see well what others do; but this Testament
    shall be Luther's German Testament; for carping and cavilling is
    now without measure or end. And be every one cautioned against
    other copies, for I have already experienced how negligently and
    falsely others reprint us."[1]

The disputed verse (1 John, v. 7.) is omitted in all the editions
printed under Luther's eye or sanction in his lifetime; but it has not,
I think, been remarked that in verse 8. the words _auf erde_, found in
later editions, are wanting. The passage stands:--

    "Denn drey sind die da zeugen, der Geist, und das Wasser, und
    das Blut, und die drey sind beysamen."

In the first edition of the Saxon (Duedesche version of Luther's Bible,
by Jo. Heddersen, printed in a magnificent volume at Lubeck, by Lo.
Dietz, in 1533-4), the verse stands thus:--

    "Wente dre synt dede tuechinisse geven, de Geist unde dat Water,
    unde dat Bloth, unde de dre synt by emander."

A MS. note of a former possessor remarks:--

    "The 7th verse is not found here, nor is it in the Bibles of
    Magdeburg, 1544, of Wittemberg, 1541, ditto 1584, Frankfort,
    1560 and 1580."

In the edition of this same version, printed by Hans Lufft, Wittemberg,
1541, the passage is exactly similar; but in one printed by Hans
Walther, Magdeburg, 1545, the words _up erdeu_ are inserted.

These Saxon versions are interesting from the very great similarity that
idiom has to our early language; and they, doubtless, influenced much
our own early versions.

In a translation of the N.T. from the Latin of Erasmus (the first
printed in Latin with a translation on the same page, and which is very
similar in appearance to Udal's), printed at Zurich in 1535, 4to., with
a Preface by Johansen Zwikk of Constance, the 7th verse is given (as it
was in the Latin); but is distinguished by being printed in brackets,
and in both verses we have--

    "Unnd die drey dienend in eins."

Erasmus having admitted the verse into his third edition, gave occasion
perhaps to the liberty which has been taken in later times to print both
verses, with this distinction, in editions of the Lutheran version. The
earliest edition, I believe, in which it thus appears, is one at
Wittemberg in 1596, which was repeated in 1597, 1604, 1605[2], and 1625.
It also appears, but printed in smaller type, in the Hamburgh Bible by
Wolder in 1597, in that of Jena 1598, and in Hutter's Nuremburg, 1599.

In a curious edition of the N.T. printed at Wandesbeck in 1710, in 4to.,
in which four German versions, the Catholic, the Lutheran, the Reformed,
a new version by Reitz, and the received Dutch version, are printed in
parallel columns, both verses are given in every instance; but a note
points out that Luther uniformly omitted the 7th verse, and the words
_auf erde_.

There cannot be a doubt, therefore, that the insertion is entirely
unwarranted in any edition of the New Testament professing to be
_Luther's_ translation.

S.W. SINGER.

April 25. 1850.

    [Footnote 1: "Ich bitte alle meine Freunde, und Feinde, meine
    Meister Druecker und Leser, wolten dis Newe Testament lassen mein
    sein, Haben sie aber mangel dran, das sie selbs ein eigens fuer
    sich machen; Ich weiss wol was ich mache, Sehe auch wol was
    andere machen, Aber dis Testament sol des Luther's Deudsch
    Testament sein, Denn Meisterns und Klugelus ist jtzt weder masse
    noch ende. Und sey jederman gewarnet fuer andern Exemplaren, Denn
    ich bisher wol erfaren wie unfvleissig und falsch uns andere
    nachdruecken."]

    [Footnote 2: Fr. Er. Kettner, who printed at Leipsic, in 1696, a
    long and strenuous defence of the authenticity of the 7th verse,
    exults in the existence of this verse in an edition of the
    Bible, Wittemberg, 1606, which is falsely said on the title-page
    to be _juxta ultimum a Luthero revisum exemplar correctum_.]


_Luther's Translation of the Bible_ (No. 25, p. 309.).--De Wette, in his
critical Commentary on the verse 1 John, after stating his opinion that
the controverted passage is a spurious interpolation, gives a list of
the codices and editions in which the passage is not found, and of those
in which it is found.

The passage is _wanting_ in all Greek Codd. except Codd. 34. 162. 172.
(of his introduction, where it is introduced from the Vulgate), and in
all MS. {454} of the Vulgate before the tenth century; in Erasmus' edit.
of 1516 and 1518; in Ald. Ed. Venet. 1518; in all editions of Luther's
translation published by him during his life-time, and up to 1581; in
the edit. Withenb., 1607; Hamb. 1596. 1619. 1620.

The passage is _found_ in all the editions printed of the Vulgate, and
in all translations from it before Luther; and the edit. complut.; in
Erasmus' of 1522, and in his paraphrase; in the edit. of Rob. Stephens,
1546-69; and Beza, 1565-76. 1582; in the Lutheran translations reprinted
by Froschauer, Zurich, 1529-31. (but in small type); edit. 1536-89. in
brackets; edit. 1597, without the brackets; in the edit. Frankf. 1593;
Wittenb. 1596-97, and many later ones. I may add, that the passage is in
every edition of recent date that I have seen of the Lutheran Bible, but
not, of course, in De Wette's translation.

S.W.

       *       *       *       *       *

LINES ON LONDON DISSENTING MINISTERS.

In reply to one of the Queries of "W." (No. 24. p. 383.), I transcribe
from the MSS. of Mr. Chewning Blackmore, a Presbyterian minister of
Worcester, the "Lines on London Dissenting Ministers of a former Day,"
which I have never seen entire in print:--

  "Behold how Papal Wright with lordly pride
   Directs his haughty eye to either side,
   Gives forth his doctrine with imperious nod,
   And fraught with pride addresses e'en his God.

  "Not so the gentle Watts, in him we find
   The fairest pattern of a humble mind;
   In him the meekest, lowliest virtue dwells,
   As mild as light, as soft as ev'ning gales.

  "Tuning melodious nonsense, Bradbury stands,
   With head uplifted and with dancing hands,
   Prone to sedition, and to slander free,
   Sacheverell sure was but a type of thee.

  "Mark how the pious matrons flock around,
   Pleased with the noise of Guyse's empty sound;
   How sweetly each unmeaning period flows
   To lull the audience to a gentle doze!

  "Eternal Bragge in never-ending strains
   Unfolds the mysteries Joseph's coat contains,
   Of every hue describes a different cause,
   And from each patch a solemn mystery draws.

  "With soundest judgment and with nicest skill,
   The learned Hunt explains his Master's will,
   So just his meaning, and his sense to true,
   He only pleases the discerning few.

  "In Chandler's solid, well-composed discourse,
   What wond'rous energy! what mighty force!
   Still, friend to Truth, and strict to Reason's rules,
   He scorns the censure of unthinking fools.

  "But see the accomplish'd orator appear,
   Refined his language, and his reasoning dear,
   Thou only, Foster, has the pleasing art,
   At once to please the ear and mend the heart!

  "Lawrence, with clear and solid judgment speaks,
   And on the sober mind impression makes,
   The sacred truths with justness he explains,
   And he from ev'ry hearer praise obtains."

Of the author of these lines I can give no information. He evidently
belonged to the Anti-Calvinistic party. His name does not appear to have
been known to Mr. Walter Wilson, the historian of the "Dissenting
Churches" of London, although he quotes a portion of them. But they were
probably composed between 1728 and 1738. In the former year, Dr. James
Foster's London popularity arose, on the occasion of his undertaking the
evening lecture at the Old Jewry. In the year 1738, Mr. Robert Bragge,
one of the subjects of the poem, died. Of this gentleman the story is
told (and to it the poem evidently alludes), that he was employed no
less than four months in developing the mysteries of Joseph's coat, from
Genesis, xxxvii. 3.: "And he made him a coat of many colours." In reply
to the sarcasm on Mr. Bragge, Mr. Walter Wilson states (_Hist. and Ant.
of Diss._ ch. i. p. 247.) that the following stanza was composed:--

  "The unwearied Bragge, with zeal, in moving strains,
   Unfolds the mysteries Scripture-Book contains;
   Marks every truth, of error shows the cause,
   And from each mystery useful doctrine draws."

The unfavourable notice of Dr. Sam. Wright in the opening stanza, is at
variance with the general report of biographers. In the copy of the
verses in the Blackmore MSS. is this note:--"I think this is too severe
on the Dr." Dr. Wright was admired for his pulpit elocution; and it is
said that Archbishop Herring was, in his younger years, a frequent
hearer of his, with a view to improve in elocution. The notice of the
celebrated Tom Bradbury is grossly unjust. He was a man of wit and
courage, though sometimes boisterous and personal. His unsparing
opponent, Dr. Caleb Fleming, wrote admiringly of "his musical voice, and
the flow of his periods, adapting scripture language to every
purpose."--_The Character of the Rev. Mr. Thos. Bradbury, taken from his
own Pen, &c._ Lond. 8vo. 1749, p. 35.

A.B.R.

Dukinfield.

       *       *       *       *       *

REPLIES TO MINOR QUERIES.

_Tracts by Dekker and Nash._--_The Raven's Almanacke_, 1609, is the
production of Thomas Dekker, the dramatist, and one of the rarest of his
numerous works. A copy sold in the _Gordonstown_ sale for seven guineas;
and another occurred in Mr. J.H. Bright's collection (No. 1691.); but I
have not the sale catalogue at hand to quote the price. Dekker was also
the author of a similar work, entitled _The Owle's Almanacke_, 1618; but
it is not mentioned in the lists furnished by {455} Lowndes and Dr.
Nott. The latter is indeed very inaccurate, omitting many well-known
productions of the author, and assigning others to him for which he is
not answerable. Whilst upon the subject of Dekker, I cannot resist
mentioning a fraud upon his memory which has, I believe, escaped the
notice of bibliographers. In 1697 was published a small volume,
entitled, _The Young Gallant's Academy, or Directions how he should
behave himself in an Ordinary, in a Playhouse, in a Tavern, &c., with
the Character of a Town-Huff, by Samuel Vincent_. This is nothing more
than a reprint of Dekker's _Gull's Horn-book_, with some slight
alterations to adapt it to the times.

Nash's _Terrors of the Night, or a Discourse of Apparitions_, was
printed by John Danter for William Jones, 1594. It is a very interesting
tract, and contains many personal allusions to its unfortunate author. A
copy was sold in Heber's sale (Part IV. No. 1592.) for 5l. 18s. A note
in the handwriting of that distinguished collector gives us the
following information:--

    "Only two other copies are known to exist, one in the Ashbridge
    Library at Cleveland House, the other, not so fine as the
    present, bought by Malone at Brand's, since James Boswell's, and
    now (1825) _penes_ me, R.H."

All things considered, I think your correspondent "J.E." (p. 400.) _may_
congratulate himself on having "met with a prize."

EDWARD F. RIMBAULT.


_Nash's Terrors of the Night._--Excessively rare. Boswell had a copy,
and another is in the library of the Earl of Ellesmere, described in Mr.
Collier's _Bridgewater Catalogue_ as one of the worst of Nash's tracts.

L.


_Tureen_ (No. 25. p. 407.).--The valuable reference to Knox proves the
etymology from the Latin. _Terrene_, as an adjective, occurs in old
English. See quotation in Halliwell, p. 859.

L.


_English Translations of Erasmus' Encomium Moriae_ (No. 24. p.
385.).--Sir Thomas Challoner's translation of Erasmus' _Praise of Folly_
was first printed, I believe, in 1540. Subsequent impressions are dated
1549, 1569, 1577. In 1566, William Pickering had a license "for
pryntinge of a mery and pleasaunt history, donne in tymes paste by
Erasmus Roterdamus," which possibly might be an impression of the
_Praise of Folly_. (See Collier's _Extracts from the Registers of the
Stationers' Company_, vol. i. p. 125.). This popular work was again
translated in the latter part of the following century, by White Kennet.
It was printed at Oxford in 1683, under the title of _Wit against
Wisdom, or a Panegyric upon Folly_. This is in all probability the
intermediate translation inquired after by your correspondent.

EDWARD F. RIMBAULT.


In answer to "JARLZBERG," I beg to inform him of the following
translation of Erasmus' _Praise of Folly_:--

    "Moriae Encomium, or the Praise of Folly, made English from the
    Latin of Erasmus by W. Kennet, of S. Edm. Hall, Oxon, now Lord
    Bishop of Peterborough. Adorn'd with 46 copper plates, and the
    effigies of Erasmus and Sir Thos. More, all neatly engraved from
    the designs of the celebrated Hans Holbeine. 4th edition. 1724."

Kennett, however, in his preface, dated 1683, alludes to two other
translations, and to Sir Thomas Challoner's as the _first_. He does not
mention the name of the second translator, but alludes to him as "_the
modern translator_," and as having lost a good deal of the wit of the
book by having "tied himself so strictly to a literal observance of the
Latin." This is his excuse for offering to the public a third
translation, in which he professes to have allowed himself such
"elbow-room of expression as the humoursomeness of the subject and the
idiom of the language did invite."

HERMES.


The intermediate translation of the _Moriae Encomium_ of Erasmus, to
which your correspondent refers, is that by John Wilson, 8vo. London
1661, of which there is a copy in the Bodleian.

M.

Oxford.


_Court of Wards._--I cannot tell "J.B." (No. 11. p. 173.) anything about
Mr. D'Israeli's researches in the Court of Wards; but "J.B." may be glad
to know that there is among the MSS. in the British Museum a treatise on
the Court of Wards. I remember seeing it, but have not read it. I dare
say it might be usefully published, for we know little in detail about
the Court of Wards.

C.H.


_Scala Coeli_ (No. 23. p. 366.).--In Foxe's _Acts and Mon._, vol. v. p.
364., Lond. 1838, your Querist may see a copy of a grant from Pope
Clement VII. in 1526, to the brethren of a Boston guild, assuring them
that any member thereof who should enter the Lady Chapel in St.
Botolph's Church, Boston, once a quarter, and say there "a Paternoster,
Ave Maria, and Creed, shall have the full remission due to them that
visit the Chapel of Scala Scoeli."

H.W.


_Twm Shawn Cattie_ (No. 24, p. 383.).--The following extract from
Cliffe's _Book of South Wales_, furnishes a reply to this Query.

In describing the beautiful mountain scenery between Llandovery and
Tregaron, he says:--

    "High in the rock above the fall yawns a hole, hardly a cavern,
    where once lurked a famous freebooter of Wales, Twm Sion Catti:
    the entrance to this cave is through a narrow aperture, formed
    of two immense slate rocks, which face each other, and the space
    between them is narrower at the bottom than the top, so {456}
    that the passage can only be entered sideways, with the figure
    inclined according to the slanting of the rock.

    "The history of Twm Sion Catti (pronounced Toom Shone Catti),
    alias Thomas Jones, Esq., is very romantic. He was a natural son
    of John ap David Moethe, by Catharine, natural daughter of
    Meredydd ap Ivan ap Robert, grandfather of Sir John Wynne, of
    Gwydir (see _The Heraldic Visitations of Wales_, published by
    the Welsh MSS. Society), and is said to have died in 1630, at
    the age of 61. In early life, 'he was a notorious freebooter and
    highwayman,' and levied black mail on the country within reach
    of his mountain abode, with the aid of a small band of
    followers. He soon reformed, married a rich heiress, was then
    created a justice of peace for Brecon, and ultimately became
    sheriff of that county and Carmarthenshire. He was, observes Sir
    S.R. Meyrick, esteemed as an antiquarian and poet, but is more
    known for the tricks attributed to him as a robber."

A.B.


_Twm Sion Catti._--The noted robber, Twm Sion or Shon Catti, referred to
at No. 24. p. 383., was a Welshman who flourished between the years 1590
and 1630. He was the natural son of Sir John Wynne, and obtained his
surname of Catti from the appellation of his mother Catherine. In early
life he was a brigand of the most audacious character, who plundered and
terrified the rich in such a manner that his name was a sufficient
warrant for the raising of any sum which he might desire; while his
unbounded generosity to the poor or unprotected, joined to an innate
love of fun and frolic--for he was a very Eulenspiegel--made him the
darling of the people. His chosen dwelling-place was in the almost
inaccessible cave situated near Llandovery, at the junction of the Tywi
and the Dethia (the Toothy of Drayton), which still bears his name. As
time passed on, he wooed and won the heiress of Ystrad-ffin, in the vale
of Tywi; and on becoming possessed of her property, abandoned his wild
life, and with it the name of Catti; and quietly subsiding into Thomas
Jones, Esq., became a poet and antiquary of high reputation. In addition
to which, and as if to mark their sense of the value of a man so
powerful for good or for evil, the government appointed him high sheriff
for the county of Carmarthen. He died universally respected, and left a
name which yet kindles many a Welsh heart, or amuses many a cottage
circle in the long nights of winter.

His life has been published in an 8vo. volume, which was probably the
work to which the "Note" of "MELANION" referred.

SELEUCUS.


_Cheshire Round_ (No. 24. p. 383.).--A dance so called, peculiar to the
county from whence it takes its name. The musical notes of the _Cheshire
Round_ may be seen in _The Dancing Master_, 1721, vol. i., and in Edward
Jones' _Cheshire Melodies_. It was sometimes danced "longways for as
many us will" (as described in _The Dancing Master_), but more
frequently by one person. A handbill of the time of William the Third
states, "In Bartholomew Fair, at the Coach-House on the Pav'd stones at
Hosier-Lane-End, you shall see a Black that dances the _Cheshire Rounds_
to the admiration of all spectators." Michael Root and John Sleepe, two
clever caterers of "Bartlemy," also advertise "a little boy that dances
the _Cheshire Round_ to perfection." There is a portrait of Dogget the
celebrated comedian (said to be the only one extant, but query if it is
not Penkethman?), representing him dancing the _Cheshire Round_, with
the motto "_Ne sutor ultra crepidam_."

EDWARD F. RIMBAULT.


_Horns to a River._--Why the poets give horns to rivers, must be sought
for in the poet's book, nature. I like the interpretation given by a
glance up some sinuous and shelving valley, where the mighty stream,
more than half lost to the eye, is only seen in one or two of its bolder
reaches, as it tosses itself here to the right, and there to the left,
to find a way for its mountain waters.

The third question about horns I am not able to answer. It would be
interesting to know where your correspondent has found it in late Greek.

J.E.

Oxford, April 16. 1850.


_Horns._--For answer to the third Query of "L.C." (No. 24. p. 383.), I
subscribe the following, from Coleridge:--

"Having quoted the passage from Shakspeare,

  "'Take thou no scorn
  To wear the horn, the lusty horn;
  It was a crest ere thou wert born."

_As You Like It_, Act iv. sc. 2.

"I question (he says), whether there exists a parallel instance of a
phrase, that, like this of 'Horns,' is universal in all languages, and
yet for which no one has discovered even a plausible origin."--_Literary
Remains_, vol. i. p. 120. Pickering, 1849.

ROBERT SNOW.


_Coal Brandy_ (No. 22. p. 352.).--This is only a contraction of "coaled
brandy," that is, "burnt brandy," and has no reference to the _purity_
of the spirit. It was the "universal pectoral" of the last century; and
more than once I have seen it prepared by "good housewives" and
"croaking husbands" in the present, pretty much as directed in the
following prescription. It is only necessary to remark, that the
orthodox method of "coaling," or setting the brandy on fire, was
effected by dropping "a live coal" ("_gleed_") or red-hot cinder into
the brandy. This is copied from a leaf of paper, on the other side of
which are written, in the hand of John Nourse, the great publisher of
scientific books in his day, some errata in the first 8vo. edit. of
Simsons's Euclid, and hence may be referred to the year 1762. It was
written evidently by some {457} "dropper-in," who found "honest John"
suffering from a severe cold, and upon the first piece of paper that
came to hand. The writer's caligraphy bespeaks age, and the punctuation
and erasures show him to have been a literary man, and a careful though
stilted writer. It is not, however, a hand of which I find any other
exemplars amongst Nourse's correspondence.

    "Take two glasses of the best brandy, put them into a cup which
    may stand over the fire; have two long wires, and put an ounce
    of sugar-candy upon the wires, and set the brandy on fire. Let
    it burn till it is put out by itself, and drink it before you go
    to bed.

    "To make it more pectoral, take some rosemary and put it in the
    brandy, infused for a whole day, before you burn it."

This is the fundamental element of all the quack medicines for "coughs,
colds, catarrhs, and consumption," from Ford's "Balsam of Horehound" to
Dr. Solomon's "Balm of Gilead."

T.S.D.

Shooter's Hill, April 4.


_Howkey or Horkey_ (No. 17. p. 263.).--Does the following passage from
Sir Thomas Overbury's _Witty Descriptions of the Properties of sundry
Persons_, first published, I believe, in 1614, afford any clue to the
etymology of this word? It occurs in the description of a Frankling or
Yeoman:--

    "He allows of honest pastime, and thinks not the bones of the
    dead anything bruised or the worse for it, though the country
    lasses dance in the church-yard after even-song. Rock-Monday,
    and the wake in summer shrovings, the wakeful catches on
    Christmas eve, _the hoky or seed-cake_, these he yearly keeps,
    yet holds them no relics of Popery."

As I have not the book by me, and am only quoting from an extract, I am
unable to give a more precise reference.

E.R.J.H.

Chancery Lane.


It may be possible further the purpose of the noble Querist as to the
word _Howkey_ or _Horkey_, if I state, that when in my boyhood I was
accustomed to hear this word, it was pronounced as if spelt _Hockey_. As
_Howkey_ I should not have recognised it, nor hardly as _Horkey_.

AN EAST ANGLIAN.


_Hockey_, a game played by boys with a stick bent at the end, is very
likely derived from _hook_, an Anglo-Saxon word too. But we cannot
suppose that anything else was derived from that, and especially when we
come to words apparently more genuine than that. It seems natural to
connect them with a hock-tide, Hoch-zeit (German), and Heoh-tid (A.-S.),
a name given to more than one season when it was usual to have games and
festivities. Now surely this is nothing else than _high_ tide, a time of
some high feast; as we vulgarly say, "high days and holidays." So in the
Scripture, "that Sabbath day was a high day." So high Mass. We
Protestants have no conception of the close connection between the
superior sanctity and the superior jollity of a particular season. Among
the heathen Romans, _festicus_ is derived from _festus_.[3] We say high
romps, high jinks.

See Wachter, who applies Hoch-zeit to Christmas, Easter, and
Whitsuntide, and says it may be derived either from high, or from
_Hogen_, "gaudere," which also see. He says that the lower Saxons "hodie
utuntur '_Hoege_'" to mean "gaudium privatum et publicum convivale et
nuptiale." See also Hohen. See Lye, who has also heah, freols summa
festivitas, summum festum.

Ihre (_Lex. Suio Goth._) says _Hugna_ is "to make glad." But in Hog-tid
he observes, that gladness is only the secondary meaning of
_Hogen_,--"_Hokanat_ vocabatur a Borealibus festum quod media hieme
celebrabatur;" and he shows that hawks were formerly sacrificed at it.

C.B.

    [Footnote 3: Is not the derivation of "feast" and "fast" originally the
    same? that which is appointed, connected with "_fas_," and that from
    "_fari_."]

_Howkey or Horkey_ (No. 17. p. 263.).--Is not this word simply a
corruption of _Hockey_? Vide under "Hock-cart," in _Brand's Antiquities_
by Ellis, where the following quotation from _Poor Robin's Almanack_ for
1676 occurs:--

  "_Hoacky_ is brought home with hallowing,
  Boys with plum-cake the cart following."

J.M.B.


_Luther's Portrait at Warwick Castle_ (No. 25. p. 400.).--The Portrait
by Holbein, in Warwick Castle, certainly erroneously stated to be that
of Luther, was, I believe, engraved as such in Knight's _Portrait
Gallery_, published by the Society for the Diffusion of Useful
Knowledge. I cannot find in any account of Helbein's works a mention of
a portrait of Luther by him.

S.W.


_Symbolism of Flowers, etc._--In reference to works illustrative of
poetical, mythological, scriptural, and historical associations
connected with animals and plants, inquired for in No. 11. p. 173., many
a literary man must equally desire an interpreter,--

  "T' unbind the charms that in slight fables lie,
  And teach that truth is truest poesy."

Yet, in the English language there is, I believe, no work of this
description; and I therefore beg leave to suggest, that your learned
correspondents may contribute to a very useful compilation by furnishing
illustrations, or references to illustrations, critical and poetical,
collected from the most valuable authors, ancient and modern; and that
this "sacred eloquence," {458}

  "Where'er 'tis found
  On Christian or on heathen ground,"

if transplanted into learned pages, would to many readers, afford much
pleasure. Meanwhile, I would refer Querist to the useful work of
Camerarius on _Symbols and Emblems_.

  "Do thou, bright Phoebus, guide me luckily
  To the first plant by some kind augury."

The proverbial expression, "Under the rose," appears opportunely in p.
214, beautifully illustrated[4], but still deserving further
consideration. Schedius (_De Diis Gemanis_) and others have, with much
learning, shown Venus Urania to be the same as Isis Myrionyma. With
erudition not inferior, but in support of a peculiar theory, Gorop.
Bacanus maintains Harpocrates and Cupido, son of Venus Uranis, to be one
and the same hieroglyphical character. I shall now endeavour to explain
the symbolism and dedication of the Rose. This "flower of flowers"
adumbrates the highest faculty of human nature--_Reason_, and Silence,
or the rest of the reasoning powers, which is indicated by the Greek
term [Greek: epistaemae], _science_. (See Harris's _Philosoph. Arrang._
p. 444., and _Hermes_, p. 369.). To whom, then, could the hieroglyphical
rose have been more appropriately dedicated than Harpocrates, who is
described with his finger pointing to his mouth--_tacito plenus
amore_--a proper emblem of that silence with which we ought to behave in
religious matters.

T.J.

    [Footnote 4: Has "ARCHILAEUS" looked for these verses into the
    _Rhodologia_ of Rosenbergius? I have in vain searched for them under
    "Rosae," in the _Amphitheatrum sapientiae_ of Dornavius.]


"_Where England's Monarch_" (No. 26. p. 415.).--The two lines inquired
for are in Bramston's _Man of Taste_, a poem printed about the middle of
the last century. I need hardly add, that the poet was misinformed, it
being well known that Charles I., when brought to trial, refused to
plead or _to take off his hat_.

There is an account of Duke of Marlborough's adventure with Barnard in
the _Gentleman's Magazine_, May 1758: but it may be the same as that in
the _Annual Register_.

BRAYBROOKE

April 27.


_Journeyman_ (No. 19. p. 309.).--"GOMER" may like to know that the old
labourers in North Essex still speak of a day's ploughing as a "_journey
at plough_."

BRAYBROOKE.


_Sydenham or Tidenham._--I have no doubt as to Sydenham, included in the
inquiry respecting Cromwell's Estates (No. 24. p. 389.), being
_Tidenham_; for this manor, the property of the Marquis of Worcester,
was possessed by Cromwell; and, among my title deeds connected with this
parish, I have Court Rolls _in Cromwell's name_ both for _Tidenham_
itself and for _Beachley_, a mesne manor within it.

These manors, which were inherited from the Herberts by the Somersets,
were taken out of the former Marches by the statute 27 Hen. VIII. cap.
26. Sec. 13., and annexed, together with _Woolaston_, similarly
circumstanced, to the country of Gloucester and to the hundred of
Westbury; of which hundred, in a legal sense, they still continue a
part.

GEO. ORMEROD.

Sedbury Park, Chepstow, April 18. 1850.


_J.B.'s Treatise on Nature and Art_ (No. 25. p. 401.).--The book to
which your correspondent "M." refers, is, I believe, "_The Mysteries of
Nature and Art, in Foure severall Parts: The First of Water Works,--the
Second of Fire Works, &c., &c. By John Bate_."

I have the second edition, 1635; to which is prefixed a rude engraving
of the author:--"Vera effigies Johannis Bate, memoria manet, modo
permaneant studium et industria."

HERMES.


"_A Frog he would a-wooing go_."--In answer to the inquiry of "B.G.J."
(in No. 25, p. 401.), as to the origin of "'Heigh ho!' says Rowley," I
do not think it is older that thirty of thirty-five years, when Liston
sang an altered version of the very old song,--

  "A frog, he would a-wooing ride,
  With sword and buckler by his side,"

and instead of the usual chorus[5], inserted

  "Heigho, says Rowley,"

as burthen. Liston's song was published by Goulding and Co., Soho
Square, entitled "The Love-sick Frog," with an original air by C.E.H.,
Esq. (_qy._ Charles Edward Horn?), and an accompaniment by Thomas Cook.
The first verse is as follows:--

  "A frog he would a-wooing go;
    'Heigh ho!' says Rowley;
  Whether his mother would let him or no,
    With a rowly, powly,
  Gammon and spinach,
    'Heigh!' and Anthony Rowley,"

R.S.S.

April 23. 1850.

    [Footnote 5: In my interleaved copy of Halliwell's _Nursery Rhymes_, I
    have the original song of the "Frog and Mouse" with three different
    melodies, and _nonsense_ burthens, as sung by my excellent nurse, Betty
    Richens, whose name I hope to see immortalised in your pages.]


"_My Love and I for kisses played, &c._" (No. 19. p. 302.).--The little
_jeu d'esprit_ which "Dr. RIMBAULT" {459} has given from Paget's _Common
Place Book_:--

  "My love and I for kisses play'd,"

occurs in the MS. volume from which James Boswell extracted
"Shakspeare's Verses on the King," but with a much better reading of the
last couplet:--

  "Nay then, quoth shee, is this your wrangling vaine?
  Give mee my stakes, take your own stakes againe."

They are entitled, "Upon a Lover and his Mistris playing for Kisses,"
and are there without any name or signature. They remind us of Lilly's
very elegant "Cupid and Campaspe."

The ballad, or rather ode, as Drayton himself entitles it:--

  "Fair stood the wind for France,"

is to be found in the very rare volume with the following title, _Poemes
Lyrick and Pastorall, Odes, Eglogs, The Man in the Moon, by Michael
Drayton, Esquire_. At London, printed by R.B. for N.L. and J. Flaskett.
12mo. (No date, but circa 1600.)

I think the odes are given in the other volumes of the early editions of
Drayton's _Miscellaneous Poems_; but I speak without book, my collection
being in the country.

The selection from Herrick, noticed by Mr. Milner Barry, was made by Dr.
Nott of Bristol, whose initials, J.N., are on the title page. "The head
and front of my offending" is the Preface of Mr. Pickering's neat
edition of Herrick in 1846.

S.W.S.

March 12. 1850.

    ["O.E." informs us that these pretty lines form No. CCXXXIX. of
    _A Collection of Epigrams. London. Printed for J. Walthoe_,
    1727, and of which a second volume was published in 1737; and
    "J.B.M." adds, that they are also to be found in the
    _Encyclopaedia of Wit_, published about half a century since.]


_Teneber Wednesday._--In Hall's _Chronicle_, under the date of 23rd Hen.
VIII., is this passage:

    "When Ester began to draw nere, the Parliament for that tyme
    ended, and was proroged till the last day of Marche, in the next
    yere. In the Parliament aforesayde was an Acte made that
    whosoeuer dyd poyson any persone, shoulde be boyled in hote
    water to the death; which Acte was made bicause one Richard
    Roose, int the Parliament tyme, had poysoned dyuers persons at
    the Bishop of Rochester's place, which Richard, according to the
    same Acte, was boyled in Smythfelde the _Teneber-Wednysday_
    following, to the terrible example of all other."

I conjecture that Teneber Wednesday is the Wednesday next before Easter,
of "Feria quarta majoris Hebdomadao," and that the name is derived form
the Gospel for that day according to the ritual of the Church of Rome.

    "Erat autem fere hora sexta, et _tenebroe_ factoe sunt in
    universam terram usque in horam nonam. Et obscuratus est sol: et
    velum templi seissum est medium."--Luke, xxiii. 44, 45.

Should this conjecture be ill founded, I shall be glad to see it
corrected; at any rate, I shall be obliged if any of your correspondents
can supply other instances of the use of the term, or state what are or
were the ceremonies peculiar to the day.

C.H. COOPER

Cambridge, April 4. 1850.

P.S. Since the above was written, I have noticed that "_Tenable
Wednesday_" occurs three times in the Ordinance for "weshing of all
mannar of Lynnon belonging to my Lordes Chapell" in the Northumberland
Household Book (pp. 243, 244.). In each instance it is placed between
Lady Day and Easter Even.

    [If our correspondent refers to Mr. Hampson's most useful work,
    _Medii aevi Kalendarium_, vol. i. p. 370., to the words
    _Tenables, Tenabulles, Tenebrae_, he will find them explained
    "The three nights before Easter;" and the following among other
    illustrations:--

    "Worshipfull frendis, ye shall cum to holi chirch on Wednysday,
    Thursday, and Friday at even for to here dyvyne service, as
    commendable custom of holi chirch has ordeyned. And holi chirch
    useth the iij dayes, Wednysday, Thursday, and Friday, the
    service to be saide in the eventyde in derkenes. And hit is
    called with divers men _Tenables_, but holi chirch _Tenebras_,
    as _Raccionale Divinorum_ seth, that is to say, thieness or
    derkenes, to commemorate the betrayal of our Lord by
    night."--_Harl. MS._ 2247. fo. 83.]


_The Buckingham Motto._--Permit me to suggest that your correspondents
"S." and "P." (No. 18. pp. 283, 284.) are labouring under a mistaken
notion in supposing that the line

  _Sovente me sorene_,

belongs to the French idiom, and answers to our phrase "Forget me not."
Such a sentiment would be sufficiently appropriate as the parting prayer
or injunction of a lover, but does not possess the essential
characteristic of a _motto_, which one selects for the purpose of
declaring his own sentiments of conduct towards _others_, not to
deprecate or direct those of others towards _himself_.

The language employed is, in part, pure Italian, not antiquated, but
exactly such as is spoken by persons of education at the present day;
and if "S." would again examine the original MS., I make no doubt that
he would find the line written _Sovente mi sooviene (sovene)_, i.e. with
the personal pronoun in the dative instead of the accusative case. The
expression _mi souviene_ is equivalent to _mi ricordo_, but is a more
elegant form that the latter; and the meaning of the motto will be "I
seldom forget,"--a pithy and suggestive sentence, implying as much the
memory of a wrong to be avenged as of a favour to be required.

A. RICH, JUN. {460}


_Larig._--I am obliged by the suggestions of your correspondents "B.W."
and "C.I.R." (No. 24. p. 387.), to which I beg leave to offer the
following reply. The Dutch and Flemish (or Netherlandish, as they may be
considered one language until the fifteenth century) _Le'er_ and _Le'ar_
are simply contractions of _Leder_, as Tenkate observes, _euphonis
gratia_, by the omission of the _d_, which takes place in other similar
words; and what is remarkable in _Ledig_, empty, which becomes _Le'eg_.
_Le'erig_ is of course _leathery_, or _tough_; but _Lederen_ or
_Le'ersen_, would be used for _made_ of _leather_, and in A.-S., most
probably [A-S: hydig]. We have no such contraction in A.-S.: it is
always [A-S: Leether] and [A-S: Leethern]. The epithet, _leathery_-shields,
could hardly have been used where they are said to _resound_; and the
instance of _vaulted_ shields in Judith is, I think, conclusive. The
root of _Leder_ is possibly _hlid-an_, to cover HIDE? That of _Leer_
possibly _lieren_, amittere, privari?

I should have noted the instances of the word from Junius and Schilter,
which were not unknown to me, but for brevity's sake; and indeed I had
not Urry's _Chaucer_ at hand to verify the reference of Junius to the
Tale of Beryn, the only valuable portion of Urry's book. I knew that a
simple reference to the O.H.G. Lari would be sufficient for Dr. Grimm.

Thorkelin, in his very incorrect edition of Beowulf, has followed Lye,
in rendering _Lind haebbende_, Vexilla habens; and Haldorsen's
explanation of _Lind_ might have taught him better. Mr. Kemble has
rendered it _shield-bearers_, and gives instances in his Glossary of
similar combinations, as _rond-haebbendra_, _bord-haebbende_,
_scaro-haebbendra_.

S.W. SINGER.

April 15. 1850.


_Zenobia a Jewess?_ (No. 24. p. 383.)--

    "To conclude what I have to say of this princess, I shall add
    here, after M. de Tillemont, that St. Athanasius _took her to be
    a Jewess_, meaning, without doubt, _in respect of her religion_;
    and that, according to Theodoret, it was to please her that Paul
    of Samosata, whom she patronised, professed opinions very like
    those of the Jews concerning the person of Jesus Christ, saying
    that he was only a mere man, who had nothing in his nature
    superior to other men, nor was distinguished from them any
    otherwise than by a more abundant participation of the divine
    grace."--Crevier, _Hist. of Rom. Emperors_, Book 27. "Aurelian,"
    vol. ix. p. 174.

M. Crevier refers to "Tillem. Aur. art. 5."

C. FORBES

Temple, April 16.


_Temple Stanyan._--The following notices, relating to _one_ Temple
Stanyan may interest your correspondent "A.G." (No. 24 p. 382.).

    "1725. March 23. Died Mrs. ---- Stanyan, wife of Temple Stanyan,
    Esq., one of the Chief Clerks in the office of Secretary of
    State."--_Historical Register._

    "1726. April 28. Temple Stanyan, Esq., one of the Clerks of His
    Majesty's most Hon. Privy Council, married to Mrs.
    Pauncefort."--Ibid.

There is a monument in one of the churches at Southampton,--

    "To the Memory of Catharine, Relict of Admiral Sir Charles
    Hardy, and only daughter of Temple Staynian, Esq., of Rawlins in
    co. Oxon. She died Feb. 19. 1801, aged 75 years. This monument
    was erected by her only surviving son, Temple Hardy, Captain in
    His Majesty's Navy."

Edward Pauncefort, Esq., was one of the executors of Sir Charles Hardy's
will, proved in Doctors' Commons, 10th June, 1780.

W.H.


_Temple Stanyan_ wrote a History of Greece, 1751, which was common when
I was at school, and another book, as Watts says. If the question is
biographical, I can say nothing.

C.B.


_Temple Stanyan_ (No. 24. p. 382.).--He also published an _Account of
Switzerland_, 8vo. London, 1714.

M.


_"Who was Temple Stanyan?"_ (no. 24. p. 382.) Temple Stanyan was the son
of Abraham Stanyan, Esq., a Member of the Kit Kat Club, M.P. for
Buckingham, Ambassador to the Porte, a Lord of the Admiralty, etc. Mr.
Temple Stanyan was himself also Minister at Constantinople, and at
several other courts; and afterwards Under-Secretary of State under both
Addison and the Duke of Newcastle. He published in 1714 an Account of
Switzerland; and his Grecian history in 2 vols. was, till the
publication of Mitford's, the best in our language. I believe that his
daughter married Adm. Sir Charles Hardy. He died in 1752.

C.


_Auctorite de Dibil_ (no. 25. p. 205.).--Probably an error of
transcription; read _Auctorite de Bibil_.

J.M.B.


_The Bristol Riots_ (No. 22. p. 352.).--"J.B.M." is informed, that the
volume to which he alludes is generally considered by Bristolians as the
most authentic and fullest narrative that was published of those
disgraceful scenes.

J.M.G.

Worcester.


_Religious Tract by F.H._ (No. 25. p. 400.)--The author of the religious
tract which has fallen into the hands of "J.C." is no doubt one of the
early Quakers, and probably Francis Howgill. Howgill was originally a
clergyman of the Church of England, but afterwards became a Baptist, and
in the year 1652 joined the early Quakers, upon hearing the preaching of
George Fox. His works were published in folio, in 1676, by Ellis Hookes.

[Greek: Theta]. {461}


_Complutensian MSS._--"E.M.B." (No. 25. p. 402.) will find full answers
to his Queries, and more interesting information on the same subject, in
a note in vol iv. p. 235. of Don Pedro Saban's Spanish translation of
Prescott's _Ferdinand and Isabella_. Madrid, 1846.

I am told by an American gentleman, who has seen the MSS. within a month
in the library of the University of Madrid, wither they were removed
from Alcala in 1837, that the Chaldaic and Hebrew manuscripts are all
originals, and on parchment. The only MSS. of Zamora among them are 3
vols. in Latin, translated from the Hebrew.

The Greek MSS., or some of them, are still with the collection as above;
and of course were not returned to the Vatican.

H.S.

Morley's Hotel, April 28.


_Tablet to Napoleon_ (No. 17. p. 263., No. 25. p. 406.).--"C.I.R.'s"
interpretation can hardly be admitted. The true meaning will be best
exhibited by the following form:--

  "Napoleoni,
    AEgyptiaco,
  Bis Italico,
    Semper Invicto."

_Bis Italico_ alludes to his twice conquering Italy, viz., in his first
campaign, and again in that of Marengo.

C.


_Malone's Blunder_ (No. 25. p. 403.).--"Mr. BOLTON CORNEY," in his
answer on this subject, says very justly, that "before we censure a
writer, we should consult his own edition." He has, however, not
followed this excellent principle in this case, for he has certainly not
looked at the Irish edition of Malone, on which the question arises. He
has repeated what I had already stated (No. 24. p. 386.), that the
mistake was _not_ a blunder of _Malone's_; and he has also pointed out,
what had escaped me, Malone's supplemental note containing the first
_three_ articles of the pretended will of _John_ Shakspeare: but when he
adds that there is "_no fabrication_" and "_no mystery_" in the case,
and that "the blunder of the Irish editor was merely in attempting to
_unite the two fragments_ as published by Malone," it is quite clear
that he has not seen the edition in question, and has, I think, mistaken
the whole affair. The Irish editor did _not_ attempt to unite Malone's
fragments--quite the contrary--he left Malone's first fragment as he
found it; but he took the second fragment, namely, the exordium of the
pretended will of _John_ Shakspeare, and substituted it _bodily_ as the
exordium of the will of _William_ Shakspeare, suppressing altogether the
real exordium of the latter. So that this Irish will begins, "I, _John_
Shakspeare," &c., and ends, "by me, _William_ Shakspeare." I have no
doubt that the will of John Shakspeare is a forgery altogether; but the
taking three paragraphs of it, and substituting them for the two first
paragraphs of _William_ Shakspeare's genuine will, is what I call, and
what no doubt "Mr. BOLTON CORNEY" will think, on this explanation of the
facts, "an audacious fabrication." The best guess I can make as to how,
or with what design, the Irish editor should have perpetrated so
complicated, and yet so manifest a blunder, is this:--Malone printed the
fragment in question at the end of his volume, amongst his "Emendations
and additions," as belonging to "_the will before printed_," meaning the
forged will of _John_ Shakspeare, but that the Irish editor understood
him to mean the genuine will of _William_ Shakspeare; and so thought
that he was only restoring the latter to its integrity: but how he could
have overlooked the difference of names, and the want of continuity in
the meaning of the documents, is still to me utterly incomprehensible.

C.


_Theses._--Perhaps it may assist your correspondent "M." (No. 25. p.
401.) to be informed that the University of Goettingen is particularly
rich in "_Theses_" (termed _Disputationes et Dissertationes_), to which
there is a large room entirely devoted in the library of that
university; together with the transactions of learned bodies. A special
librarian is attached to this department, which is much consulted. A
Catalogue was begun to be published of this collection, so far as
respects the _Memoirs_ contained in the various transactions, in 1801,
by J.D. Reuss; and 16 vols. in 4to. had appeared up to 1821; after
which, I believe, the publication has been suspended. Of Catalogues of
Theses, I think the following work is in good esteem:--_Dissert. Acad.
Upsal. habitae sub Praesid. C.P. Thunberg_, 3 tom. 8vo. Goetting.
1799-1801. The second part of vol. ii. in the _Catalogus Bibliothecae
Thottiauae_ (7 vol. 8vo. Fauniae, 1789-1795.) contains a catalogue, which
it might be well to consult, of dissertations under the name of the
president or head of the institution or college where they were
delivered, than under the writer's name. At least, in a _collective_
sense the former method is adopted, as in the following instance:
Schultens, (Alb.) _Sylloge Dissertationem Philologico-Eregeticarum,
adiversis Auctoribus Editarum, sub Praesidio A. Schultens, etc._, 2 tom.:
although, if the author should happen to be distinguished for his other
productions, _all_ that he wrote is anxiously sought out, and placed
under his own name.

J.M.

Oxford, April 24.

    ["M." may also be referred to the _Catalogus Dissertationum
    Academicarum quibusnsuper aucta est Bibliotheca Bodleiana_. A
    quarto volume, printed at the Oxford University Press in 1834.]


_MSS. of Locke_ (No. 25. p. 401.).--"C." is informed {462} that Dr.
Thomas Hancock died at Lisburn, in Ireland, during the past year. The
papers of Locke respecting which he inquires are probably still in the
possession of Dr. H.'s son.

[Greek: Theta]

       *       *       *       *       *


MISCELLANIES.

_Spur Money._--Although I used often, twenty years ago, when a chorister
at the Chapel Royal, to take part in levying a fine on all who entered
that place with spurs on, I was not aware of its origin till I saw it
explained in your interesting publication (No. 23. p. 374.). There was a
custom however, connected with this impost, the origin of which I should
be glad to learn. After the claim was made, the person from whom it was
sought to be exacted had the power to summon the youngest chorister
before him, and request him to "repeat his gamut," and if he failed, the
spur-bearer was entitled to exemption.

E.J.H.


_Spur Money._--I beg to offer the following humble illustration of
spur-money, which I copied from the belfry wall of All Saints Church at
Hastings:--

    1.
  "This is a belfry that is free
  For all those that civil be:
  And if you please to chime or ring,
  It is a very pleasant thing.

    2.
  "There is no musick play'd or sung,
  Like unto bells when they're well rung:
  Then right your bells well, if you can--
  Silence is best for every man.

    3.
  "But if you ring in _spur or hat_,
  Sixpence you pay--be sure of that:
  And if a bell you overthrow,
  Pray pay a groat before you go."

(dated) 1756.

ALFRED GATTY.

Ecclesfield, April 6. 1850.


_Note Books._--Looking at what your correspondent says about "Note
Books," I think the following hint may be useful to others, as it has
been to myself. Many persons never get so far as the formality of a
common-place book, and do not like to write in their books. Let them
follow my plan. The envelope maker will procure them any number of
little slips of white paper, with a touch of isinglass at each of the
four corners. Let the note be written on one of these, and then let the
slip be stuck into any book which is sure to be wanted in connection
with the subject when it comes up again; either by one, two, or four
corners, as convenient. The isinglass will not hurt the book, if ever it
be wanted to remove the slip. A note is more in the way, when attached
to a book which suggested it, than when buried among unindexed
miscellanies; and there are few who index themselves. Your motto is good
as far as it goes; but the other half is wanting:--

  "When made a note of,--find if you can."

M.

       *       *       *       *       *

LADY RACHAEL RUSSELL.

Mr. Dyce has admitted Lady Rachael Russell among his _British Poetesses_
on account of the following verses:--

  TO THE MEMORY OF HER HUSBAND.

  "Right noble twice, by virtue and by birth,
  Of Heaven lov'd, and honour'd on the earth;
  His country's hope, his kindred's chief delight,
  My husband dear, more than this world's light,
  Death hath me reft. But I from death will take
  His memory, to whom this tomb I make.
  John was his name (ah, was! wretch must I say),
  Lord Russell once, now my tear-thirsty clay."

Now "John" was not the Christian name of William Lord Russell, so that
these verses could not have come from his widow's pen. Indeed, they are
much older than Lady Rachael's time, and may be found on the monument in
Westminster Abbey erected by Lady Russell, in the reign of Queen
Elizabeth, to John Lord Russell, who died in 1584.

P. CUNNINGHAM.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Byron and Tacitus_ (No. 20. p. 390.).--To your young friend, who
honestly signs himself "A SCHOOLBOY," let an older correspondent say,
that he will do more wisely to let the rules of his teachers keep him
from perusing an author who makes a mock of all moral and all honourable
feelings. But if he wishes to know whether the introduction of the
sentence from Tacitus into a poetical tale should be called "cabbaging,"
the reply will properly be, No. The poet expected that the well-known
figure, which he had thus thrown into verse, would be immediately
recognised by every literary reader, and that the recognition would give
pleasure. He was trying his hand at a task of which it has been affirmed
by a master, that _Difficile est proprie communia dicere_. The Schoolboy
knows where to find these words; and I hope that he also knows where to
find the words of one who speaks with greater authority, and has said
most kindly, "Cease, my son, to hear [read] the instruction that causeth
to err."

H.W.


_Aboriginal Chambers near Tilbury._--It is proposed to descend some of
the aboriginal chambers alluded to by Camden, near Tilbury in Essex. In
consequence, however, of Camden having named a wrong parish, later
antiquaries have been puzzled to ascertain their precise whereabouts.
Mr. Crafter, in 1848, after many days' labour, found them out; and a
brief notice of them was given {463} in an article upon "Primaeval
Britain" in the _West Kent Almanack for_ 1849. Hasted mentions similar
pits in Crayford Parish, Kent. In Dartford parish is another called "the
Sound Hole," from the echoes, &c., made upon a stone being thrown down.
Mr. S. Laudale intends an examination of it this summer. Tradition
reports that there are three enormous caverns, which communicate with
the central shaft.

How, or what, is the best way of driving the foul air out of those
chambers which are aloof from the central shaft?

[Greek: Delta]


_Sir R. Haigh's Letter-Book._--A few days ago, Messrs. Puttick and
Simpson sold a very important manuscript, the original letter-book of
Sir R. Haigh, of Lancashire, of the time of Charles II. It fetched 51l.,
being bought by a collector whose name has not transpired; but perhaps
this notice, if you kindly insert it, may induce the purchaser to edit
it for the Chetham Society, to whose publications it would for a most
valuable addition.

R.


_A Phonetic Peculiarity._--I venture to note as a very curious phonetic
peculiarity, that we have in the English language a large number of
monosyllabic words ending is _sh_, all of which are expressive of some
violet action or emotion. I quote a few which have occurred without
search, in alphabetical order. "Brush, brash, crash, crush, dash, gash,
gush, hash, gnash, lash, mash, pash, push, quash, rush, slash, smash,
squash, thrash."

J.M.B.

       *       *       *       *       *


MISCELLANEOUS.

NOTES ON BOOKS, CATALOGUES, SALES, ETC.

At the late Annual Meeting of the Shakespeare Society it was announced
that a complete collection of the works of Thomas Heywood had been
determined upon, and the first volume containing six plays was laid upon
the table. It was also shown that Mr. Collier's _Essay on the Chandos
Portrait_ had only been delayed from a desire to obtain the most novel
and accurate information.

The members of the Percy Society will be glad to hear, that at the
Annual Meeting on the 1st instant, the immediate publication of the
third volume of Mr. Wright's edition of the _Canterbury Tales_ was
announced.

The plan for the _restoration of Chaucer's tomb_ in Poet's Corner has at
length assumed a practical shape. It has been ascertained that less than
100l. will do every thing that can be desired to repair the ravages of
time, and preserve the monument for centuries to come. It is proposed to
raise this sum by subscriptions of five shillings, that more may share
in the good work; and a committee has been formed to carry out this
scheme, which has already received the sanction of the Earl of Carlisle,
the Earl of Ellesmere, Lord Braybrooke, Mr. Charles Wynn, and other
distinguished lovers of literature. Subscriptions are received by every
member of the committee, and parties resident in the country may remit
them by post-office orders payable at Charing Cross in favour of William
Richard Drake, Esq., F.S.A., of 46. Parliament Street, the Honorary
Treasurer; or of William J. Thoms, Esq., the Honorary Secretary of the
Committee.

The Annual Meeting of the Camden Society on the 2d instant, under the
Presidentship of Lord Braybrooke, gave general satisfaction. The council
reported the publication during the past year of the _Peterborough
Chronicle_; the _Letters of Elizabeth and James VI._; and the _Chronicle
of Queen Jane_. This last volume was then only on the eve of
circulation; it has since been issued, and found to justify the
announcement of the council that it is work of great historical value,
and an interesting companion to _Machyn's Diary_.

We have received the following Catalogues:--James Darling's (21. Little
Queen Street, Lincoln's Inn Fields) Catalogue of Books Old and New,
Theological and Miscellaneous, and Andrew Clark's (4. City Road)
Catalogue, No. 8., of Books in English and Foreign Theology, Literature,
Roman Catholic Controversy, Classics, &c.

       *       *       *       *       *

BOOKS AND ODD VOLUMES

WANTED TO PURCHASE.

(_In continuation of Lists in former Nos._)

THE ANTI-JACOBIN.

ROCCHA DE CAMPANIS.

_Odd Volumes_.

THE SPIRIT OF THE PUBLIC JOURNALS, Vol I. 1797.

CALENDAR OF HARLEIAN MSS., Vol. IV.

       *       *       *       *       *

NOTICES TO CORRESPONDENTS.

COMPLETION OF OUR FIRST VOLUME.--_Two more numbers will complete our
First Volume, to which a very full Index is preparing. A Second Volume,
of the same size, will be completed at the end of December, and we shall
then be enabled to judge how far it will be desirable to adopt the
system of Half-Yearly or Yearly volumes._

_Our readers will find the present and two following Numbers principally
occupied with_ REPLIES, _as it is obviously desirable that they should,
as far as possible, appear in the same volume as the_ QUERIES _to which
they refer._

COLLAR OF SS. _This subject shall be brought forward early in the next
volume._

E.S.T. _Thanks._ The Query and Folk Lore _shall appear as soon as
possible_.

W.M.T. _is also thanked. It can scarcely be necessary to assure him,
that had we known what he has so kindly informed us, the article he
alludes to would not have been inserted, nay, we are sure we may add,
that the friend who sent it would never have handed it to us for
publication_.

       *       *       *       *       * {464}

On the 30th of APRIL, 1850, was published, by CHARLES KNIGHT,

PART I. OF

THE IMPERIAL CYCLOPAEDIA;

To be continued in Monthly Parts, price Half-a-Crown, Super-royal 8vo.

The Work now announced is the commencement of a NEW SERIES OF
CYCLOPAEDIAS, FOUNDED UPON THE VAST TREASURY OF ORIGINAL MATERIALS IN
"THE PENNY CYCLOPAEDIA."

The publication commences with

THE GEOGRAPHY OF THE BRITISH EMPIRE;

To form Two Volumes, with Steel Engravings and numerous Coloured Maps;
And to be completed in Twelve Monthly Parts, at Half-a-Crown.

"The Part now before us is the commencement of the 'Cyclopaedia of
Geography.' The articles which appear in the present number convey a
large amount of useful information in a compact and intelligent form.
They are evidently the productions of competent writers, well acquainted
with the present state of geographical science. The Maps are beautifully
distinct. Fulness, compactness, and clearness--the great requisites of a
Cyclopaedia--are here combined in a high degree."--_The Athenaeum_, No.
1175.

"The Part before us promises well. Books published subsequently to the
'Penny Cyclopaedia' have been consulted, to bring down the information to
the latest date; and many contributions from local residents of places
in this country enrich particular articles with full knowledge."--_The
Spectator_, No. 1140.

LONDON: CHARLES KNIGHT, FLEET STREET.

       *       *       *       *       *

Now ready, containing 149 Plates, royal 8vo. 28s.; folio, 2l. 5s.; India
Paper, 4l. 4s.

THE MONUMENTAL BRASSES of ENGLAND: a Series of Engravings upon Wood,
from every variety of these interesting and valuable Memorials,
accompanied with Descriptive Notices.

By the Rev. C. FOUTELL, M.A. Rector of Downham Market. Part XII,
completing the work, price 7s. 6d.; folio, 12s.; India paper, 24s.

By the same Author, royal 8vo. 15s.; large paper, 21s.

MONUMENTAL BRASSES and SLABS: an Historical and Descriptive Notice of
the Incised Monumental Memorials of the Middle Ages. With upward of 200
Engravings.

"A Handsome large octavo volume, abundantly supplied with well-engraved
woodcuts and lithographic plates; a sort of Encyclopaedia for ready
reference.... The whole work has a look of painstaking completeness
highly commendable."--_Athenaeum_.

"One of the most beautifully got up and interesting volumes we have seen
for a long time. It gives in the compass of one volume an account of the
History of those beautiful monuments of former days ... The
illustrations are extremely well chosen."--_English Churchman._

A few copies of this work remain for sale; and, as it will not be
reprinted in the same form and at the same price, the remaining copies
are raised in price. Early application for the Large Paper Edition is
necessary.

By the same Author, to be completed in Four Parts, CHRISTIAN MONUMENTS
in ENGLAND and WALES: an Historical and Descriptive Sketch of the
various classes of Monumenta Memorials which have been in use in this
country from about the time of the Norman Conquest. Profusely
illustrated with Wood Engravings. Part I. price 7s. 6d.; Part II. 2s.
6d.

"A well conceived and executed work."--_Ecclesiologist._

       *       *       *       *       *

MATERIALS for making RUBBINGS of MONUMENTAL BRASSES and other Incised
Works of Art.

Heel Ball, in cakes, at 3d. and 1s. each.

Also, RICHARDSON'S METALLIC RUBBER, in cakes price 1s. l6d.; Double
cakes, 2s. 6d.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE ROMANCE of the PEERAGE; or, Curiosities of Family History. by GEORGE
LILLIE CRAIK. Vols. I. II. and III. Post 8vo., cloth, 10s. 6d. each.

"A book of strange facts."--_Atlas._

"Great industry and minute research are apparent in almost every page.
Mr. Craik happily unites excellence of style with patient
erudition."--_Morning Chronicle._

"For our own parts, let us at once say, that Mr. Craik's design appears
to us an extremely good one, and that we are glad to see it in competent
hands. It is precisely that kind of book to which scrupulous care and
diligent labour were essential; and in this respect we cannot speak too
highly of the volume lying on our table."--_Examiner._

Volume IV., completing the work, is in the press.

London: CHAPMAN and HALL, 186. Strand.

       *       *       *       *       *

CUT AND COME AGAIN!

TO HISTORIANS, ANTIQUARIES, and COUNTY COLLECTORS.--Highly interesting
and curious Biographical, Antiquarian, and Topographical CUTTINGS FROM
OLD NEWSPAPERS, MAGAZINES, REGISTERS, &c., may be had at the Little
Bookshop, 26 Red Lion Street, Holborn.

N.B. Every Cutting is correctly and distinctly dated.

       *       *       *       *       *

Just published, WILLIAMS and NORGATE'S CATALOGUE of GERMAN THEOLOGICAL
BOOKS; including the WORKS of NEANDER, THOLUCK, NITZSCH, JULIUS MULLER,
KRUMMACHER, DORNER, HENGSTENBERG, EWALD, HARLESS, LANGE, UMBRIET, STIER,
OLSHAUSEN, SCHLEIERMACHER, &c., EDITIONS of the BIBLE, the WORKS of the
FATHERS and REFORMERS, &c. &c. Gratis (two stamps).

14. Henrietta Street, Covent Garden.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE PRIMAEVAL ANTIQUITIES OF ENGLAND ILLUSTRATED BY THOSE OF DENMARK.

THE PRIMAEVAL ANTIQUITIES OF DENMARK. By J.J.A. WORSAAE, Member of the
Royal Society of Antiquaries of Copenhagen. Translated and applied to
the illustrations of similar Remains in England, by WILLIAM J. THOMS,
F.S.A., Secretary of the Camden Society. With numerous Woodcuts. 8vo.
10s. 6d.

"The best antiquarian handbook we have ever met with--so clear is its
arrangement, and so well and so plainly is each subject illustrated by
well-executed engravings.... It is the joint production of two men who
have already distinguished themselves as authors and antiquarians."--
_Morning Herald._

"A book of remarkable interest and ability.... Mr. Worsaae's book is in
all ways a valuable addition to our literature.... Mr. Thoms has
executed the translation in flowing and idiomatic English, and has
appended many curious and interesting notes and observations of his
own."--_Guardian._

See also the _Gentleman's Magazine_ for February 1850.

Oxford: JOHN HENRY PARKER, and 337. Strand, London.

       *       *       *       *       *

Printed by THOMAS CLARK SHAW, of No. 8. New Street Square, at No. 5. New
Street Square, in the Parish of St. Bride, in the City of London; and
published by GEORGE BELL, of No. 186. Fleet Street, in the Parish of St.
Dunstan in the West, and in the City of London, Publisher, at No. 186.
Fleet Street aforesaid.--Saturday, May 11. 1850.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Notes and Queries, No. 28. Saturday,
May 11, 1850, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NOTES AND QUERIES ***

***** This file should be named 13684.txt or 13684.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/1/3/6/8/13684/

Produced by The Internet Library of Early Journals, Jon Ingram, David
King, and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

*** END: FULL LICENSE ***

