The Project Gutenberg EBook of Notes & Queries, No. 30. Saturday, May 25,
1850, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Notes & Queries, No. 30. Saturday, May 25, 1850
       A Medium Of Inter-Communication For Literary Men, Artists,
       Antiquaries, Genealogists, Etc.


Author: Various

Release Date: October 11, 2004 [EBook #13713]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NOTES & QUERIES, NO. 30. ***




Produced by Jon Ingram, David King, the PG Online Distributed
Proofreading Team and The Internet Library of Early Journals,





NOTES AND QUERIES:

A MEDIUM OF INTER-COMMUNICATION FOR LITERARY MEN, ARTISTS, ANTIQUARIES,
GENEALOGISTS, ETC.

       *       *       *       *       *

"When found, make a note of."--CAPTAIN CUTTLE.

       *       *       *       *       *

No. 30.] SATURDAY, MAY 25, 1850 [Price Threepence. Stamped Edition 4d.

       *       *       *       *       * {481}


CONTENTS

NOTES:--
  Dr. Johnson and Dr. Warton, by F.H. Markland. 481
  Spenser's Monument. 481
  Borrowed Thoughts, by S.W. Singer. 482
  Folk Lore:--Easter Eggs--A Cure for Warts--Charm
    for Wounds--Fifth Son--Cwm Wybir. 482
  Bartholomew Legate, the Martyr. 483
  Bohn's Edition of Milton's Prose Works. 483
  Reprint of Jeremy Taylor's Works. 483
  Dr. Thos. Bever's Legal Polity of Great Britain. 483

QUERIES:--
  Dr. Richard Holsworth and Thos. Fuller. 484
  Queries upon Cunningham's Handbook of London. 484
  On a Passage in Macbeth. 484
  Minor Queries:--As throng as Throp's Wife--Trimble
    Family--"Brozier." 485

REPLIES:--
  The Dodo Queries, by S.W. Singer. 485
  Abbey of St. Wandrille. 486
  Origin of the Word "News." 487
  Replies to Minor Queries:--Dr. Whichcot and Lord
    Shaftesbury--Elizabeth and Isabel--Trunck Breeches--Mercenary
    Preacher--Abdication of James II.--Toom Shawn Cattie--Wotton's
    Poem to Lord Bacon--"My Mind to Me a Kingdom is"--Gesta
    Grayorum--Marylebone Gardens--Mother of Thomas a Becket--Dr.
    Strode's Poem--Lord Carrington--Esquires
    and Gentlemen--Early Inscriptions--American Aborigines--Vox
    Populi--Dutch Language--Salting, &c. 488

MISCELLANIES:--
  Bishop Burnet as an Historian--Dance Thumbkin--King's
    Coffee House--Spur Money. 493

MISCELLANEOUS:--
  Notes on Books, Catalogues, Sales, &c. 494
  Books and Odd Volumes wanted. 494
  Notice to Correspondents. 494
  Advertisements. 495

       *       *       *       *       *


NOTES

DR. JOHNSON AND DR. WARTON.

Amongst the poems of the Rev. Thos. Warton, vicar of Basingstoke, who is
best remembered as the father of two celebrated sons, is one entitled
_The Universal Love of Pleasure_, commencing--

  "All human race, from China to Peru,
  Pleasure, howe'er disguised by art, pursue."
  &c. &c.

Warton died in 1745, and his Poems were published in 1748.

Johnson's _Vanity of Human Wishes_ appeared in 1749; but Boswell
believes that it was composed in the preceding year. That Poem, as we
well remember, commences thus tamely:--

  "Let observation with extensive view,
  Survey Mankind from China to Peru."

Though so immeasurably inferior to his own, Johnson may have noticed
these verses of Warton's with some little attention, and unfortunately
borrowed the only prosaic lines in his poem. Besides the imitation
before quoted, both writers allude to Charles of Sweden. Thus Warton
says,--

  "'Twas hence rough Charles rush'd forth to ruthless war."

Johnson, in his highly finished picture of the same monarch, says,--

  "War sounds the trump, he rushes to the field."

J.H. MARKLAND.

Bath.

       *       *       *       *       *

SPENSER'S MONUMENT.

In the _Lives of English Poets_, by William Winstanley (London, printed
by H. Clark for Samuel Manship, 1687), in his account of Spenser, p.
92., he says, "he died anno 1598, and was honourably buried at the sole
charge of Robert, first of that name, Earl of Essex, on whose monument
is written this epitaph:--

    "Edmundus Spenser, Londinensis, Anglicorum poetarum nostri
    seculi fuit princeps, quod ejus Poemata, faventibus Musis, et
    victuro genio conscripa comprobant. Obiit immatura morte, anno
    salutis 1598, et prope Galfredum Chaucerum conditur, qui
    foelicisime Poesin Anglicis literis primus illustravit. In quem
    haec scripta sunt Epitaphia.

      "Hic prope Chaucerum situs est Spenserius, illi
        Prominens ingenio, proximum ut tumulo
      Hic prope Chaucerum Spensere poeta poetam
        Conderis, et versud quam tumulo proprior,
      Anglica te vivo vixit, plausitque l'oesis;
        Nunc moritura timet, te moriente mori."

I have also a folio copy of Spenser, printed by Henry Hills for Jonathan
Edwin, London, 1679. In a short life therein printed, it says that he
was buried near Chaucer, 1596; and the frontispiece is an engraving of
his tomb, by E. White, which bears this epitaph:--

    "Heare lyes (expecting the second comminge of our Saviour,
    Christ Jesus) the body of Edmond Spenser, the Prince of Poets in
    his tyme, whose Divine spirit needs noe othir witness than the
    works which he left behind {482} him. He was borne in London in
    the yeare 1510, and died in the yeare 1596."

Beneath are these lines:--

   "Such is the tombs the Noble Essex gave
    Great Spenser's learned reliques, such his grave:
    Howe'er ill-treated in his life he were,
    His sacred bones rest honourably here."

How are these two epitaphs, with their differing dates, to be
reconciled? Can he have been born in 1510, as the first one says "obiit
_immatura_ morte?" Now eighty-five is not very immature; and I believe
he entered at Pembroke College, Cambridge, in 1569, at which time he
would be fifty-nine, and that at a period when college education
commenced at an earlier age than now. Vertue's portrait, engraved 1727,
takes as a motto the last two lines of the first epitaph--"Anglica te
vivo," &c.

E.N.W

Southwark, April 29 1850.

       *       *       *       *       *

BORROWED THOUGHTS.

Crenius wrote a dissertation _De Furibus Librariis_, and J. Conrad
Schwarz another _De Plagio Literario_, in which some curious
appropriations are pointed out; your pages have already contained some
additional recent instances. The writers thus pillaged might exclaim,
"Pereant iste qui _post_ nos nostra dixerunt." Two or three instances
have occurred to me which, I think, have not been noticed. Goldsmith's
_Madame Blaize_ is known to be a free version of _La fameuse La
Galisse_. His well-known epigram,--

   "Here lies poor Ned Purdon, from misery freed,"

is borrowed from the following by the Chevalier de Cailly (or d'Aceilly,
as he writes himself) entitled,--

  "_La Mort du Sieur Etienne_.

  "Il est au bout de ses travaux,
   Il a passe le Sieur Etienne;
   En ce monde il eut tant des maux,
   Qu'on ne croit pas qu'il revienne."

Another well-know epigram,--

  "I do not like thee, Doctor Fell,"

is merely a version of the 33d epigram of the first books of those by
the witty Roger de Bussy, Comte de Rabutin:--

  "Je ne vous aime pas, Hylas,
   Je n'en saurois dire la cause,
   Je sais seulement une chose;
   C'est que je ne vous aime pas."

Lastly, Prior's epitaph on himself has its prototype in one long
previously written by or for one John Carnegie:--

  "Johnnie Carnegie lais heer,
     Descendit of Adam and Eve,
   Gif ony con gang hieher,
     I'se willing gie him leve."

S.W. SINGER

       *       *       *       *       *

FOLK LORE.

_Easter Eggs_ (No. 25. p. 397.).--The custom recorded by Brande as being
in use in the North of England in his time, still continues in
Richmondshire.

_A Cure for Warts_ is practised with the utmost faith in East Sussex.
The nails are cut, the cuttings carefully wrapped in paper, and placed
in the hollow of a pollard ash, concealed from the birds; when the paper
decays, the warts disappear. For this I can vouch: in my own case the
paper did decay, and the warts did all disappear, and, of course, the
effect was produced by the cause. Does the practice exist elsewhere?

_Charm for Wounds._--Boys, in his _History of Sandwich_, gives, (p.
690.) the following from the Corporation Records, 1568: a woman examined
touching her power to charm wounds who--

    "Sayesth that she can charme for fyer and skalding in forme as
    oulde women do, sayeng 'Owt fyer in frost, in the name of the
    Father, the Sonne, and the Holly Ghost;' and she hath used when
    the skyn of children do cleve fast, to advise the mother to
    annoynt them with the mother's milk and oyle olyfe; and for
    skalding to take oyle olyfe only."

W. DURRANT COOPER.


_Fifth Son._--What is the superstition relating to a fifth son? I
should be glad of any illustrations of it. There certainly are instances
in which the fifth son has been the most distinguished scion of the
family.

W.S.G.


_Cwn Wybir, or Cwn Annwn_--_Curlews_ (No. 19. p. 294).--The late
ingenious and well-informed Mr. William Weston Young, then residing in
Glamorgan, gave me the following exposition of these mysterious _Dogs of
the Sky_, or _Dogs of the Abyss_, whose aerial cries at first perplexed
as well as startled him. He was in the habit of traversing wild tracts
of country, in his profession of land surveyor and often rode by night.
One intensely dark night he was crossing a desolate range of hills, when
he heard a most diabolical yelping and shrieking in the air, horrible
enough in such a region and at black midnight. He was not, however, a
superstitious man, and, being an observant naturalist, had paid great
attention to the notes of birds, and the remarkable variations between
the day and night notes of the same species. He suspected these strange
unearthly sounds to be made by some gregarious birds on the wing; but
{483} the darkness was impenetrable, and he gazed upwards in vain. The
noises, meanwhile, were precisely those which he had heard ascribed to
the _Cwn Wybir_, and would have been truly appalling to a superstitious
imagination. His quick ear at length caught the rush of pinions, and, in
a short time, a large flight of curlews came sweeping down to the
heather, so near his head, that some of their wings brushed his hat.
They were no sooner settled, than the _Cwn Wybir_ ceased to be heard.
Mr. Young then recollected having noticed similar nocturnal cries from
the curlew, but had never before encountered such a formidable flying
legion of those birds, screaming in a great variety of keys, amidst
mountain echoes.

ELIJAH WARING.

       *       *       *       *       *

BARTHOLOMEW LEGATE, THE MARTYR.

An erroneous date, resting on such authorities as Mr. Hallam and Mr. J.
Payne Collier, deserves a note. The former in his _Const. Hist._ (ii.
275. note, second edition), and the latter in the _Egerton Papers_,
printed for the Camden Society (p. 446.), assigns the date 1614 to the
death of Bartholomew Legate at Smithfield. The latter also gives the
date March 13. Now the true date is March 18, 1611-12, as will appear by
consulting--1. The commissions and warrants for the burning of Legate
and Wightman, inserted in _Truth brought to Light, or the Narrative
History of King James for the first Fourteen Years_, 4to. 1651; 2.
Chamberlain's _Letters to Sir Dudley Carleton_, dated Feb. 26, 1611
(1611-12), and March 25, 1612, printed in _The Court and Times of James
I._, vol. i. pp. 136. 164.; and 3. Wallace's _Antitrinitarian
Biography_, vol. ii. p. 534. Fuller, in his _Church History_, gives the
correct date, and states that his "burning of heretics much startled
common people;" "wherefore King James politicly preferred that heretics
hereafter, though condemned, should silently and privately waste
themselves away in the prison."

Legate and Wightman were, in fact, the last martyrs burnt at the stake
in England for their religious opinions.

A.B.R.

       *       *       *       *       *

BOHN'S EDITION OF MILTON'S PROSE WORKS.

Three volumes of this edition have already appeared, the last bearing
the date of 1848, and concluding thus:--"End of Vol. III." In the latest
Catalogue, which Mr. Bohn has appended to his publications, appears a
notice of "Milton's Prose Works, _complete_ in 3 vols." This word
_complete_ is not consistent with the words terminating the last volume,
nor with the exact truth. For instance, the History of Britain does not
find a place in this edition; and I can hardly believe that Mr. Bohn
originally intended that the Prose Works of Milton should be issued from
his press without a full index. Without such an index, this edition is
comparatively worthless to the investigator of history. I would
therefore suggest to Mr. Bohn (whose services to literature I most
gratefully acknowledge), that he should render his edition of Milton's
Prose Works _really complete_, by issuing a fourth volume, which _inter
alia_, might contain the _Latin_ prose works of Milton, reprinted in
Fletcher's edition of 1834, together with any omitted English prose work
of the author, and be terminated, as is usual in Mr. Bohn's
publications, with a full alphabetical index, embracing both persons and
things. The lover of historical pursuits would then have _fresh_ reason
to thank Mr. Bohn.

N.

       *       *       *       *       *

REPRINT OF JEREMY TAYLOR'S WORKS.

A reprint being called for of vol. iv. of _Bishop Jeremy Taylor's
Works_, now in course of publication, I would beg permission to make it
known to your readers, that assistance in regard to any references which
were not verified in the former edition of that volume would be very
acceptable to me. They should be sent within the next fortnight.

C. PAGE EDEN.

       *       *       *       *       *

DR. THOMAS BEVER'S LEGAL POLITY OF GREAT BRITAIN.

I do not know if such a notice as this is intended to be, is admissible
into your publication.

Many years ago, I bought of a bookseller a MS. intitled "A Short History
of the Legal and Judicial Polity of Great Britain, attempted by Thos.
Bever, LL.D., Advocate in Doctor's Commons, and Fellow of All Souls
College, Oxford, 1759." It is presented to Richard Pennant, Esq.; and
there is a letter from Mr. Bever to Mr. Pennant wafered to the fly-leaf.
At the close of the "Advertisement," the author "earnestly requests that
it [the work] may not be suffered to fall into the hands of a
bookseller, or be copied, without his consent: and whenever it shall
become useless, and lose its value (if any it ever had) with the present
owner, that he will be kind enough to return it to the author if living,
or if dead, to any of his surviving family at Mortimer near Reading,
Berks."

In pious sympathy with this wish, I more than thirty years since wrote a
letter, addressed to "---- Bever, Esq., Mortimer, near Reading, Berks,"
offering to give up the volume to any one entitled to it under the above
description; but my letter was returned from the post office with the
announcement "Not found" upon it. I make this other attempt, if you are
pleased to admit it, through you; and immediate attention will be paid
to any claim which may appear in your pages.

J.R.

       *       *       *       *       * {484}


QUERIES.

DR. RICHARD HOLSWORTH AND THOS. FULLER.

Can any of your readers inform me who was the author of _The Valley of
Vision_, published in 1651 as the work of Dr. Richard Holsworth, the
Master of Emmanuel College, and Dean of Worcester. In a preface to the
reader, Fuller laments "that so worthy a man should dye issulesse
without leaving any books behind him for the benefit of learning and
religion." He adds that the private notes which he had left behind him
were dark and obscure; his hand being legible only to himself, and
almost useless for any other. The sermon published as _The Valley of
Vision_ appears to have been prepared for publication from the notes of
a short-hand writer. When Fuller published, about eleven years
afterwards, his _Worthies of England_, he wrote thus:--

    "Pity it is so learned a person left no monuments (save a
    sermon) to posterity; for _I behold that posthume work as none
    of his, named by the transcriber The Valley of Vision_, a
    Scripture expression, but here misplaced.... This I conceived
    myself in credit and conscience concerned to observe, because I
    was surprised at the _preface_ to the book, and will take the
    blame rather than clear myself, when my innocency is complicated
    with the accusing of others."

If, as is probable, Dr. Holsworth, in this instance, preached other
men's sermons, which the short-hand writer afterwards gave to the world
as his, it is a singular fact, that in the preface of this
supposititious volume, Fuller speaks of the abuse of printed sermons by
some--

    "Who lazily imp their wings with other men's plumes, wherewith
    they soar high in common esteeme, yet have not the ingenuity
    with that son of the Prophet to confesse, Alasse! it was
    borrowed."

A.B.R.

       *       *       *       *       *

QUERIES UPON CUNNINGHAM'S HANDBOOK OF LONDON.

We promised to make a few QUERIES on this amusing volume, and thus
redeem our promise.

Mr. Cunningham has been the first to point out the precise situation of
a spot often mentioned by our old dramatists, which had baffled the
ingenuity of Gifford, Dyce, and in fact of all the commentators,--the
notorious Picthatch. He thus describes it:--

    "_Picthatch_, or _Pickehatch_.--A famous receptacle for
    prostitutes and pickpockets, generally supposed to have been in
    _Turnmill Street_, near Clerkenwell Green, but its position is
    determined by a grant of the 33rd of Queen Elizabeth, and a
    survey of 1649. What _was_ Picthatch is a street at the back of
    a narrow turning called Middle Row (formerly Rotten Row)
    opposite the Charter-house wall in Goswell Street. The name is
    still preserved in 'Pickax Yard' adjoining Middle Row."

Why then, among the curious illustrations which he has brought to bear
upon the subject, has Mr. Cunningham omitted that of the origin of the
name from the "picks upon the hatch?" which is clearly established both
by Malone and Steevens, in their notes upon "'twere not amiss to keep
our door hatch'd," in Pericles.

The following is an excellent suggestion as to the origin of the--

    "_Goat and Compasses._--At Cologne, in the church of Santa Maria
    in Capitolio, is a flat stone on the floor professing to be the
    Grabstein der Brueder und Schwester eines ehrbaren Wein-und
    Fass-Ampts, Anno 1693; that is, as I suppose, a vault belonging
    to the Wine Coopers' Company. The arms exhibit a shield with a
    pair of compasses, an axe, and a dray, or truck, with goats for
    supporters. In a country like England, dealing so much at one
    time in Rhenish wine, a more likely origin for such a sign could
    hardly be imagined. For this information I am indebted to the
    courtesy of Sir Edmund Head."

Can Mr. Cunningham, Sir E. Head, or any of our correspondents point out
any German "Randle Holme" whose work may be consulted for the purpose of
ascertaining the arms, &c. of the various professions, trades, &c. of
that country?

Why has not Mr. Cunningham, in his description of _St. James' Street_,
mentioned what certainly existed long after the commencement of the
present century, the occasional "steps" which there were in the
foot-path--making the street a succession of terraces. This fact renders
intelligible the passage quoted from Pope's letter to Mr. Pearse, in
which he speaks of "y'e second Terras in St. James' Street." Why, too,
omit that characteristic feature of the street, the rows of _sedan
chairs_ with which it was formerly lined? The writer of this perfectly
remembers seeing Queen Charlotte in her sedan chair, going from the
Queen's Library in the Green Park to Buckingham House.

Mr. Cunningham states, we dare say correctly, that Sheridan died at No.
17 Saville Row. We thought he had died at Mr. Peter Moore's, in Great
George Street, Westminster. Was he not living there shortly before his
death? and did not his funeral at Westminster Abbey proceed from Mr.
Moore's?

       *       *       *       *       *

ON A PASSAGE IN MACBETH.

If any of your correspondents would favour me, I should like to be
satisfied with respect to the following passage in Macbeth; which, as at
present punctuated, is exceedingly obscure:--

  "If it were done, when 'tis done, then 'twere well
  It were done quickly: If the assassination
  Could trammel up the consequence, and catch,
  With his surcease, success; that but this blow
  Might be the be-all and the end-all here, {485}
  But here, upon this bank and shoal of time,--
  We'd jump the life to come."

Now, I think by altering the punctuation, the sense of the passage is at
once made apparent, as thus,--

  "If it were done when 'tis done then 'twere well.
  It were done quickly, if the assassination
  Could trammel up the consequence, and catch,
  With his surcease, success, that but this blow
  Might be the be-all and the end all here," &c.

but to make use of a paradox, it is _not_ done when it _is_ done; for
this reason, there is the conscience to torment the evil-doer while
living, and the dread of punishment in another world after death: the
"bank and shoal of time" refers to the interval between life and death,
and to "_jump_" the life to come is to _hazard_ it. The same thought
occurs in _Hamlet_, when he alludes to--

  "That undiscovered country, from whose bourne
  No traveller returns."

But that is clear enough, as in all probability the annotators left the
passage as they found it. I have not the opportunity of consulting Mr.
Collier's edition of Shakespeare, so that I am unaware of the manner in
which he renders it; perhaps I ought to have done so before I troubled
you. Possibly some of your readers may be disposed to coincide with me
in the "new reading;" and if not, so to explain it that it may be shown
it is my own obscurity, and not Shakespeare's, with which I ought to
cavil.

I have witnessed many representations of _Macbeth_, and in every
instance the passage referred to has been delivered as I object to it:
but that is not to be wondered at, for there are professed admirers of
Shakspeare among actors who read him _not_ as if they understood him,
but who are--

  "Full of sound and fury, signifying nothing."

G. BLINK.

       *       *       *       *       *

MINOR QUERIES.

_As throng as Throp's Wife._--As I was busy in my garden yesterday, a
parishioner, whose eighty-two years of age render her a somewhat
privileged person to have a gossip with, came in to speak to me. With a
view to eliciting material for a Note or a Query, I said to her, "You
see I am _as throng as Throp's wife_;" to which she replied, "Aye, Sir,
and _she_ hanged herself in the dishcloth." The answer is new to me; but
the proverb itself, as well as the one mentioned by "D.V.S." (No. 24. p.
382.) "As lazy as Ludlum's dog, &c.," has been an especial object of
conjecture to me as long as I can remember. I send this as a pendant to
"D.V.S.'s" Query, in hopes of shortly seeing the origin of _both_ these
curious sayings.

J.E.

Ecclesfield, Sheffield, April 19. 1850.


_Trimble Family._--In a MS. account of the Fellows of King's I find the
following:--

    "1530.--Rich. Trimble, a very merry fellow, the fiddle of the
    society, who called him 'Mad Trimble.' M. Stokes of 1531 wrote
    this distich on him:--

      'Os, oculi, mentum, dens, guttur, lingua, palatum
        Sunt tibi; sed nasus, Trimbale, dic ubi sit?'

    By which it appears he had a very small nose; and this day, July
    13, 1739, I hear that there is one Mr. R. Trimble of an English
    family, an apothecary at Lisburn in Ireland, who is remarkable
    for the same."

As "NOTES AND QUERIES" circulate in Ireland, are there any of the family
of "Trimble" now in that country, and are they distinguished by any such
peculiarity?

J.H.L.


_The Word "Brozier."_--my brother Etonians will feelingly recollect the
word "Brozier," used by the boys for nearly a century to denote any one
who had spent his pocket-money; an event of very frequent occurrence
shortly after the holidays. There were also sometimes attempts made to
"_brozier my dame_," in case a suspicion had arisen that the good lady's
larder was not too well supplied. The supper table was accordingly
cleared of all the provisions, and a further stock of eatables
peremptorily demanded.

I spell the word "brozier" as it is still pronounced; perhaps some of
your readers have seen it in print, and may be able to give some account
of its origin and etymology, and decide whether it is exclusively
belonging to Eton.

BRAYBROOKE.

April 14.

       *       *       *       *       *


REPLIES.

THE DODO QUERIES.

There is no mention of the Solitaire as inhabiting Bourbon, either in
Pere Brown's letter or in the _Voyage de l'Arabic Heureuse_, from whence
the notice of the Oiseau Bleu was extracted. I have since seen Dellon,
_Relation d'un Voyage des Indes Orientales_, 2 vols. 12mo. Paris, 1685,
in which there is a brief notice of the Isle of Bourbon or Mascarin; but
neither the Dodo, the Solitaire, or the Oiseau Bleu are noticed. The
large Bat is mentioned, and the writer says that the French who were on
the island did not eat it, but only the Indians. He also notices the
tameness of the birds, and says that the Flammand, with its long neck,
is the only bird it was necessary to use a gun against, the others being
readily destroyed with a stick or taken by hand.

Mr. Strickland's correction of the error about the monumental evidence
of the discovery of Bourbon by the Portuguese, in 1545, will aid
research into the period at which it was first visited and named; but my
stock of Portuguese literature is but small, and not all of it
accessible {486} to me at present. In the meantime it may be acceptable
to Mr. Strickland to know, that there is a detailed account of
Portuguese discoveries in a book whose title would hardly indicate it,
in which one passage will probably interest him. I allude to the rare
and interesting folio volume printed at Lisbon in 1571. _De Rebus
Emanuelis Regis Lusitanie, invictissimi Virtute et Auspicio Gestis,
auctore Hieronymo Osorio Episcopo Silvensis_. These annals embrace the
period from 1495 to 1529. In narrating the principal events of Vasco de
Gama's first voyage, after he had rounded the Cape of Good Hope on the
25th November, 1497, steering to the east along the southern coast of
Africa, the vessels anchor in the bay of St. Blaize, where--

    "In intimo sinu est parva quaedam Insula, ad quam nostri aquandi
    gratia naves-appulerunt. Ibi phocarum armenta conspexere
    admiranda quaedam multitudine. In quibus inerat tanta feritas et
    truculentia, ut in homines irruerent. AVES etiam eo in loco visae
    sunt, quas incolas apellant SOLTICARIOS, pares anscribus
    magnitudine: plumis minime vestiuntur, alas habent similes alis
    verspertionum: volare nequeunt, sed explicatis alarum membranis,
    cursum celeritate summa conficiunt."

The islet was probably that of _La Cruz_; but what were the birds? and
what was the indigenous name which is represented by _Solticarios_? It
is possible that some of your correspondents may be familiar with the
original narration which Osorio follows, or Mr. Strickland may be able
to solve the question.

I may just remark, that my observation respecting the improbability of
Tradescant's stuffed specimen having been a fabrication could hardly be
considered superfluous, seeing that some naturalists, Dr. Gray, I
believe, among others, had suggested that it most probably was one.

S.W. SINGER.

May 3. 1850.

       *       *       *       *       *

ABBEY OF ST. WANDRILLE.

In reply to the Vicar of Ecclesfield (No. 24. p. 382.), I am sorry to
say that the "Chronicle of the Abby of St. Wandrille," to which I
alluded (No. 21. p. 338.), contains nothing relating to the subject of
his inquiry. The Abbey of Fontanelle, or St. Wandrille, was founded A.D.
645; and this chronicle contains a very concise account of a few only of
its abbots and most celebrated members, down to the year 834: written,
it is supposed, by a cotemporary of Ansegisus, the last abbot therein
mentioned. It is followed by an appendix containing a compilation from a
book on miracles wrought in the translation of the body of St. Wilfran,
by an "eye-witness," which also recounts incidentally some of the acts
of the abbots of St. Wandrille to the year 1053. Acheri speaks of
persons who had been long engaged in collecting memorials of the history
of this abbey up to the time of his writing, 1659. Whether these have
ever been published, I have not the means at this moment of
ascertaining. Some account of this abbey, with views of its ruins, will
be found in that splendid work, _Voyages dans L'Ancienne France_, by
Nodier, &c., vol. i.

The following notes from this chronicle may not be without interest, as
showing an early connection between the abbey and this country, and our
attachment to the See of Rome.

Chapter V. is devoted to the praise of BAGGA, a monk and presbyter of
this abbey, who is said to have been "ex Britannia Oceani insula
Saxonico ex genere ortus." He died, and was buried in the abbey, between
the years 707 and 723; on which occasion the Abbot Benignus is said to
have exclaimed, "O signifer fortissime Christi militiae BAGGA, nunc
mercedem laborum laetus accipis tuorum. Deprecare ipsum benignum Dominum,
ut una tecum mereamur gaudere consortiis justorum per aevum." Here is a
prayer not for, but _to_ the dead.

During the presidency of AUSTRULPHUS (ch. 13.), which began in 747 and
ended in 753, a certain receptacle, in the form of a small _pharos_, was
driven ashore in the district of Coriovallum, which contained a very
fair copy of the four Gospels, beautifully written in Roman characters
on the purest vellum; and part of the precious jaw of St. George the
Martyr, as well as a portion of the "health-bearing" wood of the true
cross, duly labelled. The acquisition of this treasure was of course
ascribed to the immediate interposition of God. And as about the same
period the head of St. George was discovered at Rome, through the
intervention of Pope Zachary, it was conjectured that this pontiff had
given the wonder-working relic to some venerable men from _Britain_, a
country described as being "always on the most intimate footing (_maxime
familiares_) with the Apostolic See;" and that, these being wrecked on
their voyage home, or through some other adventure, the said treasure
was providentially driven ashore at Coriovallum.

Chapter XV. gives us an account of GERVOLDUS, who ruled this abbey
eighteen years, dying A.D. 806. He had been ambassador from Charlemagne
to Offa, King of Mercia. The son of Charlemagne demanded the daughter of
Offa in marriage, who refused his consent, unless his own son should
receive the hand of Bertha, the daughter of the French king. Charles, in
consequence, inhibited the subjects of Offa from trading on the French
coast. This inhibition was, however, withdrawn through the mediation of
the Abbot Gervoldus, who seems to have been in great favour with
Charles.

I need hardly say, that throughout the chronicle there is a tolerable
sprinkling of the marvellous. {487} I give you the following as a
warning to all dishonest bell-founders.

The pious builder of a church being desirous, according to custom, of
putting a bell in the turret, engaged a skillful craftsman to carry into
effect his design. This man, "at the instigation of the devil," stole
some of the metal with which he had been furnished for the work; and the
bell was, in consequence, mis-shapen and of small size. It was, however,
placed in the turret; but, as a divine punishment for his crime,
whenever the bell was struck, the dishonest founder was thereupon seized
with frenzy, uttering strange words and barking like a dog!

GASTROS.

       *       *       *       *       *

ORIGIN OF THE WORD "NEWS."

I have great respect for "Mr. SAMUEL HICKSON," but I cannot treat his
derivation of the word "News" with any respect (No. 27. p. 428.). I wish
"Mr. HICKSON" had been a little more modest in his manner of propounding
his novelty. Can any thing be more dogmatic than his assertions? which I
will recapitulate as much as possible in his own words, before I proceed
to deal with them.

1. "I have never had the least doubt that this word is derived
immediately from the German."

2. "It is, in fact, 'das Neue' in the genitive case;" and "Mr. H."
proceeds to mention the German phrase, "Was giebt's Neues?" as giving
the exact sense of our "What is the news?" [which cannot be gainsaid;
but I shall have a word to say presently about _neues_ in that phrase
being the genitive case.]

3. "That the word is not derived from the English adjective 'new,'--that
it is not of English manufacture at all--I feel well assured."

4. "In that case '_s_' would be the sign of the plural; and we should
have, as the Germans have, either extant or obsolete, also 'the new.'"
[I do not see the _sequitur_.]

5 "'News' is a noun singular, and as such must have been adopted bodily
into the language."

Such are "Mr. HICKSON's" principal assertions: and when I add, that he
has found out that the German "neu" was in olden time spelt "new," so
that the genitive, "newes," was identical with the old form of the
English word "news;" and that he explains the transformation of a
genitive case of a German adjective into an English substantive by
English ignorance, which he further thinks is exemplified by the Koran
having been called "the Alkoran," in ignorance of "_Al_" meaning "the,"
I have given not only all of his assertions, but also the whole of his
argument.

I now proceed to assert on my part that the word "news" is not "derived
immediately from the German," and "has not been adopted bodily into our
language;" that the English "new" and German "neu" have, however, of
course the same origin, their common root being widely spread in other
languages, as [Greek: neos], Gr.; _norus_, Lat.; _neuf_, Fr., &c.; that
"news" is a noun of plural form and plural meaning, like _goods_,
_riches_, &c.; that its peculiar and frequent use is quite sufficient to
account for its having come to be used as a singular noun ("riches," by
the way, may be prefixed sometimes to a singular verb, as "riches is a
cause of corruption"); that Mr. HICKSON might as well say that "goods"
is derived immediately from "gutes," the genitive of "gut;" and "riches"
from "reiches," the genitive of "reich:" and also that if "_s_" in
"goods," and "_es_" in "riches" are signs of the plural, "we should
have, as the Germans have, either extant or obsolete," the "good," "the
rich," (not that I quite understand this part of "Mr. HICKSON's"
argument): and, lastly, I assert that I believe that _Neues_, in the
phrase "Was giebt's Neues?" is not the genitive, but the nominative
neuter, so that the phrase is to be literally translated "What is there
new?"

As regards the derivation of "News," I wish you had allowed the question
to rest as it stood after the sensible remarks of "A.E.B." (No. 23. p.
369.). Pray excuse me, Sir, for expressing a hope that you will ponder
well before you again allow us to be puzzled on so plain a subject, and
give circulation and your sanction to paradoxes, even though coming from
one so entitled to attention as "Mr. HICKSON."

The early communication between the English and German languages, of
which "Mr. HICKSON" puts forward the derivation of "news" from "neues"
as an instance, may be an interesting and profitable subject of inquiry;
but as I think he has been singularly unfortunate in the one instance,
so I do not think him particularly happy in his other. I see no further
resemblance between Heywood's "Song in praise of his Mistress," and the
early German poem, than what _might_ arise from treatment of the same
and a very common subject.

I am not enough of an etymologist to give you the root of the word
"noise." But my faith in "Mr. HICKSON" in this capacity is not strong
enough to lead me to believe, on his dictum, that "news" and "noise" are
the same word; and when, pursuing his fancy about "neues," he goes on to
say that "noise" is "from a dialect from which the modern German
pronunciation of the dipthong is derived," I fear his pronunciation of
German is faulty, if he pronounces _eu_ in "Neues" like _oi_ in "noise."

    [We differ from our correspondent on this point, and think that
    here, at all events, Mr. HICKSON has the advantage of the
    argument.]

I beg to repeat that for "Mr. HICKSON" I feel great respect. If he knew
my name, he would probably know nothing about me; but I happen {488} to
know of him, what perhaps, some of your readers do not, that he has
unostentatiously rendered many considerable services not only to
literature but to our social and political interests. In my humble
opinion, his recent essay in your columns on _The Taming of the Shrew_
is a contribution to our literary history which you may be proud of
having published. But I feel that I cannot too strongly protest against
his derivation of "News."

CH.

       *       *       *       *       *

REPLIES TO MINOR QUERIES.

_Dr. Whichcot and Lord Shaftesbury_ (No. 24. p. 382., No. 27. p.
444.).--I am obliged to "COLL. REGAL. SOCIUS" for his notice of my
inquiry. The Lord Chamberlain and Chancellor of Cambridge University
mentioned in Lord Lauderdale's letter to Dr. Whichcot, is the Earl of
Manchester. Shaftesbury was never either Lord Chamberlain or Chancellor
of Cambridge.

I may mention that Whichcot's intimacy with Lord Shaftesbury would
probably have been brought about by his being incumbent of the church of
St. Lawrence Jewry, Shaftesbury having his London house in the latter
part of his life in Aldersgate Street.

If it is not committing unpardonable trespass on that useful part of
your publication in which books and odd volumes are asked for, I will go
on to say that I should be glad to have a copy of the volume of
Whichcot's _Sermons_ (1698) which the third Lord Shaftesbury edited, at
a reasonable price.

CH.


_Elizabeth and Isabel_ (No. 27. p. 439.).--Mr. Thomas Duffus Hardy, in
his evidence on the Camoys Peerage case (June 18. 1838, Evidence, p.
351.) proved that the names of Isabella and Elizabeth were in ancient
times used indifferently, and particularly in the reigns of Edward I.
and Edward III. Mr. Hardy says in his evidence:--

    "In the British Museum there is a Latin letter of Elizabeth of
    Austria, Queen of Charles IX. of France, to Queen Elizabeth of
    England. In the Latin she is called Elizabetha, and she signs
    her name Ysabel. In the _Chronicle de St. Denis_, in the year
    1180, it is stated, 'Le jor martmes espousa la noble Roine
    Ysabel,' 'Upon this day, Queen Elizabeth was married;' and in
    _Rigordus de Gestis Philippi Augusti Regis Francois_ it is
    stated, 'Tune inuncta fuit Elizabeth uxor ejus venerabilis
    foemina;' and Moreri says she is called 'Elizabeth or Izabeau de
    Hainault, Queen of France, wife of Philippe Auguste.' Camden, in
    his _Remains_, says, 'Isabel is the same as Elizabeth;' that the
    Spaniards always translate Elizabeth into Isabel, and the French
    into Izabeau. I have seen in the British Museum a deed, in which
    the name Elizabetha is written in Latin; on the seal it is
    Isabella. In the _Inquisitiones post Mortem_ I have frequently
    seen Ysabella returned in one country and Elizabetha in an other
    for the same person. I have something like a dozen other
    instances from Moreri, in which he says that Elizabeth and
    Isabella or Isabeau are the same. Elizabeth or Izabeau de
    France, dau. of Lewis VIII. and Blanche of Castella; Elizabeth
    or Isabelle d'Aragon, Queen of France, wife of Philippe III.,
    surnamed le Hardie; Elizabeth or Isabeau de Baviere, Queen of
    France, wife of Charles VI.; Elizabeth or Isabeau d'Angouleme,
    wife of King John of England; Elizabeth or Isabeau de France,
    Queen of England, dau. of Philippe IV.; Elizabeth or Isabelle of
    France, Queen of Richard II.; Elizabeth or Isabelle de France,
    Queen of Navarre; Elizabeth or Isabelle de Valois, dau. of
    Charles of France; Elizabeth or Isabelle de France, dau. of
    Philippe le Long, King of France; Elizabeth or Isabelle de
    France, Duchess of Milan; Elizabeth or Isabelle, Queen of
    Philippe V. of Spain."

WM. DURRANT COOPER.

81. Guildford Street, May 4. 1850.



_Elizabeth--Isabel._--The Greek word [Greek: Elisabet] (Luke, i. 5. &c.)
from which Elizabeth, or _Elisabeth_, must have been adopted as a
Christian name, is used by the LXX. (Exodus, vi. 23.) to express the
Hebrew [Hebrew: Elisheba], the name of Aaron's wife. This at once
directs us to the verb [Hebrew: shaba], or rather to its Niphal,
[Hebrew: nishba], for the _Kal_ form does not occur, _to swear_; for the
combination of letters in [Hebrew: el isshaba], _God will swear_, or
_God sweareth_, is the same as that in the proper name. Now let us
transpose the verb and its nominative case, and we have [Hebrew: ishaba
el], which a Greek translator might soften into [Greek: Isabel].

The use of [Greek: Elisabet] both by the LXX. and the Evangelist, makes
it probable that the mother of John the Baptist, who was _of the
daughters of Aaron_ (Luke, i. 5.), was known amongst her own people by
the recognized and _family_ name of _Elisheba_, as _Anna_ no doubt would
be _Hannah_ ([Hebrew: hanah]), and _Mary, Miriam_ ([Greek: Mariam],
Luke, i. 27.). And this is confirmed by the Syriac version, the
vernacular, or nearly so, of Our Blessed Lord and His disciples, which
has [Syriac: elisheba].

Genesius, in his _Lexicon_, explains Elisheba to mean "cui Deus est
sacramentum," "quae jurat per Deum, i.e. Dei cultrix: cf. Is. xix. 18." I
should rather take it to be a name expressive of trust in God's promises
or oath, such as _Elijah_, "the LORD is my God;" _Isaiah_, "the LORD is
my salvation;" _Ezekiel_, "God strengtheneth." Schleusner (_Lex. N.T._)
says that others derived it from [Hebrew: saba], _saturavit_; "sic in
Alberti _Gloss. N.T._, p. 87. explicatur, [Greek: Theou mou
plaesmonae]." Wolfius, in his note on Luke, i. 5., refers to Witsii
_Miscellanea_, tom. ii. p. 478., to which I must refer your
correspondent "A.C.," as I have not the book by me.

Camden must, of course, have derived the name {489} from [Hebrew:
shabath], _to rest_; but I think we must rather defer to the authority
of the LXX. And though [Hebrew: el ishaboth] may give us _Elisabeth_, we
shall not be able to deduce _Isabel_ from [Hebrew: ishboth el] quite so
easily.

B.

L ---- Rectory, S ----, May 4. 1850.


_Trunck Breeches_ (No. 24. p. 384.), more commonly called "trunk-hose,"
were short wide breeches reaching a little above, or sometimes below the
knees, stuffed with hair, and striped. (See _The Oxford Manual for
Brasses_, p. cvi.; and Planche's _British Costume_, pp. 334-339. new
ed.) Two years ago, I saw in the Strand an old man with a _queue_; a
sight which I made a note of as soon as I got home, influenced by the
same motive that, no doubt, led Smith in 1640 to append to the death of
"old Mr. Grice" the remark, "who wore truncke breeches," namely, the
antique singularity of the habiliment.

ARUN.


_Mercenary Preacher_ (No. 24. p. 384.).--I think mercenary here is used
in its primary signification, and in the sense in which we still apply
it to troops in the pay of a state foreign to their own; to designate
one who, having no settled cure, was at liberty to be "hired" by those
who had occasion for his services.

ARUN.


_Abdication of James the Second_ (No. 3. p. 40.).--"J.E." would probably
hear of the MSS. mentioned by Sir Harris Nicholas, on application to the
Rev. Sir Thomas Miller, Bart., Froyle, near Alton, Hants.

E.W.
Clifton.


_Toom Shawn Cattie_ (No. 24. p. 383.).--An entertaining volume,
containing the life and adventures of Twm Sion Catti, was published at
Biulth some years ago, by Mr. Jeffery Llewelyn Prichard, who recently
told me it was out of print, and that inquiries had been made for the
book which might probably lead to a new and improved edition.

ELIJAH WARING.
Dowry Parade, Clifton.


_Wotton's Poem to Lord Bacon_ (No. 19. p. 302.).--The poem communicated
by Dr. Rimbault, with the heading, "To the Lord Bacon when falling from
Favour," and with the remark that he does "not remember to have seen it
in print," was written by Sir Henry Wotton, and may be found under the
title, "Upon the sudden restraint of the _Earl of Somerset_, then
falling from Favour," in all the old editions of the _Reliquiae
Wottonianae_ (1651, 1654, 1672, and 1685), as well as in the modern
editions of Sir Henry's poems, by Mr. Dyce and Mr. Hannah. It was also
printed as Wotton's in Clarke's _Aurea Legenda_, 1682, p. 97., and more
recently in Campbell's _Specimens_, in both cases, doubtless, from _Rel.
Wotton_. The misapplication of it to Lord Bacon's fall dates from an
unauthorised publication in 1651, which misled Park in his edition of
Walpole's _Royal and Noble Authors_, ii. 208. In stanza 3. line 2. of
Dr. Rimbault's copy, "burst" should be "trust."

R.A.


"_My Mind to Me a Kingdom is_" (No. 19. p. 302.).--The following note,
from the Introduction to Mr. Hannah's edition of the Poems of Sir H.
Wotton and Sir Walter Raleigh, 1845, p. lxv., will answer Dr. Rimbault's
Query, and also show that a claim had been put in for Sir E. Dyer before
Mr. Singer's very valuable communication to "NOTES AND QUERIES," p. 355.

    "There are three copies of verses on that model; two of which,
    viz., one of four stanzas and another of size, were printed by
    Byrd in 1588. They have been reprinted from his text in _Cens.
    Lit_ ii. 108-110, and _Exc. Tudor_, i. 100-103. Percy inserted
    them in the _Reliques_ with some alterations and additions; but
    he changed his mind more than once as to whether they were two
    distinct poems, or only the discovered parts of one (see i.
    292-294. 303., ed. 1767; and i. 307-310. ed. 1839). The third
    (containing four stanzas) is among Sylvester's _Posthumous
    Poems_ p. 651.; and Ellis reprinted it under his name. In _Cens.
    Lit._ ii. 102., another copy of it is given from a music book by
    Gibbons, 1612. Now the longest, and apparently the earliest of
    these poems is signed 'E. DIER,' in MS. Rawl. Poet. 35., fol.
    17. That copy contains _eight_ stanzas, and one of the two which
    are not in Byrd corresponds with a stanza which Percy added. The
    following are the reasons which incline us to trust this
    MS.:--(1.) Because it is the very MS. to which reference is
    commonly made for several of Dyer's unprinted poems, as by Dr.
    Bliss, _A.O._ i. 743.; and apparently by Mr. Dyce, ed. of
    Greene, i. p. xxxv. n.; and by Park, note on Warton, iii. 230.
    Park is the only person I can recollect who has mentioned this
    particular poem in the MS., and he cannot have read more than
    the first line, for he only says, 'one of them bears the popular
    burden of "My mind to me a kingdom is."' (2.) Because it is
    quite impossible that Dyer wrote many extant poems, of which he
    is not known to be the author; for, as Mr. Dyce says, none of
    his (_acknowledged_) productions 'have descended to our times
    that seem to justify the contemporary applause which he
    received.' (3.) Because I cannot discover that there is any
    other claimant to this poem. One of Greene's poems ends with the
    line,

      'A mind content both crown and kingdom is.'"

      (_Works_, ii. 288., ed. Dyce.)

It will be observed that no mention is here made of the copy in Breton's
tract; therefore this summary gains from both the correspondents of
"NOTES AND QUERIES"--an addition from the one, a corroboration from the
other.

R.A.


_Gesta Grayorum_ (No. 22. p. 351.).--"J.S." is informed that copies of
the _Gesta Grayorum_ are by no means uncommon. It was originally printed
{490} for _one shilling_; but the bibliomaniac must now pay from
_twenty_ to _thirty shillings_ for a copy. The original, printed in
1688, does not contain the second part, which was published by Mr.
Nichols for the first time. Copies are in the Bodleian, and in the
University Library, Cambridge.

EDWARD F. RIMBAULT.


_Marylebone Gardens_ (No. 24. p. 383.).--These gardens were finally
closed in 1777-8. It is not generally known that, previous to the year
1737, this "fashionable" place of amusement was entered _gratis_ by all
ranks of people; but the company becoming more "select," Mr. Gough, the
proprietor, determined to charge a shilling as entrance money, for which
the party paying was to receive an equivalent in viands.

EDWARD F. RIMBAULT.


_Mother of Thomas a Becket_ (No. 26. p. 415.).--An inspection of some of
the numerous legends touching the blessed martyr, St. Thomas of
Canterbury, would probably supply many interesting particulars
concerning the story of his father's romantic marriage. But the most
important narrative is that of Herbert Bosham, Becket's secretary, who,
it will be remembered, was present at his martyrdom. Bosham's _Vita et
Res Gestae Thomae Episcopi Cantuariensis_ is published in the
_Quadrilogus_, Paris, 1495. Consult also the French translation of Peter
Langtoft, and the English one by Laurence Wade, a Benedictine monk of
Canterbury. Robert of Gloucester's metrical _Legend of the Life and
Martyrdom of Thomas Beket_, published by the Percy Society, under the
editorial care of Mr. W.H. Black, fully confirms the "romance;" as also
do the later historians, Hollingshed, Fox, and Baker.

EDWARD F. RIMBAULT.


_Dr. Strode's Poem_ (no. 10. p. 147.).--Dr. Strode's poem, beginning--

  "Return my joys, and hither bring--"

which Dr. Rimbault does "not remember to have seen in print," is in
Ellis's _Specimens_, iii. 173. ed. 1811. He took it from _Wit Restored_,
p. 66. ed. 1658, or i. 168. reprint. It is the second poem mentioned by
Dr. Bliss, _A.O._ iii. 152., as occurring with Strode's name in MS.
Rawl. 142.

R.A.


"_All to-broke_" (No. 25. p. 395.).--Surely the explanation of Judges,
ix. 53, is incorrect. Ought not the words to be printed "and all-to
brake his scull," where "all-to" = "altogether"?

R.A.


_Woolton's Christian Manual_ (No. 25. p. 399.).--There is a copy in the
Grenville Collection.

NOVUS.


_Tract by F.H._ (No. 25. p. 400.).--"J.E." may advance his knowledge
about F.H. slightly, by referring to Herbert's _Ames_, p. 1123.

NOVUS.


_Duke of Marlborough_ (No. 26. p. 415.).--Your correspondent "BURIENSIS"
is referred to the Trial of William Barnard, Howell's _State Trials_,
xix. 815-846.; the case of Rex _v._ Fielding, Esq., Burrow's _Reports_,
ii. 719. and Lounger's _Common Place Book_, tit. Barnard, William. The
greater part of this latter article is in Leigh Hunt's _One Hundred
Romances of Real Life_, No. 1.

C.H. COOPER.
Cambridge, April 29. 1850.

    ["C.I.R." refers "BURIENSIS" to Burke's _Celebrated Trials
    connected with the Aristocracy_, London, 1848; and "J.P. Jun."
    refers to Leigh Hunt's _London Journal_, No. 1. p. 5., No. 3. p.
    24.]


_Lord Carrington or Karinthon_ (No. 27. p. 440.).--The nobleman about
whom "C." inquires, was Sir Charles Smith, created an English baron 19
Charles I., by the title of Lord Carrington, and afterwards advanced to
the dignity of an Irish Viscount under the same name. These honours were
conferred upon him for his services to the King in the time of his
majesty's great distresses.

On the 20th Feb., 1655, whilst travelling in France, Lord Carrington was
barbarously murdered by one of his servants for the sake of his money
and jewels, and buried at Pontoise. (Bankes' _Dormant and Extinct
Peerage_, vol. iii. p. 155.) The title became extinct circiter 1705.

BRAYBOOKE.


Lord Monson presents his compliments to the Editor of "NOTES AND
QUERIES," and has the pleasure of answering a Query contained in this
day's Number, p. 440.; and takes the liberty of adding another.

The English nobleman murdered at Pontoise was Charles Smith, Viscount
Carrington of Barrefen, Ireland, and Baron Carrington of Wotton Warem,
co. Warwick; the date in the pedigrees of the murder is usually given
1666, probably March 1665-6.

The last Lord Carrington died 17 May, 1706: the estates of Wotton came
to Lewis Smith, who married Eliz., daughter of William Viscount Monson,
and relict of Sir Philip Hungate. His son Francis Smith Carrington died
in 1749, and left one daughter and heir. What relation was Lewis Smith
to the Smiths Lord Carrington? No pedigree gives the connection.

Dover, May 4. 1850.

    ["J.M.W." has kindly answered this Query; so also has "W.M.T.,"
    who adds, "Lord Carrington, previously Sir Charles Smith,
    brother to Sir John Smith, who fell on the King's side at
    Alresford in 1644, being Commissary-General of the Horse. By the
    way, Bankes says it was his _son_ John who fell at Alresford,
    but it is more likely to have been, as Clarendon states, his
    brother, unless he lost there both a brother and a son."] {491}


_Esquires and Gentlemen._--I would ask your correspondent (No. 27. p.
437.), whether he has ascertained _the grounds of distinction_ made in
the seventeenth and in the early part of the eighteenth century, between
_esquires_ and _gentlemen_, when both were landed proprietors? We find
lists of names of governors of hospitals, trustees, &c., where this
distinction is made, and which, apparently, can only be accounted for on
this ground, that the estates of the gentleman were smaller in extent
than those of the esquire; and, consequently, that the former was so far
a person of less consideration. Had the bearing of coat armour, or a
connection with knighthood, any thing to do with the matter?

J.H. MARKLAND.
Bath, May.


_Early Inscriptions._--The excellent remarks by "T.S.D." on "Arabic
Numerals, &c." (No. 18. p. 279.) have put me in mind of two cases which
in some degree confirm the necessity for his caution respecting
pronouncing definitively on the authenticity of old inscriptions, and
especially those on "Balks and Beams" in old manorial dwellings. The
house in which I spent the greater portion of my youth was a mansion of
the olden time, whose pointed gables told a tale of years; and whose
internal walls and principal floors, both below and above stairs, were
formed of "raddle and daub." It had formerly belonged to a family of the
name of Abbot; but the "last of the race" was an extravagant libertine,
and after spending a handsome patrimonial estate, ended his days as a
beggar. Abbot House was evidently an ancient structure; but
unfortunately, as tradition stated, a stone, bearing the date of its
erection, had been carelessly lost during some repairs. However, in my
time, on the white wainscot of a long lobby on the second floor, the
initials, "T.H. 1478," were distinctly traced in black paint, and many
persons considered this as nothing less than a "true copy" of the lost
inscription. Subsequent inquiry, however, finally settled the point; for
the inscription was traced to the rude hand of one of the workmen
formerly employed in repairing the building, who naively excused himself
by declaring that he considered it "a pity so old a house should be
without a year of our Lord."

The second instance is that of the occurrence of "four nearly straight
lines" on one of the compartments of a fine old font in Stydd Church,
near Ribchester, which many visitors have mistaken for the date "1178."
A closer scrutiny, however, soon dispels the illusion; and a comparison
of this with similar inscriptions on the old oak beams of the roof, soon
determines it to be nothing more than a rude, or somewhat defaced,
attempt to exhibit the sacred monogram "I.H.S."

J.W.
Burnley, April 27. 1850.


_American Aborigines called Indians_ (No. 16. p. 254.).--I believe the
reason is that the continent in which they live passed under the name of
_India_, with the whole of the New World discovered at the close of the
fifteenth century. It is, of course, unnecessary to dwell upon the fact
of Columbus believing he had discovered a new route to India by sailing
due west; or upon the acquiescence of the whole world in that idea, the
effects of which have not yet passed away; for we not only hear in
Seville, even now, of the "India House" meaning house of management of
affairs for the "New World," but we even retain ourselves the name of
the West Indies, given as unwarrantably to the islands of the Caribbean
Sea. It is needless to do more than allude to this, and to other
misnomers still prevalent, notwithstanding the fact of the notions or
ideas under which the names were originally given having long since been
exploded; such as the "four quarters of the globe," the "four elements,"
&c. If your correspondent searches for the solution of his difficulty on
different grounds from those I have mentioned, it would not satisfy him
to be more diffuse; and if the whole reason be that which I conceive,
quite enough has been said upon the subject.

G.W.
89. Hamilton Terrace, St. John's Wood.


"Northman" is informed, that on the discovery of America by Columbus,
when he landed at Guanahani (now called Cat Island), he thought, in
conformity with his theory of the spherical shape of the earth, that he
had landed on one of the islands lying at the eastern extremity of
India; and with this belief he gave the inhabitants the name of Indians.
The following quotations will perhaps be interesting:--

    "America persaepe dicitur, sed improprie, Indiae Occidentales,
    _les Indes Occidentales_, Gallis, _West Inde_, Belgis: Non
    tantum ab Hispanis, qui illam denominationem primi usurparunt,
    sed etiam a Belgis, Anglis, et aliquando a Francis, quod eodem
    fere tempore detecta sit ad occidentem, quo ad Orientem India
    reperta est."--_Hofmanni Lexicon Univ._ 1677, sub titulo
    "_America_."

    "At eadem terra nonnullis _India Occidentalis_, nuncupatur, quia
    eodem tempore, quo India Orientalis in Asia, haec etiam delecta
    fuit; tum quod utriusque incolis similis ac pene eadern ivendi
    ratio: nudi quippe utrique agunt."--_P. Clurerii Introduct. in
    Univ. Geographiam_, Cap. xi (iv.) 1711.

    "The most improper name of all, and yet not much less used than
    that of _America_, is the _West Indies_: _West_, in regard of
    the western situation of it from these parts of Europe; and
    _Indies_, either as mistook for some part of India at the first
    discovery, or else because the seamen use to call all countries,
    if remote and rich, by the name of _India_."--_Heylyn's
    Cosmography_, 1677, Book iv., sub initio.

It is almost needless to mention, that India received {492} its name
from the river _Indus_; and that _Indus_ and [Greek: Indos] are the
Roman and Greek forms of _Sindo_, the name it was known by among the
natives.

HENRY KERSLEY.
Corpus Christi Hall, Maidstone.

    [We have received many other replies to this Query, referring
    "NORTHMAN" to Robertson's _History of America_, and Humboldt's
    _Aspects, &c._, vol. ii. p. 319.]


_Vox Populi Vox Dei_ (No. 20. p. 321.).--Your correspondent "QUAESITOR"
asks for the origin of the saying _Vox populi Vox Dei_. Warwick, in his
_Spare Minutes_ (1637), says--

    "That the voice of the common people is the voice of God, is the
    common voice of the people; yet it is as full of falsehood as
    commonnesse. The cry before Pilate's judgement-seat, 'Let him be
    crucified,' was _vox populi_, 'the cry of all the people.' How
    far was it the voice of God?"

M.

    [Mr. G. Cornewall Lewis, in his valuable _Essay on the Influence
    of Authority in Matters of Opinion_, p. 172., has some very
    interesting remarks upon this proverb, which, "in its original
    sense, appears to be an echo of some of the sentences in the
    classical writers, which attribute a divine or prophetic
    character to common fame or rumour." See pp. 172, 173., and the
    accompanying Notes.]


_Dutch Language_ (No. 24. p. 383.).--"E.V." will find Holtrop's
_Dictionary_ in 2 vols. one of the best. Werninck's _Pocket Dictionary_
is very good: also Tauchnitz's _Dutch and French_ (pocket): also
Picard's _English and Dutch_. Jansen's is not bad. Swier's _Grammar_ is
a good one; but I do not know whether there is any late edition. See
Williams and Norgate, or Quaritch.

AREDJID KOOEZ.

    [Messrs. Williams and Norgate have also obligingly answered this
    Query, by the following list:--

    PYL (R. van der), A practical Grammar of the Dutch Language,
    8vo. Rotterd. 1826, 8s.

    AHN (F.) Neue hollaendische Sprachlehre nebst Lesestucke, 12mo.
    Cref. 1841, 2s.

    AHN (F) hollaendische Umgangsprache, 12mo. 1846, 1s. 6d.

    PICARD (H.) A new Pocket Dictionary of the English and Dutch
    Languages, remodelled and corrected from the best Authorities.
    Zalt-bommel, 1848, 10s. 6d.

    DICTIONNAIRE Hollandais et Francais. 16mo. Leipzig, 4s.

    HOLLANDISCH u. deutsches Taschen-woerterbuch. 16mo. 4s.]



"_Salting._"--Salt is said by all writers upon magic to be particularly
disagreeable to evil spirits; and it is owing to this noxious substance
being dissolved in holy water, that it has such power in scaring them
away. Query, did not salt acquire this high character, and its use in
all sacrifices, from its powers of resisting corruption?

Salt is used emblematically in many of our foreign universities. There
is a book published at Strasburg as late as 1666, containing twenty
plates, illustrating the several strange ceremonies of the "Depositio."
The last represents _the giving of the salt_, which a person is on a
plate in his left hand; and, with his right hand, about to put _a pinch
of it_ upon the tongue of each _Becanus_ or Freshman. A glass, probably
holding wine, is standing near him. Underneath is the following
couplet:--

  "_Sal Sophiae gustate_, bibatis vinaque laeta,
  Augeat immensus vos in utrisque Deus!"

A copy of this rare book was sold in the Rev. John Brand's collection. I
have never seen it, and know it only from a MS. note in one of Brand's
Common Place Books now in my possession.

EDWARD F. RIMBAULT.


_Vincent Gookin_ (No. 24. p. 385.).--Your querist "J." is referred to
Berry's _Kentish Pedigrees_, where, at pp. 60. 195. 202. 207. and 113.,
he will find notices and a pedigree of the family _Gookin_; and therein
it is shown that Vincent Gookin was the fourth son of John Gookin of
Replecourt, co. Kent, by Katherine, dau. of William Dene of Kingston.

In the early part of the 7th century, Sir Vincent Gookin, Knt. (why was
he knighted?) was living at Highfield House, in the parish of Bitton,
Gloucestershire. It appears by the register, that in 1635, Mary Gookin,
Gentleman, and Samuel, son of Sir Vincent Gookin, Knt., were buried at
Bitton.

In 1637, John Gookin of Highfield, age 11 years, was buried in the
Mayor's Chapel, Bristol.

1637, Frances, dau. of Sir Vincent Gookin, Knt., and the Lady Judith,
was baptized at Bitton.

1637, Feb. 13. "Sir Vincent Gookin, Knt., was buryed" at Bitton.

1642, May 2. "Judith, the Lady Gookin, was buryed" at Bitton.

There are no monuments remaining.

Highfield, with the manor of Upton Cheyney, was a considerable estate in
1627, where it was passed by fine from John and Mary Barker to Vincent
Gookin, Esq.

In 1646, Vincent Gookin, Esq. (no doubt the knight's _son_), and Mary
his wife, and Robert Gookin their son, Gent., passed the same estates by
fine to Dr. Samuel Bave, after which it is supposed the Gookins left the
parish. In Sims' _Index_ are references to pedigrees under _Gokin,
Kent_. Any further notices of _Sir_ Vincent or his son would be
acceptable to

H.T. ELLACOMBE.
Bitton, May 20, 1850.


_Sneck up_ (No. 29, p. 467.)--All Shakspearean {493} students will be
deeply indebted to you for giving insertion to articles on obsolete
words and phrases, so many of which are to found in the pages of the
great poet. The article by R.R. is very interesting, but I apprehend
that the passage from Taylor, first quoted by Weber, is sufficient to
show that the phrase _sneck up_ was equivalent to _be hanged_! See
Halliwell, p. 766, on the phrase, that writer not connecting it with
_sneck_, to latch. Compare, also, _Wily Beguiled_,--"An if mistress
would be ruled by him, Sophos might go _snick up_." And the _Two Angry
Women of Abingdon_, 1599,--"If they be not, let them go _snick up_,"
i.e. let them go and be hanged! These passages will not be consistently
explained on R.R.'s principle.

R.


_Hanap_ (No. 29. p. 477.).--I have a few notes by me relative to the
drinking vessel, which may, perchance, be acceptable to some of your
readers. It was similar to the _standing cup_ and grace cup, as these
vessels were subsequently called, being raised from the table by a foot
and stem, for the convenience of passing it round the table for the
company to pledge each other out of; it was thus distinguished from the
_cup_, which was smaller, and only used by one person. The hanap
frequently occurs in wills and inventories of the thirteenth,
fourteenth, and fifteenth centuries.

In the will of Lady Calre, 1355,--

    "Je devise a ma joefne fille Isabel Bardolf en cide de lui
    marier un _hanap_ plat door."

And in that of the Earl of March, 1389,--

    "Item. nous devisons a notre treschier friere Mons'r. Henri, un
    _hanaper_ de tortelez ove un ostelle en le founce."

A very elegant specimen is described in the will of the Duchess of
Gloucester, 1390,--

    "Un _hanappe_ de Beril gravez de long taille, et assis en un pee
    d'or, ove un large bordur paramont, et un covercle tout d'or,
    ove un saphir sur le pomel du dit covercle."

In an inventory 19th Henry VI. we find--

    "Une haute coupe d'argent enorrez appellez _l'anap_ de les
    pinacles pois de troie vii lb pris la lb xl. Summa xiii li."

And temp. Edward II 1324,--

    "Un hanap a pee de la veille fazon quillere et cymelle el founz
    du pois xxix, du pris xl."

In the same document several others are described having feet. I could
give many other quotations, but will conclude with only one more, as in
the last occurs the word _kyrymyry_, of which I should like to know the
derivation, if any of your readers can assist me:--

    "Item, un hanap d ore covere del ovrage d un _kyrymyry_ et iij
    scochons des armes d Engleterre et de Franuce en le sumet."

I have met with notices of cups "covered of _kerimery_ work," and
"chacez et pounsonez en lez founcez faitz de _kermery_;" and the
following, from the _Vision of Piers Ploughman_, would seem to indicate
a sort of veil or net-work:--

  "He was as pale as a pelet,
  In the palsy he semed
  And clothed in a _kaurymaury_,
  I kouthe it nought diseryve."

W.C.
Jun.

       *       *       *       *       *

MISCELLANIES

_Bishop Burnet as an Historian._--Dr. Joseph Warton told my father that
"Old Lord Barthurst," Pope's friend, had cautioned him against relying
implicitly on all Burnet's statements; observing that the good bishop
was so given to gossiping and anecdote hunting, that the wags about
court used often to tell him idle tales, for the mischievous pleasure of
seeing him make note on them. Lord Bathurst did not, I believe, charge
Burnet with deliberate misrepresentation, but considered some of his
presumed facts _questionable_, for the reason stated.

ELIJAH WARING.


_Dance Thumbkin._--In the _Book of Nursery Rhymes_, published by the
Percy Society, there is a small error of importance, involving no less
that the learned would call "a non sequitur," and which, if my
correct-and-almost-unequalled nurse, Betty Richins, was alive, she would
have noticed much sooner that the nurseling who now addresses you. (She
died about the year 1796.) In the valuable and still popular nursery
classical song, "Dance Thumbkin, dance," it is not only an error to say
"Thumbkin _he can_ dance alone" (let any one reader of the "NOTES AND
QUERIES," male or female, _only try_), but it is not the correct text.
Betty Richins has "borne me on her knee a hundred times" and sung it
thus:--

  Thumbkin _cannot_ dance alone.
  So[1] dance ye merry men, every one."

I scarcely need add, that if this be true of Thumbkin, it is _truer_ of
Foreman, Longman, Middleman, and Littleman.

R.S.S.

    [Footnote 1: Or _then_, meaning "for that reason."]


_King's Coffee-house, Covent Garden._--As an addition to "Mr.
RIMBAULT's" Notes on Cunningham's _Handbook_, the following extract from
Harwood's _Alumni Etonenses_, p. 293., in the recount of the boys
elected for Eton to King's College may be interesting:--

    "A.D. 1713, 12."

    "Thomas King born at West Ashton in Wiltshire; went away
    scholar, in apprehension that his fellowship {494} would be
    denied him, and afterwards kept that coffee-house in Covent
    Garden which was called by his own name."

J.H.L.


_Spur Money_ (No. 23. p. 374, and No 28. p. 462.).--In a curious tract,
published in 1598, under the title of _The Children of the Chapel stript
and whipt_, we have the following passage:--

    "Wee think it very necessarye that every quorister sholde bringe
    with him to churche a Testament in Englishe, and turne to everie
    chapter as it is daily read, or som other good and godly
    prayer-booke, rather than spend their tyme in talk and hunting
    after _spur-money_, whereon they set their whole mindes, and do
    often abuse dyvers if they doe not bestowe somewhat on them."

In 1622, the dean of the Chapel Royal issued an order by which it was
decreed--

    "That if anie Knight, or other persone entituled to weare spurs,
    enter the chappell in that guise, he shall pay to y'e quiristers
    the accustomed fine; but if he command y'e youngest quirister to
    repeate his _Gamut_, and he faile in y'e so doing, the said
    Knight, or other, shall not pay y'e fine."

This curious extract I copied from the ancient cheque-book of the Chapel
Royal.

Within my recollection, His Grace the Duke of Wellington (who, by the
way, is an excellent musician) entered the Royal Chapel "booted and
spurred," and was, of course, called upon for the fine. But His Grace
calling upon the youngest chorister to repeat his GAMUT, and the "little
urchin" failing, the impost was not demanded.

EDWARD F. RIMBAULT.

       *       *       *       *       *


MISCELLANEOUS.

NOTES ON BOOKS, CATALOGUES, SALES, ETC.

Mr. W.S.W. Vaux, of the department of Antiquities, British Museum, has
just published a very interesting little volume under the title of
_Nineveh and Persepolis: an Historical Sketch of Ancient Assyria and
Persia, with an Account of the recent Researches in those Countries_.
The work is illustrated with numerous woodcuts; and the two points which
Mr. Vaux has proposed to elucidate,--viz., 1. The history of Assyria and
Persia, and, as connected with it, that of the Medes, the Jews, and the
Chaldees, so far as it can be ascertained from the Bible, and the works
of classical authors: and 2. The results of those inquiries which have
been carried on for nearly three centuries by European travellers,--he
has successfully accomplished, in a way to make his book a most useful
introduction to the study of the larger works which have been written
upon this important subject; and a valuable substitute to those who have
neither the means to purchase them, nor time to devote to their perusal.

The Rev. Dr. Maitland has just published a second edition of his
_Eruvin, or Miscellaneous Essays on Subjects connected with the Nature,
History, and Destiny of Man_. The Essays are ten in number, and treat:
I. On the Nature and Objects of Revelation. II. On the Impediments to
the Right Understanding of Scripture. III. Man before the Fall. IV.
Satan. V. The Consequences of the Fall. VI. The Fallen Angels. VII. The
Millenium. VIII. The Kingdom of Messiah. IX. The Regeneration. X. The
Modern Doctrine of Miracles. We mention the subjects of these papers
because, although they are of a nature not to be discussed in our
columns, we are sure many of our readers will be glad to know the points
on which they treat.

We have received the following Catalogues:--Bibliotheca Selecta, Curiosa
et Rarissima. Part First of a general Catalougue of Miscellaneous
English and Foreign Books now on sale by Thomas G. Stevenson, 87.
Princes Street, Edinburgh--(a Catalogue well deserving attention of our
Antiquarian friends); John Miller's (43. Chandos Street) Catalogue of
Books Old and New; W.S. Lincoln's (Cheltenham House, Westminster Road)
Catalogue No. 56., May, 1850, of English, Foreign, Classical and
Miscellaneous Literature.

Messrs. Sotheby and Co., of Wellington Street, will commence on Monday
next an eight days' sale of the valuable library of the late Rev. Peter
Hall, consisting of rare and early English Theology, Ecclesiastical
History and Antiquities, Foreign and English Controversial Works,
Classics, Biblical Criticism, &c.

       *       *       *       *       *

BOOKS AND ODD VOLUMES

WANTED TO PURCHASE.

(_In continuation of Lists in former Nos._)

GORGH (R.), CATALOGUE OF ALL WORKS PRINTED RELATING TO WALES.

A Pamphlet ON THE LEAD AND SILVER MINES OF GOWER, published about a
century since.

SECOND TRAVELS OF AN IRISH GENTLEMAN IN SEARCH OF A RELIGION, BY BLANCO
WHITE.

Letters, stating particulars and lowest price, _carriage free_, to be
sent to Mr. Bell, Publisher of "NOTES AND QUERIES," 186. Fleet Street.

       *       *       *       *       *

NOTICE TO CORRESPONDENTS.

COMPLETION OF VOLUME THE FIRST. _The present Number completes the First
Volume of_ NOTES AND QUERIES, _to which a Title-page and copious Index
will be printed as soon as possible: when copies of it may be had in
cloth boards. In the meantime, may we beg such of our Subscribers as
have not complete sets, to secure such Numbers as they may be in want of
without delay._

_Errata._--No. 28. p. 452., for "Bayle" read "Bale," and for "Carood"
read "Cawood." No. 29. p. 467., for "dick the string" read "click," and
for "bung" read "bang."

       *       *       *       *       * {495}

HYMNS AND POEMS FOR THE SICK.

SECOND EDITION.

In small 8vo., price 7s. 6d.

HYMNS and POEMS for the SICK and SUFFERING. In connection with the
Service for the Visitation of the Sick. Edited by the Rev. T. V.
FOSBERY, M.A., Perpetual Curate of Sunningdale.

This volume contains 233 separate pieces, of which about 90 are by
writers who lived prior to the eighteenth century; the rest are modern,
and some of these original. Amongst the names of the writers (between 70
and 80 in number) occur those of Sir J. Beaumont, Sir T. Browne, F.
Davison, Elizabeth of Bohemia, P. Fletcher, G. Herbert, Dean Hickes, Bp.
Ken. Norris, Quarles Sandys, Bp. J. Taylor, Henry Vaughan, and Sir. H.
Wotton; and of modern writers, Miss E.B. Barrett, the Bishop of Oxford,
S.T. Coleridge, Sir R. Grant, Miss E. Taylor, W. Wordsworth, Rev.
Messrs. Chandler, Keble, Lyte, Monsell, Moultrie, and Trench.

RIVINGTON'S, St. Paul's Church Yard, and Waterloo Place.

       *       *       *       *       *

DR. MAITLAND'S ERUVIN--SECOND EDITION

In small 8vo., price 5s. 6d.

ERUVIN; or Miscellaneous Essays on Subjects connected with the Nature,
History, and Destiny of Man. By the Rev. S.R. MAITLAND, D.D. F.R.S. &
F.S.A.

RIVINGTON'S, St. Paul's Church Yard, and Waterloo Place;

Of whom may be had, by the same Author,

1. ESSAYS on the REFORMATION in ENGLAND. 15s.

2. ESSAYS on the DARK AGES. Second Edition. 12s.

       *       *       *       *       *

LAWYERS, SOLICITORS, PERIODICAL PUBLISHERS, and MUSIC SELLERS, &c. will
find the newly-invented PAMPHLET or LETTER BINDER the most useful
article yet offered to the Public for the purpose of facilitating the
binding of extracting of any Letter or Pamphlet, without the possibility
of deranging the consecutive order of such documents. They are equally
useful as Music Binders or Portfolios, as it forms a perfect book,
whether inclosing one sheet or five hundred. As a Portfolio, it is
invaluable, as it precludes the possibility of the drawings being broken
or in any way injured.

To be had of DE LA RUE and Co., Stationers, Bunhill Row, or of any other
respectable Stationer.

       *       *       *       *       *

Now Publishing

THE CHURCHES OF THE MIDDLE AGES. By HENRY BOWMAN and JOSEPH S. CROWTHER,
Architects, Manchester. To be completed in Twenty Parts, each containing
Six Plates, Imperial Folio. Issued at intervals of two months. Price per
Part to Subscribers, Proofs, large paper, 10s. 6d.; Tinted, small paper.
9s.; Plain, 7s. 6d. Parts 1 to 7 are now published, and contain
illustrations of Ewerby Church, Lincolnshire; Temple Balsall Chapel,
Warwickshire; and Heckington church, Lincolnshire.

On the 1st of July next, the price of the work, to Subscribers whose
names may be received after that date, will be raised as
follows:--Proofs, tinted, large paper, per Part 12s.; tinted, small
paper, 10s. 6d.; Plain 9s.

"Ewerby is a magnificent specimen of a Flowing Middle-Pointed Church. It
is most perfectly measured and described; one can follow the most
recondite beauties of the construction, mouldings and joints, in these
Plates, almost as well as in the original structure. Such a monograph as
this will be of incalculable value to the architects of our Colonies or
the United States, who have no means of access to ancient churches. The
Plates are on stone, done with remarkable skill and distinctness. Of
Heckington we can only say that the perspective view from the south-east
presents a very vision of beauty; we can hardly conceive anything more
perfect. We heartily recommend this series to all who are able to
patronize it."--_Ecclesiologist_, Oct. 1849.

London: GEORGE BELL, 186. Fleet Street.

       *       *       *       *       *

Just published, fcp. 8vo., cloth lettered. 2s. 6d.

A GLOSSARY to the OBSOLETE and UNUSUAL WORDS and PHRASES of the HOLY
SCRIPTURES. With an Introductory History of the last English Version. By
J. JAMESON.

London: WERTHEIM AND MACINTOSH. 24. Paternoster Row.

       *       *       *       *       *

Preparing for publication. In 2 vols. small 8vo.

THE FOLK-LORE of ENGLAND. By WILLIAM J. THOMS, F.S.A., Secretary of the
Camden Society, Editor of "Early Prose Romances," "Lays and Legends of
all Nations," &c. One object of the present work is to furnish new
contributions to the History of our National Folk-Lore; and especially
some of the more striking Illustrations of the subject to be found in
the Writings of Jacob Grimm and other Continental Antiquaries.

Communications of inedited Legends, Notices of remarkable Customs and
Popular Observances, Rhyming Charms, &c. are earnestly solicited, and
will be thankfully acknowledged by the Editor. They may be addressed to
the care of Mr. BELL, Office of "NOTES AND QUERIES," 186. Fleet Street.

       *       *       *       *       *

Now Ready, containing 149 Plates, royal 8vo. 28s.; follo, 2l. 5s. India
Paper, 4l. 4s.

THE MONUMENTAL BRASSES of ENGLAND; a series of Engravings upon Wood,
from every variety of these interesting and valuable Memorials,
accompanied with Descriptive Notices.

By the Rev. C. BOUTELI. M.A. Rector of Downham Market.

Part XII., completing the work, price 7s. 6d.; folio, 12s.; India paper,
24s.

By the same Author, royal 8vo., 15s.; large paper, 21s.

MONUMENTAL BRASSES and SLABS: an Historical and Descriptive Notice of
the Incised Monumental Memorials of the Middle Ages. With upwards of 200
Engravings.

"A handsome large octavo volume, abundantly supplied with well-engraved
woodcuts and lithographic plates; a sort of Encyclopaedia for ready
reference.... The whole work has a look of painstaking completeness
highly commendable."--_Athenorum_

"One of the most beautifully got up and interesting volumes we have seen
for a long time. It gives, in the compass of one volume, an account of
the history of those beautiful monuments of former days.... The
illustrations are extremely well chosen."--_English Churchman_

A few copies only of this work remain for sale; and, as it will not be
reprinted in the same form and at the same price, the remaining copies
are raised in price. Early application for the Large Paper Edition is
necessary.

By the same Author, to be completed in Four Parts.

CHRISTIAN MOMUMENTS in ENGLAND and WALES; An Historical and Descriptive
Sketch of the various classes of Momumental Memorials which have been in
use in this country from about the time of the Norman Conquest.
Profusely illustrated with Wood Engravings. Part I. price 7s. 6d.; Part
II 2s. 6d.

"A well conceived and executed work."--_Ecclesiologist._

       *       *       *       *       * {496}

LIST OF BOOKS PUBLISHED BY JOHN RUSSELL SMITH, 4. OLD COMPTON STREET,
SOHO, LONDON.

       *       *       *       *       *

A SECOND AND CHEAPER EDITION.

In 2 vols. 8vo., containing upwards of 1000 pages, closely printed in
double columns, price 1l. 1s. cloth.

A DICTIONARY of ARCHAIC and PROVINCIAL WORDS, Obsolete Phrases,
Proverbs, and Ancient Customs, from the Reign of Edward I. by JAMES
ORCHARD HALLIWELL, F.R.S.F.S.A. &c.

It contains above 50,000 Words (embodying all the known scattered
glossaries of the English Language), forming a complete key to the
reader of the works of our old Poets, Dramatists, Theologians, and other
authors whose works abound with allusions, of which explanations are not
to be found in ordinary dictionaries and books of reference. Most of the
principal Archaisms are illustrated by examples selected from early
inedited MSS, and rare books, and by far the greater portion will be
found to be original authorities.

ANGLO-SAXON.--A DELECTUS in ANGLO-SAXON, intended as a First Class-book
in the Language. By the Rev. W. BARNES, of St. John's College,
Cambridge, Author of the Poems and Glossary in the Dorset Dialect. 12mo.
cloth, 2s. 6d.

"To those who wish to possess a critical knowledge of their own native
English, some acquaintance with Anglo-Saxon is indispensable; and we
have never seen an introduction better calculated than the present to
supply the wants of a beginner in a short space of time. The declensions
and conjugations are well stated, and illustrated by references to the
Greek, Latin, French, and other languages. A philosophical spirit
pervades every part. The Delectus consists of Short pieces, on various
subjects, with extracts from Anglo-Saxon History and the Saxon
Chronicle. There is a good glossary at the end."--_Athenaeum_, Oct. 20.
1849.

ANGLO-SAXON.--GUIDE to the ANGLO-SAXON TONGUE; with Lessons in Verse and
Prose. For the use of Learners. By E.J. VERNON, B.A., Oxon. 12mo. cloth,
5s. 6d.

This will be found useful as a Second Class-book, or to those well
versed in other languages.

ANGLO-SAXON.--A COMPENDIOUS ANGLO-SAXON and ENGLISH DICTIONARY. By the
Rev. JOSEPH BOSWORTH, D.D. F.R.S. &c. In 8vo. closely printed in treble
columns, cloth, 12s.

This may be considered quite a new work from the author's former
Dictionary; it has been entirely remodelled and enlarged, bringing it
down to the present state of Anglo-Saxon literature, both at home and
abroad.

HOLBEIN'S DANCE of DEATH; with an Historical and Literary Introduction
by an Antiquary. Square post 8vo., with 54 Engravings, being the most
accurate copies ever executed of these gems of art, and a Frontispiece
of an Ancient Bedstead at Aix-la-Chapelle, with a Dance of Death carved
on it, engraved by Fairholt, cloth, 9s.

"The designs are executed with a spirit and fidelity quite
extraordinary. They are indeed most truthful."--_Athenaeum_.

ENGLISH SURNAMES: an Essay on Family Nomenclature, Historical,
Etymological, and Humorous. By MARK ANTONY-LOWER, M.A. Third Edition,
enlarged, 2 vols. post 8v., cloth, 12s.

This new and much improved edition, besides a great enlargement of the
chapters contained in the previous editions, comprises several that are
entirely new, together with Notes on Scottish, Irish, and Norman
Surnames. The "Additional Prolusions," besides the articles on Rebuses,
Allusive Arms, and the Roll of Battel Abbey, contain Dissertations on
Inn Signs, and Remarks on Christian Names; with a copious Index of many
thousand names. These features render "English Surnames" rather a new
work than a new edition.

THE CURIOSITIES of HERALDRY; with Illustrations from Old English
Writers. By MARK ANTONY LOWER. With illuminated Title-page and numerous
Engravings from Designs by the Author. 8vo., cloth, 14s.

HERALD'S VISITATIONS.--An Index to all the Pedigrees and Arms in the
Heraldic Visitations and other Genealogical MSS. in the British Museum.
By G. SIMS, of the Manuscript Department. 8vo., closely printed in
double columns, cloth, 15s.

An indispensable book to those engaged in genealogical or topographical
pursuits, affording a ready clue to the pedigrees and arms of above
30,000 of the gentry of England, their residences, &c. (distinguishing
the different families of the same name in every county), as recorded by
the Heralds in their Visitations, with Indexes to other genealogical
MSS. in the British Museum. It has been the work of immense labour. No
public library ought to be without it.

GUIDE to ARCHAEOLOGY Archaeological Index to Remains of Antiquity of the
Celtic, Romano-British, and Anglo-Saxon Periods. By JOHN YONGE AKERMAN,
Fellow and Secretary to the Society of Antiquaries. 1 vol. 8vo.,
illustrated with numerous Engravings, comprising upwards of 500 objects.
15s., cloth.

"One of the first wants of an incipient antiquary is the facility of
comparison, and here it is furnished him at one glance. The places,
indeed, form the most valuable part of the book, both by their number
and the judicious selection of types and examples which they contain. It
is a book which we can, on this account, safely and warmly recommend to
all who are interested in the antiquities of their native
land."--_Literary Gazette_.

"A book of such utility--so concise, so clear, so well condensed from
such varied and voluminous sources, cannot fail to be generally
acceptable."--_Art-Union_.

COINS.--An Introduction to the Study of Ancient and Modern Coins. By
J.Y. AKERMAN. Fep. 8vo., with numerous Wood Engravings, from the
Original Coins, 6s. 6d.

COINS of the ROMANS relating to BRITAIN described and illustrated. By
J.Y. AKERMAN, F.S.A. Second Edition, 8vo., greatly enlarged, with Plates
and Woodcuts, 10s. 6d.

SHAKSPERE.--A New Life of Shakspere, including many particulars
respecting the Poet and his Family never before published. By J.O.
HALLIWELL, F.R.S. &c. One handsome vol., 8vo., illustrated with 76
Engravings on Wood, from Drawings by Fairholt, 15s. cloth.

THE NURSERY RHYMES of ENGLAND, collected chiefly from Oral Tradition.
Edited by J.O. HALLIWELL. Fourth Edition, 12mo. with 38 Designs by W.B.
Scott, 4s. 6d. cloth.

POPULAR RHYMES and NURSERY TALES; with Historical Elucidations: a Sequel
to "The Nursery Rhymes of England." Edited by J.O. HALLIWELL, Royal
18mo. 4s. 6d.

PLAYING CARDS.--Facts and Speculations on the Origin and History of
Playing Cards. By WILLIAM ANDREW CHATTO, Author of "Jackson's History of
Wood Engraving." Thick 8vo., with numerous Engravings from Copper, Stone
and wood, both plain and coloured, cloth, 1l. 1s.

ESSAYS on Subjects connected with the LITERATURE, POPULAR SUPERSTITIONS,
and HISTORY of ENGLAND in the MIDDLE AGES. By THOMAS WRIGHT, M.A.F.S.A.
Two handsome vols. post 8vo., elegantly printed, cloth, 16s.

       *       *       *       *       *

Printed by THOMAS CLARK SHAW, of No. 8. New Street Square, at No. 5. New
Street Square, in the Parish of St. Bride, in the City of London; and
published by GEORGE BELL, of No. 186. Fleet Street, in the Parish of St.
Dunstan in the West, in the City of London, Publisher, at No. 186. Fleet
Street aforesaid.--Saturday, May 25. 1850.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Notes & Queries, No. 30. Saturday, May
25, 1850, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NOTES & QUERIES, NO. 30. ***

***** This file should be named 13713.txt or 13713.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/1/3/7/1/13713/

Produced by Jon Ingram, David King, the PG Online Distributed
Proofreading Team and The Internet Library of Early Journals,


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
