The Project Gutenberg EBook of A Kindergarten Story Book, by Jane L. Hoxie

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: A Kindergarten Story Book

Author: Jane L. Hoxie

Release Date: November 22, 2004 [EBook #14127]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A KINDERGARTEN STORY BOOK ***




Produced by Al Haines





A KINDERGARTEN STORY BOOK

By JANE L. HOXIE





TENTH EDITION





PUBLISHED BY

MILTON BRADLEY COMPANY

SPRINGFIELD, MASS.

NEW YORK                 BOSTON            PHILADELPHIA

ATLANTA      SAN FRANCISCO


1916




COPYRIGHT, 1966

BY MILTON BRADLEY COMPANY

SPRINGFIELD, MASS.




TO MY FATHER

  whose evening story-hour
  is the happiest memory of my childhood
  this little volume
  is affectionately inscribed




INTRODUCTORY NOTE.

A number of the stories in this little book have been told to thousands
of children in the kindergartens of Boston, Brooklyn, Philadelphia,
Washington, Baltimore, Pittsburg, and other cities.  The delight with
which they have everywhere been listened to is an assurance of their
appeal to child thought and sympathy.  I know no equally simple,
varied, and interesting collection of stories for children between the
ages of four and six; and I earnestly hope that A KINDERGARTEN STORY
BOOK may rapidly win the popularity it merits.

SUSAN E. BLOW.




PREFACE.

It is the author's aim in this collection to furnish stories for the
child that shall be short, simple in form and familiar in subject, that
shall contain much repetition, rhythm, dramatic possibility,
alliteration, and also onomatopoetical and imaginative qualities, all
of which the young child craves in the literature which is presented to
him.  The writer has striven to avoid elaborate introductions, long and
intricate descriptions, and all those characteristics from which the
child instinctively turns.

The matter here presented naturally falls under three heads: first,
original stories; secondly, favorite childhood stories rewritten;
thirdly, adaptations of popular tales.

Nearly all of the purely original stories are based upon some of the
more vital motifs to be found in the best of our fairy lore.

Of the favorite childhood stories, "Billy Bobtail" is evidently founded
upon "The Bremen Town-Musicians"; and, as it is given here, it is an
adaptation of a story heard frequently during the writer's childhood.
It will readily be seen that "Kid Would Not Go" is only another form of
"The Old Woman and Her Pig," and that "Fox Lox" is identical with the
tale of "Chicken Little."  "The Wee, Wee Woman" is supposedly an
adaptation of the old English story of "Teeny Weeny."  It is given here
in the form in which it was told to the author by a friend.  "The
Little Long Tail" will be recognized by many as a prime favorite of
their early childhood.

In the three stories from Grimm it has been the aim to simplify, to
shorten, and to eliminate all objectionable qualities; as, for
instance, the cruel step-mother element to be found in the original
Cinderella.

The two stories from Mrs. Ewing and the adaptation of Saintine's
"Picciola" have proved fascinating to the childish audiences to which
they have been presented.

Simplicity of form and language makes it possible for the teacher not
only to tell the stories contained in this collection, but also to read
them to the children, with good effect.  Some of the tales, notably the
favorite childhood stories rewritten, may be placed in the hands of the
children themselves, to be used in the primary grades as supplementary
reading material.

This little volume is the result of several years of practical
experience, and it is hoped that it will prove a valuable addition to
the story repertoire of kindergartners and primary teachers.

J.L.H.




TABLE OF CONTENTS.

ORIGINAL STORIES.

  DUNNY
  LUDWIG AND MARLEEN
  FROGGY'S ADVENTURE
  WHAT HAPPENED ON THE ROAD TO GRANDFATHER GOODFIELD'S
  THE LOST COMB
  THE TOPSY STORIES--
      I.  The Coming of Topsy
     II.  How Topsy Kept Warm
    III.  How Topsy Mothered Her Neighbor's Kittens
     IV.  Topsy's Hiding Place
      V.  Topsy's Babies
  ETHEL'S FRIENDS



REWRITTEN STORIES

  BILLY BOBTAIL
  KID WOULD NOT GO
  FOX LOX
  THE WEE, WEE WOMAN
  THE LITTLE LONG TAIL



ADAPTED STORIES

  THE BROWNIES
  THE FAIRY SHOES
  PICCIOLA
  CINDERELLA
  THE HUT IN THE FOREST
  THE SLEEPING PRINCESS




DUNNY.

Once there were three children, three brothers, who played together in
the sunshine about their father's door.  Now the youngest of them all
was not as large and strong as his brothers; and for that reason they
often teased him, saying: "You are not as tall as we.  You cannot run
as fast.  See! we can jump farther and swing higher than you."  If ever
they wrestled together, the youngest was the first to be thrown to the
ground; and no matter what he tried to do, the others always laughed,
and called out: "Oh! you are so stupid.  That is not the way.  Let me
show you how, you dunny!"  So after a while they called him nothing but
Dunny.

One day a traveler, with a wonderful pony, stopped at the door of the
cottage.  His little animal not only could perform all manner of
curious tricks, but he was the most gentle little beast in the whole
world and, withal, as sleek and pretty a creature as one could wish to
see.

The three brothers were wild with delight at the pony's antics, and
gave their father no peace until at last he consented to buy the little
animal.  At first they were very happy with their new play-fellow, but
soon they quarreled.

"He is my pony!" said the eldest.

"He is not!" said Dunny.

"Father bought him for me,", said the second brother, "and neither of
you shall play with him at all!"

"It is not so!  He is all mine!" said the first, as he caught the
little beast by the rein and tried to drag him away.

But his brother snatched the bridle also.  "You shall not have him!" he
cried.

"Boys! boys!  What does this mean?" said their father.  "Why are you
quarreling?  The pony belongs to all three."

But the boys would not have it so; and, at last, the father said: "He
shall be given to the one of you who will bring this basket to me
filled full with the water of yonder pond."  Now the basket was very
old and full of holes, but the three brothers eagerly consented to the
plan.

"You shall be the first to try your luck," said the father, placing the
basket in the hands of his eldest son.  As the boy walked quickly
toward the pond, a little bird hopped along the path in front of him,
and in a sweet voice sang:--

  "Fill it with moss and fill it with clay,[*]
  And carry a basketful away."

[*]From an old folk tale.

The boy did not know what the bird was saying.  "Out of my path, you
stupid creature!" he cried, flinging a stone at it.  But the little
bird flew away into the forest, where he was quite safe.  When at last
the boy reached the pond, there sat a great green frog who croaked in a
great hoarse voice:--

  "Fill it with moss and fill it with clay,
  And carry a basketful away."

But the boy did not know what the frog was saying.  "Out of my way, you
ugly creature!" he cried, flinging a stone at it.  The great frog
jumped back into the water, where he was quite safe.  The eldest boy
covered the bottom of the basket with sand, thinking that that would
keep the water from running out; then he filled it to the very brim.
But, though he ran all the way home, not a single drop of water was
left inside the basket when he reached his father.

Then it was the second son's turn.  As he walked quickly toward the
pond, the same little bird hopped along the path in front of him, and
in the same sweet voice sang:--

  "Fill it with moss and fill it with clay,
  And carry a basketful away."

The boy did not know what the bird was saying.  "Out of my path, you
stupid creature!" he cried, flinging a stone at it.  But the little
bird flew away into the forest, where he was quite safe.  When at last
the boy reached the pond, there sat the same great green frog who
croaked in the same great hoarse voice:--

  "Fill it with moss and fill it with clay,
  And carry a basketful away."

But the boy did not know what the frog was saying.  "Out of my way, you
ugly creature!" he cried, flinging a stone at it.  The great frog
jumped back into the water, where he was quite safe.  The second boy
covered the bottom of the basket with leaves, thinking that they would
keep the water from running out; then he filled it to the very brim.
But, though he too ran all the way home, not a single drop of water was
left inside the basket when he reached his father.

Now, at last, it was Dunny's turn; but the two elder brothers teased
him, saying, "Of what use is it for such a stupid as you to try, when
we, who are so much more clever than you, have failed?"

As Dunny walked quickly toward the pond, the same little bird hopped
along the path in front of him, and in the same sweet voice sang:--

  "Fill it with moss and fill it with clay,
  And carry a basketful away."

Now Dunny was very fond of all the wild creatures of the woods and
fields, and often spent long hours in their company; and he knew what
the little bird was saying.  And he was never happier than when playing
with the frogs and fishes in the pond; so when the great green frog, in
his great hoarse voice, croaked:--

  "Fill it with moss and fill it with clay,
  And carry a basketful away."

Dunny knew what he was saying, and, gathering moss and clay from the
bank of the pond, he carefully stopped all the holes and cracks in the
basket.  Then filling it with water to the very brim, he carried it
safely home to his father and did not lose even a single drop.  So the
pony was given to him, and his brothers never called him Dunny again.




LUDWIG AND MARLEEN.

"Help me out!  Help me out, little Ludwig!" cried a great red fox,
caught fast in a trap in the woods.  "Help me out, and it shall be well
with you!"  Now Ludwig loved the wild creatures of the forest; he was
their friend and playmate, their sorrows were his own; so, stepping to
the trap, he pressed the spring, and the fox was free.  When, however,
the poor beast tried to limp away, so great was the pain in his foot
that he was forced to lie down instead.  Seeing this, Ludwig ran to a
spring near by and, dipping his handkerchief into the clear cool water,
tenderly bound up the bruised and swollen foot.

"You have been very kind, my little friend," said the fox.  "You have
saved my life.  If you have a wish, tell me what it is and it shall be
granted."

"Oh, as to that," said Ludwig, "I wish my little pail here were full of
berries, for my sister and I are very hungry."  Hardly had he spoken
when his pail, which before had been quite empty, became full to the
very brim with great delicious strawberries.  Ludwig ran swiftly home
to the little brown hut where he and his sister lived quite alone on
the edge of the forest.

"See, sister dear," he called, "what a fine breakfast I have brought."

"I am glad, brother," said Marleen, "for I am very hungry; but where
did you find so many berries in so short a time, and such delicious
ones, too?"

Then Ludwig told his sister all about the fox, and how he had wished
for the berries.

"Was I not wise, dear sister, to get such a good breakfast for us with
so little trouble?"

But Marleen was not satisfied, and cried:

"Foolish boy!  It was no ordinary fox whose foot you pulled out of the
trap.  If he could fill your pail with berries, just for the asking, he
could do far greater things.  You should have wished for something
better.  Go back into the forest, find the fox, and tell him that our
cupboard must be always full of food whenever we are hungry."

"Be satisfied, dear sister," said Ludwig.  "We are quite happy as we
are.  When we are again hungry I will go and find food in the forest as
I have always done before."

"No, no, I will not be satisfied!" said Marleen.  "You must do as I
tell you;" and she gave her brother no peace until he went again into
the forest.

"How now, little brother!" said the fox, when he saw Ludwig coming
toward him through the trees; "is it not well with you?"

"Alas, my sister is not satisfied with the pail of berries," said
Ludwig.

"What would she, little brother?"

"That our cupboard should be always full whenever we are hungry."

"Go, little brother, it shall be as she wishes," said the fox.

Now, after this, whenever brother or sister were hungry, they found
plenty of food just to their liking in the cupboard; and, as Ludwig had
no longer to seek for nuts and berries in the forest, he could play all
day long with his sister, and they were very happy because they were
never separated.  But after a time Marleen refused to play, and sat
moping on the doorstone.  "Why are you so troubled, sister?  Come, let
us play in the sunshine," said the boy.

"Why should I be happy?" said Marleen.  "Why should I play?  We have no
toys, only ugly sticks and stones for playthings.  If you will go to
the fox and get a beautiful doll, then I will play."

"Be satisfied, dear sister," said Ludwig.  "We are quite happy as we
are."

"No, no, I will not be satisfied!" said Marleen.  "You must do as I
tell you;" and she gave her brother no peace until he went again into
the forest.

"How now, little brother!" said the fox, when he saw Ludwig coming
toward him through the trees; "is it not well with you?"

"Alas, my sister is not satisfied with the food always in the cupboard."

"What would she, little brother?"

"She would have a beautiful doll all dressed in shining silk."

"Go, little brother, it shall be as she wishes," said the fox.

Now Marleen was quite happy for a few days; but soon she grew tired of
the doll and again refused to play.  "I, too, must have a fine silk
dress to wear," said she.  "Go to the fox, brother, and get it for me."

"Be satisfied, dear sister," said Ludwig.  "We are quite happy as we
are.  Your dress is warm and fine enough."

"No, no, I will not be satisfied!" said Marleen.  "You must do as I
tell you;" and she gave her brother no peace until he went again into
the forest.

"How now, little brother!" said the fox, when he saw Ludwig coming
toward him through the trees; "is it not well with you?"

"Alas, my sister is not satisfied with the doll."

"What would she, little brother?"

"She would have for herself a dress of shining silk."

"Go, little brother, it shall be as she wishes," said the fox.

But only for a time was Marleen content with the beautiful dress.  "I
will stay no longer in this smoky old hut," said she.  "Go, brother,
and ask the fox for a fine house to live in.  He can give us one if he
will."

"Be satisfied, dear sister," said Ludwig.  "We are quite happy as we
are."

"No, no, I will not be satisfied!" said Marleen, "You must do as I tell
you;" and she gave her brother no peace until he went again into the
forest.

"How now, little brother!" said the fox, when he saw Ludwig coming
toward him through the trees; "is it not well with you?"

"Alas, my sister is not satisfied with the dress," said Ludwig.

"What would she, little brother?"

"A fine house in place of our poor old hut."

"Go, little brother, it shall be as she wishes," said the fox.

Soon Marleen wearied also of the stately house in which they now lived.
"I am tired to death of this old doll and this empty house and this
poor dress," she said.  "I must have something to amuse me.  Go,
brother, to the fox and tell him that I must have one of every kind of
toy in the whole world, and quickly, too."

"Be satisfied, dear sister," said Ludwig.  "We are quite happy as we
are."

"No, no, I will not be satisfied!" said Marleen.  "You must do as I
tell you;" and she gave her brother no peace until he went again into
the forest.

"How now, little brother!" said the fox when he saw Ludwig coming
toward him through the trees; "is it not well with you?"

"Alas, my sister is not satisfied with the house."

"What would she, little brother?"

"One of every kind of toy in the whole world."

"Go, little brother, it shall be as she wishes," said the fox.

Now there were so many of the toys that they filled the whole house,
and it took days and days just to look at them.  At last, however,
Marleen had seen and touched every one, and she cried:

"These things are dull and stupid.  I must have something to amuse me.
Go, brother, and tell the fox that these toys are all ugly and useless;
but that there is one thing that I would like above all else, one thing
that would make me quite happy.  Tell him I must have the great silvery
ball that hangs at night above us in the sky,"

"Be satisfied, dear sister," said Ludwig.  "We are quite happy as we
are."

"No, no, I will not be satisfied!" said Marleen.  "You must do as I
tell you;" and she gave her brother no peace until he went again into
the forest.

"How now, little brother!" said the fox, when he saw Ludwig coming
toward him through the trees; "is it not well with you?"

"Alas, my sister is not satisfied with the toys."

"What would she, little brother?"

"That the great silvery moon that hangs high in the heavens at night
should be her plaything."

Very slowly the fox answered:--

"Go, little brother, it shall NOT be as she wishes."

Now when Ludwig reached home once more, in place of the stately house,
there stood their little old hut again.  Marleen sat weeping in the
doorway, her fine silk dress was gone, her beautiful doll was nowhere
to be seen, all the lovely toys had vanished.

"Do not cry, dear sister," said Ludwig.  "We are quite happy as we are.
Come, let us have supper, for I am very hungry."  But alas, when they
went to the cupboard it was quite empty; and ever afterwards, when they
were hungry, Ludwig and Marleen were forced to seek for nuts and
berries in the forest.  The great silvery moon still looked down upon
their little hut at night; but though Ludwig sought through the whole
forest, far and wide, he never saw his friend the fox again.




FROGGY'S ADVENTURE.

"Knee-deep!  Knee-deep!  Knee-deep!" came a shrill cry from the middle
of the pond.

"Better-go-round!  Better-go-round!  Better-go-round!" croaked a hoarse
voice from the bank.

Now all the little frogs, when they heard their mother call, turned
back, and, swimming far around the deep place, got safely to the shore.

Did I say all?  No, one little frog failed to hear his mother's voice
and, piping in his little shrill tone:  "Who's afraid!  Who's afraid!
Who's afraid!" he swam straight on.  Suddenly one of his hind legs got
tangled among the weeds at the bottom of the pond; and, though he
pulled and jerked with all his little might, he could not free himself.
At last, after a long struggle, he gave it up and called loudly:
"Help-me-out!  Help-me-out!  Help-me-out!"

The other frogs heard and came swimming all about,--little and big,
young and old; but when they saw poor Froggy caught fast, instead of
trying to free him, they began peeping and croaking and "kerchugging,"
until such a noise went up from the pond as was never heard before.

The little frogs all sat around in a little circle, crying in their
little shrill voices: "Oh-he'll-die!  Oh-he'll-die!  Oh-he'll-die!"

And the great frogs all sat around in a great circle, croaking in their
great hoarse voices: "Oh-he'll-drown!  Oh-he'll-drown!  Oh-he'll-drown!"

"Help!  Help!  Help!" shrieked the little frogs in their little shrill
voices.

"Help!  Help!  Help!" croaked the great frogs in their great hoarse
voices.

The little frogs sobbed and moaned, and wiped the tears from their
little bulgy eyes with their little, flat, green hands; the great frogs
sobbed and moaned, and wiped the tears from their great bulgy eyes with
their great, flat, green hands.  Altogether they raised such a noise
and commotion that every creature in the pond poked his nose from his
house and came out to see what could be the matter.

At last a great, friendly fish, who, with his wife and children, was
summering in a quiet corner of the pond, swam up to find what all the
noise was about.  When he saw poor Froggy struggling to free himself
(feebly now, for his strength was nearly gone) with all his friends and
relations sitting by, sobbing and moaning and croaking, but not trying
to help him out at all, the fish flew into a terrible rage, and,
lashing the water all around into a white foam with his great tail, he
cried:

"Pull him out!  Pull him out!"

But the little frogs only wiped the tears from their little bulgy eyes
with their little, flat, green hands and went on with their piping:
"Oh-he'll-die!  Oh-he'll-die!  Oh-he'll-die!"

The great frogs only wiped the tears from their great bulgy eyes with
their great, flat, green hands and went on with their croaking:
"Oh-he'll-drown!  Oh-he'll-drown!  Oh-he'll-drown!"

"You stupids!" cried the great fish; and, pushing the little frogs and
the big frogs all to the right and left with his huge body, he swam to
little drowning Froggy, seized the poor little fellow in his big mouth
and carried him safely to his home by the shore.  There the great fish
left Froggy, to be cuddled by his silly brothers and to be crooned over
by his good but stupid mother.




WHAT HAPPENED ON THE ROAD TO GRANDFATHER GOODFIELD'S.

"Oh, I wonder, I wonder, I wonder," said Alice, as she trudged along
the dusty road, a bright tin pail held tightly in her hand.  "Why do
you wonder, little maid?" said a deep, deep voice.  On looking up,
Alice saw close beside her a great tawny lion.  At first she was
afraid, but the great beast looking kindly upon her, placed his great
paw softly on her arm and once more said, "why do you wonder, Alice?"

"Ah!" cried the girl crossly, "I wonder what is in this pail.  Mamma
has promised me a pretty red sash if I do but carry it safely to
Grandfather Goodfield, who lives under the hill by the great dark
forest yonder, but oh! it has grown so heavy, and my feet have grown so
tired.  I must go quickly and I must not even peep inside.  Just
listen! such a funny noise."  Alice held the pail close to the great
lion's ear,--"Buzz z z z z z z" came a muffled sound.  "Oh, I wonder
what can be inside!" she said.

"Do not wonder, little maid," said the great lion, "but hurry thy
little feet as thy mother hath bidden thee, else the sun will be in his
bed ere thy journey be ended, and thy little bed will be empty and thy
mother's heart will be heavy with watching."

So Alice hastened on.  Soon again her little feet were lagging; and
once more her eyes turned curiously upon the pail she carried and again
she said, "Oh, I wonder, I wonder, I wonder."  "Why do you wonder,
little maid?" said a deep, gruff voice.  On looking up once more Alice
saw close beside her, not her friend the tawny lion, but a shaggy black
bear.  At first she was afraid; but the great beast, looking kindly
upon her, placed his great paw softly on her arm and once more said,
"Why do you wonder, Alice?"

"Ah!" cried the girl crossly, "I wonder what is in this pail.  Mamma
has promised me a pretty red sash if I do but carry it safely to
Grandfather Goodfield, who lives under the hill by the great dark
forest yonder, but oh! it has grown so heavy, and my feet have grown so
tired.  I must go quickly, and I must not even peep inside.  Just
listen! such a funny noise."  Alice held the pail close to the great
bear's ear,--"Buzz z z z z z z z" came a muffled sound.  "Oh, I wonder
what can be inside!" she said.

"Do not wonder, little maid," said the great bear, "but hurry thy
little feet as thy mother hath bidden thee, else the sun will be in his
bed ere thy journey be ended, and thy little bed will be empty and thy
mother's heart will be heavy with watching."

So Alice hastened on.  Soon again her feet were lagging and once more
her eyes turned curiously upon the pail she carried and again she said,
"Oh, I wonder, I wonder, I wonder."  "Why do you wonder, little maid?"
said a harsh strong voice.  On looking up, Alice saw close beside her,
not her friend the shaggy bear, but a gaunt gray wolf.  At first she
was afraid, but the great beast, looking kindly upon her, placed his
great paw softly on her arm and once more said, "Why do you wonder,
Alice?"

"Ah!" cried the girl crossly, "I wonder what is in this pail.  Mamma
has promised me a pretty red sash if I do but carry it safely to
Grandfather Goodfield, who lives under the hill by the great dark
forest yonder, but oh! it has grown so heavy and my feet have grown so
tired.  I must go quickly and I must not even peep inside.  Just
listen! such a funny noise."  Alice held the pail close to the great
wolf's ear,--"Buzz z z z z z z z" came a muffled sound.  "Oh, I wonder
what can be inside!" she said.

"Do not wonder, little maid," said the great wolf, "but hurry thy
little feet as thy mother hath bidden thee, else the sun will be in his
bed ere thy journey be ended, and thy little bed will be empty and thy
mother's heart will be heavy with watching."

So Alice hastened on.  Soon again her feet were lagging and once more
her eyes turned curiously upon the pail she carried and again she said,
"Oh, I wonder, I wonder, I wonder."  "Why do you wonder, little maid?"
said a sweet soft voice.  On looking up, Alice saw close beside her,
not her friend the gaunt gray wolf, but a little child like herself.
The boy placed his hand softly upon her arm; and with his great dark
eyes looking straight into her own he said, "Why do you wonder, Alice?"

"Ah!" cried the girl crossly, "I wonder what is in this pail.  Mamma
has promised me a pretty red sash if I do but carry it safely to
Grandfather Goodfield, who lives under the hill by the great dark
forest yonder, but oh! it has grown so heavy and my feet have grown so
tired.  I must go quickly and I must not even peep inside.  Just
listen! such a funny noise."  Alice held the pail close to the boy's
ear,--"Buzz-z z z z z z z" came a muffled sound.  "Oh, I wonder what
can be inside!" she said.

"Do not wonder but let us look and see," said the boy.  "No! no!" cried
Alice.  "My mother has forbidden it."  "She will never know," said the
boy.  "Only one little peep.  Surely it can do no harm.  See, I will
raise the cover for you."  "No! no!" said Alice and, tightly clasping
the pail, she started again upon her journey.

"You are so tired," called the boy running after, "do but stop and rest
awhile.  See, your feet are really bleeding from the sharp stones you
have traveled over.  Look, what a soft green bank yonder under the
shade of that great tree.  Do but sit down upon it for a moment.  You
will be able to go on all the faster after a quiet rest, then I will go
with you."

Now Alice was really very tired indeed; and the bank with its cool
shade looked so tempting that at last she seated herself upon it,
letting her feet sink deep into its mossy side.  She clasped the
precious pail tightly in her hands, but the noise inside grew louder,
and now it had an angry sound.  "Oh, I wonder what it can be!" said
Alice.

"Do let me take the pail for a moment," said the boy drawing it gently
from her hand.  "Now I will peep inside.  What harm can it do?  See, I
will lift the cover ever so gently."  He put his eye to the crack, when
suddenly the cover slipped from his hand and rolled away upon the bank.
A great swarm of angry, buzzing creatures flew into his face.  He
struck at them with his hands, but it was of no use.  They stung and
stung him.  "Alice!  Alice!" he cried, "oh, I am stung!  I am stung!"
The girl sprang quickly to help him but the angry bees flew at her also
and stung her tender hands and face until she cried out with the pain.
"Oh, what have we done!  What have we done!" and, snatching the cover,
Alice tried to place it upon the pail again--but too late, for not a
single bee was left inside.  For a little time the air was filled with
angry buzzing, but soon the bees flew far away into the wood and Alice
and her friend were left alone.

Smarting with pain the girl turned toward her home.  Her little feet
moved wearily, and the empty pail hung loosely on her arm.  That night
she cried herself to sleep in mother's arms, but the pretty red sash
was never worn by Alice, except sometimes in her dreams.




THE LOST COMB.

One day while Lesa was picking flowers in the wood the beautiful golden
comb that she always wore fell out of her hair and was lost.  She
searched and she searched, but she could not find it.  At last she
began to cry, and she cried and she cried.

Just then along came Rollicking Robin.

"Oh, do help me, Rollicking Robin!" sobbed Lesa.  "I have lost my comb,
my golden comb.  What shall I do?  My mother will fret, my father will
scold, my little sister will cry, and some harm will surely come to me
if I do not find it."

"Cheer up, cheer up, cheer up!  I'll go seek it." sang Rollicking
Robin, "I will find your golden comb, have no fear."

So he looked and he looked and he looked, but no comb could he find.

Just then along came Busy Bee.

"Oh, do help me, Busy Bee!" sobbed Lesa.  "I have lost my comb, my
golden comb.  What shall I do?  My mother will fret, my father will
scold, my little sister will cry, and some harm will surely come to me
if I do not find it."

"Buzz, buzz, buzz!  I'll go seek it," hummed Busy Bee.  "I will find
your golden comb, have no fear."

So she looked and she looked and she looked, but no comb could she find.

Just then along came Fleet-footed Field Mouse.

"Oh, do help me, Fleet-footed Field Mouse!" sobbed Lesa.  "I have lost
my comb, my golden comb.  What shall I do?  My mother will fret, my
father will scold, my little sister will cry, and some harm will surely
come to me if I do not find it."

"Eep, eep, eep!  I'll go seek it," squeaked Fleet-footed Field Mouse.
"I will find your golden comb, have no fear."

So he looked and he looked and he looked, but no comb could he find.

Just then along came Chirping Cricket.

"Oh, do help me, Chirping Cricket!" sobbed Lesa.  "I have lost my comb,
my golden comb.  What shall I do?  My mother will fret, my father will
scold, my little sister will cry, and some harm will surely come to me
if I do not find it."

"Chirp, chirp, chirp!  I'll go seek it," piped Chirping Cricket.  "I
will find your golden comb, have no fear."

So he looked and he looked and he looked, but no comb could he find.

Just then along came Gliding Brown Snake.

"Oh, do help me, Gliding Brown Snake!" sobbed Lesa.  "I have lost my
comb, my golden comb.  What shall I do?  My mother will fret, my father
will scold, my little sister will cry, and some harm will surely come
to me if I do not find it."

"Sssssssss!  I'll go seek it," hissed Gliding Brown Snake.  "I will
find your golden comb, have no fear."

So he looked and he looked and he looked, but no comb could he find.

Just then along came Cunning Black Ant.

"Oh, do help me, Cunning Black Ant!" sobbed Lesa.  "I have lost my
comb, my golden comb.  What shall I do?  My mother will fret, my father
will scold, my little sister will cry, and some harm will surely come
to me if I do not find it."

"I'll go seek it," said Cunning Black Ant.  "I will find your golden
comb, have no fear."

So she looked and she looked and she looked, but no comb could she find.

Just then along came Flitting Butterfly.

"Oh, do help me, Flitting Butterfly!" sobbed Lesa.  "I have lost my
comb, my golden comb.  What shall I do?  My mother will fret, my father
will scold, my little sister will cry, and some harm will surely come
to me if I do not find it."

"I'll go seek it," said Flitting Butterfly.  "I will find your golden
comb, have no fear."

So she looked and she looked and she looked, but no comb could she find.

Just then along came Wrinkled Brown Toad.

"Oo-o-o-o!  You ugly thing!  Out of my sight!" cried Lesa.  "I have
trouble enough without you!  I have lost my comb, my golden comb!  No
one can find it!  Oh, what shall I do?"

"I'll go seek it," croaked Wrinkled Brown Toad.  "I will find your
golden comb, have no fear."

"You find my comb!" cried Lesa.  "If Rollicking Robin and Busy Bee and
Fleet-footed Field Mouse and Chirping Cricket and Gliding Brown Snake
and Cunning Black Ant and Flitting Butterfly cannot help me, how can
such a stupid, ugly, hobbling thing as you find my golden comb?  Be
off!  Get out of my sight!"

Poor Wrinkled Brown Toad hopped away and Lesa was left alone.  "Oh,
what shall I do?  What shall I do?" she cried.  "Oh, my comb, my golden
comb!  Some harm will surely come to me if I do not find it!"  And,
throwing herself upon the ground, Lesa sobbed as if her heart would
break.

For a long time this forlorn little girl lay with her face buried in
the moss and leaves.  Suddenly she heard a strange noise behind her.
She sprang to her feet and, turning, saw coming toward her with great
flying leaps--whom do you suppose?  Yes, it was Wrinkled Brown Toad
again.  And what do you suppose he held in his ugly jaws?  Yes, it was
Lesa's golden comb.

"Oh, there it is!  There it is!  Oh, I'm so glad, so glad!" cried Lesa.
"Oh, thank you!  Thank you!  Where did you find it?  I'm sorry I was
cross!  I'm sorry I called you stupid and ugly and hobbling!  You have
bright eyes.  I did not notice them before.  Yes, they are really
beautiful, all golden like my comb."

And Lesa bent and stroked Wrinkled Brown Toad on his ugly head; and,
ever after that, they were friends.




BILLY BOBTAIL.

Once upon a time a little boy named Billy Bobtail went to seek his
fortune; and on the road he met a bull.

"Moo, moo, moo!" said the bull.  "Where are you going, Billy Bobtail?"

"Oh, I'm going to seek my fortune!" said Billy Bobtail.

"May I go, too?" said the bull.

"No," said Billy Bobtail.

"Yes, I will," said the bull.

"Well, then, come along," said Billy Bobtail.

So the bull followed on after Billy Bobtail.

They went along a little way farther, and met a goat.

"Baa, baa, baa!" said the goat.  "Where are you going, Billy Bobtail?"

"Oh, I'm going to seek my fortune!" said Billy Bobtail.

"May I go, too?" said the goat.

"No," said Billy Bobtail.

"Yes, I will," said the goat.

"Well, then, come along," said Billy Bobtail.

So the goat followed on after Billy Bobtail.

They went along a little way farther and met a sheep.

"Maa, maa, maa!" said the sheep.  "Where are you going, Billy Bobtail?"

"Oh, I'm going to seek my fortune!" said Billy Bobtail.

"May I go, too?" said the sheep.

"No," said Billy Bobtail.

"Yes, I will," said the sheep.

"Well, then, come along," said Billy Bobtail.

So the sheep followed on after Billy Bobtail.

They went along a little way farther and met a pig.

"Wee, wee, wee!" said the pig.  "Where are you going, Billy Bobtail?"

"Oh, I'm going to seek my fortune!" said Billy Bobtail.

"May I go, too?" said the pig.

"No," said Billy Bobtail.

"Yes, I will," said the pig.

"Well, then, come along," said Billy Bobtail.

So the pig followed on after Billy Bobtail.

They went along a little way farther and met a dog.

"Bow, wow, wow!" said the dog.  "Where are you going, Billy Bobtail?"

"Oh, I'm going to seek my fortune!" said Billy Bobtail.

"May I go, too?" said the dog.

"No," said Billy Bobtail.

"Yes, I will," said the dog.

"Well, then, come along," said Billy Bobtail.

So the dog followed on after Billy Bobtail.

They went along a little way farther and met a cat.

"Meow, meow, meow!" said the cat.  "Where are you going, Billy Bobtail?"

"Oh, I'm going to seek my fortune!" said Billy Bobtail.

"May I go, too?" said the cat.

"No," said Billy Bobtail.

"Yes, I will," said the cat.

"Well, then, come along," said Billy Bobtail.

So the cat followed on after Billy Bobtail.

They went along a little way farther and met a turkey.

"Gobble, gobble, gobble!" said the turkey.  "Where are you going, Billy
Bobtail?"

"Oh, I'm going to seek my fortune!" said Billy Bobtail.

"May I go, too?" said the turkey.

"No," said Billy Bobtail.

"Yes, I will," said the turkey.

"Well, then, come along," said Billy Bobtail.

So the turkey followed on after Billy Bobtail.

They went along a little way farther and met a rooster.

"Cock-a-doodle-doo!" said the rooster.  "Where are you going, Billy
Bobtail?"

"Oh, I'm going to seek my fortune!" said Billy Bobtail.

"May I go, too?" said the rooster.

"No," said Billy Bobtail.

"Yes, I will," said the rooster.

"Well, then, come along," said Billy Bobtail.

So the rooster followed on after Billy Bobtail.

They went along a little way farther and met a hen.

"Cut-cut-cut-cut-ka-dat-cut!" said the hen.  "Where are you going,
Billy Bobtail?"

"Oh, I'm going to seek my fortune!" said Billy Bobtail.

"May I go, too?" said the hen.

"No," said Billy Bobtail.

"Yes, I will," said the hen.

"Well, then, come along," said Billy Bobtail.

So the hen followed on after Billy Bobtail.  And there they
were,--first Billy Bobtail and then the bull and then the goat and then
the sheep and then the pig and then the dog and then the cat and then
the turkey and then the rooster and then the hen,--all following on
after Billy Bobtail.  On and on they walked.  All day long they
traveled; and, just as it began to grow dark, they came to a deep, deep
wood.  It looked so dark that Billy Bobtail almost felt afraid.  "Never
mind!" said he, "if anything tries to hurt us, I can whistle and throw
stones."

"And I can bellow and hook," said the bull.

"And I can butt and bleat," said the goat.

"And I can butt and bleat," said the sheep.

"And I can squeal and bite," said the pig.

"And I can bark and bite," said the dog.

"And I can mew and scratch," said the cat.

"And I can gobble," said the turkey.

"And I can crow," said the rooster.

"And I can cackle," said the hen.

"Very well," said Billy Bobtail; "I think we shall be quite safe."

So on they went through the wood; but suddenly they heard a crashing
and trampling in the underbrush and then a savage growl, as of some
great wild creature about to rush upon them.

Billy Bobtail began to whistle and throw stones.

The bull began to bellow.

The goat began to bleat.

The sheep began to bleat.

The pig began to squeal.

The dog began to bark.

The cat began to mew.

The turkey began to gobble.

The rooster began to crow.

The hen began to cackle.

And they all made such a noise that the creature, whoever he was, was
so frightened that he ran away as fast as his legs could carry him,
never even once stopping to look back.

Soon Billy Bobtail and his friends came to a clearing--a place in the
wood where the trees had all been cut away.  Right in the middle of
this clearing stood a little house.

"What a fine place for us to stay in all night," said Billy Bobtail,
for it was now almost dark.

"But suppose the people are not friendly?" said the bull, thinking of
the savage creature that they had just frightened away.

"I will go and peep in at the window and find out," said the cat.  "I
can walk softly on my four cushions, and with my green eyes I can see
in the dark."

So the cat crept to the window of the little house, and peeped in.
Soon she came back and said, "There is no one at home, and it does not
look as if anyone had lived here for a long, long time."

When Billy Bobtail and his friends went inside the little house they
found it very comfortable.

"Hurrah!  I shall sleep in the bed," said Billy Bobtail.

"Bow, wow, wow!  I shall sleep under the bed," said the dog, "and guard
my master."

"Wee, wee!" said the pig, "I shall sleep in the oven where it is nice
and warm."

"Gobble, gobble, gobble!"  "Cock-a-doodle-doo!"
"Cut-cut-cut-cut-ka-dat-cut!" cried the turkey, the rooster, and the
hen all together, "we shall roost high up on the mantelshelf."

"Baa!" said the goat, "I shall sleep on the front doorstone and keep
guard."

"Maa, maa!  I shall sleep just inside the front door and help to keep
guard," said the sheep.

"Moo, moo, moo!" called the bull, "the wood shed is the place for me."

"Meow, meow, meow!" cried the cat, "I do not care about sleeping in the
night.  I shall keep watch that no harm comes nigh."

They had a good night's rest.  When morning came and Billy Bobtail saw
what a cozy house it was and that there was a fine garden too, he said,
"This is my fortune.  I'm not going any farther to seek it!"

So Billy Bobtail and his friends lived safely in the little house in
the clearing for many years, and were very, very happy.




KID WOULD NOT GO.

One day as I was going across London Bridge I found a penny and bought
a kid.  Kid would not go.

  "See, by the moonlight, it is almost midnight.
  Time kid and I were home an hour and a half ago."

I went along a little farther and met a staff.

  "Staff, staff, beat kid!
  Kid will not go.
  See, by the moonlight, it is almost midnight.
  Time kid and I were home an hour and a half ago."

But the staff would not.

I went along a little way farther and met a hatchet.

  "Hatchet, hatchet, hack staff!
  Staff will not beat kid.
  Kid will not go.
  See, by the moonlight, it is almost midnight.
  Time kid and I were home an hour and a half ago."

But the hatchet would not.

I went along a little way farther and met some fire.

  "Fire, fire, burn hatchet!
  Hatchet will not hack staff.
  Staff will not beat kid.
  Kid will not go.
  See, by the moonlight, it is almost midnight.
  Time kid and I were home an hour and a half ago."

But the fire would not.

I went along a little way farther and met some water.

  "Water, water, quench fire!
  Fire will not burn hatchet.
  Hatchet will not hack staff.
  Staff will not beat kid.
  Kid will not go.
  See, by the moonlight, it is almost midnight.
  Time kid and I were home an hour and a half ago."

But the water would not.

I went along a little way farther and met an ox.

  "Ox, ox, drink water!
  Water will not quench fire.
  Fire will not burn hatchet.
  Hatchet will not hack staff.
  Staff will not beat kid.
  Kid will not go.
  See, by the moonlight, it is almost midnight.
  Time kid and I were home an hour and a half ago."

But the ox would not.

I went along a little way farther and met a rope.

  "Rope, rope, hang ox!
  Ox will not drink water.
  Water will not quench fire.
  Fire will not burn hatchet.
  Hatchet will not hack staff.
  Staff will not beat kid.
  Kid will not go.
  See, by the moonlight, it is almost midnight.
  Time kid and I were home an hour and a half ago."

But the rope would not.

I went along a little way farther and met some grease.

  "Grease, grease, grease rope!
  Rope will not hang ox.
  Ox will not drink water.
  Water will not quench fire.
  Fire will not burn hatchet.
  Hatchet will not hack staff.
  Staff will not beat kid.
  Kid will not go.
  See, by the moonlight, it is almost midnight,
  Time kid and I were home an hour and a half ago."

But the grease would not.

I went along a little way farther and met a rat.

  "Rat, rat, gnaw grease!
  Grease will not grease rope.
  Rope will not hang ox.
  Ox will not drink water.
  Water will not quench fire.
  Fire will not burn hatchet.
  Hatchet will not hack staff.
  Staff will not beat kid.
  Kid will not go.
  See, by the moonlight, it is almost midnight.
  Time kid and I were home an hour and a half ago."

But the rat would not.

I went along a little way farther and met a cat.

  "Cat, cat, catch rat!
  Rat will not gnaw grease.
  Grease will not grease rope.
  Rope will not hang ox.
  Ox will not drink water.
  Water will not quench fire.
  Fire will not burn hatchet.
  Hatchet will not hack staff.
  Staff will not beat kid.
  Kid will not go.
  See, by the moonlight, it is almost midnight.
  Time kid and I were home an hour and a half ago."

But the cat would not.

I went along a little way farther and met a dog.

  "Dog, dog, bite cat!
  Cat will not catch rat.
  Rat will not gnaw grease.
  Grease will not grease rope.
  Rope will not hang ox.
  Ox will not drink water.
  Water will not quench fire.
  Fire will not burn hatchet.
  Hatchet will not hack staff.
  Staff will not beat kid.
  Kid will not go.
  See, by the moonlight, it is almost midnight.
  Time kid and I were home an hour and a half ago."

  The dog began to bite the cat.
  The cat began to catch the rat.
  The rat began to gnaw the grease.
  The grease began to grease the rope.
  The rope began to hang the ox.
  The ox began to drink the water.
  The water began to quench the fire.
  The fire began to burn the hatchet.
  The hatchet began to hack the staff.
  The staff began to beat the kid.
  The kid began to go.
  "See, by the moonlight, it is almost midnight.
  Kid and I got home an hour and a half ago."




FOX LOX.

Once upon a time hungry Fox Lox was prowling about under a great tree
on the hillside, when a chestnut burr fell thump upon his head.  "Ah!"
said cunning Fox Lox, "by this I will get a fine dinner."  Just then
along came Chicker Ricker.

"Oh, run down hill with me where you will be quite safe, Chicker
Ricker," cried Fox Lox, "for the sky is surely tumbling down!"

"Who told you, Fox Lox?"

"Oh, I heard it and I felt it and it came thump upon my crown!"

"Then I will run down hill with you," cried Chicker Ricker.

So they ran and they ran and they ran.  Soon they met Hen Ren.

"The sky is tumbling down, Hen Ren!" cried Chicker Ricker.

"Who told you, Chicker Ricker?"

"Oh, Fox Lox!"

"Who told you, Fox Lox?"

"Oh, I heard it and I felt it and it came thump upon my crown!  Run
down hill with me where you will be quite safe," said Fox Lox.

"That I will!" cried Hen Ren.

So they ran and they ran and they ran.  Soon they met Cock Lock.

"The sky is tumbling down, Cock Lock!" cried Hen Ren.

"Who told you, Hen Ren?"

"Oh, Chicker Ricker!"

"Who told you, Chicker Ricker?"

"Oh, Fox Lox!"

"Who told you, Fox Lox?"

"Oh, I heard it and I felt it and it came thump upon my crown!  Run
down hill with me where you will be quite safe," said Fox Lox.

"That I will!" cried Cock Lock.

So they ran and they ran and they ran.  Soon they met Duck Luck.

"The sky is tumbling down, Duck Luck!" cried Cock Lock.

"Who told you, Cock Lock?"

"Oh, Hen Ren!"

"Who told you, Hen Ren?"

"Oh, Chicker Ricker!"

"Who told you, Chicker Ricker?"

"Oh, Fox Lox!"

"Who told you, Fox Lox?"

"Oh, I heard it and I felt it and it came thump upon my crown!  Run
down hill with me where you will be quite safe," said Fox Lox.

"That I will!" cried Duck Luck.

So they ran and they ran and they ran.  Soon they met Drake Lake.

"The sky is tumbling down, Drake Lake!" cried Duck Luck.

"Who told you, Duck Luck?"

"Oh, Cock Lock!"

"Who told you, Cock Lock?"

"Oh, Hen Ren!"

"Who told you, Hen Ren?"

"Oh, Chicker Ricker!"

"Who told you, Chicker Ricker?"

"Oh, Fox Lox!"

"Who told you, Fox Lox?"

"Oh, I heard it and I felt it and it came thump upon my crown!  Run
down hill with me where you will be quite safe," said Fox Lox.

"That I will!" cried Drake Lake.

So they ran and they ran and they ran.  Soon they met Goose Loose.

"The sky is tumbling down, Goose Loose!" cried Drake Lake.

"Who told you, Drake Lake?"

"Oh, Duck Luck!"

"Who told you, Duck Luck?"

"Oh, Cock Lock!"

"Who told you, Cock Lock?"

"Oh, Hen Ren!"

"Who told you, Hen Ren?"

"Oh, Chicker Ricker!"

"Who told you, Chicker Ricker?"

"Oh, Fox Lox!"

"Who told you, Fox Lox?"

"Oh, I heard it and I felt it and it came thump upon my crown!  Run
down hill with me where you will be quite safe," said Fox Lox.

"That I will!" cried Goose Loose.

So they ran and they ran and they ran.  Soon they met Gander Lander.

"The sky is tumbling down, Gander Lander!" cried Goose Loose.

"Who told you, Goose Loose?"

"Oh, Drake Lake!"

"Who told you, Drake Lake?"

"Oh, Duck Luck!"

"Who told you, Duck Luck?"

"Oh, Cock Lock!"

"Who told you, Cock Lock?"

"Oh, Hen Ren!"

"Who told you, Hen Ren?"

"Oh, Chicker Ricker!"

"Who told you, Chicker Ricker?"

"Oh, Fox Lox!"

"Who told you, Fox Lox?"

"Oh, I heard it and I felt it and it came thump upon my crown!  Run
down hill with me where you will be quite safe," said Fox Lox.

"That I will!" cried Gander Lander.

So they ran and they ran and they ran.  Soon they met Turk Lurk.

"The sky is tumbling down, Turk Lurk!" cried Gander Lander.

"Who told you, Gander Lander?"

"Oh, Goose Loose!"

"Who told you, Goose Loose?"

"Oh, Drake Lake!"

"Who told you, Drake Lake?"

"Oh, Duck Luck!"

"Who told you, Duck Luck?"

"Oh, Cock Lock!"

"Who told you, Cock Lock?"

"Oh, Hen Ren!"

"Who told you, Hen Ren?"

"Oh, Chicker Ricker!"

"Who told you, Chicker Ricker?"

"Oh, Fox Lox!"

"Who told you, Fox Lox?"

"Oh, I heard it and I felt it and it came thump upon my crown!  Run
down hill with me where you will be quite safe," said Fox Lox.

"That I will!" cried Turk Lurk.

So they ran and they ran and they ran.  Soon they met Dove Love.

"The sky is tumbling down, Dove Love!" cried Turk Lurk.

"Who told you, Turk Lurk?"

"Oh, Gander Lander!"

"Who told you, Gander Lander?"

"Oh, Goose Loose!"

"Who told you, Goose Loose?"

"Oh, Drake Lake!"

"Who told you, Drake Lake?"

"Oh, Duck Luck!"

"Who told you, Duck Luck?"

"Oh, Cock Lock!"

"Who told you, Cock Lock?"

"Oh, Hen Ren!"

"Who told you, Hen Ren?"

"Oh, Chicker Ricker!"

"Who told you, Chicker Ricker?"

"Oh, Fox Lox!"

"Who told you, Fox Lox?"

"Oh, I heard it and I felt it and it came thump upon my crown!  Run
down hill with me where you will be quite safe," said Fox Lox.

"That I will!" cried Dove Love.

So they ran and they ran and they ran; and when Chicker Ricker and Hen
Ren and Cock Lock and Duck Luck and Drake Lake and Goose Loose and
Gander Lander and Turk Lurk and Dove Love reached the bottom of the
hill, they were going so fast that they could not stop and they ran
straight into Fox Lox's hole.

"Now I have you!  Now I have you!" cried Fox Lox.  And he gobbled them
all up.




THE WEE, WEE WOMAN.

Once upon a time there was a wee, wee woman who lived all alone in a
wee, wee house.

One night this wee, wee woman lighted her wee, wee candle, crept softly
up her wee, wee stairs, got into her wee, wee bed, and fell fast
asleep.  Soon this wee, wee woman was awakened by a noise.  She jumped
out of her wee, wee bed, lighted her wee, wee candle and looked behind
her wee, wee door, but there was nothing there.  Then she looked under
her wee, wee bed, but there was nothing there.

So this wee, wee woman took her wee, wee candle in her wee, wee hand,
crept softly down her wee, wee stairs and, when she reached the room
below, she looked under her wee, wee chair, but there was nothing
there.  Then she looked into her wee, wee cupboard, but there was
nothing there.  Then she looked behind her wee, wee stove, but there
was nothing there.  Then she looked under her wee, wee table, but there
was nothing there.

So this wee, wee woman took her wee, wee candle in her wee, wee hand,
crept softly up her wee, wee stairs, got into her wee, wee bed and fell
fast asleep.  Soon this wee, wee woman was awakened by a noise.  She
jumped out of her wee, wee bed, lighted her wee, wee candle and looked
behind, her wee, wee door, but there was nothing there.  Then she
looked under her wee, wee bed, but there was nothing there.

So this wee, wee woman took her wee, wee candle in her wee, wee hand,
crept softly down her wee, wee stairs, and, when she reached the room
below, she looked under her wee, wee chair, but there was nothing
there.  Then she looked into her wee, wee cupboard, but there was
nothing there.  Then she looked behind her wee, wee stove, but there
was nothing there.  Then she looked under her wee, wee table, but there
was nothing there.

So this wee, wee woman took her wee, wee candle in her wee, wee hand,
crept softly up her wee, wee stairs, got into her wee, wee bed and fell
fast asleep.  Soon this wee, wee woman was awakened by a noise.  She
jumped out of her wee, wee bed, lighted her wee, wee candle and looked
behind her wee, wee door, but there was nothing there.  Then she looked
under her wee, wee bed, but there was nothing there.

So this wee, wee woman took her wee, wee candle in her wee, wee hand,
crept softly down her wee, wee stairs, and, when she reached the room
below, she looked under her wee, wee chair, but there was nothing
there.  Then she looked into her wee, wee cupboard, but there was
nothing there.  Then she looked behind her wee, wee stove, but there
was nothing there.  Then she looked under her wee, wee table and out
jumped--BOO!!!




THE LITTLE LONG TAIL.

  As a cat and a mouse ran over a rail
  The cat bit off the mouse's tail.

The little mouse cried, "Cat, Cat, give back my little long tail again!"

"That I will if you'll give me milk!" said Cat.

The little mouse ran to Cow and cried, "Cow, Cow, give me milk, that I
may give Cat milk, that Cat may give back my little long tail again!"

"That I will if you'll give me hay!" said Cow.

The little mouse ran to Barn and cried, "Barn, Barn, give me hay, that
I may give Cow hay, that Cow may give me milk, that I may give Cat
milk, that Cat may give back my little long tail again!"

"That I will if you'll give me key!" said Barn.

The little mouse ran to Smith and cried, "Smith, Smith, give me key,
that I may give Barn key, that Barn may give me hay, that I may give
Cow hay, that Cow may give me milk, that I may give Cat milk, that Cat
may give back my little long tail again!"

"That I will if you'll give me coal!" said Smith.

The little mouse ran to Miner and cried, "Miner, Miner, give me coal,
that I may give Smith coal, that Smith may give me key, that I may give
Barn key, that Barn may give me hay, that I may give Cow hay, that Cow
may give me milk, that I may give Cat milk, that Cat may give back my
little long tail again!"

"That I will!" cried Miner, and he gave the mouse coal.  The mouse gave
Smith coal and Smith gave him key.  The mouse gave Barn key and Barn
gave him hay.  The mouse gave Cow hay and Cow gave him milk.  The mouse
gave Cat milk and Cat gave back his little long tail again.




THE BROWNIES.

ADAPTED FROM MRS. EWING.

Such wonderful stories as grandmother told Johnnie and Tommy!  Stories
of ghosts and hob-goblins, of dwarfs and fairies; and once she told
them about a brownie that was said to have lived in their own family,
long ago,--a brownie who did all manner of wonderful and useful things.
He was a little fellow no larger than Tommy, she said, but very active
and very shy.  He slept by the kitchen fire, and no one ever saw him;
but, early in the morning, when all the family were in their beds, this
brownie would get up, sweep the room, build the fire, spread the table,
milk the cow, churn the cream, bring the water, scrub and dust, until
there was not a speck of dirt anywhere to be seen.

The children liked this story very much, and oh! how they did wish such
a brownie would come to live in their house now!  Over and over again
they said: "Was there really and truly a brownie, grandmother, and did
he really help all the people as you say?  How we wish he would come
back again!  Why, he could mind the baby and tidy the room and bring in
the wood and wait on you, grandmother!  Can't we do something to get
him back again?"

"I don't know, my dears," said the grandmother; "but they used to say,
in my young days, that if one set a bowl of bread and milk or even a
pan of clear water for him over night he would be sure to come, and
would do all the work just for that."

"Oh! let us try it!" said both the boys; and one ran to get a pan, and
the other to fetch fresh water from the well, for they knew, poor
hungry lads, that there was no bread or milk in the house.  Their
father, who was a poor tailor, could scarcely earn money enough to buy
food for them all.  His wife had died when the baby was born and he
could not make as many coats as before, for he must now do all the work
of the house.  Johnnie and Tommy were idle and lazy and too thoughtless
to help their father, although they were fine grown lads of five and
seven.

One night Tommy had a wonderful dream.  He thought he went down in the
meadow by the old mill pond, and there he saw an owl who shook her
feathers, rolled her great eyes, and called: "Tuwhit, tuwhoo!  Tuwhoo,
whoo-o-o-o!  Tommy, what are you doing way down here this time of
night?"

"Please, I came to find the brownies," said Tommy; "can you tell me
where they live, ma'am?"

"Tuwhoo, tuwhoo!" screamed the old owl; "so it's the brownies you are
after, is it?  Tuwhoo, tuwhoo!  Go look in the mill pond.  Tuwhoo,
tuwhoo!  Go look in the water at midnight, and you'll see one.  By the
light of the moon a brownie you'll see, to be sure, but such a lazy
one!  Tuwhoo, tuwhoo!" screamed the old owl; and, flapping her wings,
she went sailing away in the moonlight.

"The mill pond, at midnight, by moonlight," thought Tommy.  What could
the old owl mean?  It was midnight then, and moonlight, too; and there
he was right down by the water.  "Silly old thing," said Tommy,
"brownies don't live in the water."  But for all that Tommy went to the
bank and peeped in.  The moon was shining as bright as day; and what do
you suppose he saw?  Why, just a picture of himself in the water, and
that was all.  "Humph!  I'm no brownie," said he to himself; but the
longer he looked the harder he thought.  At last he said:

"Am I a brownie?  Perhaps I am one, after all.  Grandmother said they
are about as large as I, and the old owl said that I would see a very
lazy one if I looked in the water.  Am I lazy?  That must be what she
meant.  I am the brownie myself."  The longer he thought about it the
surer he was that he must be a brownie.  "Why," he said, "if I am one,
Johnnie must be another; then there are two of us.  I'll go home and
tell Johnnie all about it."

Off he ran as fast as his legs could carry him, and just as he was
calling, "Johnnie, Johnnie!  We are brownies!  The old owl told me!" he
found himself wide awake, sitting up in bed, rubbing his eyes, while
Johnnie lay fast asleep by his side.  The first faint rays of morning
light were just creeping in at their chamber window.  "Johnnie,
Johnnie, wake up!  I have something to tell you!"

After telling his brother all about his strange dream, Tommy said: "Let
us play we really are brownies, John, even if we are not; it will be
such fun for once to surprise father and grandmother.  We will keep out
of sight and tell about it afterwards.  Oh, do come!  It will be such
fun!"

So these two brownies put on their clothes in a great hurry and crept
softly down to the kitchen, where at first there seemed enough work for
a dozen brownies to do.  Tommy built up a blazing fire, and, while the
kettle was boiling, swept the untidy floor, while Johnnie dusted,
placed his grandmother's chair, got the cradle ready for the baby and
spread the table.  Just as everything was in order they heard their
father's footstep on the stairs.  "Run!" whispered Tommy, "or he will
see us."  So the boys scampered away to their bed in the loft and
pretended to be fast asleep when their father called them to breakfast.

The poor tailor was fairly beside himself with delight and
astonishment, and believed that the brownie he had heard so much about
in his childhood had really come back again.  The old grandmother was
delighted, too, and said: "What did I tell you, son Thomas?  I always
knew there were real brownies."

Although being brownies was fun for the boys, it was hard work, too,
and they sometimes thought they would leave off; but then they would
think of their hard-working father and would grow quite ashamed.
Things were so much better at home than they used to be.  The tailor
never scolded now, the grandmother was more cheerful than of old, the
baby was less fretful, the house was always tidy; and because the
tailor had more time for his work, now that the brownies helped, he
could make more coats and could get more money, and the boys did not go
hungry to bed as they used to do; but there was always bread and milk
enough, and a great bowlful to spare that they set each night for the
brownie.

At last the tailor said, "I am going to do something for that brownie.
He has done so much for us all."  So he cut and stitched the neatest
little coat you ever saw; for he said: "I have always heard that a
brownie's clothes are ragged, so our brownie will need this, I know."
When the coat was done it just fitted Tommy and was very fine to see,
all stitched with gold thread and covered with brave brass buttons.

That night the little coat was placed by the bowl of milk set for the
brownie and, when the early morning came, the tailor was awakened by
the sound of laughter and scuffling in the kitchen.  "It's the
brownie," thought he; and getting out of bed he crept softly down the
stairs.

But when he reached the kitchen, instead of the brownie, he saw Johnnie
and Tommy sweeping and making the fire and dusting and setting the
table.  Tommy had put on the coat that the tailor had made for the
brownie, and was skipping about in it laughing and calling to Johnnie
to see how fine he looked, but saying: "I wish he had made it to fit
you, John."

"Boys, what does all this mean?" cried the tailor.  "Tommy, why have
you put on that coat?"

When the boys saw their father they ran to him and tried to tell him
all about it.  "There is no brownie, father," they cried, "but we have
done the work.  And O father! we are sorry that we were lazy and idle
so long; but we mean to be brownies now, real brownies, and help you
till we grow to be big men."  The poor tailor was so happy that he knew
not what to say, and there were tears in his eyes as he kissed each
little son.

Tommy and Johnnie kept their promise and continued being brownies until
they went away to homes of their own.  But their little sister grew to
be the best brownie of all; and she kept her father's house so bright
and clean with mop and brush and broom and dustpan that not a speck of
dirt was anywhere to be seen.




THE FAIRY SHOES.

ADAPTED FROM MRS. EWING.

Once upon a time a baby boy was born in a little brown house, far away
in a country village, and everybody was invited to his christening and
everybody was glad to come.

Now the baby's mother had a fairy godmother of whom she was very fond.
This fairy was rich and all the people said, "Surely she will bring a
present to the baby on his christening-day, that is worth a great deal
of money."  But, at last when the time came, what do you suppose she
really brought?--a pair of stout little leather shoes with copper toes.

In spite of the disappointment at the fairy's present the festivities
went merrily on and, when the party was over and the fairy bade her
god-daughter good-bye, she said: "My little present is not quite as
shabby as it looks.  Those shoes will never wear out and, besides, the
little feet that have them on can never go wrong.  When your baby has
grown large enough to wear those shoes, if you send him on an errand,
and tell him to come back quickly, and he forgets and stops to play,
those little shoes will help him to remember by pinching his feet and
pulling and twitching at his ankles until he will be glad to go on
again.  They will remind him to go straight to school and to come
straight home again as you have bidden him.  Indeed, wherever he is
sent he will be quite sure to go, and he will come back again at just
the right moment and, by the time his feet have grown too large to wear
the little shoes, he will no longer need their help."

Days passed by, months passed by.  The boy was no longer a baby, but
had grown large enough to wear the fairy's shoes and, just as she had
said, they always helped him to go the right way.

Months sped and years sped and another baby boy came to stay in the
little brown house, and then another and another and another, until the
mother had nine boys.  Each one in turn wore the little shoes and, just
as the fairy had said, they never wore out.  At last they descended to
the ninth and youngest boy and became Timothy's shoes.

Now the eighth little boy had rather small feet and had worn the shoes
longer than the others, besides Timothy was the baby and, for one
reason and another like these, his mother hated to put the rough little
shoes upon him.  For a long time Timothy had gone his own way, which
was rarely the right way.  At last he played truant from school so
often and was late to dinner so many times, that his mother said she
could bear it no longer, he must wear the fairy shoes.  So she had them
freshly blackened and the copper tips newly polished and, one morning,
she brought them out and told Timothy to put them on.

"Now, Tim dear," she said, "go straight to school this morning.  If you
don't these little shoes will pinch your feet terribly."

But Timothy did not mind.  It was a bright, sunny morning in May and,
if he had loitered on the way when the cold March winds blew up his
jacket sleeves and made him shiver, and when the snow lay in great
drifts by the roadside, how could he help wishing to linger now when
every bush held a bird and every bank a flower?

Once or twice Timothy stopped to pick spring flowers, but the shoes
pinched his feet and he ran on again.  At last he reached the bank
overlooking the swamp and, gazing down, he saw great clumps of
cowslips, with their dark green leaves and crowns of beautiful yellow
flowers.

Then Timothy forgot all about school, forgot what his mother had said,
forgot the shoes and their pinches and thought only of the cowslips.
Oh, he must have some!

In a moment away went his satchel on the grass and away went the
flowers he had picked and he began scrambling down the bank toward the
swamp as fast as he could go.  But the little shoes, they meant to go
another way.  They meant to go to school and they pinched Timothy's
feet and pulled and twitched at his ankles, trying to make him turn
about and go in the right way, until he thought his feet would be
wrenched off.  Timothy was very determined, the harder the little shoes
pinched the more he was bound to have the bright yellow flowers; so, in
spite of the pain, he kept on going down toward the swamp.

When at last this little boy reached the foot of the bank and came to
the edge of the swamp he found that the cowslips were all out of reach.
Still he would have them.  Round and round the swamp he went, the shoes
pinching and pulling harder at every step, till at last he grew quite
desperate and, giving a big jump, he landed right out in the swamp in
the very middle of a large clump of the flowers.  Then something
strange happened, his feet sank down, down into the mud and water until
the little shoes were soaked right off.  Poor, wayward Timothy's best
friends were gone, but he did not know that.  He just waded around in
the swamp and picked cowslips to his heart's content.

At last, however, Timothy grew very tired.  He hurt his foot on a sharp
stick.  A great green frog jumped into his face and startled him.  He
had more flowers than he could carry.  Suddenly he remembered school
and his lost shoes and thought of what his mother had told him.  Oh!
how he did wish now that he had done just as she asked him to do.

"What shall I say to the teacher?" he thought.  "Oh, what shall I do?
How I wish I had gone straight to school as the little shoes tried to
have me go!"

Weary and sad Timothy climbed the bank.  Wiping the mud from his
clothes with his handkerchief and taking his satchel, he started slowly
for school again, all the time wondering what he should say to the
teacher about being late.  At last he reached the door and prepared to
tiptoe quietly in, but he had no sooner put his head inside and
commenced to make an excuse than all the children began to laugh.
Timothy was very much ashamed.  He looked to find, what they were
laughing at and saw--What do you suppose he saw?  Standing in the
middle of the floor, in the place in the class where he himself should
have stood, were his little shoes, very muddy indeed and with a cowslip
in each one of them.

"You have been in the swamp, Timothy," said the teacher.  "Put on your
shoes."

When his lessons and his punishment were over, Timothy was very glad to
let the little shoes take him quickly home.  And always after that he
tried to do what his mother and the little shoes wished him to do.




PICCIOLA.

ADAPTED FROM "SAINTINE."

Long, long ago a good man was thrown into prison by a great king.  The
prison was dark and cold and still; for the gray stone walls and the
stone roof and floor shut out the sunlight and all the beautiful sights
and sounds of the world.  There was no one for the man to talk to, and
there was no work for him to do.  There was one little window to let in
the air, but it was so high up beyond his reach that he could not even
get a glimpse of the blue sky.  Here he was kept for weeks and months
and years, and was not allowed to know anything about his family,
friends or home.  At last a door was opened into another part of the
prison.  The walls of this part were high and strong, and the floor was
paved with the same great, gray stones, but there was no roof overhead.
Here the wind could come in and the rain and the sunlight.  He was
allowed to walk here just for one short hour each day, and then he had
to go back to his dark cell and the door was shut upon him.

Once while walking here the prisoner saw a little mound of earth rising
between two of the great stones of the floor.  At first he thought that
some tiny worm or insect was trying to build a house for itself.
Looking closer he saw that it was only the home of a little plant.  The
stray seed had been brought by the wind, and it was now sending its
roots down into the crevice between the stones.  "Poor little plant!"
said the prisoner, "what a sad home you have found!  Shall I not crush
you?  No!  Perhaps you have come to comfort me in this terrible place."
Hurrying to his cell, he brought his cup of precious water.  "Drink!
little one," he cried, as he poured the water out around it.  "Drink!
and lift up your head."

The next day he watched it again and watered it, and the next day, and
the next.  How bravely it seemed to struggle to push its head up and
its roots down, to open its leaves and to catch, the dull light.  At
last the little plant became a dear friend and companion to the man.
He would bend over it the whole hour each day and talk softly to it.
He called it Picciola,--his Picciola,--his little one, and as the plant
grew and put on new beauty he forgot his wrongs and his heart was
filled with love and gentleness.

Once there was a storm, and great hailstones beat down upon Picciola.
"Ah, my poor little one will be killed!" cried the prisoner.  And he
bent over her and sheltered her and the cruel hail fell upon his own
head until the storm was past.  Fearing that other storms might come
when he was shut away from her, he built a little house around her with
the wood that was given him to keep him warm, and made a roof over her
with a mat which he wove from the straw of his own bed.  This made him
happy; for, though he could be with his Picciola for but one short hour
each day, he felt that she was safe.  So the little plant grew and
grew, and opened her flowers and sent out her perfume to make glad the
heart of her lonely friend.

But, alas! the day came when Picciola began to droop and wither.  She
seemed about to die.  The poor prisoner was frantic with grief and
cried, "Is my little one, my joy, my hope, the only thing for which I
live, to be taken from me?"  Searching, he found that as Picciola had
grown taller her stem had had grown larger, and now there was not room
enough for it in the crevice between the stones.  Her sap,--her life
blood,--was running away, as the rough edges of the stones cut into her
delicate stem.  Nothing could save her but to lift those cruel stones.
The prisoner tore at them with his weak hands.  Weeping, he begged the
jailer to raise them, but the jailer could do nothing.  No one but the
king could cause them to be lifted.  But how could the prisoner ask the
king?  The king was far away.  The prisoner must send a letter to him,
but he had no pen, ink or paper; so he wrote on his handkerchief with a
bit of charred wood and begged, not for his own life, but for the life
of Picciola,--that the king would cause the stones that were killing
her to be raised.

When the king read the prisoner's letter he said, "No man who is really
wicked could care so much for a little, simple flower.  I will not only
have the stones raised that are killing his Picciola, but I will pardon
him.  He shall be free because of the love he bears his plant."

So the prisoner left his lonely cell carrying with him his
Picciola,--his little one whom he had saved and who in turn had set him
free.




CINDERELLA.

The room was dark, the fire was out and a little girl sat crying all
alone in the ashes.  "I want to go to the party too!" she sobbed.  "I
want to dance and wear a pretty dress, but my dress is ragged.  My
sisters have gone and left me.  Nobody wants me.  It's so dark here I'm
afraid.  Oh!  I'm so cold." The tears ran down the face of this forlorn
little girl and fell in the ashes at her feet.  Poor child!  Poor
little maid!  She had to wash and scrub and dust, while her sisters did
nothing but wear pretty clothes and go to all the parties.  They never
thought of taking her with them.  She was only fit to blacken their
boots and to mend their dresses.  Because her hands and her hair were
sometimes gray and dusty from tending the fire and sweeping the hearth,
they called her Cinderella.  She had helped her sisters to dress that
very night, smiling all the time, but now that they were gone,
Cinderella could keep back the tears no longer.  She was sobbing as if
her heart would break, when suddenly she heard a noise, the room was
filled with light and, right in front of her stood a curious little old
woman, with a long stick in her hand.  She had pointed shoes on her
feet and a tassel in her cap.

"You shall go to the party!" said the queer little creature, stamping
her foot on the floor.  "You have always been a good child.  You have
as much right to go as your sisters.  You shall go! and you shall wear
a pretty dress and ride in a fine carriage too, so dry your eyes, my
dear, and bring me the biggest yellow pumpkin you can find in the
garden," said the fairy; for this little old woman was really a fairy.

The pumpkin was so large that Cinderella could hardly lift it.  With a
nod of her pointed cap, the old woman touched it with her curious stick
and a carriage, a wonderful carriage, stood in its place.  The
cushion's were soft velvet ones, the windows were hung with curtains of
silk and there were silver handles on both the doors.

"Now quickly," said the fairy, "bring me the traps from the cellar!"
There were six little shivering mice in one trap and two plump gray
rats in the other.  "Open the doors!" said the old woman.  As the six
mice crept slowly out she touched them, one at a time, with her long
stick, which was really a fairy wand, and in a minute each little mouse
was turned into a prancing gray horse that sprang to his place in front
of the carriage.  Tap!  Tap! went the wand, and the rats were nowhere
to be seen.  In their place stood two big, tall men with shiny boots on
their feet and high hats on their heads.  They jumped upon the box and
one of them caught the reins in his hands.

"Now one thing more, my dear," said the fairy to Cinderella; "run into
the garden again and bring the six lizards you will find under a big
stone by the wall."  When the lizards were brought, the fairy touched
them too and, in a twinkling, they jumped up from the ground and stood
beside the carriage doors, three on one side and three on the
other,--six little footmen, with six little green coats on their backs
and six little red hats in their hands, all ready to help Cinderella
into her wonderful carriage.

Another touch of the old woman's wand and Cinderella herself stood
dressed in a gown as blue as the blue sky above and all covered from
top to toe with shining silver stars.  She was just going to step into
the carriage and drive away when, looking down, she saw that her feet
were quite bare, she had no shoes on.  The fairy saw too.  She smiled
and took a pair of little slippers from her pocket.  They were all made
of glass and they were such tiny, tiny slippers that, when Cinderella
had put them on, she looked the most beautiful maiden in the whole wide
world.  "Take good care of them, my dear," said the old woman.  "If you
want to be happy be careful how you use those little shoes.  Now go,
child, but there is one thing you must remember,--when the clock
strikes twelve you must be at home again in this very room.  If you are
not, all your beautiful things will vanish and you will be left alone
just a poor little, ragged cinder-maid."

Cinderella promised to remember.  She thanked the fairy and drove
quickly away.  At last she reached the big house where the Prince was
giving the party.  There was music and dancing in the great hall, but
when Cinderella walked in, everybody stopped dancing and looked at her.
They said, "What a pretty girl!  Who is she?  Where did she come from?
She must be a princess to wear such wonderful clothes!  She has on such
a fine dress, she must surely be a princess!"  When the Prince saw her,
he asked her to dance with him and, after that, he would dance with no
one else.  But Cinderella remembered what the fairy had told her and,
just before midnight, she slipped away and was safe in the kitchen at
home when the clock struck twelve.  No one had seen her leave the great
hall.  No one had seen her drive away, but the Prince missed her the
moment she was gone and had the great house searched from top to
bottom, but not a trace of the pretty maiden could be found.

On the second night of the great party all happened as on the first.
Cinderella was made ready by the fairy and, when she reached the big
house on the hill, the Prince ran to welcome her.  He would dance with
no one else as before and, when Cinderella vanished just before the
clock struck twelve, he was so unhappy that no one could comfort him.

Now the third and last night of the party had come.  The Prince could
think of nothing but the pretty maid.  "I must know who she is and
where she comes from, or I shall never be happy again.  I will keep
fast hold of her hand to-night.  She shall not slip away this time as
she has always done before," said the Prince.

Never had Cinderella been as happy as on that evening, never had she
danced as well, never had the lights shone brighter or the music
sounded sweeter, never had the Prince been half as gay.  Cinderella
danced on and on.  She forgot the fairy, she forgot her promise, she
forgot the hour.  The great clock in the hall ticked off the minutes.
It was nearly twelve, still Cinderella danced on without a thought.
The six gray horses pawed restlessly at the door.  Louder and louder
grew the music, faster and faster flew the dancers, and the gayest of
them all was Cinderella as she whirled by on the arm of the happy
Prince.  But, hark!  What's that?  Above the noise of the dancing,
above the music and laughter, a sound is heard.  It is the great clock
striking the hour of midnight.

Cinderella heard at last, at last she remembered.  She snatched her
hand from the hand of the Prince.  She rushed to the doorway, but she
tripped upon the mat and one of her little glass slippers fell off.
The Prince ran after her, but he stopped to pick up her slipper, and
when he reached the gateway the beautiful lady was nowhere to be seen.
All was dark and still, only a ragged beggar-maid, sobbing as if her
heart would break, went quickly away into the night.  Poor, poor
Cinderella!  Her wonderful carriage had vanished, her beautiful dress
was gone, nothing was left her but one tiny glass slipper.  She stooped
and taking it from her foot she put it carefully into the pocket of her
ragged dress, and walked barefoot all the way home alone in the
darkness.

Time passed, the poor Prince could not sleep by night and could not
rest by day for he had lost his beautiful lady.  He had her little
slipper and that was his only comfort.  At last he said, "Whoever can
wear this slipper shall be my queen and queen of all my people."

He took the precious slipper and he traveled far and near through all
the land.  He stopped at every cottage and he stopped at every castle
and he begged every maiden whom he met to try it on.  But, alas! he
found no one with foot small enough to wear it.  At last, one day, he
stopped before the only house that, in all his kingdom, he had not
visited.  Cinderella's sisters hurried to meet him for it was at their
door he stood.  They tried and tried to crowd their great feet into the
tiny slipper, but it was of no use.  The Prince was turning sadly away
thinking, "I shall never see my beautiful lady again," when he caught
sight of a face at the kitchen window.  "Who is that?" he cried.  "Oh,
it is only Cinderella! a poor kitchen maid," said the sisters.  "Let
her be brought!  She too shall try the slipper!" said the Prince.  "No!
no!  She is too ragged and dirty to be seen.  Do you think that a
cinder-maid can wear your shoe when we cannot get it on?" But the
Prince would have his way.

When Cinderella was brought, her dainty little foot slid into the glass
shoe as easily as though she had worn it all her life.  She smiled and
took its mate from the pocket of her ragged dress.  The Prince smiled
too and, looking into Cinderella's face, he saw his long lost lady of
the party.  With a cry of joy he lifted her, all ragged as she was,
upon his horse and the Prince and his chosen princess rode away.




THE HUT IN THE FOREST.

"Indra!  Indra!  Indra!  Oh, Indra!  Where are you?" called Carla and
Alween.  "Come, Indra, we are going home.  Come, it will soon be dark.
Hurry, or we shall lose our way."  But Indra did not answer.  In her
eagerness to find the biggest berries she had strayed away from her
sisters.  Now it was quite dark, and she could not find the path.  She
called and called but heard nothing save the sound of her own voice.
At last, just as she was thinking, "I will have to pass the night here
all alone in the wood," she saw a light shining through the darkness.
Following this light, Indra soon stood in front of a small house at the
door of which she knocked.  "Come in!" called a harsh voice.  Stepping
inside, the girl saw before her an old man whose beard was long, whose
hair was white and whose back was bent almost double; while lying near
him in front of the fire, were a cock, a hen and a brindled cow.

"I have lost my way in the forest," said Indra.  "It is dark, I have
nowhere to sleep and I am so hungry.  Will you not give me something to
eat and a bed to lie on?"

The old man looked at her for a long time with his sharp, gray eyes
then, turning to the animals by the fire, he said,--

  "My cock, my hen,
  My brindled cow,
  What say you now?
  What say you now?"

The cock, the hen, and the brindled cow all opened their mouths and
called out together,--

  "Oh, let her stay!
  We'll not say nay."

"Go into the kitchen and cook us some supper," said the old man turning
again to Indra.  The girl did as she was bidden.  Soon a good meal was
ready which she placed upon the table, but she gave nothing to the
animals and without speaking to them, or even so much as looking at
them, she sat down at the old man's side and ate heartily.

"Now I am satisfied," said Indra.  "Show me where to sleep."  The
animals said nothing.  "Go into the room above and make ready the two
beds you will find there, then I will come and lie down and sleep also,
for I am weary," said the old man.

Indra spread the two beds with fresh linen.  Then without giving one
thought to the hungry animals below, she laid herself down in one of
the beds and fell fast asleep.

When at last the old man climbed to the loft and saw Indra lying in a
deep slumber, he looked sorrowfully at her for a long time.  Then
shaking his head sadly and slowly, he opened a curious door beneath the
bed on which the girl lay and let her down into the dark, underground
cellar of the hut.

That night there was trouble and sorrow for good Mother Grougans and
for Carla and Alween.  As soon as daylight came they went forth to
search for Sister Indra; but, though they scoured the forest far and
wide, not a trace of her could be found, and at last they were forced
to give their dear one up as lost.

Now as the two sisters Carla and Alween gathered berries in the forest
one day not long after, Carla, in her eagerness to fill her pail with
the biggest berries, strayed away just as her sister Indra had done.
Alween was forced to return home alone, and it happened with Carla just
as it had with her elder sister.  She followed the light that shone
from the cottage window, knocked at the door, entered, and saw the old
man sitting and the animals lying by the fire.  She too begged for food
and a bed in which to sleep.

Turning to the animals the old man said,--

  "My cock, my hen,
  My brindled cow,
  What say you now?
  What say you now?"

The cock, the hen, and the brindled cow all opened their mouths and
called out together,--

  "Oh, let her stay!
  We'll not say nay."

Then the old man sent Carla to prepare supper.  Just as her sister had
done, she cooked and ate and gave not so much as a glance or a thought
to the hungry animals.  "Now I am satisfied," said Carla at last.
"Show me where to sleep."  The animals said nothing, but the old man
told her to prepare the two beds in the loft.  After spreading them
with fresh linen the girl laid herself down upon one of the beds and
fell fast asleep.

When the old man climbed to the loft and saw Carla lying in a sound
slumber, he opened the curious door again and let her also down into
the cellar.

Now when Carla failed to return home.  Mother Grougans was lost in
grief and she forbade her youngest daughter, Alween, to go into the
wood on any account whatsoever.  And she said, "Shall I lose my
youngest and my dearest also?"  But soon mother and daughter were both
so hungry that Alween was forced to go into the forbidden forest in
search of food.  In her eagerness to get the largest and the sweetest
berries for her mother, she too strayed away from the path, and all
happened with her as it had with her sisters.

When Alween entered the hut and begged for food and shelter, the old
man turned to his animals and said,--

  "My cock, my hen,
  My brindled cow,
  What say you now?
  What say you now?"

The cock, the hen, and the brindled cow all opened their mouths and
called out together,--

  "Oh, let her stay!
  We'll not say nay."

Then Alween thanked the animals for their kindness and, going close to
them, she stroked the smooth feathers of the cock and the hen and
patted the brindled cow on the white star in her forehead.  She made
ready the supper and set it before the old man; but, before satisfying
her own hunger, she said, "The good animals are hungry too.  I must
first get food for them."  So she placed a bundle of hay in front of
the brindled cow and scattered wheat and barley for the cock and the
hen and brought a fresh drink of water for all.  Then she herself ate
and was satisfied.

That night Alween slept soundly in the loft of the little hut, but not
before she had seen the old man tucked snugly into his bed and fast
asleep.  When she wakened, with the first rays of morning light, she
thought, "I must dress quickly and get breakfast for the poor old man
and feed the little cock and the little hen and the pretty brindled
cow."  But when she opened her eyes she seemed to be no longer in the
loft of the little old hut in the wood.  Instead of its dingy walls she
saw before her a vast hall hung with cloth of gold and rich
embroideries, and light and sunshine and flowers were everywhere.  "I
am surely dreaming," said Alween.  Pushing aside the rich silken
curtain of her bed, which also seemed a part of her dream, she thought
to dress herself; but the poor ragged clothes she had put off the night
before were nowhere to be found.  In their place lay costly garments of
satin and velvet.

"Oh, this is a dream, a dream!" thought the girl.  She rubbed her eyes
again and again as she gazed at the rich curtains and the costly
garments and the splendid walls with their gay embroideries.  She
called aloud.  She ran to the old man's bed to see if he were still
asleep,--there in his place lay a stranger, young and handsome.

"Oh, where is the little old hut in the forest and where is the poor
old man?  Oh, where is the little cock and the little hen and the
pretty brindled cow and where, oh, where am I?" she cried.  At this the
stranger wakened and, sitting up in bed, he called softly: "Do not run
away.  Alween!  Alween!  Come back!  Come back!  Do not be frightened.
We are all here.  I was the old man with the long white beard and my
servants yonder were the cock, the hen and the brindled cow.  You have
saved our lives.  You have set us free.  You have delivered us from
worse than death.  I am a king's son, but I was bewitched by a wicked
old fairy and forced, in the form of an old, old man, to live here in a
hut in the forest all alone, except for my three servants, who were
made to take the form of a cock, of a hen, and of a brindled cow.  Here
we were obliged to stay until some one came to us who showed love and
kindness toward my animals as well as toward myself.  You have saved
us.  You have set us free and this great palace and all within it is
yours."

And Alween married the king's son and they were very happy together for
many, many years; but her sisters were forced to live lives of hardship
and poverty until their hearts had grown more kindly toward all living
creatures.




THE SLEEPING PRINCESS.

Once, a long, long time ago, there lived a brave king and a beautiful
queen.  They ruled the land wisely; they loved each other dearly, and
they would have been happy but for one thing--they had no children.

At last there came a day of joy--a day that brought a little princess
to the palace.  The baby girl grew strong and rosy and the time for her
christening drew near.  Then came twelve good fairy godmothers to eat
from the king's twelve golden plates, to drink from his twelve golden
goblets and to bring twelve good wishes to his little daughter.

Now thirteen fairies lived in the kingdom; but, as the king had only
twelve golden plates and twelve golden goblets, the thirteenth fairy
was not invited.  This made her very angry and she cried, "I will go to
the christening!  I will see the king's daughter and the king shall rue
the day on which he dared to slight me!"

They named the little princess Briar Rose.  The first fairy godmother
gave her beauty.  The second gave happiness.  "Wisdom is my gift," said
number three.  "Grace shall be hers," cried four.  "I give her wit,"
said five.  The sixth godmother gave sympathy.  The seventh gave
wealth.  The eighth said, "The princess shall have courage and shall be
strong and brave."  Number nine cried, "Health is hers as long as ever
she may live."  The tenth gave youth.  "The Briar Rose shall love her
people and she shall rule gently and where she goes joy shall go too,"
said number eleven.  The twelfth fairy opened her lips to wish long
life, when, just at that moment, the thirteenth fairy, who had not been
invited, burst into the room.  She pushed the good fairy aside and,
before anyone could stop her, she cried out in a loud angry voice, "The
princess shall prick her finger with a spindle, on her fifteenth
birthday, and shall die!"  In a moment all was excitement.  The jealous
old fairy rushed from the palace, but the people dashed after her.
"Drive the wicked witch from the kingdom!  Burn every spindle in the
land!" they cried.

The twelfth fairy could not take away the bad wish, she could only
soften it.  "The princess shall not die," she said, "but she shall fall
into a deep sleep that shall last for a hundred years."

The jealous old fairy was driven far, far away.  The king ordered that
every spindle in the whole land be burned.  Then every one was happy
once more, for now all thought that no harm could come near the little
Briar Rose.

Day by day the princess grew more gentle and more beautiful and all who
saw her loved her.  Years flew by, the bad wish of the jealous old
fairy was forgotten.  All the people thought that some day the little
princess would be their queen.  She was a big girl now, almost a woman.
At last her fifteenth birthday came and, to amuse herself upon that
very morning, she went wandering about the old palace all alone.  She
peeped into unused rooms; she took curious old treasures into her
hands; she walked through long halls; she ran up and down dark
corridors.

At last the princess reached the topmost tower of the great palace.
Here a flight of wooden steps led up to a little door that she had
never before seen.  The door was close shut, but a rusty key stood in
the lock.  She sprang upon the stairs.  She turned the rusty key.  The
door swung slowly open and the princess saw that, in a far corner of a
dimly lighted room, sat a little, bent old woman.  She was spinning.
It was really the jealous old fairy, who had uttered the bad wish so
many years ago, but the princess did not know this.

"Good morrow, good mother," she said.  But the old woman kept on
spinning.

"Who are you and where did you come from?" cried the princess.  But the
old woman kept on spinning.

"Why do you sit by yourself in this dark room?  Have you no home?  Have
you no friends?  Have you no fire to warm you, or light to cheer you?"
But the old woman kept on spinning.

At last, getting no answer to her questions, the little Briar Rose
stepped across the threshold.  She stood beside the old woman's chair,
and, bending over it, called out in her sweet tones, "What is that I
see in your hand, good mother, which whirls about so merrily?"  But the
old woman only kept on spinning.

"Let me take that curious thing," said the princess, reaching out her
hand for the spindle.

Then for the first time the old woman lifted her ugly face.  She rose
quickly from her chair.  She thrust the spindle into the girl's hand.
She opened her wicked old lips.  "Take it," she croaked, "and may death
go with it!"

Scarcely had the spindle touched the hand of the poor princess when a
tiny stream of blood flowed from her little finger and she fell into a
deep, deep sleep.

At that moment every one in the great palace fell fast asleep also.
The king slept upon his golden throne; the queen slept in her royal
parlor; the judges slept on the council benches.  Fast asleep fell
lords and ladies of the court.  Even the flies slept on the walls, and
the fires died down upon the palace hearths.  The dogs slept in their
kennels, and the horses in their stalls.  Outside the birds slept on
the branches, and the drowsy bees slept in the drooping flowers.  Not
even a leaf stirred upon a single tree within the castle yard, but all
was quiet and as still as death.  A hedge of thorn trees shot up around
the palace and, in a single night, the hedge grew so thick that not a
chink of light shone through it, and so tall that not even the tallest
palace spire could be seen above it.

Years went by and Briar Rose was forgotten.  No one living knew what
was hidden behind the great hedge.  Old tales were sometimes told of a
beautiful princess who lay there asleep and, every now and then, a bold
young prince would try to force his way through the hedge; but the
thorns were so sharp that no one had ever caught so much as a glimpse
even of the old castle, in which this beautiful princess slept.

At last there came a handsome prince, bolder than all the others, who
cried, "I will break down this hedge!  I will set this princess free!"
Now it happened that that very day ended the long sleep of the Briar
Rose.  All the hundred summers had just passed by.  The wish had come
true and it was now time for the beautiful princess to awake, but the
bold prince did not know this.  He drew his sword.  He rushed upon the
hedge, when, lo! the sharp thorns turned aside; the branches opened and
there before him stood the sleeping palace.

He burst the gates.  Not even a leaf stirred upon a single tree within
the castle yard.  Not a dog bayed in the kennels.  Not a horse whinnied
in the stalls.  Not a bird sang in the branches.  Not a bee droned in
the flowers.  All was as still as death.  He burst the palace doors.
There slept the king upon his golden throne.  There slept the queen
within her royal parlor.  There slept the judges on the council
benches.  There slept the lords and ladies of the court; but the
princess, the beautiful princess, where was she?  He looked in all the
splendid rooms.  He searched the halls and corridors but no princess
could he find.  He climbed the winding stairway,--higher and higher up
he went, higher and yet higher still.  At last he reached the little
chamber.  Would he find her here?  He turned the rusty key.  The low
door opened.  He entered.  There before him lay--could it be she, the
sleeping beauty?  Her eyes were closed, but her cheeks were pink like
the wild roses at the gate.  Her lips were red like the scarlet ribbon
that she wore.  Her black hair had grown to her very feet and lay about
her like a splendid dress.  "Would she waken?" thought the prince.  He
stooped!  He caught his breath!  He kissed her!  The charm was broken!
Her eyes flew open and the princess smiled upon her prince.

Just at that moment the king rose from his golden throne.  The queen
swept from her royal parlor.  The judges yawned on the council benches.
Awake came lords and ladies of the court.  Again the fires leaped up
upon the palace hearths.  Again the flies buzzed on the window panes.
A wind blew through the castle yard.  Again the birds sang in the
branches and the bees droned in the flowers.  Again the dogs barked in
the kennels and the horses whinnied in the stalls.

The hundred years were past and all was life and joy once more.  Out of
the palace gates rode the bold prince, and beside him rode the happy
princess, whom his kiss had waked.




TOPSY STORIES.

I. THE COMING OF TOPSY.

One night, when Alice was a very little girl, her papa came home early
from the office.  He carried a small basket in his hand, but when he
saw Alice he put the basket behind his back; his eyes twinkled as he
did so.

"Guess what I have brought you, little daughter," he said.  "Something
to play with."

Alice ran and caught fast hold of her papa's knees with her two chubby
arms, and her eyes grew big and bright as she peeped around at the
basket.

"Oh, what is it, papa?  Do let me see."

"You must guess first," said her papa; "such a fine plaything."

"I know; it's a dolly!" cried Alice.

Papa laughed.  "No, it's ever so much better than a dolly, for it's
alive," he said.

"Oh, then it's a bird," cried the little girl.

But her papa only shook his head.

"Maybe it's a bunny, then," said Alice.

"No, no, you will never guess right," laughed papa, "so I will have to
tell you.  Just listen a moment," he said, as he held the basket close
to Alice's ear.

The little girl stood on her tiptoes and fairly held her breath.  Soon
she heard a faint sound: "Meow! meow! meow!"

"It's a kitty!  It's a kitty!  Do open the basket quickly, papa," cried
Alice, dancing up and down and clapping her hands.  Then she tried to
push her fingers under the cover.

Sure enough, when the basket was opened there lay a tiny kitten.

"Oh, isn't she black!" cried the little girl.

"Yes, indeed, she is," said Alice's papa.  "I should call her Topsy.
There isn't a white hair in her whole glossy coat, from the tip of her
little pink nose to the end of her little black tail."

"What big yellow eyes!  And oh, look! look! what funny feet she has!
Why are they so large, papa?" asked Alice.

"That's because she is a seven-toed kitten, little daughter.  I expect
that she will catch a great many mice with those big feet of hers, when
she grows to be a cat."

Alice turned one of the funny front paws over.  "One, two, three, four,
five, six, seven," she counted.  "Yes, there are just seven toes here,
but look, papa, there are not so many on her hind feet.  I wonder if
she is hungry.  May I feed her, mamma?"

Mamma brought some milk, and soon Topsy seemed to feel quite at home.
She lapped the milk with her little red tongue, until there was not a
drop of it left in the saucer.  Then she began to purr and to rub her
face against the hand of her new mistress.  Finally she curled up in
Alice's lap until she looked like a shiny black ball, and began
blinking at the fire with sleepy eyes.

Alice was sleepy, too.  She curled up in papa's lap, just as kitty had
done in hers, and soon Topsy and she were both fast asleep.




TOPSY STORIES.

II. HOW TOPSY KEPT WARM.

"Is that Topsy crying?" said Alice's mamma, one morning.  "Listen a
moment."

Alice stopped playing with her doll and kept very quiet.  Yes, she
could hear a faint meow.  She ran to the outside door and opened it,
but kitty was not there.  She listened again, and again she heard the
same sound: "Meow! meow! meow!"

"Perhaps kitty is at the other door," said Alice's mamma.

Alice turned the knob and pulled the door wide open; but only a rush of
cold air and a few snowflakes came in.

"Where can she be, mamma?  Oh, I know now!  She is down cellar," said
Alice.  But no kitty was there.  "Maybe she is in the wood shed.  I'll
run and see!  No, mamma, she isn't there, either.  I don't think she is
happy, wherever she is.  She doesn't sound so.  Just hear her cry!"

Both listened again to the half-smothered meow.

"No, she doesn't sound very happy, pet," said mamma.  "She is shut up
somewhere and can't get out.  We must find her."

So the mother and the little girl began to search for Topsy.  Upstairs
and downstairs they went, looking everywhere.  They opened all the
closet doors, they looked into all the trunks and boxes.  They even
peeped into the baby's hamper and lifted the lid of grandmother's big
workbasket; but no kitty did they find.  Still they could hear her
crying "Meow! meow! meow!" all the time.

Back to the kitchen they went.  "She must be in this room," said mamma;
"the meowing sounds louder here than it does anywhere else."

Round and round the room went Alice, peeping everywhere.  Her mother
looked in all the places, too.  No kitty in the cupboard, no kitty in
the china closet, no kitty in the washtubs, no kitty in the wood box!

At last Alice stood still, quite close to the big stove, wondering
where she could look next.

"Meow! meow! meow!"

"Oh, mamma.  It sounds loudest right here!"

Alice's mother bent her head and listened.  "So it does," she said.
Then she put her hand on the door of the big warming oven.  She pulled
it open, and--out walked Topsy, very warm indeed, but not hurt at all.

Alice caught kitty up in her arms and gave her a good hug.  The poor
cat's fur was quite hot.

"It's a good thing for pussy that we found her as soon as we did," said
mamma.

Alice gave Topsy a saucer of milk, and soon her pet was curled up in
the doll's cradle fast asleep and none the worse for her warming.




TOPSY STORIES.

III. HOW TOPSY MOTHERED HER NEIGHBOR'S KITTENS.

Topsy had no babies of her own.  Tarlequin, her next door neighbor, had
two soft, little, cuddley ones.  Topsy was lonely.  Her tail grew big
and bushy, and her eyes grew dark and bright as she trotted off toward
the wood shed where, in a barrel of nice smelling shavings, her
neighbor had set up housekeeping.

Tarlequin was not at home that morning.  Topsy did not stop to knock,
but gave a big spring and landed right in the middle of the babies'
bed.  Then she took one of the babies right in her mouth by the loose
skin at the back of its neck, jumped out of the barrel, and ran home as
fast as she could.  She laid the stolen kitten softly down on her own
bed, and began to wash it all over with her funny rough tongue.

Soon the kitten began to cry, for it was hungry and missed its own
mother.

Alice heard the strange sound and ran to find out what it could be.

When Topsy saw her little mistress, she curled herself up all around
the stolen baby and began to growl and hiss, something she had never
done to Alice before.

"Oh, mamma, do come and see what Topsy has found!"

"Well, well!" said mamma.  "It is one of Tarlequin's babies.  Where did
she get it?"

"Why are Topsy's eyes so shiny, and why does she growl at me, mamma?  I
am afraid to touch her," said Alice.

"She thinks that you are going to take the kitten away, little
daughter; but it will never do to let her keep it.  Tarlequin will miss
it and, besides, we have no way of feeding it."

Alice's mother began to talk softly to Topsy.  After a while she put
her hand down and gently stroked the cat's face.  Very soon Topsy
allowed mamma to take both herself and the little kitten up in her
arms.  Then mamma carried them back to Tarlequin's barrel in the
neighbor's wood shed.

Tarlequin was at home this time.  She seemed very glad to see her lost
baby back again and called, "Meow! meow! meow!"

Mamma stroked Tarlequin, saying, "Nice kitty! nice kitty!"  Then she
put Topsy right down in the nest beside Tarlequin and stroked her.
Soon the two cats were purring softly and licking each other and the
two kittens by turns.

That was the last time that Topsy was ever lonely, for she lived in
Tarlequin's barrel after that, and helped bring up Tarlequin's babies;
and she took just as good care of them as their own mother did, too.

She cuddled close to them when they were asleep so that they would not
feel cold.  Every day she licked their coats until they were smooth and
shiny.  When the kittens were big enough, Topsy brought them all the
plump mice they could eat, and she let them tumble and scramble all
over her, nip at her ears and play with her tail as much as ever they
liked.

"Isn't Tarlequin real good, mamma," said Alice one day, as she saw her
pet frolicking with the two kittens, "to let poor Topsy help bring up
her babies?"

"Yes, indeed," said mamma; "and I wonder if there was ever a family of
kits before that had two mothers at the same time!"




TOPSY STORIES.

IV. TOPSY'S HIDING PLACE.

All around the kitchen they went, playing hide and seek.  Topsy hid
under the stove, Alice hid in the cupboard; Topsy hid behind the wood
box, Alice hid under the table; Topsy hid in the corner back of the
coal hod, Alice hid in the folds of mamma's big apron hanging behind
the kitchen door; but they never failed to find each other and always
had a great frolic after each one's hiding place was discovered.

At last the play was over and Topsy went fast asleep, lying on her back
in the doll's cradle.  She looked very funny, with her paws sticking
straight up in the air.

Soon Alice wanted to put dolly to bed; so Topsy found another nice
resting place, stretched out in mamma's workbasket, with her front paws
lying on the pincushion; but when mamma came for thimble and thread
kitty was forced to move again.

"Meow! meow!" she said.  "I will get out of every one's way, and go
where I can sleep as long as I please without being disturbed!"  So
Topsy sprang upon the table, then upon a tall folded screen near by,
and, with a big jump, landed at last on the very tiptop of the china
closet.  No one saw her.  She crept far back against the wall and was
soon fast asleep, lying in a nice warm corner, just under the ceiling.

After a time Alice grew tired of playing with her doll and looked about
for kitty, but kitty was nowhere to be seen.  The little girl went to
the door and called, "Kitty! kitty! kitty!" but no kitty came.  She
called again, but no shrill meow answered her.  She called again and
again, but still no Topsy was to be heard or seen.

"Oh, mamma, where can kitty be?" said Alice, with tears in her eyes.
"I am afraid she is lost.  I haven't seen her for ever so long."

"Have you looked in all the hiding places?  Perhaps she has gone fast
asleep somewhere and doesn't hear you call," said mamma.

So Alice began to search for her pet, but though she looked everywhere
no kitty did she find.  She called and called again, but all in vain;
no Topsy answered her.

"Never mind, little daughter," said mamma, "kitty has probably gone off
hunting and will surprise you by and by with a big fat mouse."

So Alice was comforted; and though she felt very lonely with no furry
ball snuggled in her lap and no bright-eyed playmate scampering at her
heels, she tried to be happy playing with her dolly and looking at her
new picture book.

At last the long day was over and night came.  It brought no Topsy, but
it did bring papa from his work.  When Alice saw him coming, she ran
out to meet him and, throwing herself into his arms, poured out all her
trouble: "Oh, papa, Topsy is lost!  We can't find her anywhere!  She
has been gone all day long!  I have looked and looked, and called and
called, but she doesn't come!"

Papa comforted his little daughter as papas know how to do.  "Cheer up!
little girl.  We will find her after supper," he said.

When the pleasant evening meal was over and all the family sat around
the cozy fire, papa said: "I think I know how to make Topsy come, if
she is in the house."

"Oh, how?" cried Alice.

Papa said nothing but he puckered up his lips and began to whistle in
loud, shrill tones.  At the first note something stirred on top of the
china closet.  Then there was a short, protesting meow.  Papa kept on
whistling.  Kitty stood up and began to stretch.  As the shrill music
continued, Topsy walked to the edge of the cupboard and looked down.

"Oh, there she is! there she is!" cried Alice.  "Oh, my own dear kitty!
But what a funny place to hide in!"

Louder and shriller grew papa's whistling.  Kitty jumped upon the
screen and then leaped to the table.  Still papa whistled on.  Topsy
sprang to the floor and, jumping into papa's lap, began to rub her face
against his breast.  "Meow! meow!" she said.  Still the shrill noise
did not atop.  Pussy put her front paws high up on papa's chest and
rubbed her face against his chin, at the same time nipping it gently
with her teeth and calling, "Meow! meow!" which meant, "Stop! stop!
Please, master, I am here.  What do you want?  Oh, do stop that
dreadful noise!"

So papa stopped whistling and Alice and Topsy had a fine frolic before
bedtime.

This was the first and only time that Topsy was ever lost; but to this
day, she will sometimes steal away and sleep for hours on her lofty
perch, heedless of coaxing or scolding, and only dislodged at night by
papa's shrill whistle.




TOPSY STORIES.

V. TOPSY'S BABIES.

"I must teach the kittens some tricks," said Alice one day.  "They are
getting so big and plump.  Don't you think they are old enough to learn
to do things, mamma?"

"Well, little daughter, suppose you try teaching them," said mamma.

So Alice went to the door and called: "Kittens! kittens! kittens!
Come, Tip!  Come, Trot!  Come, kittens!"  Now their real names were
Tipkins and Trotkins, but Alice always called them Tip and Trot for
short.

When the kittens heard their little mistress call, they came running as
fast as their fat little bodies and their short little legs would let
them come; for "Kittens, kittens, kittens!" almost always meant: "Here
is some nice warm milk to drink."

Alice gathered the funny little things up in her arms.  They looked
just exactly alike, for Tipkins had a black spot on the end of his
tail, and Trotkins had a black spot on the end of his tail, too;
Tipkins' eyes were blue, so were Trotkins'; Tipkins' nose was black,
and Trotkins' nose was black, too.  Alice often wondered how their
mother, Topsy, ever told them apart.

"Now," said the little girl, "you have grown to be such big pussies
that it is time you learned to work.  You must earn your dinner.  What
do you say to that?"

"Meow! meow!" said Tipkins.  "Meow! meow!" said Trotkins.  "Meow!
meow!" said Tipkins and Trotkins together.  Which seemed to mean, "That
we will, little mistress; only show us how."

Alice took a tiny bit of meat in her fingers and let one of the kittens
smell of it; then she said very slowly, "Now, pussy, roll over."  The
kitten liked the smell of the meat very much, so he said, "Meow! meow!"
but he did not know in the least what "roll over" meant, so he did
nothing.  "Roll over, kitty," said his little mistress again, but he
only said, "Meow! meow! meow!" once more.  Then Alice made pussy lie
down, and she gently rolled him over with her hand, saying very slowly
as she did so, "Roll over."  After this she gave him the bit of meat.

Then it was the other kitten's turn.  He had no more idea than his
brother what "roll over" meant; but after Alice had said the words two
or three times, she gently rolled his plump little body over, too, and
then gave him the nice bit of meat also.  Then she set a big saucer of
milk down in front of her pets, and so ended the first lesson of
Tipkins and Trotkins.

This was only the first of many lessons, however.  Alice worked
patiently with the kittens every day for a whole month and, at the end
of that time, both Tipkins and Trotkins knew just what she meant and
would roll over every time she told them to, even though they got not a
scrap of anything good to eat in return.

Tipkins seemed to think it was great fun, and he would sometimes roll
over five or six times without stopping, just as Alice herself often
rolled on the grass when at play.  But Trotkins never seemed to like
doing it, and would turn round and round until he was fairly dizzy
before finally lying down.  Then, as he rolled over, he would give a
funny meow, as much as to say, "I don't like to; but, if I must, I
will."

Tipkins learned to ring a small bell by striking it with one of his
front paws.  Trotkins could never be coaxed to touch this bell; but he
would sit by while his brother rang it and cry, "Meow! meow! meow!"
Alice thought that this was very funny, and she said that Trot sang
while Tip did the playing.

Both the kittens learned to jump over a stick when their mistress held
one out in her hand, about a foot from the floor; and Alice taught
Tipkins to jump through a small wooden hoop; but she could never
persuade Trotkins even once to try to jump through the hoop.

As Tipkins and Trotkins grew older, their mother, Topsy, taught them to
hunt for mice in the big, dark barn, and to catch moles and
grasshoppers in the field.  They had less and less time, as the days
went by, to play with their little mistress; and Alice found them so
sleepy, when they did have time, that at last she gave up trying to
teach them any new antics.

As the months passed by they grew sleek and fat.  They were kittens no
longer, but had grown as large and could hunt as well as Mother Topsy;
and although they learned no new tricks now, the old ones, taught them
by their little mistress, were never forgotten by Tipkins and Trotkins.




ETHEL'S FRIENDS.

Ethel was a little girl who lived in the great city of New York, but
she loved the country very much and often wished that she could play in
the big, green fields or pick wild flowers in the wood.  She remembered
one summer, when she was a very little girl, staying in the country for
ever so many days, almost a whole month, and having such a happy time
lying on the grass, listening to the birds, and watching the cows and
horses and sheep, the cunning little lambs, and the old white hen with
her brood of downy chicks.  Oh, how she did wish that she could see
them all again!  But the country was far, far away, and Ethel's papa
and mamma were too busy to take their little daughter there.

There was a place in the big city called Central Park that seemed to
Ethel like the country.  She loved to go there, and had a happy time
watching the sparrows as they scratched for seeds and looked about for
crumbs, and trying to get the gray squirrels to come nearer and take
nuts from her hand.  Here, some days, O happiest times of all! she
could lie with her rosy face buried in the short, green grass, and
press it close, oh! so close to the "great brown house," the home of
the flowers.

One sunshiny day in June Ethel had been playing in the park for a long
time.  Though she had coaxed and coaxed the squirrels, they would not
come near; and though she had listened for a long time to the hoarse
croak of a frog, and watched and waited, and looked about with big
bright eyes, she could not get even so much as a peep at him.  At last
she grew very tired and sat down upon a bench near by to rest before
going home.  Scarcely was she seated when she heard some one call her
name.  "Ethel!  Ethel!" a sweet voice said.  She looked all about but
could see no one.  "Ethel!  Ethel!" it called again, this time very
near.  She looked around, saying, "Here I am; who is calling?"  "It is
I.  Don't you see me?  I am close beside you," said the same sweet
voice.

Looking down Ethel saw at her feet a tiny creature all dressed in
dainty green.  "Oh!" thought she, "this must really and truly be a
fairy.  Why, I supposed fairies were only make-believe people!" and
Ethel was so surprised that she forgot to answer the little creature.

Soon the fairy said: "Ethel, because you love the birds and the flowers
and the trees and all the animals, I have come to take you out into the
country to visit your friends."

Ethel clapped her hands and said: "Oh, I should love to go to the
country! but I haven't any friends there."

"Yes, you have," said the fairy, "come and see."

So away they went, and Ethel all the time wondered whom the fairy could
possibly mean by her friends; but they went so fast that, before she
had time to do much thinking, Ethel found herself in a great, green
meadow, bright and fresh and cool.  Soon they came to a tree with
spreading branches; and there, lying under it and resting in its shade,
was a gentle looking creature with soft eyes, long smooth horns, and a
hairy dress of red and white.

"Here," said the fairy, "is one of your friends, and a very good friend
she is too."  "Oh," said Ethel, "now I know whom you mean by my
friends!"

I wonder who can tell me why the fairy called the cow Ethel's friend.
Yes, because without this friend Ethel would miss her cup of milk at
breakfast and the golden butter for her bread.

Ethel gave the white star on the cow's forehead a gentle pat and,
looking into her great dark eyes, she said, "Surely you are my friend,
Bossy."  But the fairy said, "Come on, little girl, there are many more
friends to see."  So Ethel visited all the friendly animals,--the sheep
with their woolly coats, the pigs in their sty, the chickens, the ducks
and the geese in the barnyard, the pigeons in their home on the roof,
the great clever collie in his kennel; and she found that she owed
something to every one of them.

Just as she was giving Rover a farewell pat, old Dobbin, harnessed to
the farm wagon, came clattering up to the barn.  "Here comes the best
friend of all!" cried Ethel.  "What should we do without Dobbin to
carry the milk and the butter and the eggs to the city, to draw the
wood and the coal that keep us warm, to help the farmer plow and harrow
the ground in the springtime, to draw in the hay and the grain in the
autumn, and to trot cheerfully along the country road when the children
take a ride?  Oh!  I hope the farmer gives him a good, dry bed to sleep
upon, a manger of hay and a measure of oats when he is hungry.  I hope
he combs and smooths Dobbin's black coat well, and puts a blanket on
his back when the weather is cold.  I'm sure the farmer wouldn't cut
off Dobbin's shiny black tail for the world, for how could Dobbin drive
away the flies that trouble him, without his tail?  I know that there
is always plenty of fresh water for Dobbin to drink whenever he is
thirsty, and that, sometimes, the children give him a lump of sugar to
eat.  The farmer never lets Dobbin lose a shoe, I'm sure, for fear he
might go lame, but always takes him to the blacksmith if only a nail is
loose."

Buzz z z z! buzz z z z! sounded close to Ethel's ear.  She opened her
eyes and looked about.  There she sat upon a bench in the park.  The
sun had gone down behind the tall buildings, and it was almost dark.
The pretty elfin in green had vanished.  Her country friends were
nowhere to be seen.  A bee's gauzy wings and yellow legs were
disappearing in the distance.  "There goes another of my friends," said
Ethel, "I think he must have come to tell me that it is time to go
home."

So Ethel ran home and told her mother all about the fairy and her
friends.  "Oh, mamma! do you suppose the fairy really and truly took me
to the country?" said Ethel.

"No," said mamma, "I think my little girl was asleep and dreaming; but,
for all that, the animals on the farm are really among our very best
friends."

"Yes, I know that," said Ethel, "how I wish I could see them!"  And for
many days after her wonderful dream Ethel never went to the park
without thinking of how the little fairy in green took her to visit all
her friends in the country.





End of Project Gutenberg's A Kindergarten Story Book, by Jane L. Hoxie

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A KINDERGARTEN STORY BOOK ***

***** This file should be named 14127.txt or 14127.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/1/4/1/2/14127/

Produced by Al Haines

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
