The Project Gutenberg eBook, The Touchstone of Fortune, by Charles Major


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net





Title: The Touchstone of Fortune

Author: Charles Major

Release Date: December 3, 2004  [eBook #14242]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE TOUCHSTONE OF FORTUNE***


E-text prepared by Audrey Longhurst, Mary Meehan, and the Project
Gutenberg Online Distributed Proofreading Team



THE TOUCHSTONE OF FORTUNE

Being the Memoir of Baron Clyde, who lived, thrived, and fell in the
Doleful Reign of the so-called Merry Monarch, Charles II

by

CHARLES MAJOR

Author of _When Knighthood Was In Flower_, etc.

1912







To My Wife




CHAPTER I

DAUGHTERS AND POVERTY


Goddess Fortune seems to delight in smiling on a man who risks his
all, including life, perhaps, on a desperate chance of, say one to one
hundred. If her Ladyship frowns and he loses, his friends call him a
fool; if he wins, they say he is a lucky devil and are pleased to share
his prosperity if he happens to be of a giving disposition. Lucky? No!
He has simply minted his courage.

The most remarkable illustration of these truths that has ever come to my
knowledge is my friend George Hamilton, the second son in this generation
of the illustrious House of Hamilton, Count Anthony being its present
head. The younger son was penniless save for the crumbs that fell from
his elder brother's table, and Count Anthony was one who kept an eye on
the crumbs.

George, who was of an independent nature, accepted Anthony's grudging
help reluctantly. Therefore when Charles II was restored to the English
throne in 1660, the younger Hamilton, who had been with the king in
exile, was glad to assume the duties of Second Gentleman of the
Bedchamber in Whitehall Palace. With the pension attached to this office,
winnings at cards and other uncertain revenues from disreputable sources,
George was enabled to maintain himself at court where debts were not
necessarily paid, where honesty and virtue were held in contempt, and
where vice of all sorts was not only the daily stock in trade but the
daily stock of jest and pleasure, boasting and pride; for what is the
use of being wicked if one hides one's light under a bushel?

Hamilton was a favorite with those who knew him well and was respected
by those who knew him slightly, not because of his virtues, for they were
few, but because he was strikingly handsome in person, moderately quick
of wit, generous to an enemy, kind to every one, brave to the point of
recklessness, and decent even in vice, if that be possible. He was no
better than his friends save in these easy qualities, but while he was as
bad in all other respects as his surroundings, the evil in him was due
more to environment than to natural tendencies, and the good--well, that
was his undoing, as this history will show. A man who attempts to 'bout
ship morally in too great haste is liable to miss stays and be swamped,
for nothing so grates on us as the sudden reformation of our friends,
while we remain unregenerate.

But to write Hamilton's history I must begin at the beginning, which
in this case happens to be my beginning, and shall conclude with his
"hundred to one" venture, which closed his career and mine, at least
in England.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Clydes, of whom I am the present head, have always had great respect
for the inevitable and have never permitted the idealization of a
hopeless cause to lead them into trouble solely for trouble's sake. So
it was that when my father of blessed memory saw that King Charles I and
his favorites were determined to wreck the state, themselves, and their
friends, he fell ill of the gout at an opportune moment, which made it
necessary for him to hasten to Germany to take the cure at the baths.

My revered father was the twenty-second Baron Clyde, Edwin by baptism,
and I, his namesake, am, or rather was, the twenty-third and last baron
of our line, having lost my title by reason of entanglement with the
desperate fortunes of George Hamilton.

My father had been a staunch supporter of Charles I, not only because
Charles was our divinely appointed king, but also because his Majesty
was a lovable person in many respects. His misfortunes were the result
of bad advice, false philosophy, and a heart too kind. Kindliness in a
king is a dangerous virtue, and a royal conscience is like a boil on
the elbow, always in the way. Aside from his kindliness there were only
two other qualities necessary to insure King Charles I the loss of his
head, and he possessed them--stubbornness and weakness. A good king need
have but two virtues, strength and love for his people, but if he would
reign comfortably, these virtues must be supplemented by a strenuous
vice,--sure death to his enemies.

So when my father saw that fidelity to King Charles's hopeless cause
meant hopeless ruin, he took the gout and went to Germany. Absence from
England enabled him to desert the cause he loved, but could not help,
and more, it saved him the humiliation of being compelled to join the
Cromwell forces,--a cause which he could have helped, but hated.
Therefore he saw to it that his gout remained with him during the entire
Cromwell interregnum, and he died at Aix-la-Chapelle just before the
recall of Charles II to the English throne.

I inherited my father's title and a part of his estate; a great portion
of the latter having been granted to the accommodating husband of one of
Charles II's friends.

I returned to England with the king, and, as balm to my wounded estate,
was made Second Gentleman of the Wardrobe in that modern Sodom, Whitehall
Palace, Westminster, where lived Charles II, who was said to have been
appointed and anointed of God, king of our glorious realm. God makes
some curious mistakes, if human opinion is to be accepted.

The name Lot was unknown in Whitehall, but Mesdames Potiphar, Salome, and
Delilah were met at every turn, while Davids and Johns, eager to be
tempted, and Samsons, stooping to be shorn, hedged the king about with
anything save divinity.

That interesting Frenchman, Comte de Grammont, is accredited with saying
that during his residence in England he knew but one woman in Whitehall
who was both beautiful and pure,--Frances Jennings, maid of honor to
her Grace, the Duchess of York, the Duke of York being James, brother of
Charles II, and heir presumptive to the English throne.

I am proud to say that this beautiful Frances Jennings was my mother's
brother's child. In early youth I had lived in her father's house and was
more her elder brother than her cousin.

I suppose De Grammont was wrong in his sweeping assertion, but he was
right in his judgment of Frances, for though she was admittedly the most
beautiful woman--perhaps I should say girl, for she was very young--at
court, she--. But what befell her is a part of George Hamilton's history
and shall be told all in its turn.

       *       *       *       *       *

Frances Jennings and her younger sister Sarah, who afterwards became the
first duchess of the present House of Marlborough, were the daughters of
my uncle, Sir Richard Jennings, of Sundridge, near St. Albans. With a
fidelity more creditable to his heart than to his head, Sir Richard had
clung to the cause of Charles I, had lost his entire fortune, and in the
end was forced to bend his neck to the yoke of Cromwell to save his life.
When Charles II returned to the throne, he easily forgave Sir Richard his
enforced apostasy, but failed to return his estates, forgiveness being so
much easier than restitution to an indolent selfish nature.

So it was that at the time this story opens, which was several years
after King Charles's return, Sir Richard and his two daughters were
living almost in poverty at Sundridge, hoping for help from the king,
though little expecting it. Without assistance furnished by myself and a
former retainer of Sir Richard, one Roger Wentworth, who had become a
prosperous tanner of Sundridge, my cousins and my uncle would have been
reduced to want. But Wentworth and I kept up a meagre household, and I
was on watch at court to forward my uncle's interest, if by any good
fortune an opportunity should come. At last, after long waiting, it came,
though as often occurs with happiness delayed, it was mingled with
bitterness.

I think it was in the year 1662 or '63--it may have been a year or two
earlier or later, I cannot say at this distance of time--the Duchess of
York, who, with her husband, lived in Whitehall Palace with King Charles,
announced her intention of choosing her maids of honor by personal
inspection. She declared that, barring the fact that the maids must be of
good family, beauty would win the golden apple, as it had in olden
Greece. On hearing this news, I saw the opportunity for which I had
waited so long. If beauty was to be the test, surely my cousin Frances
would become a maid of honor, and once at court, if she could keep her
head and her heart, the fortunes of her house were sure to rise, for the
world has never known so good a beauty market as Whitehall was at that
time.

There was no question about my cousin's beauty. Would she be able to make
it bring a price worthy of its quality? To do this, she must have the
cunning of the serpent, the virtue of a saint, and the courage of Roland
himself. She must not be fastidious, though she must be suspicious. She
must not be a prude, though she must know that all is evil about her.
Lastly she must have no heart, though she must learn the rare art of
being tender to the right person at the right time.

I was sure that Frances was equipped with the mental and moral qualities
necessary in so dangerous a field as Whitehall Court. Among those
qualities was her knowledge that she was beautiful; not that she believed
it as a matter of vanity, but knew it simply as a matter of fact. That
knowledge would give her self-confidence and would help her to value
justly the flattery of men, which was sure to be her portion to
overflowing. She would know that flattery was her due, and therefore
would not be too grateful for it, gratitude being a dangerous virtue in
a woman. She was as dear to me as if she were my sister, and I hesitated
bringing her to terrible Whitehall. But desperate conditions need
desperate remedies, so I determined to lay the matter before my uncle and
let him and my cousins decide the question for themselves.

With this object in view, one bright spring morning, I took horse at the
Leg Tavern in King Street, Westminster, and rode to Sundridge to spend a
few days with my uncle, hoping to interest my beautiful cousin in the
Duchess of York's announcement concerning the choice of her maids. I knew
that Sir Richard would protest against Frances's going to Whitehall, but
I hoped, with the help of my cousins, to override the old gentleman's
feeble will. While I saw clearly the dangers the girl would encounter; I
had faith in her strength, and felt sure the chances of making her
fortune were worth the risk. In other words, I was staking a human soul
which was infinitely dear to me, against wealth and station--a hundred to
one chance, even with the Fates smiling. When one considers how seldom
the long odds are taken and how often they win, one cannot help believing
that courage is the touchstone of Fortune; the criterion by which the
capricious Goddess measures her votaries and distributes her smiles.

I made my journey to Sundridge and arrived there in the afternoon near
the hour of three, finding my uncle and my cousin Sarah at home, but
Frances abroad.

"She walks a great deal nowadays," remarked my uncle, and Sarah assented
with--"Yes, a great deal," having, I fancied, more significance in her
manner than in her words.

"There has been hardly a pleasant afternoon in a month that she has not
been abroad with her book," continued Sir Richard.

"Her book," murmured Sarah, who was a laconic young person, much given to
observing conditions about her and equally prone to keep her conclusions
to herself.

"She refuses all company," remarked my uncle, who did not seem to catch
the sceptical inflection in his younger daughter's voice, "and I
sometimes fear she wishes to be alone because she is brooding over our
misfortunes."

"Brooding!" murmured Sarah, with slightly lifted eyebrows.

"Even when she is at home she sits all day long at the window and sighs,"
said Sir Richard, dolefully.

"Sighs," concurred laconic Sarah.

There are so many symptoms which, in a young woman, may seem to indicate
the disease of love that one making a hasty diagnosis is likely to fall
upon that malady, it being prevalent in spring, both of the year and of
life. I had believed that my cousin's healthful vanity and quiet strength
of character would, in a measure, keep her safe from this troublesome
spring disorder, but my uncle's account of her doings led me to fear that
perhaps her wholesome armor of self-conceit was not so invulnerable as
I had hoped.

Later I spoke my half-formed doubt to Sarah, who answered:--

"I don't know what she is doing. I attend to my own business; that is,
unless I see profit in meddling elsewhere."

"Ah, but this is your business and mine if we love your sister, as you
will say when you learn the object of my visit," I answered, hoping to
loosen her cautious tongue.

Sarah's eyes opened wide with a question in them, but her lips remained
sealed, and I would not satisfy her curiosity, which I knew was at
boiling-point, until she had made a direct request. Her manner had
resolved my doubts into fears, so as she did not speak, I continued:--

"But you must be able to form an opinion as to what your sister is doing.
You are with her all the time, and every young girl instinctively knows
the symptoms of love, even though she may never have felt them."

"Not I!" she answered, with sharp emphasis.

"Oh, but you may suspect or surmise," I insisted.

"Suspect sometimes. Surmise never. Waste of energy," answered Sarah, who,
of all the persons I knew, had energy to spare.

"It would be a crime, a horrible crime," I continued, hoping in time to
extract her opinion, "if your beautiful sister were to throw herself away
on any man to be met hereabout."

"Horrible!" acquiesced Sarah, earnestly.

"Then why don't you watch her, and, if need be, prevent such a mistake?"
I suggested.

"Not necessary," answered Sarah.

As she failed to explain, I asked, "Why is it not necessary?"

"Because she is not a fool," returned Sarah, indicating by her manner
that I might find her meaning if I could.

A moment's thought carried me to her conclusions, and I laughed because I
was answered and pleased, being convinced that Sarah, at least, did not
consider her sister in danger. Then I caught Sarah in my arms and kissed
her, saying:--

"A kiss! That's for wisdom, cousin!" Sarah's was a drawing personality.

"A slap! That's for impudence!" answered Sarah, suiting the action to the
word, though there was a smile in her eyes.

Later in the afternoon Frances came home radiant and offered me her cheek
to kiss. She was delighted to see me, though I noticed short lapses from
attention, which seemed to indicate preoccupation. But I had learned my
lesson from Sarah and soon came back to my belief that Frances was not a
fool, and that whatever malady her symptoms might indicate, she would
never permit it to inure her.

After talking with my uncle and my cousins a few minutes, I said: "I have
had a long ride and want a good supper Come, Frances, let us go out and
buy all the good things in Sundridge."

Sir Richard said nothing, and a faint shadow of humiliation came to
Frances's face, but practical Sarah settled the question by saying:--

"Go with him, Frances, and see that he buys enough. You know we have had
barely a crust in the house the last fortnight, and not a farthing in all
that time with which to buy one. We have a warm welcome for you, Baron
Ned, but welcome after a long ride is a mere appetizer. I'll fetch a
basket--yes, two!"

The name "Baron Ned" was a heritage from the days of my childhood, and
doubtless it will cling to me till the day of my death. I have never
objected to it on the lips of my friends, but rather, have always liked
it.

Sarah's good common sense set us all laughing, and when she brought in
two large baskets, Frances and I went forth to buy our supper.

When we were a short way from the house, I said: "I've come to spend
several days with you, my cousin-sister. Are you not delighted?"

"Yes," she answered, cordially enough, but without the old-time gladness
in her manner.

"And my purpose in coming concerns you," I continued.

She started perceptibly and blushed, but after a moment brought herself
together and asked laughingly:--

"You don't want to marry me, brother Ned?"

"No, no," I answered. "We're far too dear to each other to spoil it all
by marriage, and my station in life, to say nothing of my small estate,
is in no way up to your value. It would not be a fair exchange. Your
husband shall be at least a duke, with not less than forty thousand
pounds a year. That, by the way, is a part of my mission in Sundridge.
No, no, I do not bring an offer!" I said, hastily, noticing that she
drew away from me in her manner, "I simply hope to pave the way to such
an offer some time in the future, and want to warn you against doing
anything that might forestall good fortune."

I had hardly finished speaking when her manner of drawing away became so
pronounced that I feared I might lose my race by going too fast, so I
quickly sought to right myself by saying with marked emphasis:--

"I am not going to pry into your affairs."

A telltale blush came to her cheek as she interrupted me with a touch of
warmth: "I have no affairs."

"I am sure you have not," I answered soothingly, "though a girl as
beautiful as you are is sure to attract men, and is quite as sure to have
little affairs. But they are of no more importance than a laugh and a
sigh."

"Yes, yes, of course. Of no importance--not the least," she answered,
blushing exquisitely, and unconsciously telling me there was an affair.

"No, no," I continued earnestly. "I do not want to pry. I am simply going
to suggest a project which perhaps you may turn to your advantage.
Marriage has no part in it save that the greatest good fortune that can
befall a woman is to marry well, which I hope will be the ultimate result
of what I shall propose. If a young woman's friends do not put her in a
position to marry the right sort of a man, they fail in their duty to
her."

"I hate the word 'marriage,'" returned Frances, impatiently.

"Ah, but it is a woman's privilege, the one great purpose of her life," I
insisted. "Why pretend otherwise? I don't believe in the drag-net process
of getting a husband, but in England a girl must be seen before she is
married, and her chief concern should be to be seen by the right man."

"I should detest the right man," returned Frances, now grown almost
surly.

"Yes, yes, now, perhaps. But the suggestion I have to make, if acted
upon, will do all these things for you and will give you the opportunity
to detest the 'right man' intelligently if you feel so inclined when you
meet him. I have taken it upon myself to come all the way to Sundridge
with a suggestion, because of the love I bear you and because you have no
mother to do these things for you. As for dear Uncle Richard--well, you
know, he can't."

"No, no! father is old and of late has been failing rapidly. Sarah and I
can look for no help from him. On the contrary, we must help him. I have
thought of nothing else, night or day, for years. Tell me what it is you
have to suggest. What you have had to say to us has always been for our
good. We should have starved these last five years had it not been for
you and good old Roger Wentworth. Tell me, Baron Ned, what have you come
to offer me?"

I had intended telling Frances privately of the Duchess of York's
announcement, but after my talk with her I concluded to wait and to make
the statement in the presence of her father, so I answered:--

"I am not ready to tell you just now, but I'll do so before I return to
London."

"Then return at once, Baron Ned."

"If I do, you'll never hear it," I answered.

"In that case, stay. But tell me as soon as you can, for pent-up
curiosity is killing to a girl," said Frances, with a doleful little
smile.

"Does nothing else trouble just now?" I asked.

She turned to me in surprise, blushed and answered: "Yes. My poor, dear
father. Yes--father. Of course there's nothing else. Why do you ask?"

"Just to be asking," I replied.

At that point we came to the shop where we were to buy our supper, and I
was glad to change the subject. I had learned definitely that there was a
man in the case, and my task would be to put him out if I could. The man
who first enters a young girl's heart is hard to dislodge, and the worst
part of the terrible business is that even she herself may be unable to
expel him her whole life through.

When supper was well under way that evening, I took the opportunity to
set my great ball rolling, and said:--

"Uncle Richard, I have come from London for the purpose of offering a
suggestion which may eventually be of advantage to all of you."

Sarah put down her knife and fork to listen; Frances held hers in
suspense, and Sir Richard looked up quickly, asking:--

"What is it, nephew? We all thank you in advance."

A cold bath is better taken quickly, so I plunged in.

"The Duchess of York has announced her intention to choose four maids of
honor by personal inspection. Aside from the fact that they must be of
good family, they will be taken solely on account of their beauty, the
most beautiful to win."

Frances dropped her knife and fork and sprang to her feet, exclaiming:--

"I'm going to see the duchess! Thank you, cousin Ned! I'll be a maid of
honor!"

"Of course--beauty!" observed Sarah, resuming her supper with a dry
laugh.

"Your sister can win on the terms offered, if anyone can," said I,
turning sharply on Sarah.

"I am sure of it," returned Sarah. "I laughed only because _she_ is so
sure."

Frances then turned to her sister, not reproachfully but earnestly:
"Sure?" she exclaimed. "Of course I am sure. I know myself. You have a
far better mind than mine, but I have--well, I know what I have. I don't
believe I am vain, but I know, sister, that you and I must rebuild the
fortunes of our house, or worse will come to us than we have ever known.
You are sure to do your part because you have intellect--brains. _You_
know you have. Is it any less a matter of vanity for you to know yourself
than it is for me to know myself? I know what I have, and I intend to use
it."

Sarah assented by the monosyllable, "Right!" while Frances ran to the
head of the table, knelt by her father's chair, and said:--

"It is all for dear old father's sake."

Sir Richard brought his daughter's head to his shoulder, affectionately
smoothed her hair for a moment, and spoke with quavering earnestness:--

"It is not to be thought of one moment. Whitehall is a nest of infamy,
and the king, I am told, is the worst man in it. I gave all I had to his
martyred father, and now the son does not even so much as refuse to make
restitution. He simply gives lying promises and leaves me to starve. I am
surprised, nephew, that you come to us with this proposition."

"In that case, dear uncle, it shall be dropped at once," said I,
expecting, however, to take it up at another time.

Frances was about to insist, but a glance from Sarah stopped her, and she
remained silent. I knew it would require a great deal of sound argument
to bring Sir Richard to our way of thinking, but I was sure that Sarah
could soften him and that, at the right time, I could finish our helpless
antagonist. Meantime the love affair of Frances, if there was one, should
be looked into, if Frances did not object too seriously. In truth, I was
a very busy man, solely with the affairs of other people.

Being so engaged in telling of other people's affairs, I have not had
time to mention the fact that I had a love affair of my own, that is, if
I may call that a love affair which involved only one person--myself. She
who I hoped would one day be the party of the second part was Mary
Hamilton, sister to Count Anthony and George Hamilton, mention of whom
was made at the outset of this history.

I myself may have been lacking in morals, but at my worst I was a saint
compared to George Hamilton and his friends, Lord Berkeley, young
Wentworth, and the king's son, James Crofts, Duke of Monmouth. There was,
however, this difference between George and his friends: he was
gentlemanly picturesque in wickedness; they were nauseous in the
_filthiness_ of vice.

After I became a suitor for the hand of George Hamilton's sister, I had
closed my eyes to his shortcomings and, for some time prior to my
Sundridge visit, had sought to further my cause with her by winning her
brother's help. I had known Hamilton many years before, when we were
all exiles in Holland and France, and had always liked him. In fact, we
had been friends from our youth, and while in latter years I had not seen
much of him, having avoided him because of his vicious mode of life, I
had found no difficulty in taking up our old intimacy. At the time of
which I am writing I was sure that he was my friend and had given him
good reason to think the same of me. There was an attraction about him
that was winning and irresistible even to men. What must it have been to
women?

I speak of this friendship between George Hamilton and me at this time
because of the great strain its bonds were soon to have; so great that I
am still wondering why they did not break. To close this mention of my
own love affair, I would say that at the time of my visit to Sundridge
I had reasonable cause to hope for a favorable termination. Not that I
expected ever to kindle a fiery passion in Mary's breast, for she was not
of the combustible sort, but I believed she liked me, favored my suit,
and I hoped would accept me in the end. While she was very pretty, she
was not of so great beauty as to mislead her family into expecting that
she would catch an earl by fishing in a duck pond, and, barring the earl,
I should be a husband more or less satisfactory to her and her family.
George was my friend in the matter, and to him I believed I owed much of
my prospects of success. Soon the relation of my own love affair to that
of my cousin Frances will be apparent.

My second day at Sundridge was spent with my uncle and my cousins,
Frances remaining at home with us. Adroit Sarah had talked with her
father about the maid-of-honorship and had found an opportunity to tell
me that while he was not yet persuaded, he was at least in a receptive
mood, ready to listen to what I had to say. In the evening Frances and
Sarah went off to bed early, leaving Sir Richard to the mercies of myself
and a flagon of wormwood wine which I had brought in as an ally from the
Black Dog Tavern.

At first when I broached the subject of Frances becoming a maid of honor,
he turned away from me, saying:--

"I fear, nephew, I fear! I confess that I did not expect the suggestion
to come from you; you know the court even better than I do. My dear boy,
we might as well send the little girl to the devil at once."

"Whitehall is no heaven, I admit," I answered. "But you don't know
Frances. She will be as safe at court as she is in your house. The devil
is everywhere, uncle, if one chooses to seek him."

"That is true, Ned."

"And Frances will not seek him anywhere. Of that I was sure before I
determined to suggest this matter. It is true she has seen nothing of
life beyond the pale of your influence and protection, but you are well
along in years, uncle, and must face the truth that your daughters will
have to confront the world without you, sooner or later--later, I hope."

"That terrible truth is my only reason to fear death," returned Sir
Richard, sighing and leaning back in his chair.

"Yes, it must be a terrible thought to you," I answered, cruelly, for the
purpose of forcing my dear old antagonist into the right way of thinking.
"But it is your duty to your daughters to face it squarely, and if
possible, to let it help you in preparing them to meet the world. They
may, if they will, find evil everywhere; they may avoid it anywhere.
Frances, with her marvellous beauty, is sure to meet good fortune at
court, and good fortune is a great moral preservative of women."

"Bad doctrine, Ned, bad doctrine," said my uncle, shaking his head.

"But good truth," I answered. "Vice, like disease, breeds best in
poverty."

"You have just admitted that Whitehall is a nest of vice. Wealth has not
prevented it there," returned my uncle, beating me in the argument for a
moment.

But I soon rallied: "Wealth will not help those who want to go wrong, but
it has saved many a woman who wanted to be good. However, all this
argument is impertinent. Frances is strong, and she is good, and you may
rest your mind of all fear that she will ever be otherwise. Hers is not
only the virtue of goodness, but of stubbornness and pride."

"I believe you are right, nephew," returned my uncle, smiling for the
first time that evening. "Stubbornness is a good thing in a woman, and my
Frances has a store of it 'that might surprise one knowing her but
slightly."

"Yes," I replied. "And now, while her beauty is reaching its climax,
is the time for her to make the most of it. I know the world, uncle,
and I know the court, only too well, I am ashamed to say. But above all,
I know my cousin, and knowing also the evil state of your fortune, I
unhesitatingly urge you to seize the opportunity presented by the Duchess
of York. She is a good woman and my dear friend. Frances will be under
her care and mine. Of my care I need not boast. It shall be that of a
brother. But Frances will need no one's care for long. She will soon find
a husband, rich and of high rank, and then--"

"Would you send my girl out angling for a husband?" asked Sir Richard.

"Yes, if you insist on putting it so," I replied. "What is every girl
doing? What else is every good mother doing for her daughter? Marriage
is the one way in which a gentlewoman may find settlement in life.
Frances has no mother. Let us help her to win the happiness she deserves.
'Angling' is an ugly word, and in Frances's case is not the right one.
Great men and rich men will soon be angling for her. Let us place her
where the bait is worth taking. Let us not mince matters, but admit
between ourselves that we are sending Frances to court to make a good
marriage. No one less than a rich duke or a wealthy earl will satisfy
me. If you wish to allow a mere jealous fear in your heart to blight her
prospects, she will be the sufferer, and hereafter may thank your folly
for her misfortune."

Sir Richard remained silent a moment or two and then spoke tremulously:
"The saddest thing about age is its hesitancy, its doubts, its fears."
Here the tears began to stream down the old man's cheek as he continued:
"Through all my misfortunes Frances has been my joy, my solace. Sarah is
a good daughter, but she lacks the ineffable tenderness, the calm, ready
sympathy of her sister. If evil were to befall Frances, my heart would
break--break." He covered his face with his hands and sobbed, murmuring
as though to himself: "My God, I fear! I fear! She is my all--all! The
king has taken everything else, and now you ask me to give her to him."

A great lump came to my throat, but in a moment I was able to say: "Do
not fear, uncle, do not fear! Rather, rejoice! Let me be your staff, your
courage, your strength! Think it over till morning, and then give your
consent with the full assurance that it will mean happiness for the girl
whom you and I so dearly love."

The old man rose, took my hand, held it in his feeble grasp for a moment,
and went to his room without another word.

As I was going down the narrow passageway to my bedroom, Frances opened
her door and asked: "What does father say? I know it almost kills him."

"Yes," I answered. "But he will consent in the morning."

Tears came to her eyes and she gave me her hand, saying: "Thank you,
brother Ned. We are wounding him only for his own sake. If it were not to
help him, all the wealth in the world would not tempt me to give him this
pain nor to go to Whitehall, for I fear the place."

As she stood at the door, candle in hand, her low-cut gown exposing her
beautiful throat with its strong full curves, its gleaming whiteness and
the pulsing hollow at the base, her marvellous hair of sunlit gold
hanging in two thick braids to below her waist, her sweet oval face of
snowy whiteness, underlaid with the faint pink of roses, her great
luminous eyes with their arched and pencilled brows, and the tears
pendant from the long black lashes, I could not help knowing that there
was not in all Whitehall beauty to compare with hers. And when her full
red lips parted in a tearful smile, showing a gleam of ivory between
their curving lines, I knew that if our king were an unmarried man, she
could be our queen, but barring that high estate, I felt sure that a
score of titles and great fortunes would lie at her feet before she had
been a month in Whitehall. That is, I knew all this would happen if she
kept her head. The king himself would be her greatest danger, for in a
way, he was handsome of person when he kept his mouth closed, and even a
little beauty in a king, like a candlelight in a distant window, shines
with magnified radiance.

I went to bed that night having great faith in my cousin's strength and
discretion, but my confidence was to receive a shock the next day.




CHAPTER II

A MAIDEN ST. GEORGE


After breakfast the following morning, while Sir Richard and I were
sipping our morning draught in the dingy little library, he brought up
the subject of the night before.

"As you justly observed, Baron Ned," my uncle began, restraining his
emotion as best he could, "sooner or later my daughters will have to face
the world alone. I am of no help to them now, and perhaps shall be no
loss when I am gone, but it is like taking the heart out of me to send my
beautiful girl to this unholy king; the wickedest man in the vilest court
on earth. But it must be done. God help me and save her!"

"I will not go!" cried Frances, running into the room from the hallway,
and kneeling by her father's chair.

"I fear you must, Frances," answered Sir Richard. "There, there, we'll
say it is settled and let it rest a few days, so that we may grow used to
the thought before making our plans in detail."

       *       *       *       *       *

After dinner I missed Frances, and when I asked Sarah where she had gone,
I received answer in one word: "Walking."

"Alone?" I asked. Sarah smiled.

In a moment I said, "I think I, too, shall go walking."

"The Bourne Path is pretty," suggested Sarah.

"Will you come with me?" I asked.

Again Sarah smiled, shaking her head for answer, and I set off, taking my
way down the path which wound beside a rocky bourne, a distance of
several miles in the direction of Hamilton House, one of the country
places of Count Hamilton.

When I reached a point perhaps half a league from Sundridge, I saw a lady
and gentleman walking leisurely ahead of me. Her hand was on his arm, and
his head was bent toward her, evidently in earnest conversation. Her head
drooped prettily, indicating a listening mood, and the two seemed very
much like lovers in the early wooing stage. At once I recognized the
beautiful figure of my cousin Frances. The gentleman I did not know,
seeing only his back, though there was something familiar to me in the
tall, straight form, the broad shoulders, and the graceful carriage of
the head. He was a cavalier, every inch of him, from his long, dark,
slightly curling hair to the golden buckles on his shoes. He carried his
beaver hat in his hand, dragging the rich plume on the ground.

I hastened forward, but they were so interested in each other that they
did not know of my presence till I asked:--

"Cousin, won't you introduce me?"

Frances turned with a little scream, and the gentleman spun around
quickly, putting on his hat and dropping my cousin's hand, which he had
been holding. At first my surprise deprived me of the power to think, but
soon I recovered self-control, and said:--

"Ah, there is no need to introduce me, cousin. I already know Master
Hamilton."

"Yes," stammered the gentleman, holding out his hand, "Baron Ned and I
know each other well."

I did not take his hand, and when I saw anger mounting to his eyes, I
explained with the best smile at my command:--

"I do not take your hand, sir, because I have that to say to my cousin
which will greatly displease you. I am glad to have the opportunity of
saying it in your presence, as I dislike speaking ill of a man behind his
back."

"You need speak no ill of Master Hamilton either in his presence or
behind his back, if you intend to do so on my account," interrupted
Frances, throwing back her head defiantly.

But I was not to be halted in my duty. Here was a future duchess in
danger of being lost to the world for the sake of a vicious, penniless
gambler, having neither title, estates, nor character.

"I do not ask your permission, cousin," I answered, bowing and smiling,
for it is well to keep one's temper in such a case. "What I shall say is
the truth, word for word, and Master Hamilton himself shall be the
arbiter."

"Speaking the truth may be a great impertinence," remarked Frances,
trying to hide her anger under an air of carelessness.

"True," I returned. "And what I have to say will confirm your position.
Shall I speak now before Master Hamilton, or shall I say what I have to
say in your father's presence and send to Master Hamilton later a full
account of my remarks?"

"For my part, sir, I shall be glad to hear whatever you have to say now,"
interrupted Hamilton, with an angry gleam in his eyes and a poor attempt
at a smile playing about his mouth.

I would say here that I was confronting one of the bravest men in England
and one of the best swordsmen in the world. While he was not prone to
seek a quarrel, he certainly had never avoided one because of fear of his
antagonist.

I took advantage of my cousin's silence and, turning to Hamilton, said:
"If I speak one work of untruth, you are at liberty to give me the lie."
Then turning to Frances, I continued: "What I have to say, cousin, is
this, Master Hamilton is one of the most disreputable men at court."

Frances drew back, startled, and Hamilton grasped his sword hilt, drawing
the blade half from its scabbard.

I bowed, smiled, and said: "Tut, tut, Hamilton! A lady should never see a
naked sword blade. Later, later, of course, at your pleasure! I shall be
found at my uncle's house in Sundridge during the next three or four
days. After that you know my lodgings in the Wardrobe at Whitehall. I
shall be delighted to receive your messenger, if it is your pleasure,
after you have heard what I have to say."

His sword disappeared, and his smile broadened to a grim laugh: "You're
right, baron. Pardon my haste. There's ample time, ample time."

Turning to my cousin, I took up my thread: "Master Hamilton is penniless,
which is no small failing in itself. Therefore he lives by gambling,
which might be excusable if he did not cheat. In gambling, you know,
cousin, the mere law of chance will not put much money in a man's purse.
Good luck is but another name for skill in trickery. If one would thrive
by cards and dice, one must be a thief."

There was another angry movement by Hamilton, which I interrupted,
smiling, bowing, and saying, "Let us talk this matter over calmly,
smilingly, if possible."

"I'll smile when I can," returned Hamilton, made more angry, if that were
possible, by a paradoxical inclination to laugh. "Proceed, baron,
proceed! I am becoming interested in myself."

Frances gave a nervous little laugh, looked first to Hamilton, then to me
and back again, as though she would ask what it all meant, and I
continued:--

"As I have said, Frances, Master Hamilton and his friends live by
cheating at cards and other games in a manner to make all decent men
avoid play with them. They pluck strangers and feather their purses from
new geese who do not know their methods. They also derive considerable
revenue from passe women who have more wealth than beauty, are more
brazen than modest, and more generous than chaste."

"I'll not listen to another word!" exclaimed Frances, looking up to
Hamilton in evident wonder at his complacency.

"Just one moment longer, Frances," I insisted. "Master Hamilton's
intimate friends have been known on more than one occasion to stoop to
the crimes of theft, robbery, and even murder to obtain money, and have
escaped punishment only because of royal favor. I do not say that Master
Hamilton has ever participated in these crimes, but he knew of them, did
not condemn them, helped the criminals to escape justice, and retained
the guilty men as his associates and nearest friends. Add to this list
the fact that Hamilton is a roue and a libertine, to whom virtue is but a
jest, and with whom no pure woman, knowing him, would be seen alone, and
I believe I have drawn a picture of a man who is in no way fit to be
your companion in a lonely stroll. On the other hand, he is a brave man,
a generous enemy, a staunch friend, and a ready help at all times to the
needy. Now I have finished what has been a disagreeable though imperative
duty. Doubtless it has been disagreeable to you, also, Master Hamilton,
but--"

"On the contrary," he interrupted, in low tones, and with bowed head.

"But, of course, I am ready to stand by my words," I continued. "And now,
sir, you may, if you wish, say to Mistress Jennings that I have lied.
Doubtless she will believe you, in which case it shall be my pleasure to
send a messenger to you, thereby saving you the trouble of sending one to
me."

I put on my hat and awaited his reply. His hat was in his hand, and his
face was bent toward the ground, his air of ironical politeness having
left him. Frances turned to him and was about to speak, but, noticing the
peculiar expression in his face and attitude, remained silent. After a
long pause Hamilton spoke without lifting his eyes:--

"I suppose no other man ever received such an arraignment in cold blood
as I have just heard from Baron Clyde." Then turning hesitatingly to my
cousin, "But I am sorry to say it is true, Mistress Jennings, true in
every word."

He looked into my eyes, again bowed his head, and spoke after a long
silence: "Baron Ned, I can almost find it in my heart to thank you for
having done your duty so bravely. I have known for some time that I am
not fit to be this lady's companion and that I have no right to seek her
friendship."

I bowed low, without speaking, and after another long pause he looked up
to me again as he asked:--

"Now will you take my hand?"

"Gladly, George," I answered, giving him my hand, which he held for a
moment and dropped without a word, a strange smile playing about his
lips.

Naturally enough, Frances was at a loss how to act. Tears of vexation
came to her eyes, and she turned from us to dry them with her
handkerchief. She failed to find the handkerchief, so she turned to
George, who, seeing her need, drew it from his pocket where she had left
it for safe-keeping. The first favor a young girl shows to a man when
she finds herself in a "coming on disposition" is to hide some of her
intimate personal belongings in his pocket. The little incident of the
handkerchief caused us all to laugh and went a long way toward making us
easy.

Hamilton's frankness had taken part of the wind out of my sails, and his
open confession had at least paved the way for absolution, which I feared
might be followed by disastrous results, since to forgive always makes
the heart grow fonder.

Presently Hamilton turned to Frances, saying: "You may better appreciate
your cousin's fidelity to your interest when I tell you that in speaking
thus frankly to you, he placed himself in danger of two misfortunes, both
of which, probably, he felt sure would befall him. Please do not think
that I boast, but it is true, nevertheless, that my sword point is
considered one of the most dangerous in England. Doubtless Baron Ned
expected to be called upon to stand by his words. Furthermore, he is a
suitor for my sister's hand, as you may know, and of late has sought my
friendship, in part, no doubt, for the purpose of forwarding his cause."

At this point he turned toward me and smiled. I, too, smiled, though not
joyously, for I thought surely this affair would ruin all my chances with
Mary.

"Therefore," continued Hamilton, "he had much to lose in arraigning me,
and nothing to gain but your welfare. You must see that it was
unselfishly done. If there is gratitude in your heart, give it here." He
placed his hand on my shoulder and, after a long pause and an apparent
effort, finished what he had to say: "Forget me. I am unworthy to speak
your name or to have the great joy of hearing you speak mine."

This was taking the wind out of my sails at a great rate. In truth, it
was taking the sails themselves, though I believed he was not speaking
for sake of the advantage. In a moment he bowed low, sweeping the plume
of his hat in the dust, saying as he left us:--

"Farewell, Mistress Jennings, and thank you, Baron Ned. You say I am a
staunch friend. You have still to learn the whole truth of your praise."

Turning instantly, he hastened away from us down the Bourne Path, and
though we waited for him to look back, he disappointed us, and soon was
lost as he passed beyond a bend. Frances was weeping gently, and I, too,
felt a lump in my throat, not because of what I had said or done, but
because of the unexpected good I had found in Hamilton, whom I had always
liked; good, which up to that time I had never suspected, having always
seen him in the shadow of a throne.

When Hamilton had disappeared, I asked Frances if we should return
to Sundridge, and she answering by a nod, we started home, each of us
heavy-hearted, one of us weeping pathetically. Her heart had just
received its first sharp blow, and I pitied her, for the first one hurts.

After walking a little way in silence, I remarked, "There is no reason
why we should add to your father's troubles by telling him of this
affair."

"Nor Sarah," sobbed Frances. "She is like a wasp--all sting." After a
long pause devoted to drying her eyes, she continued, "But it has not
been much of an affair."

"I am not asking what it has been, Frances," I returned, speaking
tenderly, for I knew her heart was sore. "I have no right to ask."

"Yes, you have the right to ask," she replied, earnestly. "You have
earned it to-day, if never before. I'll tell you all about it. You see I
did not know--I did not think it possible--that he was the evil person
you described. To me he seemed as high-minded as he was gallant and
handsome."

"He is high-minded in many respects," I said, "and might have been a
decent man in all respects had he lived under other conditions. He is far
the best of what is known at court as 'the Royal Clique,' and is an angel
of goodness compared with the king and his despicable son, James Crofts,
Duke of Monmouth. Do you want to tell me where and how you met Hamilton?"

After a moment's silence she began her pathetic little narrative,
hesitating at first, but gathering courage as she spoke:--

"I first saw him on the street in St. Albans, more than a month ago. Of
course I did not look directly at him, but I saw him and knew that he was
looking at me. I have been used to being stared at by men since I was a
child of twelve--I am past eighteen now, you know--and learned long
ago not to resent an impertinence which is alike unavoidable and, in a
poor way, flattering. But there was this difference: when he stared at me
I blush to say I liked it, nor should I have repulsed him had he spoken
to me. He was the first man I had ever seen that had really attracted me.
You are not a woman, therefore you cannot understand me fully. You see, a
man goes to a woman; a woman is drawn to a man, usually, I suppose,
against her will. I know little about the subject, this being my first,
and, I hope, my last experience, but--"

"And I, too, hope," I interrupted.

"Yes," she continued quickly. "But do you know I can almost understand
the feeble, hopeless resistance which the iron tries to exert against the
magnet. But, cousin Ned, it is powerless."

Here she brought her handkerchief to her eyes, and I exclaimed
regretfully, "Oh, Frances, I am surprised and sorry!"

"Yes, yes! I, too, was surprised, and was so sorry that I wept through
the whole night following my first sight of him, and between shame for
what I felt and longing to see him again, I suffered terribly. I prayed
for strength against this, my first temptation, and then my heart shrunk
in fear lest I should never again be tempted. The next day I walked out
on the Bourne Path toward Hamilton House and met him. To my shame I
confess that I looked at him. He stopped, bowed low before me, and asked
if he might introduce himself, since there was no one else to do that
office for him. He said that soon Lord St. Albans would be up from
London and would introduce him to my father. But having seen me the day
before at St. Albans, he was unable to wait; therefore, he was at that
moment on his way to Sundridge, hoping to see me. He seemed confused and
shy, but from what you say, I fear he was not."

"Oh, yes, he was," I interrupted, in fine irony. "George Hamilton is as
shy and as modest as the devil himself."

"I fear it is true," she answered smiling faintly and sighing.

I could see plainly that she did not look upon satanic modesty as a
serious fault in itself, and I fear it is not objectionable to her sex.
It is the manner of brazenness more than the fact which is offensive.
George's modest-faced boldness was both alluring and dangerous.

As she progressed she grew eager in her narrative, and after two or three
false starts, continued: "Then he said that Count Hamilton, our neighbor,
was his brother. I was silent for a moment, but presently was so foolish
as to say that I had seen him at St. Albans and had asked a shopkeeper
who he was. You see I was confused. I had not at all intended to say that
I had seen him, and certainly would have concealed the fact that I had
asked about him. But I said what I said because I could not help it."

"On that ground it may be excusable," I suggested.

"No, no," she protested. "It can be excused on no grounds. But I did it,
and it can't be helped now. Without waiting for permission, he turned,
and we walked together almost to Hamilton House. I suppose, under the
circumstances, he considered it best not to ask for a permission which
might have been refused, and from his standpoint doubtless he was right.
Take without asking seems to be man's best method with woman. When I saw
we were approaching Hamilton House, I turned about for home, hoping, yet
fearing, that he would not go back with me. But he did."

"Yes, you were sure to be disappointed in that respect," I answered. And
she continued hastily:--

"Yes, he walked all the way with me. Before reaching Sundridge stile, I
asked him to leave me. That was another mistake, for it gave to our
meeting a clandestine appearance. He said my word was law to him, and
that he would obey, though to do so, that is, to leave me, was pain, you
understand."

"Yes, I can understand that he did not want to leave you," I answered.
But I saw that she had not finished, so I remained silent, and in a
moment she continued:--

"He had been so respectful to me throughout that I thought him a modest,
well-behaved gentleman, and--"

I laughed, interrupting her to explain: "All art, Frances, all art.
You'll find much of that manufactured modesty at court. It is the trump
card in the game of love and is but a cloak for brazenness."

"Yes, I so found it," she answered, drooping her head, "for when he was
about to leave me at a secluded spot, he took my hand and would have
kissed me without so much as 'By your leave,' had I not caught his intent
before it was too late. I drew away, inclined to be angry, and said,
'Sir, one may overrun one's course by going too fast.'"

"That truism, under like circumstances at court, would have made you
famous," I said, pleased alike with her naivete and her wisdom.

"I tried, with fair success, to appear offended," she continued, blushing
deeply, "but the awful truth certainly is that I was not. I suppose it is
true that women like boldness and do not find wickedness in men as
distasteful as mothers say it is."

"On the contrary," I remarked, growing more and more delighted with her
wisdom, innocence, and candor.

"Yes," she continued, blushing exquisitely, "even since you have told me
how wicked he is, I am not sure that I like him less, though I fear him
and shall avoid him as I should a pestilence."

"Ah, but will you, can you, Frances?" I asked.

"Indeed, yes, brother Ned, and if you doubt me, you don't know me," she
returned.

"But do you know yourself?" I asked.

"Yes, now I do, thanks to your bravery," she answered.

"But you saw him many times after his first bold attempt," I suggested.

"Oh, it was easily forgiven," she returned, naively. "Yes, I have met him
almost every day since then. The days I did not see him seemed to be
blanks in my life. After his first boldness, he was always courteous. He
never again became familiar, but seemed to try only to convince me of his
regard in most respectful terms, and--and I listened all too willingly,
but made no answer save what I could not conceal in my manner. That, I
fear, was answer all too plain. But now you have opened my eyes, and I
see clearly. I owe you a debt of gratitude I can never repay."

"If you go to court, this affair will have been a good lesson," I
returned encouragingly. "For there you must learn to despise the
proffered love of men, whether it be pretended or real, until one comes
who is worthy of you in person, wealth, and station."

"Yes, I shall," she answered earnestly. "But here we are at home. As you
suggest, let us not speak of this poor little affair."

"By no means," I answered, as I opened the gate.

"And Baron Ned," she said, holding me back for a moment, "have no fear
that I shall lose my heart at court to the detriment of my fortune. I may
not consider myself--only my father and my house. It is my duty to make
him happy, and I am going to do it without regard to any other purpose in
life. My having known Master Hamilton will not only keep other men out of
my heart, but will help me to know them and will lead me to fear them
when I go to court."

Later in the evening my cousin and I walked out in town, and I had a long
talk with her, partly concerning Hamilton, a theme to which she always
returned, and partly concerning conditions she would meet if she became a
maid of honor. And my faith in her grew as we talked.

That night I went to sleep convinced that my beautiful cousin was strong
enough and shrewd enough to evade all the pitfalls of Whitehall, and that
her experience with Hamilton had been the one thing needful to make her
keenly alive to her danger. I felt that she was safe, but--

Near the hour of two o'clock the next afternoon, Sir Richard and I,
returning from a short walk, did not find Frances at home, so I made my
way to the Bourne Path, thinking it hardly possible that in the face of
yesterday's events Frances could have gone to meet Hamilton. Still one
can never tell; therefore I took the benefit of the doubt and set forth
to make sure.

When perhaps two miles from Sundridge, the day being warm, I climbed to a
ledge of rock on the shelving bank of the bourne, twelve or fifteen feet
above the path, and sat down to rest in the cool shade of a clump of
bushes. Below me, perhaps five or six feet above the path and far enough
back among the bushes to be hidden from passers-by, was another rocky
shelf or bench, admirably fitted to accommodate two persons.

Sarah had told me, after much questioning, that Frances had left home
only a few minutes before Sir Richard and I had returned. I had walked
rapidly, and as I had not overtaken her, I concluded I was on the wrong
scent.

Within ten minutes I discovered that I was not on the wrong scent, for,
much to my surprise, sorrow, and disgust, I saw Frances and Hamilton come
around a turn in the path, push aside the bushes as though they knew the
place, enter the dense thicket bordering the path, and sit down on the
rocky bench beneath me. My first impulse was to speak, but for many
reasons I determined to listen. Silence reigned below me during the next
minute or two, and then Hamilton spoke:--

"You must deem me a coward, Mistress Jennings, since I did not call your
cousin to account for what he said yesterday?"

"No," she answered. "It was brave of you to refrain. It must be a great
deal easier for a gentleman to resent an insult than to endure it. My
cousin said as much to me yesterday evening. He said he had always known
that you were brave, but that he had not expected to find in you the
moral courage to bear his words with equanimity. He also said he was glad
he did not have to meet you in a duel, because you were so greatly his
superior with the sword. It was brave of you not to challenge him.
Perhaps it was on my account you desisted."

"No, it was because I respected him far more than any man I have ever
known, and because he told the truth. Do not speak of my bravery in the
same breath with his. He was as cool as though he were telling an amusing
story."

"He certainly was," returned Frances, laughing softly and closing with a
sigh.

"But he had truth on his side, and truth is a great stimulant to
courage," remarked Hamilton.

Frances sighed again, diligently studying her hands resting listlessly on
her lap.

"Yes, he told the truth," continued Hamilton. "That is why I sent the
letter to you early this morning, asking you to meet me for the last
time--the last time, Frances. This is not a mere promise to lure you on,
but the truth, for I have learned my lesson from Baron Ned, and with
God's help, I, too, shall hereafter protect you from all evil, including
myself. It is not the Hamilton of yesterday who is speaking to you, but a
new man, born again in the fierce light your cousin threw upon me. I
feared you might resent his effort to protect you, and I wanted to tell
you again that he spoke nothing but the truth, and that he did his duty
where another man less brave would have failed."

Frances sighed audibly, and I was sure her eyes were filled with tears.

"Hereafter I shall be as honest with you and as brave for your welfare as
Baron Ned was yesterday," said Hamilton, his voice choking with emotion.
"I see you now for the last time, unless--" He stopped speaking for a
moment and, taking her hand, continued hesitatingly, "Does the thought
pain you?"

"I suppose I should say no," answered the girl, withdrawing her hand.
"But you see, I, too, have a little moral courage, and, in the face of an
inevitable future, do not fear to say, yes, the greatest pain I have ever
known."

He moved toward her with evident intent to embrace her, but she rose,
saying calmly, almost coldly:--

"Master Hamilton, do you wish me to leave you?"

In Hamilton's place, I should have preferred trying to embrace St.
George's dragon rather than the girl standing before him.

Hamilton bowed with humility and said: "Please do not fear. Sit down and
hear me out. I shall not detain you long."

She sat down, seeming to feel that notwithstanding her recent admission,
there was no danger of further unseemly demonstration on Hamilton's part.

"I want to say," continued Hamilton, "that while Baron Ned spoke the
truth, I have never been guilty of the crimes which it is said some of my
friends have committed. I am unworthy enough in every respect, but I am
innocent of murder and robbery. I shall mend my ways from now on. I don't
ask you to believe in me, but when I am at all worthy of your kind
regard, I shall tell you, and you _may_ believe me, for from this day
forth I shall try to be as truthful as Baron Ned. No man can be more so."

Frances sighed and answered, "I hope so."

Hamilton again took her hand, which she now permitted him to retain, and
continued: "If I am ever so fortunate as to gain wealth and position
worthy of you, I shall kneel at your feet, if you are free to hear me. If
the good fortune never comes, this will be our farewell."

"I hope the good fortune will come soon, for your sake, and--" But she
did not finish.

"Yes, yes, and--and--?" asked George, pleadingly.

"Yes, and for my own sake," she answered, turning her face from him,
probably to hide the tears that were in her eyes.

"I shall see that good fortune does come," said he, "but I do not ask you
to wait an hour for it. If happiness comes to you in the right man--I
cannot finish. Good-by!"

He rose, bent over her, kissed her hand, and was about to leave her
hastily, evidently in fear of himself. But she clung to his hand and,
drawing him down to her, offered him her lips. At first he seemed to draw
away, but unable to resist, caught her in his arms, kissed her, and fled.

Frances thrust aside the bushes and watched him as he walked rapidly down
the path. When he turned, just before reaching the bend, she kissed her
hand to him, murmuring as though speaking to herself, "Good-by, good-by!"
Then she sat down and covered her face with her hands.

After a short time she rose, dried her eyes, and started home, and in a
few minutes I climbed the hill and took a short cut to Sundridge. I
reached home before Frances, and, notwithstanding all I had seen, was
fully convinced that she would be as safe in Whitehall Court as in her
father's house.

       *       *       *       *       *

That evening Frances and I walked out together, and I, feeling stricken
in conscience, confessed that I had witnessed the interview between her
and Hamilton. She was surprised, and at first was inclined to be angry,
but she had so little vindictiveness in her nature and was so gentle of
disposition that her ill-temper was but the shadow of anger, and soon
passed away. Then, too, her good common sense, of which she had an ample
fund, came to her help and told her that whatever I had done was for her
own good. So the rare smile, which was one of her greatest charms, came
to her face, like the diaphanous glow of a good spirit, rested for a
moment on her lips, mounted to her eyes and faded slowly away, as though
it would linger a moment to ask my forgiveness.

"I am glad I witnessed the interview," said I, drawing her hand through
my arm to reassure her, "for notwithstanding all that happened, I now
feel sure you are to be trusted."

"But am I?" she asked, showing a self-doubt which I wished to remove.

"Yes, you will have no greater trial at court than the one through which
you have just passed. You have combated successfully not only your own
love, but the love of the man you love."

"Ah, Baron Ned, don't!" she exclaimed, in mild reproach, shrinking from
the thought I had just uttered so plainly.

"It is always well to look misfortunes squarely in the face," I answered.
"It helps one to despise them. The thing we call bad luck can't endure a
steady gaze."

"It will help me in one respect,--this--this--what has happened," she
returned, hanging her head.

"In what way?" I asked, catching a foreboding hint of her meaning.

She hesitated, but, after an effort, brought herself to say, "I shall
never again have to combat my own heart, and surely that is the hardest
battle a woman ever has to fight."

"Because your heart is already full?" I asked.

She nodded "Yes," her eyes brimming with tears.

Her heart was not only full of her first love, which of itself is a
burden of pain to a young girl, but also it was sore from the grief of
her first loss, the humiliation of her first mistake, and the pang of her
first regret for what might have been.

"It will all pass away, Frances," I returned assuringly.

"Ah, will it, Baron Ned? You know so much more about such matters than I,
who know nothing save what I have learned within the last few weeks."

"I feel sure it will," I answered.

"I wish I felt sure," she returned, trying to smile, but instead
liberating two great tears that had been hanging on her lashes.

After pausing in thought a moment, she said: "But I believe I should
despise myself were I to learn that what I have just done had been
prompted by a mere passing motive. I shall never again see him as I have
seen him. Of that I have neither fear nor doubt, but this I cannot help
but know: he is the first man who has ever come into my heart, and I fear
that in all my life I shall never be able to put him out entirely."

"But you may see him at Whitehall," I suggested. "What then?"

"If he remains there, I shall not. But when he learns that his presence
will drive me away, I know he will leave," she answered.

"I believe you estimate him justly. Did you tell him you were going to
court?" I asked.

"No," she answered, "because I am not sure that I shall go."

"Then we'll not tell him," I suggested.

"Nor any one else?" she asked.

"By all means, no one else," I replied. "I am sure you will win in this
beauty contest, but you might fail, in which case we should be sorry if
any one knew of the attempt."

"I shall not fail," she answered confidently, though not in vanity.

"But Hamilton said he would return to the siege when he had made his
fortune," I suggested.

"Of that I have no hope," she returned dolefully, "and I shall put him
out of my thoughts if I can, as soon as I can."

"It must be done now," I returned emphatically.

"Ay, it is easy to say 'now,' but 'now' is a hard, hard time. It is much
easier to do a difficult thing to-morrow. But do not fear, Baron Ned. It
shall be done, and I shall marry a duke or an earl, loathing him."

She was almost ready to weep, so, believing that she would like to be
alone, I left her.

Within half an hour she was at home, sitting in a low chair by her
father's side, laughing, happy, and beautiful, with that rare,
indefinable home charm a woman may have which is as far beyond the mere
beauty of hair and skin and eyes as the sparkle of a bright mysterious
star is beyond the beauty of the moon's pale sheen.

With all my cousin's marvellous beauty, her rarest charm lay in her
gracious manner, her unobtrusive vivacity, and her quaint combination of
Sarah's Machiavellian wisdom with the intense femininity of Eve. Add to
these qualities the unmistakable mark which a pure heart leaves on the
face, and we complete the picture of one who in a short time was
acknowledged to be without a peer in Whitehall, the most famous beauty
court the world has ever known.

Before I left Sundridge it had been agreed among us all that Frances
should go to London, though the plans had not been arranged nor the time
fixed. There was no need of haste, as the choosing of the maids would not
be closed for two months or more. I left with my uncle funds necessary
for the purchase of gowns, and the payment of other expenses, and, with
his consent, undertook to notify the Duchess of York that Frances would
seek to enter her Grace's service in the near future. Then I went back to
London, and when next I saw my cousin it was in the shadow of a tragedy.

My uncle's humble friend, Roger Wentworth, the leather merchant of
Sundridge, had a brother living in London, who was also a leather
merchant, Sir William Wentworth. He had been Lord Mayor at one time, and
had been knighted by the king because of a loan made by the city to his
Majesty. Sir William was an honest, simple man, who cared little to rise
above his class, but he had a wife who thrilled to the heart whenever she
heard the words "Lady Wentworth," and experienced a spasm of delight
whenever she saw her name in the news letters or journals.

Sir William had a son, also, who imagined himself to be ornamental, but
laid no claim to usefulness of any sort. Lady Wentworth concurred
heartily and proudly in her son's opinion of himself and encouraged his
uselessness to a point where it became worthlessness. But Sir William
took no pains to conceal his disappointment and disgust. Young William
held a small post at court, and, being supplied with money by his mother,
was one of the evil spirits of the set composed of Crofts, Berkeley,
Little Jermyn, the court lady-killer, and others too numerous and too
vicious to mention. Wentworth was goose to these pluckers and was willing
to give his feathers in exchange for their toleration.

       *       *       *       *       *

Shortly after I left Sundridge, Sir Richard learned that Roger
intended journeying to London in the course of a month to buy leather,
so he asked him to take Frances with him. To this request Roger gladly
and proudly assented. He usually travelled a-horseback to London, but
this being a state occasion, he brought out his old coach, a huge
lumbering concern, and had it painted a brilliant green in honor of his
fair passenger-to-be. Roger also promised Frances the services of his
sister-in-law with the Duchess of York, a help so great, in Roger's
opinion, that it could not be overestimated.

I had been at home more than a month before Frances started on her
journey. I did not know when she expected to leave Sundridge, as we had
agreed that she should notify me as soon as she reached London.

I had seen George on several occasions after my return from Sundridge,
and although he said little about himself, I knew from others that he
was at least trying to quit his old way of life and to avoid his evil
friends. Soon after my return to court he went to France, and I did
not see him again for several months, although he came home, most
unfortunately, and spent a day or two in London at the time of Frances's
arrival, of which he knew nothing until after his return to France.

All that took place at Sundridge after I left there and the occurrences
on my cousin's journey to London, I learned from her and from Hamilton
afterwards, though I shall write them down now in the order of their
happening.

Early one morning Roger presented himself at my uncle's house with the
huge green coach drawn by two horses so fat that they could hardly
breathe, driven by an old servant, Noah Sullivan, who was so fat that at
times he could not breathe at all.

The season was fair for travelling, and barring a heavy rain, the road to
London would be good. But it had a bad reputation for highwaymen, and no
cautious man with anything to lose cared to risk a journey after dark,
especially near London, save with a guard. Roger was taking with him a
thousand pounds in gold; therefore it was desirable that he and his fair
passenger should reach the city before nightfall. To do this with the fat
horses, he must start early,--a fact of which Frances had received due
notice.

On the appointed morning she was ready when the coach drove up. Her box
was placed in the boot, and she took a seat beside her old friend Roger,
giving vent to the tears she had held back so bravely while saying
good-by to her father and Sarah, who were to move up to London in case
she remained at court.

Wheezy old Noah on the box cracked his whip, the fat horses in the traces
pulled and grunted, the coach creaked and groaned, the wheels turned and
Frances had set forth, a maiden St. George, to fight the dragon of
Whitehall, compared to which the old-time monster was but a bleating
lamb. Roger had hoped to be in his brother's house long before sundown,
but when he reached that justly famous halfway house, the Cock and Spur,
Noah insisted that the fat horses were so badly winded that a rest of
several hours was necessary before they could proceed a step farther.
Roger argued with his Master of Horse, but to no purpose. The fat horses
rested till near the hour of five, when Noah yielded to his master's
importunities and the journey was resumed. Meantime an unexpected rain
had begun to fall, which increased in violence as night approached. The
road grew heavier as the journey progressed, and the wheezy horses
required rest so frequently that Roger began to fear for the safety of
his gold and his fair passenger.

Supper time approached, but Roger was so anxious to reach London before
dark that he asserted his right as master and refused to stop at an inn
where Noah had drawn up the horses, insisting that they be fed.
Considerable time was lost in argument with Noah, but at last they took
the road once more, which by that time had become very heavy. Night fell
without twilight, because of the storm, and the travellers were overtaken
by darkness just as they reached the most dangerous part of the road
within less than a league of London.

The road grew heavier with every turn of the wheels, the horses wheezed
dismally, and Roger groaned inwardly. He kept his head out of the coach
door most of the time, looking for trouble, and found it before his
journey's end. Noah lighted the great lanthorn and hung it in front of
the dashboard, his only cause of anxiety being the horses, until a
greater arose.




CHAPTER III

IT IS HARD TO BE GOOD


There is an infernal charm about sin which should have been given to
virtue, but unluckily got shifted in very early human days. And so it was
that George Hamilton had troubles of his own in this respect. When he
left Frances Jennings at Sundridge, he was aglow with good resolutions,
all of which were to be put into immediate practice, and many of which he
carried out in part by strong though spasmodic effort when he returned
to court.

His attempts to be decent at first filled his friends with surprise, then
disgust, then raillery. The untoward thing had never been tried at
Charles II's Whitehall, and it furnished a deal of talk between routine
scandals. In fact, it was looked upon as a scandal in itself.

This new phase in one of the king's own subdevils soon fell under the
notice of his Majesty, who asked George one day if he would like to have
an easy benefice in the church where he could meditate on his past and
build for the future.

"And pray for Lady Castlemain's unbaptized children, your Majesty?" asked
George, whereupon the king shrugged his shoulders and turned away. Lady
Castlemain and Charles were--well, there had been talk about them, to say
the least.

The court ladies laughed when George declined to drink himself drunk or
refused to help his former companions fleece a stranger. Nell Gwynn told
him that even his language had grown too polite for polite society, and,
lacking emphasis, was flat as stale wine. In truth, it may well be said
that George had set out to mend his ways under adverse conditions. But he
_had_ set out to do it, and that in itself was a great deal, for there is
a likable sort of virtue in every good intent. He had reached the first
of the three great R's in the act of repentance, Recognition; Regret and
Recession being the second and third--all necessary to regeneration. I
had faith in his good intentions, but doubted his ability.

Hamilton and I had become fast friends, and by his help my suit of his
sister Mary had prospered to the extent of a partial engagement of
marriage. That is to say, Mary's mother, an old worldling of the hardest
type, had thought it well to secure me and to keep me dangling, to be
landed in case no better fish took the hook. I was aware of the mother's
selfish purposes, but did not believe that Mary shared them, though I
knew her to be an obedient child. This peculiar condition of affairs
somewhat nettled me, though I do not remember that I was at all unhappy
because of it.

But to come back to George. One day, a fortnight before Frances's arrival
in London, while he and I were watching the royal brothers, King Charles
and the Duke of York, playing pall-mall, I expressed my doubts and fears
of his ultimate success in reformation so long as he remained in any way
associated with Crofts, Berkeley, Wentworth, and others of the vicious
clique.

"Yes, I know it is an uphill journey," returned George, laughing with a
touch of bitterness, "but think of my reward if I succeed!"

"Do you mean my cousin?" I asked.

"Yes, but I have little hope," he replied, though perhaps he had more
hope than he expressed.

I had told him of her intention to come to London, hoping that he would
leave before her arrival, as he did, though neither he nor I knew when
she was coming. So I asked:--

"Don't you know that she will be carried off by some rich lord before you
are half good enough for her?"

"I suppose so," he answered, with a sigh.

"You must know that she is coming for that purpose," I returned, wishing
to take all hope out of him.

He winced perceptibly and answered after a long pause, nodding his head
in the direction of the king: "There is the only man I fear--the king.
But rather than see her the victim of any man, by God, I'll kill him,
though it cost me my life the next moment!"

I was touched by the new light in which I saw him and took his arm in
friendliness as I said, "I judged you wrongfully at Sundridge."

"You were right," he answered impatiently. "You awakened in me not only a
sense of my duty to Frances, but a knowledge of my obligation to myself."

"But are you so sure of my cousin, even barring other men?" I asked,
hoping to sow the seeds of doubt.

"Yes," he answered, with emphasis. "As sure as a man may be in such a
case."

"Well, George," said I, "it warms my heart to say that I hope you will
gain wealth, station, and mode of life worthy of her, and that in the end
you may win her. My candid opinion is, however, that you will have to do
it quickly. She will accept none of these creatures at court, of that you
may be sure, but there are many worthy gentlemen in England who are rich
and of great name, who have business at court and will see her and want
her. There is Dick Talbot, Duke of Tyrconnel. He is a fine fellow,
enormously rich, and--"

"A mere lump of meat," interrupted Hamilton, angrily. "She could not love
him."

"No," I answered. "Nor do I think she will try. But it is better in
the long run that a woman respect a man, not loving him, than to love,
despising him. Respect is likely to last; all sorts of love may die. But
in any case it is Frances's intention to marry a fortune for her father's
sake, even though she has to close her eyes in doing it."

"I'll try to prevent that misfortune," he answered gloomily. "But if
she learns to love a man worthy of her, I shall take myself out of her
way forever. Let us stand together, Baron Ned, and help this girl to
happiness for life, without respect to myself. You see I'm not all bad.
In truth, I am becoming self-righteous. I have left the ranks of the
publicans and sinners and have become a Pharisee. I tell you, Baron Ned,
nothing so swells a man in the chest as the belief that he is not as
other men are."

His righteousness, at least, was not devoid of bitterness, and it is
possible that a part of his aversion to his former friends and to the
king grew out of his jealousy of them for Frances's sake.

"There is no good reason why you should allow your righteousness to
become offensive, as that of the ranter, who hates rather than pities
iniquity because, in his opinion, God is a God of vengeance," I suggested
ironically. "But rather let your virtues grow as the rose unfolds and--"

"Oh, be damned to your raillery! I'm not going to be too decent!" he
retorted, finding nothing to amuse him in my remark. Nor did he become
too decent, as will appear all too soon.

If, for a time, Hamilton's life did not conform to our desires, we must
not condemn him too harshly, for the evil which we try to throw off
clings like a bur, while the good we would keep must be tied on. Thus
much I say in anticipation. In the end he gained the battle with himself,
though his victory won him the king's hatred, put his life in jeopardy,
and brought him misfortune such as he had never before known.

Soon after the foregoing conversation, George went to Paris and remained
a few days with King Louis, whom he had known since early youth. His evil
star brought him back to London the day before Frances left Sundridge,
though, he knew nothing of her departure. I did not know of his return,
nor did I know of his remote connection with the terrible events
attending her arrival till long after they happened.

       *       *       *       *       *

While Frances, Roger, and the fat horses were struggling through the mud,
the darkness, and the rain, a band of congenial spirits were gathered
about the huge fireplace in the taproom of the Leg Tavern in King Street,
Westminster, a stone's throw from Whitehall Palace. There was my Lord
Berkeley, the king's especial crony, who possessed all his royal master's
vices without any of his Majesty's meagre virtues. He imitated the king
in dress, manner, cut of beard, and even in the use of Charles's favorite
oath, "Odds fish!" an expletive too inane even to be wicked, being a
distortion of the words "God's flesh." There was young Crofts, the
king's acknowledged son, Duke of Monmouth by grace of his mother's
frailties. He was a living example of the doctrine of total depravity
in what purported to be a man. There was John Churchill, a very decent
fellow in a politic way, though in bad company. He afterward married
my laconic cousin Sarah, whose shrewdness made him the first Duke of
Marlborough, and last, I regret to chronicle, was George Hamilton,
resting from his labors at self-reform. Soon after dark another congenial
spirit, the most pusillanimous of them all, young William Wentworth, Sir
William's son and Roger's nephew, entered the taproom dripping with rain.
Before going to the fire, he called Crofts and Berkeley to one side.
Placing his arms about their necks, he drew their faces close to his and
made the following remarkable communication in a low whisper:--

"At the supper table, to-night, my worthy sire let slip the information
that my good uncle of Sundridge had been expected this afternoon. He had
not arrived when I left home fifteen minutes ago, but probably is stuck
in the mud a mile or two outside of London on the St. Albans road."

"Let him stick! What is it to us?" asked Crofts.

"Thus much it is to me," answered Wentworth. "He has with him a thousand
pounds in gold, while I, his gentleman nephew, have not a jacobus to my
name. Now the question becomes one of mere humanity. Shall we allow my
good uncle to stick in the mud, or shall we sally forth like good
Samaritans, relieve him of a part of his load, and make travelling easier
for the dear old man?"

"As men and Christians, we must hasten to his help," declared Crofts.

"But how about Hamilton and Churchill?" asked Berkeley, whose courage was
not of the quality to make a good highwayman. "Crofts has invited them
here for a feast with us. How shall we get rid of them? Hamilton has
become a mere milksop, and Churchill always was too cautious and politic
for this sort of a game. Not only will they refuse to go with us if we
tell them of our purpose, but they will try to keep us from going."

"Let us take them with us," suggested Crofts. "They won't go if we tell
them our purpose, but they will not peach if we take them with us upon
some other excuse. We'll walk ahead of them, and--but come with me to the
fire. I have a plan. All I ask you to do, Wentworth, is to shake out your
cloak, hang it before the fire, and speak of the rain and the bad night
outside. I'll do the rest! I'll fetch them! Come!"

Laughing boisterously, the three swaggered over to Hamilton and
Churchill, who were sitting by the fireside. Wentworth took off his
coat, held it before the blaze to dry, and said, with a terrible oath:--

"Bad night without! Never saw it rain so hard! Raw and cold for this time
of the year!"

Crofts ordered a fresh bowl of Rack punch; then, turning to Wentworth,
asked:--

"Raining? Who cares for a little rain? I like to be out in it. By the
way, I have a wager to offer! Ten pounds to the man to the table; winner
to take the lump!"

"Hear! Hear!" cried everybody.

"Let us all walk out on the St. Albans road without our cloaks, the last
man to turn homeward wins the entire stake."

"Good!" shouted Wentworth. "I must owe my ten pounds to the pot until
to-morrow."

"And I'll take the wager! Here's my money!" said Berkeley, throwing ten
pounds to the table.

"Will you go?" asked Crofts, addressing Hamilton.

That evening George was in a mood for any adventure having action in it,
for he was nearly out of money. He did not suspect the real purpose of
the absurd wager, and after a moment's consideration of the forty pounds
to be won, declared:--

"I'll win the pot if I have to go to Edinburgh!"

"And you, Churchill?" asked Crofts.

"You're a pack of fools, but I'll go," replied Churchill, knocking the
ashes from his pipe.

They drank their bowl of punch and immediately set off for the St. Albans
road.

"The Oxford road is nearer than the St. Albans. Why not take it?" asked
George.

"You said you were going to Edinburgh," returned Wentworth, "and,
besides, the St. Albans road is our wager, and that is the one we'll
take, unless you want to turn back and forfeit your stake."

To the St. Albans road they started, Crofts, Berkeley, and Wentworth
walking perhaps two hundred yards in advance of Churchill and Hamilton.
The rain was pouring down in torrents, and the night was so dark that
Hamilton and Churchill could not see the advance guard, though they heard
a deal of talking, laughing, and cursing ahead of them. This order of
march was what Crofts and his friends desired, for of course the wager
was not on their minds. They were hoping for something greater, and
would have been glad to release Churchill and Hamilton had they offered
to turn back. But lacking that good fortune, the valiant three evidently
hoped to meet the coach and rob it before the others came up, in which
case Crofts and his friends would deny the robbery, if accused, and would
divide the gold into three parts instead of five.

When nearly two miles from the city, Crofts, Berkeley, and Wentworth met
Roger's coach and delivered the attack as silently as possible. Just the
manner in which it was done I have never learned, since Hamilton himself
did not know the particulars of it, and Frances told me it happened so
quickly that it was over almost before she knew it had begun. She said
the horses had stopped, which was not a matter of surprise to her, as
they had been resting every few minutes, and that a man wearing a mask
entered the coach, rummaged the cushions, and was backing out with the
bag of gold in his hand when Roger seized him.

The robber was almost out of the coach, but Roger clung to him with one
hand while he drew his pistol with the other and fired. Then the man
tossed the bag of gold to one of his friends on the road, drew his sword,
thrust it in Roger's breast, and the poor old man fell back on the coach
floor at my cousin's feet. She heard some one call to Noah: "Drive on if
you value a whole skin!" and Noah, awaiting no second command, lashed the
horses with his whip until they plunged forward at a clumsy gallop.

Hamilton and Churchill, being perhaps two hundred yards down the road,
knew nothing of the trouble ahead till they heard the pistol shot, when
they ran forward, supposing their drunken friends were fighting among
themselves. They had not taken many steps when a coach passed them,
moving rapidly. As it passed, George heard a woman scream faintly, but
immediately the coach dashed out of sight. The light from Noah's lanthorn
had fallen on Hamilton's face, and Frances had recognized the man of whom
she had been thinking and dreaming all day.

I did not know, however, till long afterwards that she had seen him, nor
did he suspect that she was in the coach.

When Hamilton and Churchill came up to the robbers, Hamilton asked:--

"What was the trouble?"

"The damned old fool in the coach shot at me," answered Crofts.

"How came he to do it?" asked Churchill, suspecting the truth.

"I do not know," returned Wentworth. "He must have taken us for
highwaymen, for he thrust his head out of the door and fired a pistol at
Crofts, who was nearest the coach."

"Yes," said Crofts. "And he was about to fire again, point blank at my
head, when I drew my sword and quieted him. Matters have come to a pretty
pass when gentlemen can't walk out on the public road without becoming a
target for every frightened fool that travels in a coach. I'll learn who
this fellow is, and will see that he becomes acquainted with the interior
of Newgate or dangles to a rope on Tyburn."

"Shall we declare the wager off?" asked Wentworth, turning to Churchill
and Hamilton.

"By all means," answered Churchill.

All being willing to return, they started back to London, Wentworth,
Berkeley, and Crofts falling behind. The story they had told was not
convincing, but when Hamilton expressed his doubts to Churchill and
intimated his belief that a robbery, if not a murder, had been committed,
Churchill answered cautiously:--

"Perhaps you are right, but the less we know or think or say about this
affair, the better it will be for you and me. As for myself, I shall
leave London for a while to avoid being called as a witness in case the
matter is investigated. If we try to bring these fellows to justice, they
may turn upon us and swear that we did the deed, in which case we might
hang, for they are three to two; a good preponderance of testimony. But
in any case the king would see that no evil befell his son and his
friends. Therefore if we are wise, we shall remain silent and take
ourselves out of the way for the time being."

The next day, as I afterwards learned, George made the mistake of
returning to France, not that he feared punishment for himself, but
because he did not want to speak the unavailing truth and thereby bring
upon himself the king's wrath, nor did he want to bear false witness to
protect the criminals.

Near the hour of ten o'clock that night, Noah drew up the fat panting
horses before Sir William's house. The porter, who had been watching all
day, opened the gate, the coach entered the courtyard, Noah uttered a
hoarse "Whoa!" and almost fell off the box to the ground. As soon as he
could get on his feet again, he went to the coach door, spoke to Frances,
ran to Sir William, who was waiting at the top of the house steps, candle
in hand, to welcome Roger, and spoke but one word: "Dead!"

Frances hurriedly came from the coach, and Sir William went to meet her.
Holding out her hands to him, she cried:--

"Oh, Sir William, they have killed your brother! Robbed him and killed
him!"

Frances was incoherently explaining to Sir William when Lady Wentworth
came down the steps and led her into the house. Then the doors were
opened wide, and poor old Roger's body was carried reverently to the best
parlor.

The following morning, when I was notified that Frances was at Sir
William's house, I went to see her and learned the particulars of the
tragedy, though she said nothing at that time about having recognized any
of the highwaymen, and seemed strangely reluctant to talk about the
affair.

On the fourth day after Roger's death he was buried in
Saint-Martin's-in-the-Fields churchyard, good Sir William taking the only
means in his power to express his love for his brother by an elaborate
funeral. Never were there more beautiful hatchments seen in London. They
bore Roger's humble coat-of-arms, half in white and half in black, to
denote that the deceased had left a widow. Never were there more nor
finer white mourning scarfs distributed among the mourners, and never in
the memory of man had so much burnt sherry been served at a funeral.

These extraordinary arrangements attracted a great deal of attention
throughout London and caused Roger's murder to be talked about far and
near. The result of this publicity was that the city authorities set on
foot an investigation which soon brought Wentworth, Crofts, and Berkeley
under suspicion. The sheriffs, however, kept their suspicions to
themselves, and I heard only faint whispers of what was going on.

After the funeral Lady Wentworth invited Frances to be her guest for a
week or two, and upon my advice the invitation was accepted.

Two or three days after the funeral, while Frances and I were walking out
together, she complained of young Wentworth's attentions.

"To-day he put his arm about me," she said, laughing, though indignant.

"And what did you say and do?" I asked.

"I simply remarked that I disliked the touch of half-witted persons,
whereupon he declared that he had wit enough to be offended. Then I told
him he should thank heaven for the small favor and pray God to help him
use it."

After cautioning her to secrecy, I told her of the ugly whispers that
were abroad connecting young Wentworth, Crofts, and Berkeley with the
murder of old Roger.

"No, no!" she cried, greatly agitated. "I saw the two men who did it. I
saw them in the light of Noah's lanthorn. Neither of them was young
Wentworth."

I at once grew interested and asked her to describe the men she saw.

"No, no, no!" she cried vehemently, almost hysterically. I thought she
was going to weep, so I said in haste:--

"Don't weep, Frances! You must forget."

She looked quickly up to me and answered: "I am not weeping. There is not
a tear in me. I have wept until I am dry."

"But your grief is unreasonable," I returned. "Roger was your friend, I
know, but his death does not call for so great sorrowing."

"No, no, it is not that, Baron Ned. You don't know. I can't tell you.
Please do not speak of this terrible affair again."

I supposed it was her horror of the tragedy that had wrought upon her
nerves, usually so strong, so I dropped the subject, and it was not
brought up again until after many weeks, when circumstances made it
necessary for me to break silence.

       *       *       *       *       *

While Hamilton was away, the murder of Roger Wentworth was freely
discussed in London and was brought to the king's notice by a deputation
of citizens who told his Majesty very plainly that certain of his friends
were under suspicion.

The king pretended that he had not heard of the crime, expressed his
grief, was moved to tears by the recital, promised to do all in his
power to bring the offenders to justice, and dismissed the Londoners
with many brave, virtuous words. As soon as they were gone, he joined
a cluster of friends, among whom were Crofts, Wentworth, and Berkeley,
to whom he repeated, with many witticisms, the complaints of the city
delegation. With what he thought was fine comedy, he reiterated his firm
determination to bring the criminals to justice with despatch that should
have nothing of the law's delay. Closing his remarks on the subject,
he said with a wink and an affected air of severity:--

"Gentlemen, I insist that you make an effort to be more careful of my
tanners in your frolics. Even tanners' hides have their uses. Waste them
not! Again I say, waste them not!"

"Not even for a thousand pounds, Rowley?" asked Crofts.

"Ah, well, of course, a thousand pounds is--well, it is a thousand
pounds," answered the king, laughing.

It may be surmised from the king's words and manner that he intended
taking no steps to bring the offenders to justice, and that he knew who
they were. The London people soon discovered his real intent and began in
earnest on their own account.

When the net began to draw too closely about the culprits, the king
interfered and gave the London courts of justice to understand that
further proceedings against Wentworth, Crofts, and Berkeley would cause a
royal frown. The Londoners were not willing to drop the matter, even at
the risk of royal displeasure, so the king caused it to be hinted to the
London officials that Crofts, Berkeley, and Wentworth were innocent, but
that possibly Hamilton was the guilty man. No mention was made of
Churchill, he being at the time the Duke of York's most intimate friend.

Hamilton was away from home and was friendless, all of which gave his
accusers the courage to fix suspicion on him, though they did so without
taking the responsibility of making the charge themselves.

So it was that when George returned to England, several weeks later, he
found trouble awaiting him in many forms.

       *       *       *       *       *

My cousin's presentation to the duchess was made in private and was a
success in every respect. I asked Mary Hamilton to accompany Lady
Wentworth, Frances, and myself on this occasion, and she graciously
consented. Lady Wentworth insisted on making the presentation, so one
morning I called for my cousin and her chaperone, took the Wentworth
barge at Blackfriars water stairs, and proceeded by river up to
Westminster stairs, where we disembarked. I left my companions in a
bookstall in the Abbey and went to fetch Mary, who lived near by in a
house called Little Hamilton House, under the shadow of Great Hamilton
House, which was the home of Count Anthony.

Mary was waiting for me, so she and I hastened to the bookstall, took up
Frances and Lady Wentworth, went back to the barge, and then by water to
Whitehall Garden stairs. There we left the river, walked to the Palace,
and proceeded immediately to the parlor of her Grace, the Duchess of
York, whom we met by appointment.

When we entered her Grace's parlor, she rose, came to meet us, paused
for a moment, gave one glance to Frances, and, without a word of
presentation, offered her hand to my cousin, saying:--

"I need no introduction to Mistress Jennings. Her beauty has been
heralded, and I know her. I understand she wishes to do me the grace of
becoming one of my maids of honor?"

"Yes, madam," returned Frances, kneeling and kissing her Grace's hand. "I
hope you may do me the grace of accepting my poor services."

"Oh, do not kneel to me here among ourselves," said the duchess, smiling
graciously. "It is you who grant the favor, and, without more ado, I
heartily welcome you to our family."

Thus, almost before she knew it, Frances's beauty had won, as we had been
sure it would, and she was a maid of honor in Whitehall Palace to her
Grace, the Duchess of York, sister-in-law to the king.

"The Mother of the Maids will instruct you in your duties, chief of which
you will find easy enough, that is, to be beautiful," said the duchess,
taking a chair and indicating that we were to be seated.

Frances, Mary, and Lady Wentworth took chairs, but nothing short of a
broken leg or tottering age would have justified me in accepting the
invitation to sit.

"Before I send for the Mother of the Maids," said the duchess,
graciously, "let us talk a few minutes about ourselves and other people."

Her suggestion being taken by silent consent, she asked Lady Wentworth
about Sir William's health and was graciously inquisitive concerning many
of her Ladyship's personal affairs, to her Ladyship's infinite delight.
She talked to Mary and to me for a moment, and then turned to Frances, of
whom she asked no personal questions, but spoke rather of her Grace's own
affairs and of life at court, dropping now and then many valuable hints
that had no appearance of being instructions.

Presently her Grace said, "Now we have talked about ourselves, let us
talk about other people."

We all laughed, and Frances inquired, "Will your Grace kindly tell us
whom we may abuse and whom praise?"

"Oh, abuse anybody--everybody. Praise only the very young, the very old
and the halt; abuse all able-bodied adults, and laugh at any one in whom
you see anything amusing," answered the duchess.

"Not the king and--" laughed Frances.

"The king!" interrupted her Grace, with a tone of contempt in her voice.
"Every one laughs at him. He's the butt of the court. Do you know his
nickname?"

"No," returned Frances.

"Yes, yes," interrupted Lady Wentworth, laughing nervously. She did not
want to be left out of the conversation entirely, so she chimed in
irrelevantly.

"We call him Old Rowley in honor of the oldest, wickedest horse in the
royal mews," said the duchess, laughing. "You need not restrain yourself.
Soon every one at court will be talking about you, the men praising your
beauty, and insinuating ugly stories about your character, and the women
wondering how any one can admire your doll's face or find any wit in what
you say. Remember that the ordinary rule of law that one is deemed
innocent until proved guilty is reversed in Whitehall. Here one is deemed
guilty till one proves one's self innocent, and that is a difficult task.
Ah, my! It has been many a day since we have had any convincing proof!
Eh, Lady Wentworth?"

"Yes, yes, your Grace! Many a day, many a day! Ah, we are a sad, naughty
court, I fear," answered my Lady, with a penitent sigh. Her chief desire
was to be a modish person; therefore she would not be left out of the
iniquitous monde, though her face, if nothing else, placed her safely
beyond the pale of Whitehall sin. One of the saddest things in life is to
be balked in an honest desire to be wicked!

"Yes, you won't know yourself when your character comes back to you,
filtered through many mouths," said the duchess, laughing. "But don't
take offence; retaliate!"

"My cousin will have to learn the art, your Grace," I suggested.

"Ah, I have a thought!" cried the duchess, turning to Frances. "Nothing
succeeds like novelty here at court. Be novel. Don't abuse people save to
their faces, but don't spare any one then. Remember that a biting epigram
is the best loved form of wit among us Sodomites. We love it for its own
sake, but more for the pain it gives the other fellow. We like to see him
squirm, and we have many a joyous hour over our friends' misfortunes.
Turn yourself into a mental bodkin, and you will find favor among us, for
it is better to be feared than loved in our happy family."

"Ah, how beautiful!" cried Lady Wentworth, determined to be heard, even
though never addressed.

"But as I have said," continued the duchess, "try, if you can, to be
novel, and be a bodkin only to the victim's face, save, of course, in the
case of a new bit of racy scandal. That must be used to the greatest
advantage as soon as possible, for scandal, like unsalted butter, will
not keep."

The duchess laughed, as though speaking in jest, but she was in earnest
and spoke the truth.

"But I must learn the current faults of my friends-to-be," suggested
Frances, laughing, "so that I may not fall into the unpardonable error of
repeating an old story. Stale scandal is doubtless an offence in the ear
of the Anointed."

The Anointed was the king.

"That is true," returned the duchess, seriously. "Old scandals bore him,
but if, by good fortune, a rich new bit comes your way, save it for our
Rowley, whisper it in his ear and forget it. Leave to him the pleasure of
disseminating it. He dearly loves the 'ohs' and 'ahs' of delight incident
to the telling of a racy tale. But I'll take you in hand one of these
days and tell you how best to please the king, though your beauty will
make all other means mere surplusage. To please the king, you need but be
yourself; to please my husband, the duke, is even an easier task. He is
everybody's friend. They will be wanting to divorce the queen and me for
your sake. Two such fools about pretty women the world has never known
before and I hope never will again. To see the two royal brothers ogling
and smiling and smirking is better than a play. I used to be disgusted,
but now it amuses me. So if my husband makes love to you, don't fear that
I shall be offended, and if the king makes love to you, as he surely
will, have no fear of the queen. She is used to it."

"I shall try to please every one," said Frances.

"No, no, no!" cried the duchess. "That would be your ruin! A dog licks
the hand that smites it. We're all dogs. Every failure I have known at
court has come from too great a desire to please."

Frances laughed uneasily, for she knew she was hearing the truth,
disguised as a jest. After a moment's silence, she asked:--

"May I not at least try to please your Grace? And may I not seek your
advice and thank you now and then for a reprimand?"

"Yours is the first request of the sort I have ever heard from a maid of
honor, and I shall take you at your word," said the duchess. "I'm not
posing as the head of a morality school, but if I may, I shall try to be
your guide."

Lady Wentworth was almost comatose with pride--"pride on the brain"
Frances afterwards called it.

Presently her Grace continued seriously. "The king will make love to you
on sight. If he fails in obtaining a satisfactory response, he may affect
to be offended for a few days, during which time my husband may try his
hand. Failing, he will smile and will withdraw to make room for Rowley's
return attack. Rowley's return will be in earnest, and then will come
your trial, for the whole court will fawn upon you, will lie about you,
and beg your favor for them with the king."

"Surely it is a delightful prospect," returned my cousin, smiling.

"Oh, delightful, delightful!" ejaculated Lady Wentworth in a semilucid
interval.

"Now I'll send for the Mother of the Maids," said her Grace, "who will
show you to your rooms and instruct you in the duties, forms, and
ceremonies of court. I suppose you dance the country dances. They are the
king's favorites. He calls the changes."

"Yes, your Grace," answered Frances.

"And the brantle and the coranto?" asked the duchess.

"Yes, your Grace."

"And do you play cards?"

"Yes, your Grace, but I loathe games."

"Ah, I see you're equipped," said the duchess. "But here comes the Mother
of the Maids."

The duchess presented Frances to the Mother, who presently led her forth
across the threshold of a new life, destined to be filled with many
strange happenings.

After leaving the Duchess of York, Frances and the Mother of the Maids
entered the Stone Gallery, half the length of which they would have to
traverse before reaching the door that entered the narrow corridor
leading to the apartments of the maids of honor. Midway in the gallery,
a man, evidently in wine, accosted Frances without so much as removing
his hat.

"Ah, ah! Whom have we here?" he asked, winking to the Mother of the
Maids.

Frances was astonished and a little frightened, but she soon brought
herself together and retorted:--

"What is it to you, sir, whom we have here?"

At once it occurred to Frances that the impertinent man was either the
king or the duke, but she hid her suspicion.

"Much it is to me, fair mistress," returned the gentleman, taking off his
hat and bowing. "The sun shines for all, and when one dare be as
beautiful as yourself, all men may bask in the radiance and may ask,
'What new luminary is this?'"

"You may bask to your heart's content," retorted Frances, laughing, "but
you must know that it does not please the sun to be stopped by an
unprepossessing stranger."

The Mother's face bore a look of consternation, and the gentleman threw
back his head, laughing uproariously.

"Ah, my beauty, but I would not remain a stranger. If I am
unprepossessing, it is because I am as God made me and I cannot help it.
But I can help being a stranger to you and would make myself known, and
would present my compliments to--"

"To the devil, who perhaps may like your impertinence better than I like
it," retorted Frances, turning from him angrily and hastening toward the
opposite end of the gallery.

When Frances reached the door of the corridor, she looked back and saw
the Mother of the Maids listening attentively to the gentleman. He was
laughing heartily, and when the Mother left him, Frances noticed that she
courtesied almost to the floor, a ceremony little used save with the
king, the queen, the duke, and the duchess.

When the door of the gallery was closed behind Frances, she asked the
Mother:--

"Who is the impudent fellow?"

"He? Why, he--is--why, he is Sir Rowley," answered the Mother,
hesitatingly, and Frances knew that she had won her first round with the
king, though she kept her knowledge to herself.




CHAPTER IV

A SMILE AT THE DEVIL


In the evening the duchess gave a little ball in her parlor to present
Frances to the king and to the queen, if her Majesty should attend, to
the Duke of York, and to others living in Whitehall immediately connected
with the palace household.

I went to the ball early, wishing to be there before Frances arrived,
to help her if need be over the untrodden paths of court forms and
etiquette. Soon after I entered her Grace's parlor, Mary Hamilton came
in with her mother, and I joined them. I should have been glad to see a
gleam of joy in Mary's eyes when I approached, but I had to be content
with a calm, gracious "I'm glad to see you, baron."

Presently the Duke of York arrived with the duchess on his arm, and they
took their places at the end of the room opposite the musicians' gallery.
Mary and I hastened to kiss their hands, and, withdrawing to a little
distance, awaited Frances's arrival. After the others in the room had
paid their respects to her Grace, she beckoned me to her chair and
said:--

"Your cousin will arrive presently. I have just seen her. Look for a
sensation when she comes. She is radiant, though her gown is as simple as
a country girl's."

"I hear you have brought us a great beauty, baron," remarked the duke.

"Yes, your Highness. We who love her think so," I answered.

"You'll be wanting to be made an earl for your service in bringing her,
eh, baron?" said the duke, laughing. Then bending toward me and
whispering: "A word in your ear, Clyde. You may have it if you play your
cards right and are persistent in importunity."

"No, your Highness. I ask for nothing save favor to my cousin," I
replied.

"She is like to have enough of that and to spare, without asking, if she
is half as beautiful as she is said to be," returned his Grace.

"Of that your Highness may now be your own judge," I returned. "Here she
comes."

At that moment Frances entered on the arm of the Mother of the Maids, and
the duke, catching sight of her, exclaimed:--

"God have pity on the other women! Half has not been told, baron. There
is no beauty at court compared to hers. Earl? You may be a duke!"

While Frances and the Mother were making their way across the room to pay
their respects to the duke and the duchess, a buzz of admiration could be
heard on every hand, and Mary whispered to me behind her fan:--

"If the king were unmarried, I would wager all I have that your cousin
would be our queen within a month."

Count Grammont, who was standing behind me, leaned forward and whispered,
"Your cousin, baron?"

"Yes, count," I answered.

"Mon Dieu!" he returned, shrugging his shoulders. "You will soon be a
duke. We may not call her the queen of hearts, for already we have one,
but surely she is the duchess of hearts. I wish I might present her in
Paris. Ah Dieu! She would make quickly my peace with my king!"

Poor Grammont's one object in life was that his peace might be made with
his king. He lived only in the hope of a recall to Versailles.

Frances made a graceful courtesy, as she kissed their Highness's hands,
and, when the brief ceremony of presentation to the duke was over, turned
to Mary and me, glad to have a moment's respite beside us. She said
nothing, but I could see that for the moment the gorgeous scene about
us had bewildered her. The vast mouldings of gold, the frescoed cupids,
nymphs and goddesses, the wonderful paintings, the brilliant tapestries,
all fairly shone in the light of a thousand wax candles, while the
polished floor of many-colored woods was a mirror under her feet,
reflecting all this beauty.

The powdered and rouged courtiers, arrayed in silks, gold lace and
jewels, seemed more like creatures from a land of phantasy than beings of
flesh and blood. The men with their great curled wigs, their plumed,
bejewelled hats and glittering gold swords, seemed to have stepped from
the pages of a wonderful picture-book, and the women, whose gorgeous
gowns exposed their bepowdered skin halfway to their waists, measuring
from the chin, and whose lifted petticoats made a proportionate display,
measuring from the feet, surely were brought from some fair land of folly
and shame.

I touched Frances's hand to awaken her, and whispered: "Show neither
wonder nor interest. See nothing, or these fools about us will laugh."

She laughed nervously, nodding her head to tell me that she understood.

"But I must look. I can't help it," she said.

"You must see it all without looking," I suggested, and Mary helped me
out by saying:--

"It is all tinsel, not worth looking at. That is the quality of all you
will see at court; gold foil, king and all."

Presently I saw the gentlemen removing their hats and tucking them under
their arms, so I knew the king had entered, and felt sure he would soon
come up to salute his hostess, the duchess, near whom we were standing.

I told Frances that she was about to meet the king, and admonished her to
keep a strong heart. She smiled as she answered:--

"I think I have met him already." Then she told us briefly of her
encounter with the tipsy gentleman in the Stone Gallery.

She had entirely recovered her self-possession and was prepared to meet
calmly the man who was a demigod to millions of English subjects.

The queen did not come with the king, so he loitered a moment among the
courtiers before making his way to the duchess, but the delay was short,
and soon he presented himself. The duchess rose when he approached, but
hardly allowed him time to finish his bow till she took his arm, turned
toward us, and smiled to Frances to approach. I touched my cousin's arm,
gently thrusting her forward, and the next moment she was courtesying to
the floor before the man who believed, in common with most of his
subjects, that he owned by divine right the body and soul of every
man in England, together with every man's ox and his ass, his wife and
his daughter, and all that to him belonged.

The king raised Frances, still retaining her hand, and bent most
gallantly before her.

"I have met Mistress Jennings," said he, smiling, "and she told me to pay
my compliments to the devil."

The king laughed, so of course the courtiers who heard him also laughed.
Instantly the news spread, and one might have heard on every hand, "The
new maid told the king to go to the devil." But as the king seemed to be
pleased, the courtiers were, too, and the new maid of honor became a
person of distinction at once.

The king's unexpected remark disconcerted Frances for a moment, and her
confusion added to her charm. In a moment she recovered herself,
courtesied, and said:--

"I beg your Majesty not to remind me of my terrible mistake. I thought
you were a bold cavalier, and of course did not know that I was speaking
to my king. I offer my humble apology. Pray do not pay your compliments
to the devil, but keep them for me, your Majesty's most devoted subject."

"Odds fish!" exclaimed his Majesty. "I'm glad of the reprieve. I did not
want to go to the devil, but Odds fish! I'd be willing to do so for a
smile from my most devoted subject."

"Merci, sire!" answered Frances, with a courtesy and smiling as
graciously as even a king could ask.

"If my most devoted subject will honor her king by asking him to dance
the next coranto with her, he will do his best to make amends for his
boldness earlier in the day, for he is naturally a modest king."

"A modest manner and a bold heart, I fear, your Majesty," returned
Frances, making the most pleasing compliment she could have paid her
sovereign. "May I be honored with your Majesty's hand for the next
coranto?"

"It is my will," graciously answered the king.

The ball opened with a brantle which his Majesty danced with the duchess,
Frances remaining, meantime, with Mary and me, awaiting the coranto with
the king, a royal favor which would win for her the envy of many a lady,
as the king seldom danced.

When the brantle was finished, the king worked his way over to Frances,
and when the bugle announced the coranto, she was saved the embarrassment
of seeking him, as she must have done had he not been by her side.

An altogether unexpected ordeal awaited Frances, for when the French
musicians began to play and his Majesty led her out, she found herself
and the king the only dancers on the floor except the Duke of York with
Mistress Stuart, and the Duke of Monmouth with his father's friend, Lady
Castlemain. Every one else stood by the wall, many of the ladies hoping
to see the new maid fail, and all of the gentlemen eager to behold her
and to comment.

The coranto is a difficult movement to perform gracefully. It consists of
a step forward, a pause during which the dancer balances on one foot,
holding the other suspended forward for a moment, then another step,
followed by a bow on the gentleman's part and a deep courtesy by the
lady.

I confess that I was uneasy, for Frances was a country girl, and the
coranto was the most trying, though, if well done, the most beautiful of
all dances.

Mary clasped my hand in alarm for Frances and whispered: "I do hope she
dances well. The lack of grace in a woman is inexcusable. She had better
not dance at all than poorly."

Mary's hopes were realized at once, for the king and Frances had not been
on the floor three minutes till the gentlemen began to clap their hands
softly, and in a moment a round of applause came from the entire
audience, as often happened in those informal balls.

The king turned to Frances, saying: "They are applauding your dancing.
Take your bow."

"No, it's all for your Majesty," she returned.

"No, no, my dancing is an old story to them. It is your grace they are
applauding."

"Spare me, your Majesty," she pleaded, laughing.

As the applause continued, they stopped dancing for a moment, and Frances
made her courtesy to the audience. Thereupon the applause increased, and
she courtesied again, kissing her hand as she rose from the floor.

The girl was in high spirits, and laughed as she talked to the king, who
smiled on her in a manner that caused my Lady Castlemain to remark:--

"The young milkmaid's affectations are disgusting." Other equally
flattering remarks were to be heard from women of the Castlemain stamp,
but the men were a unit in praising the new beauty.

Of course the king soon declared his undying love for her, and she
answered, laughing:--

"If your Majesty will swear by your grandmother's great toe that you have
never before spoken to a woman in this fashion, I'll listen and believe,
but failing the oath, you must pardon me if I laugh."

"I hope you would not laugh at your king?" he asked.

"Ay, at the Pope," she retorted, "if I found him amusing."

"But if I swear by the sacred relic you name, never again so long as I
live to speak in this fashion to any other woman, may I proceed?"
returned the king.

"I would not be a party to an oath whereby my king would be forsworn,"
she answered.

To which the king replied: "I shall say what I please to my most devoted
subject. Am I not the king?"

"I am content that you say what you please if you grant me the same
privilege," answered Frances.

The king laughed and said he would gladly grant the privilege in private,
but that in public he had a "damnable dignity" to uphold.

       *       *       *       *       *

After the dancing was over for the evening, the king offered Frances a
purse of gold to be used at the card-table, but she declined, and as
nearly every one else went to the tables, the duchess granted leave to
Frances, Mary, and myself to depart.

Mary and I went with Frances to her parlor adjoining her bedroom, where
we remained for an hour or more talking over the events of the night.
Mary had heard one in the ballroom say this and another say that. Frances
had heard all sorts of remarks, some of them kind, others spiteful.
I had heard nothing but praise of my cousin, and all that we had heard
was discussed excitedly and commented on earnestly or laughingly, as the
case might be.

Frances was in high spirits till by an unlucky chance Mary spoke of her
brother George, of whose acquaintance with Frances she knew nothing, and
instantly my cousin's eyes began to fill. I saw that the tears would
come, despite all her efforts, if something were not done to stay them.
Therefore I spoke of her father's joy when he should hear of her triumph,
and my remark furnished an excuse for her weeping. In the course of an
hour Mary and I left Frances and went to the card-tables, where we found
Mary's mother, who at that time, happening to be winner in a large sum,
was ready to quit the game, so we all walked home across the park with
linkboys.

       *       *       *       *       *

During the following month or two Hamilton was abroad, neither I nor any
one else at court so far as I knew having heard from him. After a time
the rumors connecting his name with Roger's death reached my ears, but
I paid no heed to them, believing them to have been made of whole cloth,
for I did not know that he had been present when the crime was committed.
But one day my cousin's actions and words set me thinking.

Roger was only a tanner; therefore after a deal of stir in the matter of
his death with no result more tangible than vague insinuations from
Crofts and his friends, the investigation by the London authorities was
dropped, at least for a time. Roger's tragedy was forgotten or was put
aside, save in so far as it was kept alive by Crofts, who felt that it
was well to keep the person of George Hamilton as a fender between
himself and the crime.

So, as frequently happens when a bad man turns good, Hamilton's troubles
began to gather and were awaiting his return. I did not know where he was
(though I afterwards learned he was in Paris), and therefore was unable
to warn him. In fact, I knew little that was worth telling him at the
time of which I am writing, since I did not believe he was really in
danger. I did not even know that he was aware of the Roger Wentworth
tragedy.

Meantime Frances was making progress at court, of which even I, with all
my hopefulness, had little dreamed. What she desired above all else was
money for her father. Sir Richard and Sarah had moved up to London to be
near Frances and were living in a modest little house at the end of a
cul-de-sac called Temple Street, just off the Strand near Temple Bar.

The opportunity to get money soon came to Frances in the form of an offer
by the king of a small pension which would have placed her and her father
beyond the pale of want. But the king's manner in offering it had caused
her to refuse.

She had fallen into the wholesome way of telling me all that occurred
touching herself, which during this time consisted chiefly of the efforts
of nearly every man of prominence in Whitehall, from the king and the
duke to bandylegged Little Jermyn, the lady-killer, to convince her of
his desperate passion. She laughed at them all, and her indifference
seemed to increase their ardor.

One day Frances met me in the Stone Gallery as I was coming from my
lodging in the Wardrobe over the Gate, and asked me to walk out with her.
I saw that something untoward had happened, so I joined her and we went
to the park. When we were a short way from the palace, she told me of the
king's offer and tried to tell me of his manner, the latter evidently
having been meant to be understood by Frances in case she wished to see
it as he doubtless intended she should. She saw it as the king intended,
but the result was far from what he expected.

"I turned my back on him," she said angrily, "and left him without so
much as a word or a courtesy, and I intend to leave Whitehall."

"By no means!" I exclaimed. "Accept or refuse the king's pension as you
choose, and pass serenely on your way, unconscious of what he may have
implied. If you remain at court, you must learn not to see a mere implied
affront, and perhaps to smile at many an overt one. Before you came you
had full warning of what would happen. Don't see! Don't feel! Don't care!
Be true to yourself and smile at the devil if you happen to meet him. He
has no weapon against a smile. One escapes many a disagreeable situation
by not seeing it, and one always finds trouble by looking for it."

"Your philosophy wearies me," she answered petulantly.

"In that case, I'll confine my remarks to facts and to a mere statement
of your duty. You must have money. Accept the king's pension and laugh at
him."

"I'll not take your advice," she retorted angrily. "I'll return to my
father's house at once. He was right. A decent woman has no business at
court."

"Since you speak so plainly, I'll do likewise," I rejoined, growing
angry. "You came to court to make your fortune by marriage. That is a
bald, ugly way to state the case, but it is the truth. Admit it."

"I fear I must," she answered, hanging her head.

"You surely could not ask greater progress toward your desire than you
are making," I continued. "You came into favor at a bound, and have been
growing each day, not only with the king, but with all the court,
including the queen, the duchess, and the duke. Every one loves you and,
better still, respects you, which is a distinction few beautiful women
enjoy nowadays. Dick Talbot, the Duke of Tyrconnel, the richest unmarried
nobleman in England, is eager to marry you, and would ask you to be his
wife if you would but throw him a smile."

"I hate him!" she retorted impatiently. "An overgrown Irish fool. One
would as well marry a bull calf!"

"But he is as decent as any man I know, and will meet all your purposes
in coming to court in the matter of wealth and station. I don't know that
it is a misfortune for a woman to marry a man she can rule."

"Yes, it is," she answered. "She always despises him. I should prefer one
who would beat me to such a man."

"But if you intend to carry out the purpose you had in coming to court,
you--"

But she interrupted me, speaking slowly, almost musingly: "The purpose I
had, perhaps, but not the one I have. I did not know myself. I did not
know. I doubt if any girl does. I don't want to marry any man."

"Is it because another man fills your heart?" I asked, speaking gently.
"Tell me, my beautiful sister, tell me. I'll find no fault with you. I'll
help you if I can."

I received a sigh for my answer, and another and another, as she walked
by my side, hanging her head. But when I urged her to speak, she raised
her eyes to mine, and there was a cold, angry glint in them as she
asked:--

"Do you mean--?"

She did not mention Hamilton's name, but I knew whom she meant and
answered:--

"Yes."

A long pause followed, during which I was unable to read the expression
on her face, but presently she spoke, her voice trembling with anger or
emotion, I knew not which:--

"I hate him! If he were to touch my hand, I believe I should want to cut
it off! I hate him--that is, I try to hate him."

Her words and manner caused me uneasiness in two respects: first, it led
me to fear that she loved Hamilton; and second, in view of the rumors I
had heard connecting his name with Roger Wentworth's death, it flashed
upon me that possibly he was the man she had recognized by the light of
Noah's lanthorn. Either of these surmises, if true, was enough to mar my
peace of mind, but together they brought me trouble indeed.

I had come to look for a speedy accomplishment of my cousin's good
fortune, and also to regard Hamilton as my dearest friend among men.
Still I was helpless to remedy these evils if they really existed. What I
did at the time was to insist, first, that Frances regain her senses as
soon as possible, and second, that she say nothing of her intention to
leave Whitehall for at least ten days. To my first request she replied
that she had never been so completely in possession of her senses as at
that present moment, and my second, she positively refused to consider.

The best of women want their way, at least in part, so I said, "I abandon
my first request as unreasonable."

She looked up to me, hardly knowing whether to laugh or to frown, but she
chose the former, and I continued, "And as to my second suggestion, I
amend it to, say, five or six days."

"Three!" she insisted. So we let it stand at that, each with a sense of
triumph.

We returned to the palace, and soon I had an opportunity to ask the king
for a word privately. He graciously consented, and led me to his closet,
overlooking the River Thames. From this closet, on the second floor, a
privy stairs led down to a door which opened on a small covered porch at
the head of a flight of stone steps falling to the king's private barge
landing at the water's edge. When I noticed the narrow stairway, I had no
thought of the part it would one day play in the fortunes and misfortunes
of Frances, Hamilton, and myself.

On the king's command, I sat down near him, and he asked:--

"What can I do for you, baron? I do not remember your having ever
solicited a favor of me, and I shall be delighted to grant what you ask,
if I can."

"I seek no favor, your Majesty," I returned. "I simply want to tell you
that my cousin, Mistress Jennings, has just informed me of her intention
to leave Whitehall, and I wonder--"

"No, no," cried the king, interrupting me. "She shall not go! Why is she
discontented here?"

"I am not sure that I can tell your Majesty," I answered evasively. "I am
loath to see her go, and, knowing well your kindliness, hoped you would
be willing to urge her to remain."

"Gladly," replied the king. "She is the most beautiful ornament of our
court, and we must not lose her. I don't mind telling you for your own
ear that I suspect the cause of her sudden resolution and respect it."

He laughed, and after a long pause, continued:--

"I forgot that she was fresh from the country, and that she still
retained part of her prudish ideas, so while walking with her yesterday
on the Serpentine, I offered her a pension, to which she is justly
entitled, adorning our court as she does. But I fear she took my honest
efforts at gallantry too seriously. My dear baron, the girl shall
have her pension without the slightest return on her part save one of her
rare smiles now and then. Say to her, please, that the king sends his
apology and eagerly awaits an opportunity to offer it in person."

"I thank your Majesty," I answered, rising and bowing, "and feel sure
you have done all that is needful to keep my cousin at court. She has
certain prudish standards which I fear are too easily shocked, and is
as self-willed as--well, as a beautiful woman--"

"Ought to be," interrupted the king, laughing and finishing my sentence.

I wanted him to suspect that his gallant speeches would be repeated to
me, hoping that the knowledge might temper them.

After talking a moment longer with him, I asked permission to withdraw,
and at once sought Frances. When I found her in the parlor of the
duchess, I drew her to one side and told her of my interview with the
king.

"You have tamed the lion," I said, "and you may accept the pension
without harm to your sensitive dignity. But please don't make a fool of
yourself again by taking such a matter seriously. Keep your head, keep
your heart, keep your temper, and thrive. Lose either, and have the whole
court laughing at you. I'm sorry Hamilton is so fixed in your heart that
you cannot dislodge him, but this good may grow out of the evil: you may
judge other men dispassionately."

A great sigh was her only answer.

       *       *       *       *       *

Frances took my advice, along with the king's pension, and soon learned
that as good wine needs no bush, so true virtue needs no defence.

A brief account of Frances's triumphs and adventures at court is
necessary before this history can be brought to the point of Hamilton's
return; that is, to the time when I knew he was in London.

Her first great triumph was over the heart of the king, to whose
lovemaking she learned to listen and to smile; not the smile of assent,
but of amusement.

Soon our august monarch became silly with love of the new beauty, and
with her help often made himself ridiculous. On one occasion, a few
months after Frances's installation as maid of honor, he left a love note
in her muff which she pushed out at one end as she thrust her hand in at
the other. She was careful to do this little trick in such a manner that
those who saw the king place the note in her muff should see it fall out.
It was picked up by an inquisitive soul, reached the hands of the
"lampooners," and appeared in biting verse in the next issue of the _News
Letter_.

When the king complained to Frances of her ill-treatment of his note, she
declared, with a great show of astonishment, that she had not seen it,
which was literally true, since she had only felt it. She said that it
must have fallen to the ground as she took up her muff, and tried to make
it appear that she was greatly disappointed.

"I would not slight so great an honor as a letter from my king," she said
demurely.

"No, no," returned his Majesty, laughing. "Our most devoted subject would
not slight her king's message. I believe you did it intentionally."

"In which case your Majesty will leave no more notes for me in public,"
answered Frances. And the king's choice lay between taking offence and
looking upon the affair as a jest. He was too far gone in love to take
offence, so he chose to laugh.

On another occasion, at the queen's ball, the king asked Frances to walk
out to the garden with him.

"It is dark, your Majesty, and I fear the dark," she replied. "Let us
walk there in the daytime, so that every one may see how graciously my
king honors me."

He could not coax her out, so he said: "Very well, my prudish Miss
Solomon. Have your way and break my heart."

"To do either would please me," she retorted. "I like to have my own way,
and there are few women who would not be delighted to break a handsome
king's heart."

Frances having captured the king, every other man at court was her
admirer. She could have had her choice of a husband from among the
noblest and richest men of the land, but she showed no one especial
favor. If one imagined that she smiled with marked graciousness on him,
he soon learned that others were equally fortunate, and after a time
each accepted his smile from her and took it for granted that his failure
to receive greater favor was because of the king's success. All praised
her discretion, though many believed that she was concealing adroitly
what she would not have the world suspect. With all her circumspection,
it soon became the common talk at court that she was the king's new
favorite, though there was no reason given for the rumor save the belief
that the king was not to be resisted.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Duchess of York and I knew the truth concerning Frances, but all
Westminster and London talked of the new star at Whitehall who was
outshining Castlemain, Nell Gwynn, Stuart, and the host of other
luminaries who had scintillated with scandal ever since the king's return
to Britain's throne.

One morning, shortly after the king's last-mentioned conversation with
Frances, she met Nell Gwynn in the palace garden, and was surprised when
Nelly addressed her as "Little Solomon."

"Where did you learn the name?" asked Frances.

"From its author, the king," answered Nell. "Come home with me and I'll
tell you all about it."

They took Nell's barge and went to Westminster water stairs, where they
walked across the park to her house in Pell Mell.

Frances cordially hated Lady Castlemain and the king's other brazen
friends, but, after having met Nelly several times, she had learned to
love the sweet, profane, ignorant girl because, despite her apparently
evil life, there was honesty, kindliness, and truth in Nelly's heart.

When the two young women were seated in Nelly's cozy parlor, she began to
open her heart to Frances.

"Yes, the king told me how he invited you to go to the garden with him
one evening, and how he dubbed you 'Little Solomon' when you refused."

"Ah, did he?" asked Frances, surprised at the king's willingness to speak
of his rebuff.

"Yes," returned Nelly, surprising Frances still further by a soberness of
manner rarely seen in the laughing girl.

After a long pause, Nelly continued: "Do you know, I hate the fat
Castlemain woman. And the bow-legged Stuart hussy! She seems to be proud
of her crooked shanks and exhibits them on every possible occasion. There
is something about extreme ugliness that drives it to exposure, on the
principle, I suppose, that murder will out. And there's ugly Wells! I
hate her, too! Her charm, like that of the Puritan's face, lies wholly in
her damned ugliness. I hate them all, though I do not fear them, but oh,
Mistress Jennings--" Here she leaned forward and grasped Frances's wrist
almost fiercely, "The human heart is a strange thing, at least mine is,
for I love you, but oh, I fear you!"

"No, no," cried Frances, at a loss just what to say.

"Yes," continued Nell, insistently. "Let me tell you! Of late I can
neither eat nor sleep because of the dread that you will rob me of the
king's love. I can do nothing but pray and swear. He does love me more
than he loves all the world, because he knows I am true to him! And his
love is meat and drink and life itself to me! If you could see but one
little part of my love for him, if you could know that I worship him,
God help me! as I should worship only my Maker, if you could understand
that if you were to steal him from me, you would take my life, my very
soul,--if so poor a thing as I can have a soul,--you, who may choose and
pick men at will, would leave his love to me!"

"You need not fear, you need not fear," said Frances, soothingly.

"He is not true to me," continued Nelly, impetuously, "and I know it. But
I do not care. I have his love, and with that I am content. I would not
ask fidelity. I care nothing for the wealth he gives. I accept only a
meagre portion of what he offers, and have refused honors and titles
which would be a burden to me. I want only the man, Charles Stuart."

She began to weep softly, drying her eyes and trying to laugh. "He's not
much of a man, and I know his weaknesses better than any one in all the
world knows them. But he is all to me, and I beg you to leave me this
part of a man, for you only, of all women I know, can take him from me."

"I would not take the king from you, even to be his queen, if that were
possible. I promise that I shall not rob you of his love. It is the last
thing in the world I want. You say you love me. I believe you and give
you like return. Every one loves you, Nelly."

"Ah, I thank you--Frances," answered Nelly, hesitating at the name.

"Let us seal a pact of friendship," said Frances. "We shall need each
other's help in this vile court that takes its quality from its king."

"Yes, truly he is vile," returned Nelly. "But women of my class, born and
bred in the slums of life, do not measure a man by his virtues, but by
their love of him. I know not how it is, nor why, but this I know, we
love because of what we give, and the more we give, the more we love."

"I fear the same is true of all women," answered Frances, with a sigh.
"If a woman could but say to her heart, 'Thou shalt' and 'Thou shalt
not,' there would be fewer unhappy women in this world."

"Oh, do you, too, know that awful truth?" exclaimed Nelly, eagerly
bringing her hands to Frances's shoulders. "Tell me all about it. There
is nothing sweeter than to hear the troubles of a friend. They help to
make our own seem smaller. Tell me."

"I cannot," answered Frances, now as woebegone as Nelly herself. "It is
too terrible even to think upon, yet I think of nothing else. A woman may
love a man to the point of madness and still hate him."

"But it is not the king you love?" cried Nelly, in alarm.

"No, no, Nelly. You have my word. But let us talk of something else,"
answered Frances.

"No, no, let us talk about you," insisted Nelly, whose curiosity was
equalled only by her good nature.

"Not another word," returned Frances. "Don't you want to go to the barge
for a ride on the river?" And Nelly eagerly assented.

When they were seated in the barge, Nelly's waterman asked her where he
should take them, and she proposed going to the Bridge, leaving the barge
at the Bridge stairs, and walking up Gracious Street to the Old Swan
Tavern for dinner. Frances liked the plan and accepted Nelly's invitation
to dinner--and to trouble.




CHAPTER V

THE FIGHT AT THE OLD SWAN


On the way down to the Bridge, inquisitive, irresistible Nelly drew out
of Frances a meagre statement of her case. Although Nelly could not write
her own name, she was excellent at putting two and two together, and on
this occasion quickly reached the conclusion that there was a man whom
Frances had good reason to hate, but loved.

Without suspecting that Roger Wentworth's death bore any relation to
Frances's trouble, Nelly soon began asking questions about the tragedy,
and learned that Frances had recognized one of the highwaymen. When
Frances refused in a marked and emphatic manner to describe the man
she had seen, or to speak of him beyond the first mention, Nelly began
again with her two-and-two problem, and, as the result of her second
calculation, reached the conclusion that the highwayman Frances had
recognized and the man she loved and hated were one and the same person.
However, Nelly had the good taste to keep the result of her calculations
to herself, and dropped the subject which seemed so distasteful to her
companion.

When Frances and Nelly reached the landing at the water stairs just above
the Bridge, they left their barge and walked up Gracious Street (called
by some Grace Church Street, though, in fact, it should be Grass Church
Street) to the Old Swan Tavern on the east side of the street, a little
above Eastcheap.

The Old Swan was a picturesque structure, beautiful in its quaintness,
sweet in its cleanliness, and lovable in its ancient air of hospitality.
Its token, a full-grown swan, was the best piece of sign painting in
London. Its kitchen was justly celebrated. The old inn was kept by Henry
Pickering, a man far above his occupation in manner, education, and
culture. He had lived many years in France, where he had married a woman
of good station, and where his only child, Bettina, whom we called Betty,
was born and lived during her early childhood. Pickering's wife died in
France, and his fortunes failed, so he returned to England, bought the
Old Swan, and soon became rich again.

The Old Swan Tavern must not be confused with the Old Swan wharf and
stairs, which were a short distance below the Bridge.

Neither Frances nor Nelly had ever visited the old tavern before, so,
being unacquainted with the private entrance, Nelly marched bravely into
the tap-room and asked Pickering to show them to a quiet dining room.

Two unescorted ladies of quality taking dinner at even so respectable a
house as the Old Swan was an adventure well calculated to shock the
judicious, but Nelly did not care a straw for appearances, and Frances
hardly knew how questionable the escapade was.

When Pickering had seated his beautiful guests in the small dining room
adjoining the tap-room, he returned to the bar and sent his daughter
Betty to serve them. She was a beautiful girl of eighteen, who had
returned only a few months before from France, where she had spent three
or four winters in a convent, her summers having been spent with her
father.

There was no fairer skin nor sweeter face than Betty Pickering's. The
expression of her great brown eyes, with their arching brows, was so
demure as to give the impression that somewhere back in the shadow of
their long, thick lashes lurked a fund of laughter and harmless mischief
as charming as it was apparently latent. Her form was of the partridge
fashion, though not at all too plump, and her hands, which were white and
soft as any lady's, were small and dimpled at every knuckle. Her little
feet and ankles--but we shall stop at the ankles.

Betty was unusually rich in dimples, having one in each cheek and a half
score or more about her lips and chin whenever she smiled. She was well
aware of the beauty of her dimples and her teeth; therefore, like a
sensible girl that she was, she smiled a great deal, both from feminine
policy and natural inclination. In short, Bettina was a Hebe in youth and
beauty, and soon after I learned to know her, I learned also that she was
an earthly little angel in disposition. It may appear from the enthusiasm
of this description that there was a time in my life when I was in love
with her. I admit it--desperately in love with her.

To have Betty's services at the Old Swan was a favor enjoyed only by her
friends and guests of the highest quality. She was not an ordinary
barmaid, though she had friends whom she delighted to honor. Among these
were Hamilton and myself, we having visited the Old Swan frequently prior
to the time of Hamilton's going to France.

Frances and Nelly had chosen a table in a secluded corner of the private
dining room, and were waiting somewhat impatiently when Betty went in to
serve them.

"Will my ladies eat from table linen--extra, sixpence?" asked Betty,
bending her knee in what might have been called a perpendicular courtesy.
Had she been sure that her customers were of high rank, she would have
saluted them with a low bow, omitting to mention the extra charge for the
linen. But as Frances and Nelly were not escorted by a gentleman, she was
not sure of their station.

"Will we eat from table linen?" demanded Nelly, in apparent indignation.
"Now, damn the girl! Just hear her! From what else, in God's name, hussy,
should we eat? From a trough? And mind you, if there is a spot on it as
large as my smallest finger nail, I'll tear it to shreds!" She winked to
Frances, perhaps to show Betty that she was only chaffing, for in all the
world there was no kinder heart than Nelly Gwynn's.

Betty at once concluded that her guests were great ladies, perhaps from
Whitehall itself, for surely none save ladies of the highest or lowest
rank would use the language that came so trippingly on Nelly's tongue. So
Betty made a deep courtesy, smiled, and answered:--

"Yes, my ladies, it shall be as spotless as a maid of honor's character.
It cost five shillings the ell."

"Is that the best you can do?" demanded Nelly, laughing despite herself
at Betty's reference to the maids of honor. "Never in all my life have
I eaten from anything cheaper than guinea linen, and I know I shall
choke--choke, I tell you! Odds fish! this is terrible!" Then turning
to Frances: "But it serves us right, duchess, for leaving the palace."

"Yes, your Highness," returned Frances. "But you insisted on coming to
the place."

Betty was almost taken off her feet! A princess and a duchess! So her
third courtesy was nearly to the floor, as she asked:--

"What will your Highness and your Grace have to eat?"

"A barrel of oysters, a lobster broiled--make it two lobsters--a dish of
raw turnips, with oil, vinegar, and pepper, a bottle of canary, a bit of
cheese, and a pot of tea. But Lord! I suppose you never heard of tea!
It's a new drink, child, recently brought from China."

"Yes, your Highness," answered Betty, very proud that the Old Swan could
furnish so new a beverage. "We have some excellent tea of my father's own
importation."

"Then fetch it, and in God's name, be quick about it! Doubtless you could
be quick enough in running after a man!" said Nelly.

"In running away from him if I wanted to catch him," answered Betty,
casting down her eyes demurely, as she courtesied and left to give the
order in the kitchen.

Nelly's love of fun brought trouble before the dinner was over.

When Betty left her guests, she went to her father in the tap-room and
told him that a princess and a duchess had honored his house, whereupon
Pickering began to swell with pride. As friends dropped in from time to
time, he informed them that a princess and a duchess were waiting for
their dinner in the small dining room, and followed up the extraordinary
announcement in each case by asking proudly:--

"Show me another tavern this side of Westminster that entertains guests
of like rank. If they were to drop into the Dog's Head, old Robbins would
_drop_ dead. And on what would he serve them? I would wager a jacobus to
a farthing that he hasn't a tablecloth of real linen in his house, and as
for forks, why, he never heard of them. Your fingers and a knife at the
Dog's Head! The Old Swan serves its guests of high rank with five
shilling linen and silver forks. Silver, mind you, hammered from
unalloyed coin by Backwell himself. If any of you happen to be at the
Dog's Head, drop a hint that you saw a princess and a duchess in the
Old Swan's small dining room."

If a guest doubted Pickering's statement concerning the quality of his
guests, he led them to the door of the small dining room, where the
sceptic was relieved of his doubts, for Frances and Nelly looked their
assumed parts convincingly.

Soon after Nelly's dinner had been served, a handsome gentleman entered
the tap-room, sat down at a table, and tapped with his sword-hilt for
service. His doublet and trunks of rich velvet, his broad beaver hat with
its long flowing plume, and his silken hose, had all been elegant in
their good days, but now they were stained, shabby, and almost threadbare
in spots. His shoe buckles showed vacant jewel holders, and his sword
hilt was without a precious stone, all giving evidence that their owner
had been dealing with pawnbrokers. He was shabby from head to feet,
though he bore himself with the convincing manner of a gentleman.

Pickering sent the barboy to wait on the newcomer, but the boy returned
immediately and whispered:--

"Ye made a mistake in sending me, master. Better send one of the maids or
Mistress Betty. The gentleman is more than he seems to be."

"What did he say?" asked Pickering.

"'Ee didn't say nothing," answered the boy. "'Ee looked at me."

At that moment Betty came in, and Pickering nodding toward the stranger,
she went to serve him. When she stopped by his table, she made a
perpendicular courtesy, and asked:--

"How may I serve you, sir?"

"You may bring me a bit of cheese, Betty, and a mug of your father's
famous beer," said the gentleman, giving his order modestly.

"Very well, sir," returned Betty, making another stiff courtesy to "a bit
of cheese and a mug of beer." But while her knee was bent, she caught a
glimpse of the man's face beneath the drooping brim of his hat, and the
stiff courtesy instantly changed to a bow as she exclaimed softly:--

"Ah, Master Hamilton, I did not know you. We have not seen you at the Old
Swan this many a day, and--and you are very much changed, sir."

"You are not changed, Betty, unless you have grown prettier, if that be
possible," returned George Hamilton.

"Thank you, Master Hamilton," answered Betty, laughing softly, and
bringing her dimples and teeth into fine display. With all her profound
respect for the high rank of her lady guests, Betty's smiles, while
waiting on handsome George, were of a far rarer quality than those given
to rank and station in the small dining room. In Hamilton's case, she
could not suppress the smile nor restrain the soft laugh incident to her
surprise. The warm glow in her eyes and her murmured words of modest
welcome came of their own accord, because she was kind of heart and as
bewitching a bit of humanity as one could possibly want to caress.

At different times I had imagined that Betty was in love with Hamilton,
and had suffered strange twinges of jealousy on account of my fear;
twinges that surprised and angered me, for my heart had no business going
astray after a barmaid. She had always been kind to me, with a shy
fluttering in her manner from which I should have taken comfort had she
not been freer and easier with Hamilton.

Betty's manner with me should have given me a hint of the way her heart
was tending, even at that early time, but Hamilton was so much more
likely to attract a woman than I, and his manner was so much more offhand
and dashing than mine that I thought it impossible for such a girl as
Betty to think twice of me while she might have been thinking of him. But
I was wrong, as will unfold later; wrong, greatly to my trouble and
surprise.

I should be delighted if I could discover the standards whereby women
measure men. Ugly John Prigg is adored by a beautiful wife, from whom no
other man can win a smile. Stupid little Short possesses a tall rare
Venus, and cadaverous Long a bewitching Hebe. Bandy-legged Little Jermyn,
of Whitehall, he of the "pop eyes" and the rickets head, he with neither
manner, presence, brains, rank, nor money, save what he steals and begs,
is beyond doubt the lady-killer of our court, so what are we to do about
it all but wonder and "give it up"?

"While you have changed for the better, if at all," said Hamilton, "I
also have changed for the better, and sadly for the worse, in some
respects. There is a paradox for you, Betty. I'm better and I'm worse. Do
you know what a paradox is"?

"I'm not sure, Master Hamilton. Perhaps Lord Monmouth is one," answered
Betty, laughing, and coming so close to the truth that Hamilton concluded
she knew the word. "He has been coming here of late, and has been trying
to make love to me."

"And succeeding, Betty?" asked George.

"Ah, no. I've stopped waiting on him. He hasn't money enough to buy the
shadow of a smile from me, even though he is the king's son."

"I commend your discretion, Betty," said George. "But if Monmouth and his
friends have been coming here, the Old Swan must be having rare company."

"Yes," returned Betty, with a touch of pride. "A duchess and a princess
are now taking dinner in the small dining room. There! You may hear the
princess laughing now! She is a merry one."

"A princess, say you, Betty?" asked George. "Nonsense! That is Nelly
Gwynn laughing. I should know her laugh in the din of battle."

"Nelly Gwynn?" cried Betty, joyously. There was not in all England a
duchess nor a princess half so great in Betty's opinion as Nelly Gwynn.
She was the queen of all London east of Temple Bar, and dearer to the
City's heart than any one else at court.

George, too, liked Nelly, and when Betty left him to fetch the pot of tea
from the kitchen for the ladies, he determined to go to the private
dining room and see the king's sweetest sweetheart, from whom he knew he
would hear all the news of court, including perhaps a word about Frances.

Taking his hat from the floor, Hamilton entered the small dining room and
hurried toward the princess and the duchess. Frances sat with her back
toward the door, so that she did not see him as he approached, nor did he
see her face. When Nelly saw him she rose hastily, stretched out her
hands in welcome, and exclaimed:--

"Well, well, handsome George, as sure as I'm not a bishop's wife! How are
you, my long-lost love?"

She stepped forward to meet him, gave him both her hands, stood on tiptoe
to be kissed, and when that pleasing operation had been finished, said:--

"Come with me. I want to present you to my hated rival, the king's latest
love. Mistress Jennings, this is my dangerous friend, Master George
Hamilton."

Nelly's words were my cousin's first warning of Hamilton's presence, and
her surprise, nay, her consternation, deprived her, for the moment, of
the power to think. Hamilton bowed low before my cousin and said:--

"I have the great pleasure of knowing Mistress Jennings."

Anger came to Frances's help, and she retorted: "You are mistaken, sir.
You have not the pleasure of knowing me, nor have I the humiliation of
knowing you."

She turned again to her dinner. Nelly whistled in surprise, and Hamilton
said: "I beg your pardon." Then turning to Nelly: "I thought I knew the
king's new lady love, but it seems I was mistaken. Adieu, Mistress
Gwynn." And turning hastily, he left the room.

As George was resuming his chair at the table in the tap-room, three
roystering, half-tipsy fellows, wearing the uniform of the King's Guard,
entered, flung themselves into chairs at the long table and called loudly
for brandy. Hamilton did not know any of them, though he knew by their
uniforms and swords that they were in the king's service.

Soon after the guardsmen were seated, Betty came from the kitchen
carrying a pot of hot tea and a bottle of wine for Nelly and Frances. As
she was passing the newcomers, one of them rose, seized her about the
waist, and tried to kiss her. But the girl belonged, flesh and blood,
to the class of women with whom kissing goes strictly by favor, so she
dashed the hot tea in the fellow's face and went her way with the bottle
of wine. Though the tea was hot, it cooled the fellow's ardor, and he sat
down, cursing furiously. Pickering tried to quiet him, saying:--

"A little less noise, please, gentlemen. A duchess and a princess are
dining in the next room."

"A duchess and a princess?" exclaimed one of the men. "We should like to
see the duchess and the princess that would dine here. By God! A duchess
and a princess! Come, gentlemen, let us introduce ourselves."

Accordingly the three of them made a dash for the door of the small
dining room and entered. Immediately a series of screams came from the
princess and the duchess, announcing that the intruders were introducing
themselves. Instantly Hamilton drew his sword and hastened to the rescue.
When he entered the room he saw one of the men embracing Nelly and
another trying to seize Frances. His first attention was given to the man
with Frances. He struck him with the hilt of his sword, stunning him for
the moment, but the fellow soon recovered, and the three ruffians drew
their blades.

Finding himself assailed from all quarters, George made a dash for a
corner of the room, where his back and flank were protected. In telling
me of it afterward, Frances said that she and Nelly were so badly
frightened that they could neither move nor scream. The deafening noise
of the clashing swords, the tramping of the heavy boots on the bare oak
floor, the blasphemous oaths of the drunken ruffians, and the stunning
din of battle almost deprived her of consciousness.

After a time all that she could see was Hamilton's face behind the
curtain of flashing swords, and all that she could hear, even above the
din, was his heavy breathing. He had thrown off his doublet and was
fighting in his shirt sleeves, desperately, and it seemed hopelessly.
Soon the blood began to stream down his face, and the white linen of his
shirt was covered with red blotches.

No man can stand long against odds of three to one, but, for what seemed
a very long time to Frances, Hamilton defended himself gallantly, and
seemed to be giving back as much as he received.

But the fight could not have lasted much longer, and sooner or later,
George would have been cut to pieces, had not little Betty entered the
fray. No weapon had she, not even a teapot, but she ran bravely in, knelt
behind one of the ruffians, and when an opportunity came, seized him by
the foot, bringing him down to the floor with a thud. Quickly another
foot was in Betty's deadly grasp, and another man fell, leaving only one
assailant standing, whom Hamilton soon routed. The two men on the floor
attempted to rise, but Betty clung to their feet, and George's sword
quieted them.

When George was satisfied that the ruffians would not try again to
introduce themselves to the duchess and the princess, he wiped his sword
on Betty's five shilling table linen, remarking:--

"I thank you, Betty dear. You came into the fight just in time to save my
life. Another half minute and I should have needed a coffin." He was
breathing heavily and spoke with great effort.

When George had sheathed his sword, he started to leave the room without
speaking to Frances or Nelly, but before he reached the door, Frances
called out faintly:--

"Master Hamilton! Please wait, Master Hamilton!"

For the moment she forgot the cause of her hatred of him, forgot that he
had been implicated in Roger's murder, as she supposed, forgot everything
in all the broad world save her love for him, and that he had just been
at death's door in her defence.

Hamilton stopped a little short of the door, and Frances ran to him,
calling softly: "Oh, sir, wait! Forgive me! I do know you! A moment since
I did not know you, but now--Oh, I must have made a terrible mistake! I
have judged you wrongfully. I do know you! I do know you!"

Hamilton bowed and smiled grimly through the blood which was trickling
down his face, then standing proudly erect, answered:--

"Mistress Jennings is mistaken. She does not know me, nor have I the
honor of knowing the king's new favorite."

Here Betty cut the conversation short by saying: "I'll fetch a
barber-surgeon, while father takes you to a room."

"You'll do nothing of the sort for me," objected Hamilton. "My wounds are
mere scratches. I'll go to the pump. It is the only surgeon I shall need.
Fetch a barber for the men on the floor there."

George went to the pump in the courtyard, followed by Betty, after whom
came Nelly and Frances. Betty was proceeding to wash George's wounds,
when Nelly offered to take the towel from her hand, but the girl refused
with a touch of anger, saying:--

"Please do not interfere, Mistress Gwynn. You and the duchess stood by
gaping while he was fighting to protect you. He would have been dead by
now if he had waited for help from either of you. I advise you to leave
the Old Swan, but don't forget to pay your bill to the barboy."

"Never mind the bill," said Pickering, who was at the pump handle. "But
please take my daughter's advice and go."

"Go where you may find guinea linen. Persons of your quality make too
much trouble at the Old Swan," interposed Betty, who was not in a good
temper.

At first Nelly was inclined to resent Betty's sharp words, but in a
moment she returned softly:--

"You're right, girl. You have earned the privilege to scold."

"And please forgive us," said Frances, to which Betty did not reply.

"Where are your wounds?" asked Nelly, addressing George. "Off with your
clothes and let us see."

"Not here, Nelly, not here," he answered, bending over the tub in front
of the pump. "My wounds are mere trifles. Only a scratch or two on the
scalp and a pink or two on the arms. Take Betty's advice. Leave at once.
This is no place for your friend. The society of our virtuous monarch
doubtless will be far more congenial."

Nelly hesitated, and George, seeing that Frances was about to speak,
turned upon her, almost angrily:--

"Please go before greater trouble comes. I could not hold out for another
fight. I am almost finished. Let the king fight the battles of his
friends. The ruffian that escaped will return with re-enforcements, and I
am not able to fight them again."

"Oh, but she is not the king's friend, as you suppose, as my idle words
might lead you to believe," returned Nelly, pleadingly.

George rose from the tub over which he was standing and answered: "Show
your gratitude for what I have done by going at once."

Seeing that George was in earnest, Nelly left the courtyard, leading
reluctant Frances by the hand. Hamilton's supposed crime had been
forgotten, and I believe would have been forgiven had he permitted
Frances the opportunity at that time.

When Frances and Nelly reached the street, Frances said, "I must see him
again to tell him that I am not--"

"What I am," interrupted Nelly. "Do not fear to speak plainly. I am
content with myself. But I shall take measures at once to convince George
that you are what you are. I'll set you right with him."

"I'll return and explain for myself," insisted Frances.

"He will refuse to hear you. If you wish, I'll leave you at the barge and
go back to explain to him."

Frances consenting, they went back to the barge, and Nelly, returning to
the tavern, sought Betty. Hamilton was not to be seen, and in reply to
Nelly's inquiries, Betty told her that he had fainted at the pump and had
been taken upstairs to a room.

"His wounds are deeper than he supposed," said Betty, "and the loss of
blood has been very great. We have sent for a surgeon."

"I'll go to see him," said Nelly.

"No," returned Betty, shaking her head emphatically. "Father says that
fever may set in, and that Master Hamilton must not be disturbed. You
cannot see him."

"Have your way, Betty," answered good-natured Nell. "And Betty dear, I
was only teasing you about the table linen."

"I understand. Just a little sport with the barmaid," returned Betty, a
note of sarcasm ringing sharply in her usually soft voice.

"Yes, Betty. I'm sorry. Forgive me. Here are two guineas."

"I don't want them," answered Betty, clasping her hands behind her.

"Again forgive me," said Nelly. "I have been wrong altogether in my
opinion of you. You are a good, beautiful girl, and I'm coming back to
see you very soon."

"Please don't come on my account, Mistress Gwynn," returned Betty.

"No, I shall come on my account," replied Nell, coaxingly. "I'll go now
for fear of making more trouble for you, but I intend to be your friend,
and you shall be mine. When Nelly makes up her mind to have a friend, she
always has her way. Good-by, Betty."

Betty courtesied, and Nelly left the Old Swan, returning at once to
Frances, who was waiting in the barge. On their way back to the palace
neither Frances nor Nelly spoke after Nelly had told what she had heard
at the inn. Usually Nelly was laughing or talking, or both, and when a
woman of her temperament is silent, she is thinking. In this instance her
thinking brought her to two conclusions: first, that Hamilton was the man
Frances loved and hated; and second, that it was his face she had
recognized on the night Roger Wentworth was killed.

The dangerous element in these calculations was that they were sure to
reach the king's ear as soon as Nelly found an opportunity to impart
them. It were treason to withhold from his Majesty such a tearing bit of
scandal. She had no reason to suspect that the telling of what had
happened and of what she had deduced would bring trouble to Frances and
George. She simply knew that the king would be vastly pleased with the
story, and her only purpose in life was to give him pleasure. How well
she pleased him in this instance and the result of her innocent effort to
make him happy will soon appear.

The day after the adventure of Frances and Nelly at the Old Swan, I had
business with Backwell, the goldsmith, and when I had disposed of my
matters, I walked over to the Old Swan near by to eat a grilled lobster,
a dish for which the inn was famous. I knew nothing of the trouble that
had occurred the day before, not having seen my cousin, nor did I know
that Hamilton was in London, not having seen nor heard from him since
Frances's arrival at court.

By far my greatest motive in going to the Old Swan was to see Betty,
whose beauty and sweetness had begun to haunt me about that time.

If Mary Hamilton had shown me the least evidence of warmth, my admiration
for Bettina, perhaps, would have remained merely admiration. But in view
of Mary's admirable self-control, I found myself falling into a method
of thought morally then prevalent with all modish men. I confess with
shame that I hoped to have Mary for my wife and Bettina to love me and to
be loved. I did not know Betty then, and have regretted all my life that
once I looked upon her as--well, as a barmaid. While I thoroughly
realized that she was an unusual girl in many respects, still I held to a
theory then prevalent that barmaids were created to be kissed.

When I reached the Old Swan, I chose a table in a remote corner of the
tap-room, ordered a lobster from one of the maids, and, while waiting for
it, drank a cup of wormwood wine.

The place seemed dingy and drear with its great ceiling beams of
time-darkened oak, its long, narrow windows of small square panes, its
black fireplace, lifeless without the flames, and its dark, grim mahogany
bar stretching halfway across the south side of the room. The white
floor, well sanded and polished, seemed only to accentuate the general
gloom, and the great clock, ticking solemnly behind the bar, seemed to be
marking time for a funeral dirge. But suddenly all changed to brightness
when Betty entered. Pickering was talking to me, standing between me and
the girl, so that she did not see me when she first came into the room.
She stepped behind the bar for some purpose and called to her father, who
started to go to her, but before he reached her she looked up and saw me.
In a moment she was by my side, smiling and dimpling in a manner fit to
set the heart of an anchorite a-thumping.

"I came for a lobster, Betty," I said, taking her hand, "and to see you.
I was afraid you might forget me."

"The Old Swan is likely to forget you, Baron Ned," she answered,
withdrawing her hand, "if you don't come to see us oftener."

"Ah, Betty, you're a mercenary bit of flesh and blood. Always looking out
for customers," I returned, shaking my head.

"Yes," she replied, laughing softly. "And--and very sorry when certain
customers come so seldom."

Had she spoken glibly, her words would have meant nothing, but there was
a hesitancy, a pretty fluttering in her manner which pleased me, so I was
emboldened to say:--

"I hope I am one of the 'certain customers,' Betty."

Again she laughed softly, as she answered, "Yes, Baron Ned, _the_ certain
one."

"Do you mean, Betty, that I am the 'certain one' for the Old Swan or for
Betty?" I asked.

She was standing near me, and I again caught her hand, but it was not a
part of Betty's programme to be questioned too closely, so she withdrew
her hand, saying, "I must go."

On former occasions I had put forth what I considered adroit efforts to
steal small favors from the girl, for, as already intimated, I considered
her merely a barmaid; but I had failed, and the conviction was dawning on
my mind that either she was not an ordinary barmaid or that I was the
wrong man. The first assumption would make me all the more eager, but the
second would deter any self-respecting man from further pursuit. My fears
inclined me to accept the second, and resulted in a dim sort of jealousy
of the right man, who, I suspected, was Hamilton.

When Betty started to leave me, I caught her skirt to detain her, and
said: "When George Hamilton used to come here, I was jealous of him, and
feared that he might be the 'certain customer.' But I am glad that he has
left England."

The girl blushed as she answered, "No, no, Baron Ned, there is no other
'certain customer.'" But she checked herself, evidently having said more
than she intended, and continued hurriedly: "But Master Hamilton has not
left England. He is now in the Old Swan. He asked me to say nothing of
his presence in London, but I know he would want me to tell you."

"Yes, yes, of course he would, Betty. Where is he?" I asked.

"Upstairs in bed," she answered.

"Is he sick?" I asked, rising.

"No and yes," she replied. "He is suffering from his wounds, and the
surgeon says the fever is mounting rapidly to his head."

"His wounds?" I exclaimed.

"Yes, lots of them," she answered. "But I hope none of them are serious,
save for the loss of blood."

"Wounds? Blood? Tell me, Betty, tell me! Has he been in trouble?" I
asked, deeply concerned.

"You see it was this way, Baron Ned," she began, leaning back against the
table and smoothing out her apron. "Yesterday while Mistress Gwynn and
another lady, a duchess, were eating their dinner in the small dining
room, three drunken ruffians came in and tried to kiss them. Master
Hamilton, who was here at this very table, heard the disturbance, so he
drew his sword, ran to the rescue, and he and I beat the fellows out. He
fought beautifully, but one man can't stand long against three, so I
upset two of the ruffians by tripping them--pulled their feet from under
them, you know--and Master Hamilton's sword did the rest. One of them ran
away, and the other two were carried to the hospital on stretchers. One
of the ruffians had tried to kiss me a few minutes before, and I had
almost drowned him with a pot of tea. If he ever returns, I'll see that
the tea is boiling."

"It seems that every one is wanting to kiss you, Betty," I remarked.

"Not every one, but too many," she rejoined.

"And you don't want to be kissed, Betty?" I asked.

"Well, not by the wrong man," she answered, laughing softly and tossing
her head emphatically.

"I wish I were the right man," I suggested.

"There is no right man--yet," she returned, laughing and dimpling till I
almost wished there was not a dimpling stubborn girl in all the world.

"Betty, you're a bloodthirsty little wretch," I said, shaking my head
sorrowfully. "You scald one man and help Hamilton to kill two."

"Oh, they will not die," she answered seriously. "I was haunted by the
fear that they might, so I got up in the middle of the night, took father
and one of the boys with a link, and went to the hospital, where I
learned that they will recover."

"Show me to Hamilton's room, Betty, and bring two lobsters there instead
of one. He and I will have dinner together," I said, turning to go with
her.

"He doesn't seem to want to eat, though I doubt if his lack of appetite
is owing wholly to his wounds," she replied, as we were leaving the
tap-room.

"How long has he been here?" I asked.

"Since yesterday noon," she answered. "He came just in time to find
trouble. An hour ago I took a bowl of broth to him and a plate of
sparrow-grass, but he said dolefully that the food would stick in his
throat. I told him he was not wounded in the throat. Then he said it was
in his heart, and that such a wound kills the appetite. I believe he's in
love, Baron Ned," she concluded, leaning toward me and whispering
earnestly.

"With you, Betty?" I asked.

"No, no, with some one else."

"Would it make you unhappy?" I asked.

"To be in love?" she asked, arching her eyebrows.

"No. For him to be in love," I said.

"If he is unhappily so, I should be sorry," she answered.

"And you would not be jealous?" I asked.

"Ah, Baron Ned!" she returned, protestingly.




CHAPTER VI

SWEET BETTY PICKERING


When we knocked at Hamilton's door, he answered, "Come," and I entered,
Betty closing the door behind me, leaving George and me together. He
was lying on the bed, his head and arms bandaged, and a feverish gleam
shining in his eyes. I went toward him, offering my hand. He rose and sat
on the edge of the bed, but did not accept my greeting. I was about to
speak when he lifted his hand to interrupt me, saying coldly:--

"Well, Clyde, what do you want?"

"I want to see you and help you, if I can," I answered, in surprise.

"Now that you have seen me, you may go," he returned.

I did not know the cause of his ill feeling, though I knew that something
had happened to turn him against me, so I stood my ground and answered:--

"I shall go if you insist, but before I go, please tell me in what manner
I have offended you. Neither you nor I have so many friends that we can
afford to lose one without an effort to save him. The world is full of
men and women, but a friend is a gift of God. I thought you had forgiven
me what I said at Sundridge. Your time to take offence was then, not
now."

"I hold no ill will for what you said then in my hearing. It is what you
have done in so cowardly a manner since I last saw you, and at a time
when I was not present to hear or to resent it."

"But what have I done?" I asked.

"You should know. I don't," he answered, sullenly.

"If neither you nor I know what I have done to offend, how are we to
settle this matter? How may I apologize or make amends?" I asked.

"You can't," he returned.

"Ah, but I can and I will, George Hamilton," I answered, determined not
to let him put me off without knowing wherein I had offended. "Save what
you heard at Sundridge, I have neither done nor said anything unfit to
come from a friend. If any man has reported me otherwise, he has lied.
If any woman--well, she is mistaken."

"No one has reported you otherwise or any wise," he answered.

"Then tell me the cause of your grievance, and I may be able to explain
or deny. You perhaps know by this time that I always speak the truth
to you, so out with it, George. Let us settle this matter, whatever it
be--one way or the other. Friendship should not be left to dangle between
love and hatred. It sits squarely on the heart of an honest man, or is
cast out candidly and above board. Shall I sit down?"

"Yes," he answered, rising from the bed, drawing the rug up over his
shoulders, and taking a chair not far from where I was sitting. "I saw
your cousin--"

"When and where?" I interrupted.

"Yesterday, in this house," he replied.

"Did she come to see you? And did you permit her to come?" I asked,
finding it my turn to be angry.

"No, she did not come to see me, nor had I anything to do with her visit
to the Old Swan. She was eating dinner with Nell Gwynn, and--"

"Was she the duchess, of whom Betty told me?" I asked, interrupting him.

"Yes, the Duchess of Hearts, as I hear she has been dubbed at court," he
answered, with an angry gleam in his eyes and a sharp note of contempt in
his voice.

"And was it for her you fought?" I asked, feeling as though I was reading
a page from a story-book. "Betty told me about it, but you tell me,
please?"

"Betty usually exhausts a subject, so there is no need to tell you about
the fight," he said. "It was really a small affair, and my wounds are
nothing to speak of. I suffered more from other causes."

"Yes, yes, George. Tell me all about it," I returned, drawing my chair
nearer to him. "I fear a mistake has been made, a misunderstanding of
some sort, though I cannot imagine even the sort. Now, tell me."

"I came up from Sheerness on a Dutch boat and landed at Deptford
yesterday morning," he began hesitatingly. "After sending a messenger on
business in which I was deeply interested, I came to the Old Swan to get
a bite to eat and to find a bed. While waiting in the tap-room for my
dinner, I recognized Nelly's laugh and went into the private dining room
to see her, hoping that she might drop a word concerning another person.
I should not have gone to see her, for while in France I had heard from
De Grammont, with whom I have had some correspondence, that I was out of
favor with the king and that Crofts had been trying to fix on me the
guilt of a crime which he himself committed.

"Grammont wrote me, also, of the triumphs of Mistress Jennings, the new
beauty of the court, but I paid little heed to the gossip, though I
confess I was thrown into great fear by what he wrote about her. I knew
also that the king would help Crofts make trouble for me, so I felt it
was just as well that my presence in London should remain unknown. But I
did go in to see Nelly, and, much to my surprise, found the other
person."

It was to my surprise, also, but I said only: "Yes, yes, George. Your
story is growing interesting. Proceed!"

After a moment, he continued: "Nelly offered to present me to the other
person, whom she designated as 'the king's new favorite.' Naturally I
said that I already had the honor of knowing Mistress Jennings. Then your
cousin looked up to me and remarked calmly that I was mistaken; that I
did not have the honor of knowing her, nor she the humiliation of knowing
me. So I made my bow, went back to the taproom, and in a moment the fight
occurred, of which you already know."

"But what has all this to do with your grievance against me?" I asked.

He turned his face away from me, looked out the window for a minute or
two, and answered: "These are my causes of offence, Baron Clyde. You have
brought your cousin, your own flesh and blood, to Whitehall to sell her
to the king, and--"

"That is a lie, Hamilton!" I cried, springing to my feet, "and, by God,
you shall answer for it as soon as you are able to hold a sword!"

"I shall be very willing," he returned, though it was evident he was
somewhat cooled by my anger. "But since you would know the cause of my
ill-feeling, sit down and hear what I have to say."

I resumed my chair, and he continued: "I can see no reason for your
cousin's strange aversion to me save that you have used well the time of
my absence in traducing me, hoping doubtless to smooth the king's path by
removing me from her thoughts."

What he said did little to allay my anger until I looked into his face
and saw that by reason of his fever and his great trouble, he was not
responsible for his words. I had been on the point of giving him the lie
the second time, but after a moment's consideration, my anger changed to
pity, and I said:--

"Forgive me, Hamilton. I am sorry I spoke in anger. You did not lie. You
have been simply jumping at conclusions."

"Perhaps," he answered wanderingly.

"But if I tell you, upon my honor, that you are mistaken, will you
believe me?" I asked, still feeling a touch of irritation.

He did not answer, so, thinking to give him one more chance, I continued
gently: "I have neither harbored an unkind thought of you nor spoken an
unkind word of you since the day we parted at Sundridge. On the contrary,
I believed that the hot moment there had welded a friendship between us
which would last all our lives through."

He walked over to the window, stood looking out a moment, then came back
and resumed his chair before me.

"I do not favor your suit with my cousin to any greater extent than I did
when we were at Sundridge," I continued, determined that there should be
no misunderstanding of my position in that respect, "though since that
time I have learned that you are a far better man than I had ever
supposed. I have not recommended my cousin to the king, nor is she his
favorite in the sense you seem to believe. I do not know the cause of her
aversion to you, and, sir, I have nothing else to say except that I take
it for granted that you know I speak the truth. This is my explanation.
It is for you to say whether you accept or reject it."

I rose, giving him to understand that I was ready to take my leave, but
he motioned me to resume my chair. After gazing vacantly out the window
for a moment, he covered his face with his hands and answered:--

"I accept your explanation gladly, Baron Ned. I have wronged you. I have
been in such turmoil of mind and conscience for so long a time that I am
hardly responsible, and now I suppose I am in a fever because of the loss
of blood."

I resumed my chair, the difference being settled between us, and in a
moment we began to discuss the cause of Frances's sudden change.

It must be remembered that I knew nothing all this time of Hamilton's
remote connection with Roger Wentworth's murder. The dimly hinted rumors
that had reached my ears I had put down to Crofts's desire for a
scapegoat, and the conversation between Frances and Nelly, and Nelly's
conclusions, all came to me after this interview with Hamilton.

Failing to reach any conclusion after a long discussion of the subject,
Hamilton and I began to speak on other topics, and I asked him where he
had been and what he had been doing.

"I have been at the French court, gambling furiously, and hoarding my
money," he answered. "I have not even bought a suit of clothes, and have
turned every piece of lace and every jewel I possessed into cash."

"I supposed you were leaving off some of your old ways, gambling among
them," I remarked, sorry to hear of his fall from grace.

"And so I have," he answered. "But I wanted a thousand pounds to use in a
good cause, and felt that I was doing no wrong to rob a very bad Peter in
France to pay a very good Paul at home. I have paid the good Paul, and am
now done with cards and dice forever."

"I'm glad to hear you say so, George," I returned.

"Yes, I'll tell you how it was," he continued. Then he gave me an account
of the killing of Roger Wentworth, the particulars of which I then
learned for the first time. I allowed him to proceed in his narrative
without interruption, and he finished by saying: "I learned that same
evening that a thousand pounds had been stolen from a traveller. I
suspected Crofts, Wentworth, and Berkeley of the robbery, but I did not
know certainly that they had committed the crime, since I did not see
them do it. The next morning I learned that a man had been killed by
highwaymen, and as I felt sure that the murder had been committed
in the affair I had witnessed, I went to France because I did not want
to be called to testify in case criminal proceedings were instituted.
In France I learned that the murdered man was young Wentworth's uncle.

"Of course, I did not receive a farthing of the money, but I almost felt
that I was accessory before the fact because I had not hastened to
prevent the crime, and after the fact because I had made no effort to
bring the criminals to justice. Churchill told me flatly that I should be
alone if I tried the latter, and said that he was not so great a fool as
to win the enmity of the king by attempting to bring the law upon Crofts.
You know Churchill's maxim, 'A fool conscience and a fool damned.'"

"There is wisdom in it," I answered.

"I suppose there is," returned Hamilton. "I wanted the thousand pounds to
pay Roger Wentworth's widow, so I won it in France, brought it to
England, and yesterday sent it by a trusted messenger to Sundridge. Of
course the widow does not know where it came from."

"It was like you, George," said I. "One does not do a thing of that sort
for sake of a reward, but, believe me, the reward always comes."

"It was the right thing to do," he answered. "But instead of the reward
comes now the keenest grief I have ever known, the loss of the small
regard in which I was one time held by the only woman I ever loved or
ever shall love."

He stopped speaking, but I fancied he had not finished, so I did not
interrupt him. I had so much to say in return that I did not care to
begin until I had a clear field. He was becoming restless, and I could
see that the fever was mounting rapidly. After a long pause he
continued:--

"But, in a way, the loss of her regard is the least of my troubles, and
I should bear it with equanimity, for if I am honest with her, I would
not desire to keep it, as I can bring her no happiness. It is the loss of
my respect for her, the knowledge that I was wrong in deeming her better
than other women, the humiliation of learning that I was a pitiable dupe
in giving my love to one who could give herself to Charles Stuart, that
hurts."

I saw that he was trying to suppress his excitement, but it soon got the
better of him. He rose from his chair, drew the rug closer about him, and
walked rapidly to and fro across the room a minute or two. Being near my
chair, he bent down to me, looked wildly about him to see that no one was
eavesdropping, and whispered:--

"I intend to kill the king just as soon as I'm out of this. Then God or
the devil, I care not which, may finish me."

At that moment Betty came in, followed by one of the maids carrying our
dinner. I asked George to eat with me, but he refused and lay down on the
bed, drawing the rugs up to his chin and shaking in an ague. The maid
left us, but Betty remained, evidently expecting to wait on us and
incidentally to talk, for she dearly loved to relieve her mind.

As much as I liked Betty, I asked her to leave us, and when she was gone,
I drew my chair to George's bedside, leaving the dinner to cool.

"First, I want to tell you again," said I, "that Frances is not the
king's mistress, nor ever will be."

"Do you know, or do you believe?" he asked.

"I know," I answered, and followed up my assertion with a full account of
her life at court, the king's infatuation, at which she laughed, his
offer of a pension, which at first she refused, the respect in which
every one held her, and the wisdom with which she carried herself through
it all.

"Ned, you're as great a fool about her as I was," he returned, shaking
his head. "Do you suppose Charles Stuart would give her a pension with no
other purpose than kindness or justice? Be sane! Don't be a fool!"

"I say nothing of his purposes; I speak only of her conduct. But I shall
not argue with you. If you find any pleasure in your opinion, keep it," I
answered, knowing that I could not reason with a man who was half crazy.

"I shall," he replied sullenly.

"But there is another matter in which I believe you will agree with me,"
I continued. "I have discovered the cause of my cousin's ill feeling--of
her change respecting yourself."

He rose from his bed, demanding excitedly: "What is it? Tell me, tell
me!"

"You have just told me that you and Churchill were walking at a
considerable distance behind Crofts and the others when Roger Wentworth
was killed."

"Yes, yes," he returned. "Perhaps as much as two hundred yards."

I watched his face closely to study the effect of my next bit of
information, and after a long pause, asked, "Do you know that Frances was
in the coach?"

"No, no! Hell and furies! In the coach when Wentworth was killed? My God,
tell me all about it, man!" he cried, clutching my arm, and glaring at me
with the eyes of a crazy man.

"Yes," I answered. "And she tells me she recognized one of the robbers by
the light of the coach lanthorn, though she refused to describe the man
she saw and will not be induced to talk about him. Possibly you were the
unlucky man. If true, can you wonder that she hates you?"

He sat down on the edge of the bed, musing, then fell back on the pillow
with a great sigh, and muttered as though speaking to himself:--

"I can wonder at nothing save my marvellous ill luck. This tale points a
moral, Baron Ned. If one belongs to the devil, one should stand by one's
master. Hell is swifter in revenge than heaven in reward."

"It is only the long run that tells the tale," I answered, taking his hot
hand to soothe him. "Heaven always wins, and your reward will come."

"Ah, yes, the long run is all right if one can only hold out," he
answered, gripping my hand and breathing rapidly. He was almost in
delirium. "But I'll take the short run, Baron Ned." Here his voice rose
almost to a scream: "I'll take the short run, Ned, and will kill the
king! Then to hell after him by way of Tyburn Hill!"

He sprang to me, grasped my shoulders fiercely, and spoke as one in a
frenzy: "I was right, Ned. She is all I thought she was at Sundridge.
When I first knew her I doubted my senses. I did not know there was a
pure woman outside of a convent, but when I learned to know her I changed
my mind. Now comes this accursed Charles Stuart! His house has been a
bane to England ever since the spawn of the Scotch courtesan first came
to London. But his reign will be short!"

He was becoming delirious, so I induced him to lie on the bed while I
went downstairs to find Betty. When I found her, I told her that the
fever was mounting to Hamilton's brain, and that I feared he would soon
become violent.

She sent a boy to fetch a physician, then turned to me, saying:--

"I'll go up to him. I believe I can quiet him."

So we went back to George's room and found him out of bed, prowling about
like a caged wild thing, tossing his arms, and shouting his intention to
kill the king.

"You must go back to bed, Master Hamilton," commanded Betty in her soft,
low voice.

He caught her around the waist and said, laughing, "You're a good girl,
Betty."

"I hope I am, sir. But you must go back to bed," she answered.

"And you're pretty, too. Pretty and good don't usually go together," said
George, drawing her close to him.

"No, but you must go back to bed, Master Hamilton, or you will be very
ill," she pleaded.

"I'll go for a kiss, Betty," he answered, bending over to take it. But
she put up her hands to ward him off.

"I'll give you the kiss, Master Hamilton, if you insist. But it will be
only a bribe to induce you to do what is for your own good, and if you
take it, I shall never come back to your room again."

"Ah, Ned, here's another good girl!" exclaimed George, releasing Betty.
"There are two of them in the world! Who would have suspected it? Keep
your kisses for your husband, Betty."

"Yes, Master Hamilton," she answered demurely, giving me a luminous
glance, all unconscious of its meaning. The glance was my first hint that
perhaps Betty had at times been thinking of me.

"All right! Here's to bed, my girl," said Hamilton.

She smoothed the bed covering and turning to leave the room, said, "I'll
come back when the physician arrives."

I could easily see that Hamilton was going to have what the old women
call a "bad night," so I asked Betty to sit with him, and she consenting,
I went by river to my lodging in Whitehall, where I collected a few
necessary articles in a bag and returned quickly as possible to the Old
Swan. When I reached George's room, I found Betty at her post. The
physician had given Hamilton a quieting potion, and he was resting,
though at intervals he broke out, shouting his intention to kill the
king.

During nearly two weeks Hamilton lay moaning and raving, sweet, dear
Betty rarely leaving his side for more than a few minutes at a time. I,
too, clung to my post faithfully, but at least a part of my motive in
doing so was selfish, being the joy I found in Betty's company. At the
end of two weeks George began to recover rapidly, and I was dismissed
along with the physician.

When I returned to Whitehall, I found that my Lord Sandwich, under whom
I held my place as Second Gentleman of the Wardrobe, had been seeking me.
The king had gone to Sheerness on business of the navy two weeks before,
and the Earl of Sandwich, being at that time Lord Admiral, was to go down
the river on a summons from his Majesty. Much against my will, I was
compelled to go with him, and, by reason of this enforced absence, was
away from London during the next month or two, when I very much wished to
be there.

I saw Frances only twice during George's illness, and as she made no
inquiries about him, I concluded that sober thought had brought back her
old aversion. Therefore I did not mention his name nor try to correct her
error, feeling that it was better for her to remain in her present state
of mind.

I was convinced that Hamilton's threats against the life of the king were
but the ravings of a frenzied brain, and that he had no intention of
killing Charles, but I also felt sure that trouble would come of it,
since he had been overheard by several persons. The treason was certain
to reach the king's ear, and if it did, Hamilton's life would be in
jeopardy. But of that in its turn.

       *       *       *       *       *

Immediately on my return to London I went down to the Old Swan to see
George, of course having Betty in mind. In truth, Betty had been in mind
most of the time and much to my regret ever since the day I left her.

Even if I had not been plighted to Mary Hamilton, I could not have asked
Betty to be my wife. She would not be happy in my sphere of life, and I
could not live in hers. The painful knowledge of this truth did not in
any way help me to put her out of my thoughts, but rather made my longing
for her all the greater. Since I had learned to know her well, I thought
I meant honestly by her. Still she was a barmaid, and I could not always
bring myself to respect her as she deserved. Time and again I resolved
in all sincerity never to see her again. Since I could not marry her, I
would gain nothing but unhappiness myself and perhaps misery for her by
continuing my suit.

But when back in London, I persuaded myself that it was my duty to see
George, and tried to shut my eyes to the fact that Betty was the real
cause of my anxiety.

When I reached the Old Swan, I soon found Betty, and there could be no
mistake in my reading of the light I saw in her eyes.

After talking with her a minute or two in the tap-room, I asked her to
tell me of Hamilton, and she said hesitatingly that he had left the inn
nearly two months ago.

"Do you know where he is?" I asked.

She answered hesitatingly, "N-o-o-o."

I saw that she did not want to be questioned, so I remained chatting with
her for an hour, and returned to Whitehall, very proud that I had
restrained my tongue during the interview.

       *       *       *       *       *

On the afternoon following my interview with Betty, I was sitting in
my room adjoining my Lord's private closet in the Wardrobe, trying in
vain to think of something besides Betty, when I heard a peal of merry
laughter, which I recognized as Nelly Gwynn's. Immediately following, I
heard the deep, unmistakable voice of the king. They had just entered my
Lord's private closet, between which and my room there was a loosely hung
door, permitting me to hear all that was said.

"Ah, Rowley," said Nell. "You have been away from me a long weary time,
and I know you have forgotten me."

The king denied the charge, and doubtless took his own way to convince
her.

"While you have been away, I have found a new friend to console me," said
Nelly.

"Ah!" exclaimed the king, with suddenly awakened interest.

"Yes," returned Nelly.

"Is your new friend a man or a woman?" asked Charles.

"A woman, of course, oh, jealous heart! You know there is but one man in
the world for me--your ugly self."

"Who is your friend?" asked the king.

"I'll give you three guesses. You admire her greatly," said Nelly.

"Indeed, it must be the Bishop of Canterbury's lady," suggested his
Majesty.

"Surely!" exclaimed Nell, with a merry laugh. "But guess again."

When the king had exhausted his three guesses, she said triumphantly, "My
new friend's name is Frances Jennings."

"Ah, indeed!" exclaimed the king. "She will have nothing to say to my
friends, Lady Castlemain and others, and I supposed she would be too nice
and proper to choose you for her friend."

"No, no," returned Nelly. "She is my first friend among the court ladies.
We have had several rare adventures together, and don't you know, I have
discovered that she is in love."

"With whom?" demanded the king.

"With your friend and mine, George Hamilton," returned Nelly.

"Ah, well, he is in France, and we shall see that he remains there," said
the king.

"No, he is not in France. He is in London," said Nelly. "I saw him at the
Old Swan just before you left for Sheerness, nearly two months ago."

"Odds fish!" swore his Majesty. "We'll find a mission for him abroad."

"You'll have to find him first," said Nelly. "I've been down to the Old
Swan to see him, but the girl there tells me he left the tavern long ago,
and I suspect he is at his brother's house near St. Albans. But I'll tell
you further."

Then she told the king what Frances had said about a mysterious man
whom Nelly asserted Frances both hated and loved. She told him also
that Frances had recognized one of the highwaymen who had robbed Roger
Wentworth, and closed her narrative with an account of my cousin's
refusal to recognize Hamilton and her eagerness to explain to him after
the fight.

"So you see, Rowley dear, I put this and that together and concluded that
Frances Jennings loves George Hamilton because she can't help it, and
hates him because she recognized him as one of the murderers of Roger
Wentworth. She did not say that this is all true, nor will she talk on
the subject, but one may see through a millstone with a hole in it."

"Perhaps Hamilton's complicity in the crime may save us the trouble of
sending him abroad," said the king. "We may be able to hang him instead."

"Surely you would not hang him for so small an offence? The murdered man
was only a tanner!" cried Nelly, fearing she had brought trouble on
Hamilton by her gossip.

"Of course, if there were no reason save the demands of grasping justice,
we should not trouble ourselves to look into the matter," said Charles,
"but stern justice, if used and not abused, is often a ready help to
kings."

Charles laughed, doubtless showing his yellow fangs, as was his habit
when uttering a cruel jest, and Nelly began to coax him, hoping to avert
the unforeseen trouble she had set afoot. At last the king promised that
he would take no steps against Hamilton, but I knew that royal promises
were never worth the breath they cost in making.

       *       *       *       *       *

As soon as Nelly and the king left my lord's closet, I hastened to the
river and took a boat for the Old Swan, intending to find Hamilton and to
warn him.

When I told Betty that I wanted to see Hamilton on an affair of great
urgency, she admitted that she knew where he was, and that she had
refused to tell me when I asked her the last time because he had exacted
a promise from her to tell no one.

"But I shall see him," said Betty, "and if you will come back to-morrow,
I'll tell you where he can be found if he consents."

During the last month or two a _News Letter_ had been circulated by
thousands throughout London and Westminster, in which the character of
the king had been assailed with great bitterness. At first Charles paid
no attention to the new journal, but soon its attacks got under his skin.
I was told that efforts had been made to discover the publisher and his
printing shop, but that nothing could be learned save that the sheets
were left at taverns and bookstalls by boys who declared they found them
in bundles in the churchyards.

It was impossible to find even the boys. The bookstalls and taverns were
ordered not to sell the _News Letter_, but the people hated the king so
bitterly that the circulation increased rather than diminished after the
royal interdict, and as the sheets sold for the extravagant price of one
shilling, it was impossible to stop the sale, since every one who handled
them was making a rich profit.

Judging from many articles appearing in the _News Letter_, I suspected
that Hamilton was a contributor, if not the editor. If either, he was
piling up trouble, should he be discovered.

On leaving the Old Swan, I went back to the palace and met Frances at the
Holbein Gate, cloaked and bonneted, ready to go to see her father.

I offered to accompany her, and we took a coach at Charing Cross for Sir
Richard's house.

My conscience had troubled me because I had done nothing to clear
Hamilton of her unjust suspicions. Up to that time I had found no
opportunity to speak to her privately after my return from Sheerness,
nor had I fully made up my mind to try to convince her that George was
not guilty of Roger's death. But when she and I entered the coach to go
to her father's house, I broached the subject:--

"You remember, cousin," I began, "what I said to you in Hamilton's
presence on the Bourne Path?"

"Every word," she replied. "It was all true, and I shall be grateful so
long as I live."

"But what I said at that time did not seem to cause you to hate him?" I
continued, wondering what her reply would be.

"No," she answered, with slight hesitancy. "It did not."

"Is the aversion you now feel toward him the result of what I said at
that time?" I asked.

"No, no," she returned quickly. Then suddenly checking herself, she
demanded, "Why do you speak of my aversion to him, and what do you know
about it?"

I told her that I knew all the particulars of her meeting with Hamilton
at the Old Swan, of her refusal to recognize him and of the fight that
ensued. I told her of my talk with him, at the beginning of his sickness,
two weeks before I left for Sheerness, and then without giving her time
to guard against surprise, I asked:--

"Do you believe he was implicated in the Roger Wentworth tragedy?"

She looked at me a moment, and answered defiantly: "I do not believe it.
I know it. I have not spoken to any one else about it, nor shall I speak
of it again, but I saw him, and of course I hate him." She turned her
face from me, and I fancied there were tears in her eyes.

"You know that I do not favor Hamilton as your suitor?" I asked.

"Yes," she answered, still with averted face.

"And if I were to tell you that you were wrong, that Hamilton had no part
in the robbing and killing of Roger Wentworth, would you believe me?"

"No, no!" she exclaimed, turning to me quickly, with an angry gleam in
her eyes. "I tell you I saw him, and I thank God that at last I know him
as he is! After he had fought so bravely to defend me at the Old Swan, my
heart softened for a moment, and I forgot that he was a murderer. He is
brave and strong, but--why should you try to excuse him now, when you
spoke so plainly at Sundridge? I thought you were too severe then; now
I know that you told me only a part of the terrible truth. My softened
mood lasted only a short time after I left the Old Swan, and I cared not
whether he lived or died."

Hoping to put her right, I told her of the wager at the Leg Tavern, which
in my opinion fully explained George's presence on the St. Albans road,
but she declared that it was a flimsy excuse, and said she did not want
to talk further on the subject.

Knowing that I could not convince her at that time, I bore away from the
topic and called her attention to the impropriety of taking dinner
unescorted at a public house.

"I know all about it, cousin," she returned, "but a good character is
of no value in Whitehall. It is an incumbrance. As to my conscience,
you need have no fear. When I first came to court, I supposed I should
encounter dangers. I was mistaken. I am as safe here as I should be in my
father's house. All the pitfalls and snares are to be seen by any one who
wishes to see them. It is the sleeping spider that catches the fly, not
your bold, brazen hunter, clumsily alert."

I did not want to be preaching constantly to Frances, so we talked on
other subjects till we reached my uncle's house, where I remained,
singing, dancing, and very merry with Frances, Sarah, and Churchill, till
we heard the night watch call, "One o'clock and raining!"

Churchill and I slept at Sir Richard's and returned to Whitehall the next
morning.

During the following week I went to see Betty frequently under the
pretence of wishing to see Hamilton, but she told me (honestly, I
believed) that he had left the Old Swan and that she did not know where
he was. So I repeated my visits every day, each visit growing longer and
I growing fonder. Betty, too, seemed to be looking for my visits with a
degree of pleasure that both pleased and grieved me, for with all my
longing for the girl, I never lost sight of the fact that if I were the
right sort of man, I should not wish to gain her love to an extent that
would mean sorrow to her.

If I were the right sort of man? The question has always set me
wondering. The man who never doubts that he is the right sort of man may
be put down as all bad, though the right sort of man is not necessarily
all good.




CHAPTER VII

THE EYE OF THE DRAGON


One morning, a week or more after my visit to my uncle's house, with
Frances, she came to my closet in the Wardrobe greatly excited, and told
me that a sheriff had come to take her to one of the London courts of
law.

"Here is the paper he gave me," she said, handing me a document which
proved to be a subpoena. "I have committed no crime, and I can't imagine
what it all means."

After examining the subpoena, I explained: "You are wanted merely as a
witness before a jury of inquiry engaged in investigating a crime of some
sort. It may be Hamilton's fight at the Old Swan, or it may be the Roger
Wentworth affair. Perhaps some one is trying to fix that awful crime on
Hamilton. But I tell you, Frances, he is innocent."

I had not, at that time, explained to her that Hamilton and Churchill
were two hundred yards behind Crofts and his friends when the robbery was
committed, having felt that it was just as well not to make Hamilton's
innocence too clear.

We of the court considered ourselves exempt from processes of this sort
while in the palace. Therefore I carried the paper to the king, whom I
found at cards in his closet.

"What is it, Clyde?" asked his Majesty.

For answer, I handed him the subpoena, and when he had glanced over it,
he returned it to me, saying:--

"Please tell the sheriff for me that Mistress Jennings will appear before
the court of inquiry this afternoon at two o'clock."

"It is a disagreeable business for a lady, your Majesty," I remarked,
bowing. "But if it is your desire--"


"Yes, yes, Clyde! Come with me," he interrupted, leading me out of
the room to a corridor. "You see it is this way. We of the palace have
so frequently set the law at defiance of late that the citizens are
beginning to grumble. In this instance I should like to make a great
show of compliance. We'll make it easy for your cousin by going with her.
And Clyde, if you will say to the duchess for me that I should deem it a
favor if she and one or more of her ladies will accompany us, I doubt not
she will be glad to go."

"But, your Majesty, what has my cousin done that she should be dragged
before the courts of law?" I asked, pretending ignorance of the real
nature of the summons and hoping to ascertain whether the king knew
anything about the present occasion.

I gained the information I wanted when he replied instantly: "Oh, she is
not to be tried. She has done nothing. She is called only to be
questioned concerning a crime now under investigation." Then hedging
quickly, "That is, I suppose such is the purpose of the subpoena."

The king's manner and his evident knowledge of what was going on
convinced me that Hamilton was the subject of inquiry, and I greatly
feared an effort was being made to charge him with Roger Wentworth's
death or to arraign him because of his threats against the king's life.

I was about to leave the king when he stopped me, saying "Please go to my
Lady Castlemain's lodging over Holbein's Gate and ask her to go with us
down to London. And Clyde, have my barge at the Bowling Green stairs at
one o'clock so that we may take our leisure going down the river and
still reach the law courts on time. Our punctuality will flatter the city
folk."

At one o'clock, according to instructions, I went to the royal barge
waiting at Bowling Green stairs, where presently came the king, the
duchess with one of her ladies, Frances, my Lord Clarendon, and my Lady
Castlemain, the last named bearing in her arms a young baby. In a barge
which was to follow us were several gentlemen of the court and a
halfscore of the king's guardsmen. Evidently the occasion was to be in
the nature of a frolic; poor Frances to furnish the entertainment.

On thinking it all over, I was convinced that the investigation, whatever
it should turn out to be, had been instigated by the king.

When we entered the barge, Frances clung to my hand and sat down beside
me, but the king, who was sitting with the duchess on one hand and
Castlemain on the other, beckoned Frances to sit beside him. She went to
him reluctantly, and he moved toward the duchess, making room for Frances
between himself and Castlemain. But that fair lady objected and moved up
to the king, indicating by a nod that Frances might sit on the spot her
Ladyship had vacated.

But the king said, "You are to sit by me, Mistress Jennings."

"She'll do nothing of the sort," exclaimed Castlemain, with an oath.
"She'll sit on the other side of me or in the bottom of the barge, or in
the river, I care not which."

"You shall make room, or I'll have you put out of the barge," said the
king, displaying a flash of temper.

Immediately a torrent of profanity and piercing screams came from her
Ladyship.

"Let any man lay hands on me," she cried, turning to the king, "and this
brat of yours goes into the water!"

"Sit down, in God's name, sit down and have your way," said the king,
waving his hand to the man on the wharf to throw the warps aboard.

The duchess laughed and offered to give her place to Frances, but of
course my cousin refused and came back to me.

       *       *       *       *       *

When we reached the courtroom, we found it filled with men, women, and
children, most of them belonging to the lower walks of life and all of
them eager to see the king, whom they seemed to know was coming.

As we entered, the High Sheriff, in his gown, rose and cried: "Oyez!
Oyez! His Majesty is now in presence!" Whereupon the audience rose and
remained standing till the king left.

We had entered by the public door, the king doubtless wishing to display
himself as fully as possible to the people. As we passed down the aisle
to the bar, I caught the eyes of a man garbed as a Quaker. He wore a thin
gray beard, and his white hair hung almost to his shoulders. His bearing
and expression were truly sanctimonious, and had the gleam in his eyes
been in keeping, I should not have taken a second glance at him. But it
was not, so as I came close to him I noticed him carefully and saw that
he was observing me. At once I thought of Hamilton, and although I was
not at all sure of my ground, I dropped my hat near him, as an excuse for
stopping, and, while bending toward him, whispered:--

"Dark spectacles shade the eyes."

If the man was not Hamilton, my remark would mean nothing; if he was, it
would give him a valuable hint.

When the king and the duchess were seated, the judge spoke from the
bench, calling the attention of the good people of London to the fact
that his gracious Majesty had given to the court information which, it
was hoped, would lead to the arrest of the man who had committed the
heinous crime of robbing and killing Roger Wentworth on the king's
highway. The judge said that his gracious Majesty, loving justice as
perhaps no other king of England had ever loved it, had come in person
to offer as a witness one of the fairest ladies of the court, by whose
testimony it was expected the guilty man might be brought to justice.

During this speech, which was much longer than I have given it, I noticed
that the king was restless, and I suspected that, in his heart, his
Majesty was cursing the judge for a fool.

When the judge sat down, the Grand Jury was summoned, and in a few
minutes the wheels of justice were ready to turn. In proceedings of this
nature, there is no prisoner at bar; therefore no one is in court save
the crown by its counsel, the purpose being only to obtain information
upon which a true bill or indictment may be found against some one
suspected of the crime under investigation.

After all was ready, the sheriff escorted Frances to the witness stand,
and the judge asked her to place her hand on the Bible. She did so and
made oath that she would true answers make to all questions that should
be put to her touching her knowledge of the robbery and murder of one
Roger Wentworth.

When she had made oath, the king's counsel said: "You may state to the
court whether you were acquainted with one Roger Wentworth, a tanner of
Sundridge, during his life." To which question Frances answered that she
had known Roger since her childhood.

The king's counsel then put several preliminary questions which led up to
the time of Roger's murder, after which he asked:--

"You may state to the court whether you saw the faces of any of the
highwaymen."

"I did," answered Frances.

"Are you acquainted with one George Hamilton?" asked the lawyer.

"Yes," answered Frances. And my heart almost leaped out of my mouth in
fear that her next word would mean death to an innocent man.

"You may state whether George Hamilton was one of the highwaymen who
attacked and killed Roger Wentworth."

Frances paused for perhaps ten seconds, but the time seemed an hour to
me, and I remember wondering how the Quaker felt.

"No," she answered, in a voice clear as a bell and without a flutter of
hesitancy.

It could easily be seen that her answer surprised the court and the
king's counsel, and as the king glanced up to Crofts, who was standing by
his side, I noticed a queer expression which seemed to say that the
evidence was not what they had expected.

The king's counsel held a brief whispered consultation with the judge,
who spoke privately to the king, and suddenly Frances was told that the
proceedings were over. Evidently the king had refused to have her
questioned further, fearing, no doubt, that she might testify to having
recognized the real culprits.

After the court had risen, we were perhaps ten minutes making our way
from the courtroom, and when we came to the coaches which were to take
us to our barge, I saw the Quaker standing near by. He wore colored
spectacles. He was Hamilton. As I passed the Quaker, I said to Frances
loud enough for him to hear:--

"I shall go to see Betty each Sabbath evening hereafter."

Frances looked up in surprise at my apparently senseless remark, but I
did not explain its significance, and she remained in ignorance of the
fact that Hamilton had just heard her make what she supposed to be a
false oath for his sake. Soon after we reached the palace, my cousin
and I walked out to the park, and after a long meditative silence, she
asked:--

"Was I guilty of a great sin in making a false oath on the book?"

"No," I answered. "Because you swore to the truth, not only in the
spirit, but in the letter. Hamilton was not one of the highwaymen who
attacked and killed Roger Wentworth."

"Ah, but I saw him and recognized him," she answered.

"Why, then, did you make oath that you did not?" I asked.

"I have been asking myself the same question over and over," she
returned. Then after a long pause. "I deliberately swore falsely. I did
recognize him by the light of the lanthorn. I wish I had never seen him,
but having known him as I did at one time, I almost wish that I could
have remained in ignorance of his guilt. Would that the lanthorn had been
dark so that I could not have seen him."

"I do not deny that you saw him, Frances, but I do deny that you saw him
attack Roger Wentworth. Hamilton was two hundred yards down the road when
Roger was killed. If not, he has lied to me, and, with all his faults,
I have always found him truthful."

After a moment she answered musingly: "I believe you are right. Noah had
whipped up the horses, and we must have covered at least a hundred yards
or more before I saw Master Hamilton's face. I fear I have committed
a great sin against him, and this day came near committing a greater. I
was on the point of answering 'yes' to the lawyer's question, when some
motive prompted me to say 'no,' and to make false oath. I wish I were
dead. I have wronged him cruelly, and you are to blame."

The last sentence was purely feminine logic, which is always interesting
but usually inaccurate.

She began to weep, and I took her hand to soothe her, as I asked gently:
"Tell me, Frances. Tell me all your trouble. Speak it out. Let me be your
other self. Perhaps I can help you."

After a long pause she began her pathetic story: "I cannot blind myself
to the truth. It is because I cannot stop thinking of him. The creatures
that infest this court are but foils to show me that he is a man, even
though he be a bad one, while they are mere imitations. I have often
heard you say bitingly that women do not hate wickedness in men as they
should--"

"I fear it is true," I interrupted dolefully.

"I suppose it is," she continued. "And one might go further and say that
no woman ever loved a man only because he was good. Too often goodness is
but the lack of courage to do wrong or the absence of temptation. If a
man has no qualities save goodness to recommend him, I fear he might go
his whole life through not knowing a woman's real love. We are apt to
turn from the nauseating innocuousness of the truly good and to thank God
for a modicum of interesting sin."

"I'm sorry to hear this philosophy from you, cousin, for it smacks of
bitterness, and I regret to learn that you have not thrown off your love
for Hamilton, though I have long suspected the truth."

"Yes, yes, Ned, the truth, the truth! I, too, am sorry. But it can't
be helped, and I want to tell you all about it," she said, clasping my
arm. "I--I am almost mad about him! The king and the courtiers are
harmless. It may be that my love exalts Master Hamilton and debases
others by comparison, but it is as I say with me, and I fear it will ever
be. He may be bad, but he is strong, brave, and honest. He is a man--all
man--and I tell you, Baron Ned, a woman doesn't look much further when
she goes to give her love."

My eyes were opening rapidly to qualities in my cousin that I had never
suspected, so after a moment I asked in alarm:--

"But surely you would not marry Hamilton?"

"No, I cannot marry him because of father," she answered, shaking her
head dolefully. "I must marry a rich man. More than a month ago the Duke
of Tyrconnel asked me to be his wife, as you know. He seems to know that
he must buy me if he would have me, so he tells me that he has forty
thousand pounds a year, and offers to settle ten thousand a year on me if
I will marry him. I asked for a fortnight in which to consider his offer,
and when the time was up I begged for another, which he granted, kindly
saying that he did not want me to answer till I was sure of myself, even
though the delay cost him a year's happiness. The time is almost up, and
I must ask another extension; but I shall eventually take him, and then
God pity me, for I know I shall die."

"No, no, Frances," I returned, trying to conceal my delight. "You will be
happy with Dick Talbot if you will thrust the other man out of your
heart."

"Thrust the other man out of my heart!" she exclaimed. "It was never done
by a woman. She may be cured, I suppose, by time and conditions, but she
can't cure herself. A woman's heart is like a telescope. It magnifies the
man of her choice, but reverses and becomes a diminishing glass for all
others. But I shall accept Tyrconnel just as soon as I grow used to the
thought of living with him. Soon you will have accomplished your purpose
in bringing me to court."

"My purpose?" I asked in surprise. "Was it not also your purpose?"

"I suppose it was, but I hate myself for having conceived it. I'm
learning to hate every one, the king more than any man, unless I except
that little wretch, Jermyn, the court lady-killer. What a despicable
thing your lady-killer is! Doubtless God created him to show by
comparison the great worth of worms, snakes, and other reptiles."

"What has Little Jermyn been doing?" I asked, amused at her
vindictiveness.

"He has crushed so many hearts that he deems himself irresistible, and
of late has been annoying me. If by any chance he finds me alone, he
importunes me to make a tryst with him and save him from death because of
a broken heart. I usually answer by walking away from him and try to show
him that he is beneath even my contempt, but his vanity is so great that
he imagines my manner to be the outgrowth of pique or a desire to lead
him on. Therefore when others are present, he gazes on me with down-bent
head and eyes upturned from beneath his bulging forehead, as though he
would put a spell upon me."

"Well, let him gaze. It can't harm you," I suggested.

"No, but it makes me ill," she answered. "Three nights ago I was standing
with the king and several ladies and gentlemen, waiting for the country
dance to begin, for which the king was to call the changes. This Little
Jermyn came up to the group, and, without speaking a word to any one,
fixed his upturned eyes on me."

"That was a sin," I said, laughing, but she ignored my interruption.

"For a time I paid no heed, but soon his gaze so nauseated me that I
could not restrain my anger, and said, loud enough for him and the others
to hear, 'What ails the little man, that he should stand there staring at
me like a sick calf trying to cast a spell upon the moon?' The king
laughed and Jermyn bowed, as he replied, 'The moon pretends to disdain
veal, doubtless in the hope of having royal beef.' The king laughed and
told Jermyn to gaze elsewhere, if the moon refused to be spellbound, and
the little creature left us to carry out the king's suggestion. But I
shall marry Tyrconnel and make an end of it all just as soon as
possible.'"

We returned to the palace, and I did not see my cousin during the next
week. Meantime the king was growing more importunate, and one day affairs
reached a terrifying climax when he intimated to Frances that if she
would promise to become his wife, he would try to divorce the queen. It
has been said, doubtless with truth, that the same offer was made to
Mistress Stuart, now the Duchess of Richmond.

When Frances refused his Majesty's offer, which, probably, was made only
for the purpose of inducing her to trust him, he asked with ill-concealed
anger:--

"Do you refuse my offer because you are still thinking of Hamilton?"

"I would refuse it, your Majesty, were there no other man in the world,"
answered Frances, bowing and asking leave to withdraw.

When Frances told me of this extraordinary offer, I was convinced that
the king had no intention of fulfilling it, but it served to open my eyes
to the extent of his passion, and to assure me that he would use any
means in his power, however desperate, to gain his end. Frances was in
danger.

I also knew that if the king held Hamilton responsible for Frances's
obduracy, means would be found of putting him out of the way, if his
Majesty could but get hands on him. With this belief strong upon me, I
was not surprised when Frances came to me in great tribulation, within
a day or two, and said:--

"Cousin Ned, it is reported that Master Hamilton is still in London
and that he has avowed his intention to kill the king. The surgeon who
dressed his wounds is said to be responsible for the accusation. If he
is found, he certainly will die, for the proof will be at hand, false or
true. The king told me as much, and offered to pardon Master Hamilton if
I would ask it in the proper spirit. But I refused, saying that I did not
care a farthing what he did respecting Hamilton. You must find him, Baron
Ned! Find him at once and give him warning!"

"I feel sure that Betty knows where he is," I answered. "I'll go to her
to-morrow."

"Yes, she may know, and I would save him if I could," answered Frances,
trying hard to hold back the tears. "I wronged him cruelly, and now I
fear it is too late to make amends. I can only moan and weep, and long
to ask him to forgive me and to tell him that I am not the creature he
thinks I am. I would speak plainly to him for once of what I am and of
what I feel for him, and then I am ready to part from him forever and to
marry Tyrconnel or any one else who will give me wealth."

The following day Frances asked and received permission from the duchess
to spend the day with Sir Richard. I offered to accompany her, but she
refused so emphatically that I suspected there was a purpose in her mind
over and above a mere visit to her father's house.

I remember well the day. It was near the hour of ten when I saw her
leave the palace by the garden door. She wore a long dark cloak, a small
bonnet, and a full vizard which covered her entire face. I had never
known her to wear so large a vizard, as she detested even small ones, and
wore them only out of respect for the prevailing fashion. She hastened
toward the King Street Gate, and I, following at a short distance, saw
her take boat at the Charing Cross stairs.

After thinking over the situation, I determined to go to my uncle's
house. As I had suspected, Frances was not there. After greeting Sir
Richard and Sarah, I asked them, as though speaking by the way, when they
had seen Frances.

"She hasn't been home for a week or more," answered Sir Richard.

"I wish she would make haste in choosing a husband, or in wheedling
one to choose her," remarked Sarah. "I'll beat her in the race if she
doesn't. If I should, I might furnish a new saw to the world: 'The suitor
is not always to the beautiful, nor the husband to the soft of tongue.' I
have a gallant."

"So I have suspected of late," I answered.

"Yes, you're right--John Churchill," answered Sarah.

"He is a fine man," I returned.

"Yes," replied Sarah, apparently very serious, though there was a twinkle
in her eye. "But I'm not sure of him yet." Then with a sigh: "I would
that I were. If he knows what is for his own good, he'll speak soon, as
I intend to make a duke of him before he dies, and the sooner we get at
it the better. A sensible conscience, prepense to its own interest, a
good courtier, and a shrewd wife have made many a duke of far poorer
material than my John."

I laughed, and Sir Richard smiled, but we each seemed to feel that
Sarah's words were prophetic, and the future bore us out, as all the
world knows.

After waiting in my uncle's parlor an hour or more, hoping that Frances
would arrive, I took my leave and walked down to the Old Swan, where I
found her. What happened there I learned afterward from her and from
others--that is, what I did not see for myself.

After leaving Whitehall, Frances had made her way directly to the Old
Swan, where she soon found Betty. At first the girl did not seem inclined
to be at all cordial, but when Frances told her that she was in trouble
and wanted help, Betty's kind heart responded at once. "Trouble" was the
password to Betty's good graces.

"Let us go to a room where we may be by ourselves," suggested Frances. "I
want to talk to you freely where we shall not be overheard."

Betty led the way to her own little parlor on the second floor and placed
a chair for her guest near a window opening on the court. Frances sat
down and asked Betty, who evidently intended to remain standing, to bring
a chair and sit beside her.

"I would not think of sitting in your Grace's presence," answered Betty,
courtesying respectfully.

"Sit down, Betty, please, and let us be friends," said Frances,
coaxingly. "I am not a duchess. I am only a girl like yourself. My name
is Mistress Jennings--Frances. Nelly Gwynn was jesting when she spoke of
me as a duchess, and only wanted to tease you when she objected to the
table linen. She is good and kind--no one can be more so."

"Yes," returned Betty. "She came back and said that the linen was
beautiful and offered me money for myself, but I refused. You see I
am not--well, I am not a servant. But afterward she gave me a hundred
jacobusses for the poor, and I thanked her. I am very sorry that I was
angry the day of the fight, but you know the great persons who come here
from Whitehall are very irritating, and treat us all with contempt."

"I am not a great lady, Betty, though I live at court. I am poor and very
far from happy. I am not so good as you, Betty, I'm sure, though I do the
best I can not to be bad."

"Oh, you are too beautiful not to be good," returned Betty, warming up to
my cousin.

"Whether I am beautiful or not I care little, for I am in great trouble
and have come to you for help," said Frances. "My cousin, Baron Clyde,
who is as dear to me as a brother, is full of your praises, and only the
other day said that there was no woman or girl in England purer or better
than you, and that he knew none in the world whom he deemed more
beautiful."

The red came to Betty's cheeks, and she answered, smiling and dimpling:
"Ah, did he say that of me? I deem him my very good friend indeed. Is he
really your cousin?"

"Yes, he is more a brother than a cousin," returned Frances.

Immediately Betty softened and, drawing a chair close to Frances's side,
sat down. After a long pause, she murmured: "Then if I may, I, too, would
be your friend."

"I knew you would," answered Frances. "Now give me your hand, so that we
may feel as well as see and hear each other. Ah, Betty, how soft and warm
your hand is. I don't wonder that my cousin praises you. You have won me
already, and I hope we may always be good friends."

"I shall be glad," murmured Betty, pressing Frances's hand, assuringly.
"You say you are in trouble. In what way may I help you?"

Frances began, "You know Master Hamilton--Master George Hamilton?"

"Yes," answered Betty.

"And you would be glad to help me save him from great peril?" asked
Frances.

"Yes, Mistress Jennings. He, too, is my friend and a good man."

"Yes, yes, tell me, Betty. Good, say you? I had not supposed him good,
but--"

"If you supposed otherwise, you were wrong," returned Betty,
straightening up in her chair, ready to do battle for her friend.

"Yes, yes, tell me, please, Betty, why you deem him good," pleaded
Frances, eager to be convinced. "What has he done or left undone?"

"He has left undone all which he should not have done in so far as I
know," said Betty, "and has done a great deal of good. Recently when a
plague was raging along the wall from Aldgate to Bishopgate, where a
great many poor people live, you know, Master Hamilton went down among
them at peril of his life."

"Yes, yes," interrupted Frances, eagerly.

"He nursed them and carried food and water to them. You know one stricken
with the plague is ready to die of thirst. He took care of the children,
helped to bury the dead, which, you know, in case of very poor people, is
done after night, consoled the bereaved, and--oh, Mistress Jennings, it
was an awful sight!" said Betty, tears coming to her eyes.

"And Master Hamilton helped them?" asked Frances, hoping to keep the
glorious narrative going.

"Yes, he did the work of half a score of men," said Betty. "In the
disguise of a Quaker, he solicited money with which to buy medicine and
to employ physicians, and did everything in his power to comfort the poor
sufferers. Doctor Lilly, the astrologer, helped us. People say he is a
cheat, but I wish we had more of his kind among us."

"And you helped him?" asked Frances.

"Yes, a little," said Betty, modestly. "But my father helped him a great
deal with money and food."

"Master Hamilton is in danger of his life," said Frances, "and I would
save him. Will you help me to find him?"

After a long pause, Betty asked: "But how shall I know that you mean fair
by him? I'll see him if I can, and when you return, I'll tell you where
to find him if he consents."

"So you do know where he is?" asked Frances, eagerly.

Betty did not reply, so Frances continued: "I do mean him fair, Betty. I
am risking everything--my good name, perhaps even life itself, in seeking
him. I expected to have to prove my good intent, so I brought with me
this letter which no one save myself has ever seen, nor any one other
than you shall ever see. Read it, Betty. It is one Master Hamilton sent
to me from France."

Betty hesitated, but as Frances insisted, she read the letter and
returned it, saying:--

"You are his sweetheart?"

"Yes, yes, Betty, in all that is best and most terrible in the meaning of
the word."

Betty sat thinking for a moment, then went to the window, saying, "If you
will look out the window across the courtyard, you will see a flight of
stone steps leading to the cellar."

"Yes, yes, I see," returned Frances.

"If you go down the steps, you will find a door to which I shall give you
the key. Enter and you will be in an empty room, the walls of which are
hung with worn tapestries taken from the inn. On one side of the room you
will see a tapestried panel bearing the image of St. George and the
dragon. Behind the panel is a concealed door, seemingly a part of the
wall, but if you will allow the tapestry to hang and will press the eye
of the dragon, the door will open and you may find--your St. George."

Frances caught Betty in her arms, crying, "Let me go to him at once, at
once!"

Betty and Frances went downstairs, and after waiting a minute or two,
Betty said, "Now there is no one in the courtyard, and you may cross
unseen."

Frances hastened across the courtyard and down the cellar steps. On
reaching the outer door of which Betty had spoken, she halted in fear.
But she dared not retreat, so inserting the key, she entered.

In the dim light of the room the images of faded knights, angels, saints,
and dragons seemed to stand like a small army of ghosts ready to deny her
passage. But soon she discovered the figure of St. George, pressed the
eye of the dragon, lifted the tapestry, and entered the room of a
printing shop.

While Frances had been standing in hesitation before the figure of the
saint, she had heard with some alarm a rumbling noise in the room she was
about to enter. The rumbling is destined, in my opinion, to go down the
line of the ages, an instrument of untold good to mankind, for it was the
rumbling of a printing-press.

Standing at the press, lifting and lowering it by means of a foot
lever, and feeding it with broad strips of paper, stood a man in his
shirt-sleeves. At an inclined desk, a type-case, stood another man
setting type, close beside the press. He, also, was in his shirt-sleeves
and was much older and stouter than the man at the press.

The rumbling had drowned the slight noise occasioned by the opening of
the door, so that Frances stood waiting a full minute before she was
observed. The stout man at the type-case was the first to see her, and
when he turned, she asked, trembling:--

"I am seeking Master Hamilton. Shall I find him here?"

The man at the press then turned quickly to Frances. His face was
smooth shaven, but was almost covered with printers' ink, giving him the
appearance of a blackamoor. The stout man at the type-case, failing to
respond, and the other being apparently too surprised to speak, Frances
went to the blackamoor and, standing beside the press, was about to
repeat her inquiry.

The type-case, press, and a small table, on which lay a bundle of white
paper, all stood huddled together in the centre of the room, occupying a
space of perhaps eight feet square.

Before Frances had gained courage to speak, a small bell rang.
Immediately the stout man sprang from the type-case, ran in great haste
to a chest near the wall, opened the lid and drew forth a long red cloak
and a fez-shaped cap of the same color, each embroidered with signs of
the zodiac in tarnished gold. He hurriedly put on the gown and cap, and
again diving into the chest, drew forth a long black coat, a broad Quaker
hat, a false beard, and a white wig. These he tossed to the blackamoor,
then ran across the room, opened a concealed panel in the wall, drew down
a lever, closed the panel, sprang to a large desk near by, sat down and
began to write diligently.

These strange, rapid actions on the part of the stout man were so
surprising and alarming to Frances that for the moment she did not
notice that the section of the floor on which she, the blackamoor, and
all the printing apparatus were standing was sinking. Almost before she
was aware of the startling movement of the floor, which, after it had
begun to move, seemed to fall rather than sink, it stopped suddenly,
perhaps eight feet below. The floor above closed silently over her head,
and she found herself alone with the inky man in almost total darkness.
She was too badly frightened to scream, or even to speak, and stood in
silence, awaiting with benumbed senses whatever calamity might befall
her.

After a minute or two the blackamoor spoke in whispers: "Mistress
Jennings need have no fear. The officers of her friend, the king, have
just come to the Old Swan seeking me. The bell you heard was the alarm,
sounded by Betty Pickering. Unless she is able to keep them away from
here, you may perhaps hear the sheriffs presently in the room above with
Doctor Lilly, the man you saw at the type-case. If they come, I trust you
will remain silent, unless you are here for the purpose of betraying me."

Frances recognized Hamilton's voice, and, notwithstanding his cruel
suspicion, her fear gave place to joy, for she knew that she could soon
drive all doubt from his heart. His words did not even hurt her, for she
bore in mind the great injustice she had done him, and remembered the
good reason he had to believe that she was not his friend. She tried to
speak calmly and within the bounds of propriety, but the cold words she
would have spoken refused to leave her lips, and after a futile effort to
restrain herself, that which was in her heart came forth, because she
could not keep it back.

"Ah, Master Hamilton, you do not understand. I came to tell you that I am
not what you deem me; that if you had good reason to believe me pure when
we met at Sundridge, you have the same reason now. I want to tell you
that when I refused to recognize you on that awful day in the Old Swan,
when you fought so bravely in my behalf, I thought you were guilty of
Roger Wentworth's death."

"No, no, I am not that bad," interrupted Hamilton.

"At Sundridge you made me believe that you loved me," continued Frances,
unmindful of the interruption. "And now since you would not come to me,
nor send me word in all this long weary time, I could not restrain
myself, but, all unmaidenly, have come to you because I can in no way put
my love from my heart, pray and try as I will."

She reached forth her hand in the dark and touched him. She had not
underestimated her strength when she believed that by a word she could
drive doubt from his heart and bring him to her feet, for in a breath she
who had scorned the love of a king, and had laughed at the greatest
nobles in England, was in the arms of a man on whose life the king had
set a price. Her head fell back into the bend of his elbow, her willing
lips gave him their sweetness, her arm was clasped about his neck, and
she had forgotten all save love and the man she loved.

George said nothing, so after a little time, Frances continued: "Tell me
that you know I am not the creature evil-minded persons pretend to
believe I am. I might have been a duchess, with grand estates, by gift
from the king, but I am not, nor ever shall be. I loathe him, and so
great is my sense of contamination that when he touches my hand in
dancing, I almost feel that it is a thing of evil."

"And you, whom I hear the king would marry, who, I am told, might pick
and choose a husband from among the richest and noblest of the land, for
whom it is said the Duke of Tyrconnel is longing, come here to this hole
and throw yourself away on me, an outcast; one who makes his daily bread
by labor at a printing-press, one on whose life the king has set a price?
You come here to give yourself to me!" cried George, almost stunned by
surprise and joy.

He held her close to him and kissed her lips, not to his content, for
that would have been impossible, but till he checked himself to hear her
answer. But she did not speak, and after a little time he led her,
groping his way in the dark, to a box standing against the wall, where
they sat down. She clasped his hand, but did not answer his question.

Supposing that her silence was without cause, and wishing an answer in
words, George continued:--

"It is difficult to believe that you, who went to court to make your
fortune, should refuse it when it is in your grasp and should give
yourself to me."

"No, no," she answered, withdrawing her hand from his clasp and covering
her face. "I do not, I may not give myself to you. But I do give you
love, such as I believe no woman ever before gave to a man. I am going to
marry the Duke of Tyrconnel. But when I learned how grievously I had
wronged you, I would not give him my promise of marriage until I had seen
you and had told you of my love, and had taken one moment of happiness
before the door is closed between us forever."

This answer came to Hamilton as a chilling surprise, but a moment's
consideration brought him to see that the girl was right, save, perhaps,
in telling her love to a man she could not marry. His knowledge of
womankind did not help him to know that her hopelessness had been a
stimulant, both to her love and to its prodigal expression. It did not
occur to him that what she had done and said might be the outpouring of
her despair, and that even a faint hope of ever possessing him as her
husband might have operated as a restraint for modesty's sake. Therefore,
with unconscious perversity, Hamilton resented what Frances had done in
giving him her unmeasured love when she knew that she could not give
herself, and he spoke from the midst of his pain:--

"I know that I am not worthy to be your husband. Even had you not taken
so great pains to tell me, but had been willing to wreck your life by
marrying me, I should not have accepted the sacrifice. From the first, my
love for you has been the one unselfish impulse of my life, and since I
have almost lost hope of ever being worthy of you, I should not have
permitted you to share my wretched life, even had you been willing. But
for you to come to me and to give me your love, only to snatch it back
again before I have had time to refuse the sacrifice, is cruel."

"I do not snatch my love back again," she answered pleadingly. "I could
not if I would. I have given it to you for life, and it is beyond recall.
It is yours forever and forever--all of which my poor aching heart is
capable. Would you rather it had lain in my breast unspoken, through all
the long years I have to live? You say your love is unselfish--"

"If there's anything unselfish in me," interrupted Hamilton.

"Yes, I believe it is unselfish to the extent that a man's love may be,"
returned Frances, defending herself. "But if it is, surely you would not
deny me the joy of telling you of mine, when it is all the happiness I
shall ever know my whole life through. You say, with truth, I believe,
that you would not permit me to share your fate if I would, because you
fear to make me unhappy. Yet you complain and say that I am cruel because
I take now what joy I can at so shameful a sacrifice of womanly pride and
modesty. You say that I am cruel because I cannot give you all--myself. I
would share your fortunes unhesitatingly were it not that I dare not give
one thought to my own happiness."

She paused for a moment to gather self-control, and when she was more
calm, proceeded with her defence: "I belong to my father and to my house,
and God has appointed me to lift them from their fallen estate. I cannot
give you myself, but I do give you my love for the sheer ecstasy of
giving, and beg you to accept it as all that I have to offer and to give
me the sweet privilege of keeping yours, which. I know is mine, that it
may warm my heart in the weary years to come. I wonder if you, being a
man, can understand it all. I hardly understand it myself, but this I
know: I have done what I have done because I could not help it, and you
say that I am cruel because you feel a part of the pain I suffer."

"No, no, I was wrong," said Hamilton, dropping to his knees before her
and seizing her hand. "Forgive me and believe that my love is unselfish
and that it will be yours so long as I live. All that is not evil in me,
I owe to you, and I am striving to make myself more worthy of your love,
even though I must surrender you to another."

"Betty told me of your good deeds when a plague was raging in Bishopgate
ward," said Frances, "and Baron Ned has told me that you have changed
your ways since leaving court."

"I have changed since I learned to know you," he interrupted, "and now,
with my first effort to be a man, misfortunes come trooping at my heels
so fast that I know not what to do nor where to turn."

"That was one reason why I came to see you," she said. "The king seeks
your life because it is said that you threatened his. But you seem to
know your danger, and I suppose you have been warned."

"Yes, Grammont warned me. He is a very adroit person and is my friend.
He stands guard for me at court, partly because he is my friend, but
chiefly, I imagine, because it is the command of his king, Louis of
France. I do not want to bring Baron Ned into trouble. He is known to be
my friend, and the king might have him watched, so I am using Grammont
as my spy at Whitehall."

"Ah, the Frenchman?" returned Frances. "It was he who dubbed me the
'Duchess of Hearts.' He smiles graciously when we meet, but with all we
hear about the wickedness of the French, Grammont has shown me greater
respect than I have had from any one of the so-called gallants about the
court."

"The day may come when I can repay his kindness," said Hamilton.

"But you must leave England at once," continued Frances. "The king's only
show of energy comes in a case such as this. His real reason for seeking
your life is that he believes you stand between him and me. You must
leave England without delay."

"I mean to do so, now that I have seen you," he returned. "The desire to
see you and a spirit of reckless bravado has kept me here much longer
than prudence would dictate."

At that moment voices were heard in the room above. George pressed
Frances's hand to enjoin silence, fearing that the sheriffs were at hand.
But presently a clanking noise was heard, and George, listening
attentively, whispered:--

"There is no further danger. Lilly is opening the lever panel, and soon
the floor will rise."

In a moment the doctor's voice came down through the wall, asking, "Are
you ready?"

"Yes," answered Hamilton. And then he led Frances back to the
printing-press. Instantly the floor above their heads began to roll
back, and from the depths rose Frances and Hamilton, to find Betty and
me awaiting them. As they came up through the floor, Betty began to
laugh, and soon I joined her, for on Frances's eyes, lips, and cheeks
were black inky patches, indicating plainly the exact spots where the
battle had raged. Through the ink spots on her cheeks ran furrows
ploughed by tears, but, withal, my cousin's beautiful face was never more
beautiful.

"They have been a-kissing," whispered Betty, seriously, leaning towards
me and speaking behind her hand.

"No, no, Betty," I answered, trying to keep a straight face. But she
nodded insistently, evidently much surprised and perhaps a little
shocked.

By the time Betty and I had concluded this interchange of ideas, Hamilton
and Frances were by my side.

"Why are you here?" asked Hamilton, turning to me and then to Betty.

"I had to bring him," answered Betty. "You told me to tell no one, but I
had to tell Mistress Jennings because she cried, and I had to bring Baron
Ned because he stormed and said that he knew Mistress Jennings had come
to see you."

I supplemented Betty's answer by saying: "I was sure Frances had come to
the Old Swan to see you, so I followed, arriving just in time to see her
cross the courtyard. I sought Betty and asked her to tell me where you
were and where my cousin had gone. Just then three sheriffs arrived,
searching for you, and I had to wait until Betty got rid of them. Now,
here I am, waiting to take my cousin home."

"But what if your cousin will not go home until she is ready, and does
not desire your escort?" asked Frances.

"In that case, I should advise her to make ready at once," I replied.

"And if she does not want your advice?" returned Frances.

"In that case, I should limit my advice to a mere recommendation that she
wash the ink stains from her lips, eyes, and cheeks. Master Hamilton has
pretty well covered the ground with overgrown beauty patches."

Betty laughed softly, and fat old Lilly chuckled as he resumed his place
at his desk.

There being no mirror in the room, Frances put her hand to her face and
found traces of printers' ink on her fingers, whereupon she blushed and
laughed and was so beautiful that we all laughed from the sheer delight
of looking at her.

"Again Baron Ned is right, Frances," said Hamilton, offering to lead her
toward the St. George door. "You must not remain. We may be surprised by
the sheriffs at any moment, in which case you would suffer in reputation
and I might not be able to escape."

We passed into the tapestried room, and after Hamilton had closed the
St. George door, we paused for a moment before leaving. Presently I
started to go, but Frances held back. I had reached the outer door and
was waiting, somewhat impatiently, when Betty came up to me, opened the
door, drew me outside, closed the door, and whispered:--

"Don't you understand? They would be alone a moment."

"Do you think so, Betty?" I asked, laughing at her earnestness.

"I know it," she returned emphatically.

When George and Frances were alone, she said: "I shall never again give
you cause to say that I am cruel, for I shall never again see you." She
tried to keep back the tears, but failed, and after a moment, continued,
unheeding them, "If you could but know the joy this meeting has given me
and the grief of parting, you would understand my sorrow for having
wronged you, and would know the deep pain of farewell."

"I have not spoken of my love for you," said George, "because it is so
plain that words are not needed to express it, and because you have known
it far better than I could tell it ever since the sweet days on the
Bourne Path. To speak it would seem to mar it by half expression. But
it will be yours always, and I shall take it to my grave. It has been
my redemption, and, as long as I live, no other woman shall enter my
heart."

He fell to his knee, catching her hands and kissing them passionately,
but she raised him, saying:--

"If it is your will, I shall refuse the Duke of Tyrconnel, regardless of
my duty to my father and my house, and shall wait for you, happy even in
the waiting, or share your fortune, be it good or ill, from this hour.
Which shall it be?"

"Soon I shall be an exile, or climbing the steps of a scaffold on Tyburn
Hill. This must be our farewell. Do not remain a moment longer. May God
help me and bring happiness to you!" said Hamilton, answering her
question all too plainly.

She drew his face down to hers and kissed his lips, till from very fear
of himself he thrust her from him and led her weeping to the outer door.

When Frances came out to Betty and me, she was holding her handkerchief
to her eyes and her vizard was hanging by its chain.

Sympathetic Betty lifted the vizard, saying: "Cover your face till we go
to my room. Poor mistress! It must be all awry with your love, and I have
heard that there is no pain like it."

We climbed the steps, and, as we were going across the yard, Betty twined
her arm about Frances's waist. Wishing to comfort her by changing the
subject, she said:--

"I have neither powder nor rouge in my room, but I have black patches,
though I have never dared to use one, fearing to be accused of aping the
great ladies."

"Betty, there are no great ladies so good and beautiful as you," said
Frances, trying to check her weeping. "If I were a man, you should not go
long without a chance for a husband."

"Oh, I've had chances in plenty," answered Betty, proudly. "But father
says I'm too hard to suit and will die a maid. He says I want a
gentleman, and--" (Here she sighed and glanced involuntarily toward me.)
"He is right. I will have none other."

"Seek lower and fare better," said Frances.

"I don't know how it will all turn out," replied Betty with a sigh.
The topic seemed to be alive with sighs. "A woman may not choose, and
I suppose I shall one day take the man my father chooses, having no part
in the affair myself, though it is the most important one in my life."

"Nonsense, Betty," returned Frances. "You are like the rest of us, and
when the right one comes, you will seek him if need be--in a cellar. Take
my advice, Betty, when the right one comes, help him, and thank me ever
after."

When we entered the house, Frances went with Betty to her room, leaving
me in the tap-room, waiting to take my foolish cousin home.

To say that I was troubled would feebly express my state of mind. All my
dreams of fortune for Frances and glory for her family had vanished. I
did not know at that time that she and Hamilton had agreed never to meet
again, though had I known, I should have put little faith in the compact.




CHAPTER VIII

IN FEAR OF THE KING


When Frances came downstairs, she and I started home, walking first down
Gracious Street, and then through Upper Thames Street toward Temple Bar.
It was no time to scold her, since I was sure that she knew quite as well
as I could tell her the folly and the recklessness of what she had just
done. I also believed there must have been an overpowering motive back of
it all, and that being true, I knew that nothing I could say would in any
way induce her to repent at present or forbear in future. I might bring
her to regret, but regret is a long journey from repentance. If her heart
had gone so far beyond her control as to cause her to seek Hamilton, as
she had done that day, it were surely a profitless task for me to try to
put her right. If she, who was modest, honest, and strong, could not
right herself, trying as I knew she had tried, no one else could do it
for her.

Even my silence seemed to be a reproach, so I tried to think of something
to say which would neither bear upon what she had done nor seem to avoid
it.

After a moment or two, Betty, that is, thoughts of her, came to my
relief, and I said: "If Betty were at court, she would rival the best of
the beauties. There's a charm about the girl which grows on one. I have
known her since she came from school in France, over a year ago, and the
more I see of her the better I like her. She has grace of person and
manner, is well educated, tender of heart, honest, and has wonderful
eyes."

"And dimples," suggested Frances. "You might win her, Baron Ned. I should
like to see you do something foolish to bring you down to my level."

There was a distinct note of sarcasm in her voice, and I felt sure that
if I remained silent there was more to come. I was not disappointed, for
presently, after two or three false starts, she continued:--

"I do not care to hear your comments on what I have just done. I know
quite as well in my simplicity as you in your wisdom the many good
reasons why I should not have visited the Old Swan to-day. I knew before
I started, but I should have gone had the reasons been multiplied a
thousand fold in number and cogency. Therefore, I do not care to hear
your comments on the subject. I should have gone just the same had I
feared that death awaited me. I had but one purpose in life, and for
weeks have had but one--to see him. If I was willing to put aside the
love of my father and all other considerations dear to me, nothing that
you can say will do you any good or be of advantage to me."

"My dear Frances," I replied, "I find no fault with you. I am sorry
you had to do it, but I know it could not be avoided. You were helpless
against an overpowering motive. I am sorry for you, yet I admire you more
than ever before, because of your recklessness. I have always thought you
were cold, or at least that you were wise enough to keep yourself cool,
but now I know that beneath your beauty there is a soul that can burn, a
heart that can yearn, and a reckless disregard of consequences that on
occasion may make a blessed fool of you. It is such women as you who keep
alive the spark of Himself which God first breathed into man. I do not
blame you. I pity you, and am lost in wondering what will come of it
all."

After a long pause, she spoke, sighing: "Although you may not understand
what I mean, there was a great deal of right as well as wrong in what I
did. I owed to his love, which I knew to be true, an acknowledgment of
mine, but more, I had wronged him grievously, and it was right that I
should make what poor amends I could. But right or wrong, I did what I
had to do, and I do not intend to blame myself, nor to hear blame from
any one else. I am perfectly willing that the whole world should know
what I have done--that is, I should be were it not for father."

"Again I say I do not blame you," I returned, "though I wish sincerely
you had not gone."

"Why did you follow me, and how did you know where I had gone?" asked
Frances.

I told her of my visit to her father's house and how, upon my failure to
find her there, I went to the Old Swan.

"I thought it would be better that you should leave the Old Swan with me
than alone," I said. "It would have been better had you taken me with
you."

"Would you have gone with me, knowing my errand?" she asked.

"Yes, gladly," I answered. "When a woman deliberately makes up her mind
to do a thing of this sort, she does it sooner or later, despite heaven,
earth, or the other place to the contrary. I should have gained nothing
by opposing you; I could at least have given color of propriety by going
with you."

We walked up Thames Street till we came to the neighborhood of Baynard's
Castle, where we took boat and went to Whitehall, each of us in silent
revery all the way.

While I was paying the waterman, Frances ran up the stairs to the garden,
and when I followed I saw her talking to the king, so I stopped ten or
twelve paces from them and removed my hat. Being in their lee, the wind
brought the king's words to me, and I imagined, from the loud tone in
which he spoke, that he intended me to hear what he had to say. Perhaps
he suspected that I had helped Frances in her morning's escapade.

"I am greatly disappointed, my angel, my beauty," said the king, "that
you have taken this morning's excursion."

So he knew of her "excursion," and doubtless had instigated the visit of
the sheriffs to the Old Swan.

"What has your angel done this morning to displease her king?" asked
Frances, with a laugh so merry that one might well have supposed it
genuine.

"What has she done this morning?" repeated the king. "She has been to
visit the man who seeks the king's life. That is what she has done."

He had hit the nail squarely on the head at the first stroke, but whether
his accuracy was a mere guess, or the result of knowledge, I did not
know. I trembled, awaiting the outcome of my cousin's conference.

At first Frances appeared to be horror-stricken, and her surprise seemed
to know no bounds, but after a moment of splendid acting, her manner
changed to one of righteous indignation, touched with grief, because the
king had so wrongfully accused her.

"Your Majesty horrifies me!" she exclaimed, stepping back from the king.
"Is there a man in all England who would seek his king's life?"

"There is," returned his Majesty. "And you have been to visit him."

Frances denied nothing. She was simply stunned by grief and benumbed by a
sense of outrage put upon her by the king. So after a moment of
inimitable pantomime, she answered, speaking softly:--

"I fear a gentle madness has touched your Majesty's brain, else you would
not so cruelly accuse me. You have so many weighty affairs to trouble you
and to prey on your mind that it is no wonder--"

"Did you not set out this morning with the avowed purpose of going to
your father's house?" asked the king.

"Yes, your Majesty," she answered soothingly, almost pityingly. "What
then?"

"Did you go there?" asked Charles.

"No, your Majesty."

"Where did you go?"

"Am I a prisoner in Whitehall that I may not come and go at will?" she
asked indignantly, knowing well the maxim of battle that the best way to
meet a charge is by a countercharge. "If so, I pray leave to go home to
my father, where I shall not be spied upon and suspected of evil if I but
go abroad for an hour."

Her grief had changed to indignation, and she turned her face from the
king, drying the supposed tears and exhibiting her temper in irresistible
pantomime. The king was but a man, so of course Frances's tears and her
just anger routed him. A brave man may stand against powder and steel,
but he must flee before fire and flood.

Immediately the king became apologetic: "I do not suspect you of evil,
but of thoughtlessness, my beautiful one," he said, trying to take her
hand, but failing. "Nor have I spied upon you. I heard that you had gone
to the Old Swan to see Hamilton, whom it is said you love."

Pantomime to show great grief and a deep sense of cruel injury, but the
tears ceased to flow because of the fact that she was past tears now.

"I'll leave Whitehall this day!" she said, shaking her head dolefully. "I
am not strong enough to bear your Majesty's unjust frown. I have tried to
do right, tried to please you and the duchess--everybody, and this is my
reward! I know little of Master Hamilton, having seen him only a few
times in all my life. If I had no other cause to shun him, his character
would be sufficient."

Again the handkerchief was brought to the eyes effectively, for the
purpose of giving the king a little time in which to see how grievously
he had wronged her. It required but little time for him to realize how
cruel he had been, and in a moment he said pleadingly:--

"Your king asks your forgiveness. I do not suspect you of having gone
to see Hamilton. I am convinced that I was wrong. But won't you tell
me, please, why you visited the Old Swan? It is a decent tavern, I
understand, but a public place of the sort should not be visited by one
such as you unescorted."

"Your Majesty is right, and I thank you for the reprimand," returned
Frances, drying her eyes. "But Pickering, who is the host of the Old
Swan, has a daughter, Bettina, who is a good girl, far above her station.
She is my friend. I went to see her this morning to drink a cup of
wormwood wine with her. Now you know my reason for going."

Wormwood wine was considered a toper's drink.

Her confusion and modest hesitancy in confessing to the wormwood wine
were so pretty and so convincing that the king laughed and seized her by
the arm affectionately:--

"Ah, at last it is out!" he cried. "I have discovered your sin! I knew
you must have one tucked about you somewhere. Wormwood wine! Absinthe!
The drink of our depraved French friends! Who would have suspected you of
using it?"

"Yes," murmured Frances, glad to be found guilty of the wrong sin.

"Ah, well, we'll have it together here at home," said the king, "so that
you need not go abroad for it hereafter."

"No, no, I shall never again drink wormwood," protested Frances. "Betty
Pickering tells me it causes vapors in the head, horrid waking dreams,
and in the end incurable spasms."

"Your resolution is well taken," returned the king. "We shall seek a
harmless substitute."

At this point in the conversation his Majesty looked toward me, whispered
a word to Frances, and they walked down the garden path to the fountain,
while I waited at Bowling Green for Frances's return. When she came back,
she told me in detail all that passed between her and the king.

After they had left me, the king began to talk, and Frances seldom
interrupted him save to draw him out, knowing that a talking man sooner
or later tells a great deal that he should have left unsaid. This is
especially true if a shrewd listener reads between his words.

"Nelly Gwynn tells me that you love George Hamilton," said the king, "and
in my eyes, that is his greatest crime."

Already his Majesty had told a great deal.

"I am surprised at Mistress Gwynn's imagination and her lack of
truthfulness," returned Frances. "I told her I hated him, and she herself
heard me deny that I knew him when he offered to speak to me two months
ago or more at the Old Swan. Mistress Gwynn kissed him. I refused to
recognize him. I should say that the evidences of affection were against
her rather than me."

"She says, also," continued the king, "that you believe Master Hamilton
killed Roger Wentworth; that you recognized him the night of the
tragedy."

"I said nothing of the sort," answered Frances, emphatically. "I saw but
one man's face distinctly. Here at court I have often seen the man who
killed Roger Wentworth, and I shall tell you his name if you insist. He
is near of kin to your Majesty."

The king knew that she meant his son Crofts, so he hastened away from the
subject.

"Yes, yes, I have suspected as much, but I beg you, Frances, to spare me
the pain of hearing the truth."

"Yes, the truth is a frightful thing," sighed Frances. "Why cannot the
world be made up of pleasing lies? But tell me, does your Majesty mean to
say that the wretch, Hamilton, seeks your life?"

She was seeking information.

"He does, he does," returned the king. "While he was sick at the Old
Swan, one standing outside his door heard him declare his intention to
kill the king. When I heard of the threat, I summoned his physician, one
Doctor Lilly, who, being questioned, admitted that while in a delirium
Hamilton had made threats against the king's life, but that he, Lilly,
had supposed the French king was meant. Lilly is a good faithful subject,
and I often use his astrological knowledge, which is really great, but in
this case I suspect he is trying to shield Hamilton, believing, perhaps,
that the threats meant nothing because they were made in delirium."

"It is horrible to think upon," answered Frances, shivering. "But he has
gone to France, and, thank Heaven, your Majesty is safe. Perhaps he has
gone to kill King Louis."

"How do you know he has gone to France?" asked the king, much interested.

"I had a letter from him. He imagines he is in love with me," answered
Frances, speaking in the letter of truth and with a fine air of calmness.
She had received a letter from George in France, but it was before his
return to England.

"Ah, indeed!" exclaimed the king. "Your news contradicts your avowal that
you are not in love with him."

"Shall I be in love with all who say they are in love with me?" asked
Frances, glancing up to the king.

"God forbid!" he answered. "I would have you in love with but one--one
who loves your voice, your beauty, your goodness."

"Your Majesty may at least rest easy so far as Hamilton is concerned,"
she returned.

"But I am glad that he is out of the country, and shall see to it that he
doesn't come back," said the king.

His Majesty had talked too long, for Frances had learned that his
suspicions of her love of Hamilton were not allayed, despite his pretense
to the contrary.

"I care not where he be so long as he doesn't trouble me," answered
Frances, sighing.

"But if it is not one it is another," said the king, ruefully. "I hear
that the Duke of Tyrconnel is mad for love of you."

This was a welcome opportunity to Frances, and she quickly used it. "Yes.
At least, he says he is. What does your Majesty advise? Shall I marry him
or not?"

"By all means, not!" returned the king, with strong emphasis. "He would
take you from court. Do you return his love?"

"Well--" answered Frances, drooping her head and pausing to allow the
king to fill the blank.

"But you shall not marry him," insisted the king.

"But you would not have me live a maid? Think of the humiliation of
having graven on my tombstone: 'Mistress Frances Jennings, Age 85.' I'm
going to marry the richest man that asks me."

"Odds fish! that's Tyrconnel!" exclaimed the king.

"I'll find a pretext for sending him to the Tower at once."

"If you do," returned Frances, laughing, "there is Little Jermyn. He will
be rich and an earl when his uncle dies."

"I'll send him along with Tyrconnel," declared the king.

"And there is--" began Frances, laughing.

But the king interrupted her, "I'll send every man to the Tower that
wants to marry you, if I depopulate the court."

"But here comes old Lady Castlemain," said Frances, turning to leave the
king. "I can't quarrel with her, because I can't swear with her. May I
take my leave, your Majesty?"

"I am sorry to grant it, but good-by," returned the king.

"Good-by, your Majesty, and thank you," returned Frances, grateful for
much that the king did not know he had told her. Then she came to me and
told me what the king had said, not omitting her conclusions based on
what he had left unsaid.

Frances and I walked over to the park, where we stood for a time watching
the Duke of York and John Churchill playing pall-mall, but the day
growing cold, we soon continued our walk over to the Serpentine, where we
found Tyrconnel and several other gentlemen riding. Tyrconnel dismounted
and, leading his horse, came to us. He took no notice of me, but bowed to
Frances, saying:--

"I hear it from the king himself that Mistress Jennings has been calling
on her friend, George Hamilton, at his lodgings in the Old Swan."

"And if so, is it a matter of which you have any right to speak?" asked
Frances, smiling.

"I have a right to withdraw the proposal of marriage I so foolishly
made," he retorted.

"Yes, my lord," answered Frances, laughing softly. "But you need not be
angry if I am not. How fortunate for me that I had not accepted." Then
turning to leave and looking back at him: "May we not still be friends,
my lord? You have friends at court who are as bad as I, even if what you
say be true. You say it is true; the king says it is true; therefore it
must be true. Two men so wise and honest could not be mistaken in so
small a matter, nor would they lie solely for the purpose of injuring a
woman. No, it must be true, my lord, and I congratulate you on your
timely withdrawal."

We had not taken fifty steps till Tyrconnel gave his horse to a boy and
came running after us, infinitely more eager to retract the withdrawal
than he had been to withdraw his proposal. He protested by all things
holy his total disbelief in the scandalous story, and begged Frances not
to remember what he had said in jealous anger.

"Be careful, my lord. Do not make another mistake," said Frances,
laughing in his face. "I did visit the Old Swan this morning, and the
king told me less than thirty minutes ago that Master Hamilton lives
there. It is said by those who claim to know that he is in France, but
they must be wrong, and I must have seen him. The king says I did, and
he can do no wrong. I neither deny nor affirm, though I fancy that my
real friends will not believe me guilty of the indiscretion."

"I do not believe it," protested Tyrconnel. "I know you are all that is
good."

"Thank you, my lord," returned Frances. "If I am good, I remain so for my
own sake. As for the gossips, they may think what they please, talk about
me to their hearts' content, and go to the devil for his content, if he
can find it in them."

Seeing that Tyrconnel wanted to speak with Frances alone, I drew to a
little distance for the purpose of giving him an opportunity to press his
suit, in which I so heartily wished him success.

It is uphill work making love to a woman whose heart is filled to
overflowing with love of another man, and I was sorry for poor earnest
Tyrconnel as I watched him pleading his case with Frances. He was not a
burning light intellectually, but he entertained a just estimate of
himself and was wise enough not to take any one of the daintily baited
hooks that were dangled before him by some of the fairest anglers in
England. But manlike, he yearned for the hook that was not in the water.

I followed Frances and Tyrconnel back to the palace, and when they parted
at the King's Street Gate, he asked me to go with him to the sign of the
King's Head and have a tankard of mulled sack and a breast of Welsh
mutton right off the spit.

Tyrconnel's speech was made up of an amusing lisp grafted on the broadest
Irish brogue ever heard outside of Killarney. It cannot be reproduced in
print; therefore I shall not attempt it. But it was so comical that one
could never rid one's self of a desire to laugh, be his Lordship ever so
earnest. As a result of this amusing manner of speech, his most serious
words never produced a thoughtful impression on his hearers. It is said
that the king once laughed when Tyrconnel, in tears, told him of the
death of his Lordship's mother.

Arriving at the King's Head, Tyrconnel chose a table in a remote alcove
of the dining room. After the maid had brought us the mulled sack and had
gone to fetch the mutton, his Lordship began earnestly, but laughably, to
tell me his troubles, and I did my best to listen seriously, though with
poor result.

"I want to marry your cousin, baron," he said. "Yes, yes, go on. Laugh! I
don't mind it. I know you can't help it. But listen. I want to marry her
because she is beautiful and because I know she is good. But if she is in
love with Hamilton, as report says she is, I should not want to inflict
my suit upon her. I know that at best I am no genius, but I am not so
great a fool as to seek an opportunity to make myself appear more stupid
than I am. Of course she can never marry Hamilton, but a hopeless love
clings to a woman as burning oil to the skin and is well-nigh as
impossible to extinguish. Therefore I beg you tell me. Shall I beat a
retreat and take care of my wounded, or shall I continue the battle?"

"I should not trouble myself about the wounded," I answered, reluctant to
evade the truth, for he was an honest soul, very much in earnest.

"But do you speak honestly?" he asked, mopping the perspiration from his
face with the tablecloth. "She laughs when I speak seriously, but I have
hoped that it was because of my damnable manner of speech rather than my
suit. Tell me, what do you think about it? Is she in love with Hamilton?"

His appeal was hard to resist, but I answered evasively in the spirit if
not the letter of a lie: "Thus much I know. My cousin has seen very
little of Hamilton--so little that it appears almost impossible for one
of her sound judgment and cool blood to have fallen in love with him. I
can swear that she has not, nor ever has had, a thought of marrying him.
She had better kill herself."

"Ah, that's all true enough," he answered. "And now that he is in
disgrace, with a noose awaiting him on Tyburn, it is of course impossible
for her to marry him. But you see, my dear fellow, she may love him.
Nelly Gwynn says she does."

"Yes," I replied. "Nelly set the story afloat. Her tongue is self acting.
But she had no reason to do so save in her imagination and her love of
talking. Half the troubles in life are caused by your automatic talkers."

I then told him of my cousin's visit with Nelly to the Old Swan, laying
emphasis on Frances's refusal to recognize Hamilton, but saying nothing
of the fight that followed.

"I am glad to learn the truth, if it is the truth," lisped his Lordship,
musingly.

"If you would know the real danger to Frances, you must look higher,"
I said, cautiously refraining from being too explicit. "There is one
whom my cousin scorns, but from whom she is in hourly peril. There is no
length to which he would not go, no crime, however dastardly, he would
not commit to gain his end. I watch over her constantly, and although my
fear may be groundless, still I believe that her only safety is to marry
at once and to leave court with her husband."

"But you say she despises him?" he asked.

"Yes, she even hates him. Still she is in great danger; perhaps in danger
of her life. We all know that crimes have been committed by this person--
crimes so horrible as to be almost past belief. You remember the parson's
daughter who jumped from a high wall and killed herself to escape him."

"You are her guardian, baron. Let me be her watchdog," said Tyrconnel,
leaning eagerly across the table toward me. "And if I am so fortunate as
to win her love by constant devotion, she shall be my wife."

I offered my hand as a silent compact, and we finished our mutton almost
without another word.

Two days after my interview with Tyrconnel, George Hamilton's _News
Letter_ appeared, containing a vicious attack on the king, which angered
his Majesty greatly and seemed to arouse anew his suspicion that Hamilton
was not in France, some one having told him on a mere suspicion that
George was the editor of the _News Letter_. His Majesty accused Frances
of falsehood in having told him that she had not seen Hamilton and that
she believed he was in France, but she becoming indignant, he again
apologized.

Frances's account of the king's state of mind alarmed me, and I
determined to see George as soon as possible and advise him to leave
England at once. I was delayed in going, but on a cold, stormy day at the
end of a fortnight I found my opportunity, and took boat for the Old
Swan, not minding the snow and sleet, because I was very happy knowing
that I should see Betty. I had of late done all in my power to keep
away from her, but the longing had grown upon me, and I was glad to have
an honest excuse to visit Gracious Street.

I have spoken heretofore of my engagement to marry Mary Hamilton, and
my passion for Betty may indicate that my heart was susceptible, if not
fickle. But aside from Betty's Hebe-like charms of person and sweetness
of disposition, there were other reasons for my falling off respecting
Mary. While she had promised to marry me, still there was a coldness,
perhaps I should say a calmness, in her manner toward me, and a
cautiousness in holding me aloof which seemed to indicate a desire on her
part for a better establishment in life than I could give, if perchance
a better offered. My suit had not prospered, though it had not failed,
since she was to be my wife provided she found no more eligible husband
within a reasonable time.

Dangling blunts the edge of ardor; therefore I soon found myself noticing
beauty elsewhere and discovered none that could be compared with that of
Betty Pickering of the Old Swan. It is true she was, in a sense, a
barmaid, and equally true that I had no thought of marrying her. Still it
was significant even at that early time that my mind reverted to the fact
that Edward Hyde, Lord Chancellor of England and Earl of Clarendon, had
married an innkeeper's widow, whose daughter became the mother of two
queens.

While this was true, still I respected Betty less than I admired her and
far less than she deserved, never entirely forgetting her station in life
nor ceasing to recognize the great distance between us.

When I entered the Old Swan, Betty greeted me with a smile amid a nest of
dimples, and led me upstairs to her parlor, so that we might talk without
being overheard. I sat down on a settle, and Betty took her place beside
me. Her hands rested on her lap, giving her an air of contentment as she
turned her face toward me and asked:--

"Have you come to see Master Hamilton?"

"Yes," I answered, "and you."

"And me?" she asked, looking up with a curious little smile. "In what way
may I serve you?"

"By sitting there and permitting me to look at you," I answered.

"Oh, is that all?" she asked, laughing softly.

"And by smiling once in a while," I suggested.

"Who shall smile? You or I?" she queried, glancing slyly up to me.

"Oh, you, by all means," I returned. "There is no beauty in my smile,
while yours--"

"Come, come, Baron Ned," she interrupted, looking up to me pleadingly.
"My smiles are honest, and that is all that is needful in my case. So
don't try to make me believe they are anything more. Don't make a fool of
me by flattery."

"Don't you like flattery, Betty?" I asked.

"Yes, of course I do," she returned, smiling and dimpling exquisitely.
"But it is not good for me. You know I might grow to believing it and
you."

"But it is true, Betty, and you may believe me," I answered, very
earnestly, taking her hand from her lap.

She permitted me to hold her hand for a moment, and said:--

"I am so desirous of keeping my regard for you and of holding your regard
for me that I am tempted to tell you I fear it will all change if I find
you inclined to doubt that I am an honest girl."

"I do not doubt it, Betty," I answered. "I know you and respect you, and
you shall have no good cause to change your regard for me, if you have
any."

"Frequently gentlemen are rude to me in the tap-room, and I submit rather
than make trouble by resenting it, but you have always been respectful,
and--and I have appreciated it, Baron Ned. Father says I need not go to
the tap-room hereafter, but may direct the maids in the house, now that I
am growing old--near twenty."

"Twenty?" I asked. And she nodded her head proudly.

"Yes."

"I thought you were still a child," I remarked.

"No, no," she returned, looking up to me open-eyed and very serious. "I
am a woman."

"Yes, a beautiful child-woman--the most beautiful in all the world," I
said, grasping her hand and holding it a moment till its fluttering
ceased. "And I am jealous of every other man who comes near you."

I saw that my remark had offended her, so I continued earnestly: "I meant
it, Betty; I meant it. I was not jesting."

Betty sighed, looked quickly up to me, half in doubt, half in inquiry,
and was about to speak, but closed her lips on her words and leaned
forward, her head drooping eloquently. Her gentleness, her sweetness, and
her beauty were so tempting that I could not resist their charm. Again I
caught her hand, and it trembled in mine as she tried faintly to withdraw
it. I tried to check myself but failed, and I put my arm about her waist.
Then, after a mighty effort to stay my words, I said pleadingly:--

"Ah, Betty, I love you. Please, please, Betty, believe me, and--and--just
one kiss."

"No, no," she cried pleadingly, trying to draw away from me. "It
could not be honest between us. You are a nobleman--I, a barmaid. Your
friendship is very dear to me. Please let me keep it, Baron Ned, and
let me keep my regard for you. Let there be at least one man whom I do
not fear. You know there can be nothing honest between us, and if it
be possible that one so lowly as I can deserve your respect, let me have
it, Baron Ned, let me have it. Let me keep it, for it is the dearest
thing in life to me."

There was such deep entreaty in her voice that it touched me to the
heart, and I drew away from her immediately, saying:--

"I do know there can be nothing honest between us, Betty, and knowing it,
have suffered. What I have said to you is little compared to what I feel
and to what I would say. I can't help it that I love you, Betty, but you
shall never have cause to fear me. Do you believe me and do you trust me,
Betty?"

For answer she held up her lips to me. What she had refused on my
request, she gave of her own accord, saying:--

"There, Baron Ned. Now, if you really respect me, you will know that
I trust you, for I am not a girl to do this thing wantonly. Perhaps I
should not have done it at all, but you must know that I could not help
it. If you care for my friendship or are concerned for my happiness, I
beg you never tempt me to repeat my folly. There is no other man, but now
you must know after what I have done, that there is one--yourself. But
there can be nothing but friendship between us, Baron Ned, and oh, that
is so much to me! Let me have what happiness I can find in it!"

"But I love you, Betty, and I know that you love me," I answered, unable
to restrain my tongue.

She did not speak, so I asked, "Do you not, Betty?"

"No," she answered, shaking her head dolefully. But I knew she did not
tell the truth.

Presently she asked. "Do you want to see Master Hamilton?"

I answered that I did, and she said I might go to the printing shop,
where she was sure I should find him.

She rose and started toward the door. I called to her, but she did not
stop, so I ran after her, saying:--

"Have I offended you, Betty?"

"No," she answered, drooping her head. "But I am very unhappy, and I want
to be alone so that I may cry. You know it is much harder to forego the
thing one wants but may not take, than it is to do without the thing one
wants but cannot take. Yearning for the impossible brings longing, for
the possible anguish."

And I remained silent, almost hating myself.

I went to the tap-room with Betty, and the courtyard being vacant for a
moment, I ran across and down the steps to see Hamilton.

I had tried to see Frances that morning at Whitehall, but failed, being
told that she had gone to visit her father. I had stopped at Sir
Richard's house, but Frances was not there, and I half suspected I might
find her with Hamilton.

I found Hamilton at his printing-press, and after I had told him of the
risk he ran by remaining in London, he said:--

"I have been making an honest living from my _News Letter_ and am sorry
to give it up, but I fear trouble will come very soon if I continue to
publish it. The king has a score of human bloodhounds seeking me. It is
rather odd, isn't it, to hear a man of the house of Hamilton talking
about making money by work, but of all the money I have ever touched,
that which I have made honestly from the _News Letter_ has been the
sweetest. The work has been a delight to me, even aside from the fact
that it gives me an opportunity to abuse the king. Lilly tells me that
the king asked him to consult the stars concerning my threats against the
royal life. The result was favorable to me."

"It is strange that the king should be duped by a palpable humbug," I
remarked, supposing that George would agree with me. But, no! He turned
on me almost fiercely:--

"Lilly is not a humbug! Of course he humbugs the king, but everybody
does. I have known him to do some wonderful things by the help of his
astrological figures, conjunctions, constellations, and calculations."

"Nonsense! All humbug, I tell you!" I asserted, somewhat disgusted.

"No, it is not all nonsense," he insisted. "A poor woman lost a sum of
money ten days ago. Lilly set a figure and told her where to find it."

"And of course she found it?" I inquired incredulously.

"Yes, she found it," returned George. "And Lilly would not accept a
farthing for his service. Two months ago a child was stolen from its home
in Devonshire, and the parents came all the way to London to consult
Lilly."

"And of course they found the child?" I asked.

"They did. It was with a band of gypsies who made their headquarters at a
place called Gypsy Hill, Lambeth," returned Hamilton, provoked by my
scepticism. "He learns some very curious truths from the stars."

"The stars!" I exclaimed contemptuously. "He is a shrewd observer of men
and of things about him, and when he guesses right, I venture to say he
finds his inspiration much lower than the stars."

"Perhaps he does," returned Hamilton. "Of that I cannot say. But this I
know. He can put two and two together and make a larger sum total than I
have ever seen come from any other man's calculations. He is learned in
every branch of knowledge, and I respect his wonderful conclusions,
asking no questions about his methods."

"Very well, I'll not dispute with you if you admit that he receives even
a part of his knowledge from substellar sources. But while we are alone I
want to ask you, and I want you to tell me the truth: has Frances been
here to-day?"

"No! Tell me, for God's sake, tell me quickly! Why do you ask?" he
exclaimed, turning to me in alarm. "Of late I have been haunted with the
fear that she is in danger of violence from the king. He is capable of
committing any crime--has committed many, as we all know! Why do you ask
about Frances, Baron Ned?"

"Because she is not at Whitehall nor at her father's house, where the
duchess said she was going. She never goes any place else, and it only
now occurs to me to be alarmed."

"Only now?" he demanded angrily. "What have you been doing? I supposed
you were watching over her. A fine guardian, upon my word! Where is she?
Carried off by the king, of course! What else have you expected from our
friend at Whitehall? If harm comes to her, I'll kill him!"

He threw off his printer's cap and apron, hastily cleansed his face and
hands, put on the gray beard and wig, took his broad hat and long coat
from the chest, and started toward the door, bidding me follow.

"Where are you going?" I asked.

"To Whitehall," he replied. "You to learn, if you can, where Frances is;
I to form my plans what to do in case you do not find her. You must go to
the river ahead of me and take a boat. I'll follow in another. We should
not be seen together. You stop at Sir Richard's house, and if she is not
there, go to Whitehall. Then come to me at the house of Carter, the
Quaker. You know where it is--just off King's Street, not far from the
Cross."

I followed Hamilton's suggestion. I did not find Frances at Sir Richard's
house, so I hastened to Whitehall, where I learned that she had left
shortly before noon, saying that she was going to spend the afternoon and
night at home. It was near the hour of three o'clock when I had started
up the river, from the Old Swan, and a snowstorm was raging which became
violent before I reached the palace.

While I was talking to one of the maids in the parlor of the duchess, a
page came to me and whispered, "A lady is waiting for you at Holbein's
Gate, and wishes you to go to her as soon as possible."

I suspected that the lady was Frances, so I hastened to the gate and
found, not my cousin, but Betty. I knew her the moment I saw her, despite
the fact that she wore a full vizard and a long cloak. I also knew that
nothing less than a matter of great urgency would have induced the girl
to call for me at the palace.

The snow, which had been falling all day, was now coming in horizontal
sheets, laden with sleet. The wind was blowing half a gale, and the
weather was turning bitterly cold, yet Betty had come to seek me, despite
weather and modesty. Eager to hear her errand, I led her toward Charing
Cross, and when we were away from the gate, asked:--

"What brings you, Bettina? I know it must be a matter of great urgency
that has induced you to venture forth in this terrible storm. What can I
do for you?"

"Nothing for me, Baron Ned," she answered, taking my arm and huddling
close to my side for protection against the storm.

"For whom, then? Tell me quickly," I asked.

"I fear Mistress Jennings is in trouble," she answered. "Soon after you
and Master Hamilton left the Old Swan, a girl came to me in my parlor and
told me that as she was passing a coach standing in front of Baynard's
Castle two hours or more ago, a lady called to her from the coach window
and told her to tell me that Mistress Jones was in great trouble; that
she had been seized by two men who were carrying her away. She said the
lady was bound hand and foot, and that immediately after she had spoken,
two gentlemen came from Baynard's Castle, entered the coach, and drove
toward Temple Bar. The girl said she followed the coach till she saw it
turn into the Strand beyond Temple Bar; then she came to see me."

"Did the girl say at what hour she saw the lady, Mistress Jones?" I
asked. "She probably did not catch the name Jennings."

"She said it was two hours or more before she saw me," answered Betty.
"That would make it perhaps between one and two o'clock. I ought to have
questioned her more closely, but I feared to delay telling you, so I left
her in my parlor and came to see you as quickly as possible."

"Brave Betty! Sweet Betty!" I exclaimed, rapturously. "I could find it in
my heart to kiss you a thousand times as a reward for your wisdom."

"And I could find it in my heart to be content with other reward," she
answered, though her words took a different meaning from the gentle
pressure she gave my arm.

"But tell me," asked Betty, "do you know where Mistress Jennings is?"

"She is not to be found," I returned. "Beyond a doubt the lady in the
carriage was my cousin. You say it was perhaps one o'clock when the girl
saw her?"

"Yes."

"It is after three now, nearly four, and will soon be dark. We must
hasten."

We fairly ran to the Quaker's house, where we found Hamilton, who,
forgetting his sacred calling, lapsed into the unholy manner of former
days and used language which caused Betty to cover her ears with her
hands. We did not, however, allow his profanity to delay us, but hastened
to the Cross, expecting to take a coach for the Old Swan. But none was to
be found, so we went to the river, where we were compelled to take an
open boat with a steersman and one oarsman. We made poor headway, having
to beat against the wind and the tide, so George and I each took an oar.
After a time the man at the steering oar said that he would row if George
or I would steer the boat, but neither of us knew the river and therefore
could not take his place.

Betty said that she knew the river, having kept a small boat since she
was strong enough to lift an oar, so she took the steering oar, and with
four sweeps out we sped along at a fine rate. I shall never forget that
water ride. We seemed to be pulling uphill every fathom of the way. The
black, oily waves, with their teethlike crests of white, rose above our
bow at every stroke of the sweeps, and when I looked behind me it seemed
that we must surely be engulfed.

The snow, driven by the wind, swirled in angry blasts, and the damp, cold
air chilled us to the bone. Our greatest danger would be when we came to
land at the Bridge stairs, for the tide was pouring in through the arches
of the Bridge and was falling in a great cataract just below the foot of
the stairs. One false stroke of Betty's steering oar when we came to
land, and our boat would be swamped. But she clung to the oar and brought
us safely to the stairs within a fathom of the breakers.

We ran up Gracious Street and found the girl waiting in Betty's parlor.
But Betty had told us all there was to be learned, so we gave the girl a
few shillings and sent her home.

"What shall we do?" asked Betty, feeling that she had earned a right to
couple herself with Hamilton and me by the pronoun "we."

"I'll go to see Lilly," said Hamilton. "He lives in the Strand, not far
from Temple Bar."

"Why do you wish to see him?" I asked.

"He will tell us where Frances is and how to find her. Will you go with
me?" asked Hamilton.

"Certainly," I responded, though I considered the visit a waste of time.

"May I, too, go?" asked Betty, with the double motive, doubtless, of
helping and seeing. Lilly, engaged in his incantations, would be an
inspiring sight to her.

"No, no, you may not go with us," answered Hamilton.

Betty's eyes looked up to me entreatingly, so I took up her cause, and
suggested:--

"Lilly may want to question her about what the girl said."

"You are right," returned George. "Wrap yourself up well, Betty, and come
along. We'll take a coach to Lilly's."

A porter soon brought us a coach, and Betty, having explained to her
father where and why she was going, climbed in with George and me, and we
were off.




CHAPTER IX

KIDNAPPED


We found Lilly at home, eager to help us. He asked many questions
relating to my cousin's life and her friends at court, to all of which I
made full answer in so far as I knew, including an account of the king's
objectionable attentions. I suspected that the Doctor would make more use
of the knowledge he obtained from me than of that to be received from the
stars, but I did not care how he reached his conclusions if he could but
tell us how and where to find Frances.

Lilly questioned Betty also, and when he had learned all that she knew,
he left us seated in the parlor while he went to his observatory to set a
figure. In the course of ten minutes he returned and gave us the result
of his calculations, as follows:--

"I believe I can tell you where Mistress Jennings is, and how she may be
found," he said, speaking and acting as one walking in sleep. "But your
failure to tell me the exact hour of her birth lends uncertainty to my
calculations. I have all the particulars concerning the nativity of a man
whom I shall not name. I have read the stars many times for him and on
many subjects. If he is connected with the disappearance of Mistress
Jennings, you will find her at a place called Merlin House, six leagues
from Westminster and half a league from the Oxford Road."

Here his eyes began to roll and he seemed to be under a spell. He made
strange, weird passes in the air for a time, then became rigid, his face
upturned and his arms uplifted. Betty was frightened and drew close to my
side, grasping my arm.

After perhaps a minute of silence, Lilly began to speak again in low
sepulchral tones: "I see a house in the depths of a forest dark and wild.
It is surrounded by a high wall. In the east side of the wall is a double
door or gate of thick oak, which you will find locked and barred. The
house is of brick, save a tower at the southeast corner, which is of
stone three stories high. To reach the house, you must travel on the
Oxford Road a distance of six leagues and two furlongs, where you will
find a broken shrine, erected hundreds of years ago to the Blessed
Virgin. The shrine is on the left side of the road as you travel west,
one hundred paces back, on the top of a low hill surrounded by a bleak
moor. The shrine has gone to decay, but it holds a sacred relic of the
Blessed Virgin."

Betty, who was a Catholic, crossed herself and murmured an Ave. Lilly
continued:--

"On the apex of the shrine there is a broken cross. The night is dark
and you may pass without seeing it, therefore I shall direct you how to
find it. A short distance this side of the shrine the road turns sharply
to the left, just before crossing a bourne which is six leagues from
Westminster. After you have crossed the bourne, bring your horses to a
walk, and when you have counted a number equal to the sum of seven times
the square of eleven, counting as the clock ticks, halt, and you will
find the shrine on a hillock in a bleak moor. You may easily see it, as
it will be dark against the snow. Neither rain nor snow touches it, and
the storm spares it. It has been abandoned by men hundreds of years,
therefore the Blessed Virgin protects it from further decay."

He seemed to be a long time coming to the house, but after another pause,
he continued:--

"Half a league beyond the shrine a narrow road branches to the south.
Take it, and soon you will be in the midst of a forest, dark and wild.
The road will be dim and difficult to follow in its windings, but your
horses will keep the way and will take you to a gate in the midst of the
forest. Enter by the gate and follow the road winding among the trees
till you reach the double door or gate in the wall. The house will be
dark save in the third story of the stone tower, where you will see a
star beaming in the window. Raphael, my familiar spirit, will hold the
star for your guidance. In the room of the star, you will find the person
you seek. Delay not!"

He stopped speaking, bent forward, breathed upon a gold plate covered
with mystic signs which rested on a table, rose to an upright posture,
again became rigid, stretched out his hands with face upturned, and
whispered in tones almost inaudible:--

"Come thou, great Raphael, spirit of rescue, and help me this night in a
righteous cause. In the name of Jupiter, the father of the gods, Mercury,
his son, and Psyche, the spirit of the stars!"

He stood dazed for a moment, as though just awakened, then turning
quickly to me, said: "Lose not a moment's time. Hasten at once to the
rescue. I am sure my directions will lead you to her whom you seek."

Betty, George, and I gathered our hats and cloaks, and George, turning to
me, said:--

"We must find a light coach and four good horses. The road will be heavy
with snow, and we must be prepared to travel rapidly."

"Father has four good horses, as strong and swift as any in London,"
suggested Betty. "He has a light coach, too. Let us return to the Old
Swan and prepare to start at once."

"Betty, you are too wise for one of your age and sex," said George. "But
without your wisdom, I don't know what we should have done this night.
Let us go immediately."

Our coachman put his horses to a gallop, we reached the Old Swan in a
short time, and within less than half an hour, a porter informed me that
a coach and four were awaiting us in the courtyard. Pickering lent us
greatcoats and rugs and all things needful to keep us warm. He did not
know the exact reason for our journey, but had learned from Betty that it
was undertaken in an affair of great moment, involving my cousin's
safety.

George and I each carried a heavy sword and a pistol in addition to two
hand guns, primed and charged, which lay in a box on the coach floor. The
drivers on the box were each armed with a sword and a pistol. They had
been reluctant to leave the kitchen fire to face the storm, but when they
had a hint that a fight was possible, and when Pickering offered them a
guinea each, they changed their minds, quickly wrapped themselves in
greatcoats, and were on the box when we came out. George stopped at the
inn door to have a word with Pickering, and while they were talking I
climbed to the top of the front wheel of the coach to give instructions
to the drivers. I told them to drive at a moderate gait down Candlestick
Street and the Strand till they reached Charing Cross; then to turn up
towards Saint-Martin's-in-the-Fields and take the crooked road across
the Common till they reached the Oxford Road. When on the main highway,
they were to travel at full gallop.

"How long is the journey, sir?" asked one of the drivers. "I ask so that
I may know how fast to drive the horses."

"Between six and seven leagues," I answered.

"Ah, they can go that distance at a good pace if we on the box don't
freeze to death," he returned, buttoning up his greatcoat, bringing the
rug tightly about him and drawing on his gloves.

I sprang from the wheel and started to enter the coach just as George
left Pickering, but when I put my foot on the step, I saw a small man
sitting in the furthest corner of the back seat.

"Come, come, what are you doing here? And who are you?" I asked, stepping
into the coach for the purpose of pulling the fellow out.

I was greeted by a soft laugh and this answer: "I am sitting here, and my
name is Betty Pickering."

"My God, Betty, you can't go with us," I exclaimed, making ready to help
her out of the coach.

But she put her hand over my mouth to silence me and whispered, "The men
on the box must not know me."

Betty pushed me backward out of the coach, came out herself and led me to
George, who, by that time, was halfway across the courtyard.

"Who are you?" cried George, surprised to see the little man beside me,
for Betty was in greatcoat, trousers, and boots.

"I am Betty, and Baron Ned says I shall not go with you."

"No, no, Betty," answered George. "See the snow, the sleet, and the
storm. It is freezing and the wind cuts like a knife. It would kill you
to go with us."

"Think a moment," she answered, whispering, so that her words might not
be overheard by the men on the box. "Mistress Jennings may need the help
of a woman, but in any case you shall not have the coach and horses if I
don't go."

"Does your father know?" I asked.

"Yes, yes, come on! We are wasting valuable time," answered Betty,
starting toward the coach.

George and I were helpless against Betty's will, so we said nothing more,
and she climbed into the coach, taking her former place at the left end
of the back seat. George followed, taking the middle place next to her,
and after giving the word to start, I followed George, taking the right
hand corner, thus leaving him between Betty and me, an arrangement that
did not at all please me. But my disappointment was short lived, for
hardly was I seated till Betty spoke in tones plainly showing that she
was pouting:--

"I want Baron Ned to sit by me."

George laughed, he and I changed places, and when I was settled beside
Betty, she caught my hand, giving it a saucy little squeeze, and fell
back in her corner with a sigh and a low gurgling laugh.

When we had climbed Gracious Street hill, we turned into Candlestick
Street and drove along at a brisk pace, George and I watching the houses
to note our progress.

After passing Temple Bar, the street being broader and the night very
dark, we could not distinguish the houses save when a light gleamed over
a front door now and then, and were not sure where we were until we saw
the flambeaux over Whitehall Gate scintillating through the falling snow.

Before reaching Charing Cross, one of the drivers lifted the rug which
hung across the front of the coach between us and the box and asked:--

"Did you say, sir, to take the road across the Common from
Saint-Martin's-in-the-Fields?"

"Yes," I answered.

"Then, sir, have your pistols ready, for it is the worst bloody stretch
of road about London for highwaymen, though I doubt if they be out on a
night like this."

"You're not afraid?" I asked.

"Devil a bit, sir! I'd rather fight than eat, but I thought maybe your
honors would rather eat."

He cracked his whip, and soon we were over the dangerous ground,
travelling along on the Oxford Road at a fine gallop. On reaching the
open country the wind gave us its full force, there being no doors to our
coach, and soon our rugs were covered with snow. But George and I were
wrapped to our chins, and Bettina nestled cozily down in her corner
untouched by the storm.

After leaving Westminster, we had no means of knowing our rate of
progress, for there were no houses near the road, and, if there had been,
we should not have known them. The drivers kept the horses in a strong
trot, at times a vigorous gallop, and I judged that we were making nearly
three leagues an hour. At that rate it would require perhaps two hours to
reach the shrine mentioned by Lilly.

We had instructed the men on the box to watch for a sharp bend in the
road just before crossing a bourne, and we, too, began to watch soon
after leaving Westminster. After what seemed to be a long time, George
asked me to make a flare in my tinder box, while he caught a glimpse
of the face of his watch. This I did under the rug, and, much to our
disgust, we found that we had been less than twenty minutes on the road,
so provokingly had time lagged.

After our disappointment we lay back in the coach, determined to ignore
time, and thereby perhaps hasten it. In truth, time's lagging was not
unpleasant for me, in one respect, at least, for Bettina was by my side.
I found delight in keeping her well tucked about with rugs, so that not
even a breath of the storm nor a flake of snow could reach her. She wore
a great fur hood which buttoned under her chin, almost covering her face
and falling in a soft warm curtain to her shoulders and bosom. She was
warm, and aside from our great cause of anxiety, I believe, was happy.
I wished a hundred times that George were in another coach, though had
he been, I well knew that I should have said a great deal to Betty which
on the morrow would have been regretted, both for her sake and my own.

Just at a point when time seemed to have halted, the driver lifted the
rug hanging behind him, and said:--

"Here is the bend, sir, and yonder is the bourne."

Presently we knew by the breaking of the ice and the splashing of the
water that we were crossing the bourne, and when we were over, George
called to the driver, directing him to allow the horses to walk until the
order came to stop.

George dropped the front curtain, and turning to Betty and me, said:--

"Now, let us count as the clock ticks to the number 847, and when
finished, we shall be at the shrine."

"We are more apt to find a bleak moor and a sharp blast of wind," I
suggested.

While under the spell of Lilly's incantations, I had almost accepted his
absurd vaporings, but cooler thought had brought contempt, and I had
begun to look upon our journey as a very wild goose chase indeed.

"We have found the sharp turn in the road and the bourne," said George,
"and I see no reason to doubt that we shall find the shrine."

"Lilly may have passed over the road and may know that the shrine is
here; but when we find it, what will it prove?" I asked.

"It will prove nothing, though I am willing to stake my life that we find
Frances in Merlin House."

"Count!" exclaimed Betty, sharply. In our discussion, George and I had
forgotten to count, but Betty had been counting under her breath as the
clock ticks, and we took her number and started with it.

We all reached the number 847 almost at the same second, when we stopped
the coach, and sure enough, there by the roadside, on a small rocky
hillock surrounded by a bleak moor, was the shrine. Even from the road we
could see the fragment of a cross projecting above the one piece of wall
left standing. One would hardly have taken it to be a shrine unless the
fact had been suggested, but with the thought in mind, the fragmentary
cross was convincing evidence. Had its sacred quality been suspected
during the time of Cromwell, not one stone would have been left upon
another, but no one knew that it was the Virgin's shrine, therefore it
was not disturbed, but stood there, black on a field of luminous white.
We all saw it at the same moment. I was content to view it from the
coach, but George went to examine it, and returned, saying:--

"It is a shrine. Part of the cross still remains surmounting a fragment
of a wall."

He climbed into the coach and was about to give the word to start again,
when Betty spoke up, hesitatingly, pleadingly but emphatically:--

"Please wait a moment. I want to see it."

I followed Betty when she got out of the coach, and, as we approached the
shrine, she exclaimed: "Doctor Lilly was right! There is no snow on the
shrine. The Virgin protects it. There must be a relic beneath the
stones!"

We climbed a little hillock and after standing before the shrine for a
moment, Betty said, "Please return to the coach and leave me alone."

"Why, Betty?" I asked. "You may speak plainly to me. I think I know your
motive."

"I want to offer a little prayer to the Virgin here at her broken
shrine--a prayer for your cousin and for you--and for me."

I knelt with her, and after Betty had finished her simple invocation, we
rose, and I, who at another time would have laughed at the prayer, felt
the thrill of her whispered words lingering in my heart. I seemed to know
that we should rescue Frances, and I also knew that my love for Bettina
would bring me nothing but joy, softened and sanctified by sadness, and
to her nothing of evil save the pain of a gentle longing.

Betty felt as I did, for when she rose she said, "Now we shall find
Mistress Jennings, and, Baron Ned, I shall fear you no more."

"Have you feared me?" I asked, touched to the quick by her artless
candor.

"Yes," she answered, sighing. "Though I have feared myself more. You
are so far above me in every way that it is no wonder I am bewildered
when you say--say--that you--. You know what I mean."

"Yes, Betty," I answered quickly, feeling that she had more to say.

"I was bewildered in my parlor at the Old Swan to-day," she said, hanging
her head. "Your opinion of me must have fallen."

"No, no, I understood, Betty, I understood, and I dare not tell you how
much my opinion has risen because I would say more than would be good for
you or for me," I answered reassuringly.

"But you must remember that a girl has impulses and yearnings at times,
and she should not be too harshly blamed if she sometimes fails to beat
them down. But now it will all be different. The Blessed Virgin will help
us, and our conflict is over."

Betty and I started back to the coach, both feeling the uplift of
our answered prayer. Probably we were the only devotees that had knelt
before the shrine in hundreds of years, and the Virgin had heard our
supplication. It was a proposition I should have laughed at and held to
scorn prior to that time.

After leaving the shrine, it was only a few minutes till the coach
turned to the left into a narrow road, and we were approaching the end
of our rough journey. We continued to travel at a brisk trot and came
to the forest, "dark and wild," of which Lilly had spoken. Thus far his
"calculations" were correct, and I was beginning to take hope that they
would continue so to the end. After half an hour on the winding road
through the forest, the drivers halted at the gate of which Lilly had
spoken, and in ten minutes more drew rein beside the high brick wall
surrounding Merlin House.

Without the least trouble we found the gates or doors in the wall, and
truly enough, they were of "thick oak" so strong that we could not feel
them vibrate when we tried to shake them, and so firmly locked in the
middle that we almost despaired of opening them. The wall was too high
to scale, and for a moment it looked as though our journey had been in
vain. But Betty's keen wits came to our rescue.

When George and I had examined the gates and had almost despaired of
opening them, Betty undertook an inspection of her own, and presently
called our attention to a hole, perhaps four inches in diameter, in
each gate, which was hidden by round curtains of wood hung within, so
completely closing up the holes as to make them invisible save on close
examination. She suggested that we pass the trace chain through one hole,
draw it out through the other, hitch the horses to the two ends, and pull
down the wall if the gates refused to give way.

Her plan was so good that the horses soon opened the gate, though it
required a strong pull from all four of them to do it. Betty and I were
the first to enter, George following close at our heels. The two drivers,
who had taken the horses back to the coach, hitched them to a tree and
soon followed us, bringing the long leather reins to be used as climbing
ropes if necessary.

Hardly had we entered the gate till we saw a starlike gleam of light in a
window of a room in the third story of the tower, as Lilly had predicted.
While I was convinced that the light came through a hole in the curtain
rather than from a star held by Raphael to guide us, still my scepticism
was rapidly turning to awe.

We were speaking of the light when two great dogs came bounding out of
the darkness and attacked us. I drew my sword, a sharp, heavy blade, and
being much frightened, began to swing it heroically in every direction.
Fortunately one of the dogs happened to be in one of the directions, and
I split its head. The other dog attacked Betty, but George ran to her
rescue and finished the animal before it had time to bark.

Having vanquished the dogs, we hastened to the tower and stopped beneath
the window of the star. We had hoped to attract Frances's attention by
casting pebbles against the window-pane, but we had counted without our
ammunition. We could find no pebbles, the snow being at least a foot
deep.

A thick vine, probably an ivy, covered the front of the tower, and George
attempted to make the escalade by climbing. He would have denuded the
wall had he continued his efforts, for the vine broke, not being strong
enough to bear his weight.

"Let me try it," whispered Betty, taking off her greatcoat, hood, gloves,
and boots and tossing them to the ground.

I objected to her risking her pretty neck and limbs, but she insisted
that she could make the ascent easily, and George agreeing with her, I
reluctantly consented.

Brave little Betty at once began the ascent, I standing under her to
break the fall if she should take one. When she had climbed five or six
feet from the ground, the vine broke and she fell, landing gracefully on
her feet. Instantly she was at it again, for Betty had a will of her own
greatly disproportioned to her size. Again the vine broke, and when I
picked her up I found that she had lost her breath by the fall, but she
laughed as soon as her breath returned, and was in no way discouraged.

In a moment she tried again, despite my protest, saying she would go more
slowly and use greater care in choosing the larger vines. This time she
was determined to succeed, so she again tied the leather reins about her
arm, grasped the vine, and within two minutes was standing on the upper
coping of the second-story window, her waist on a level with the sill of
the window of the star.

The wind howling through the trees and around the corner of the tower
made so great a din that at first we did not hear what Betty said to
attract Frances's attention, but presently, the storm lulling for a
moment, we listened intently and heard her say:--

"It is Betty Pickering."

We supposed she spoke in response to an inquiry from within, and we were
right, for almost instantly the curtains parted, the window opened, and
we saw Frances standing in the light of Raphael's star--a candle.

Up to that time I had been incredulous of Lilly's wisdom, and while I
had hoped to find my cousin, I had little faith in the result. But now
conviction came with a shock and, notwithstanding my joy at seeing
Frances, I found myself forgetting where I was in wondering whether Lilly
were a god, a devil, or merely a shrewd charlatan who had obtained his
wonderfully accurate knowledge from something that had happened in the
past wherein the king was concerned, or from some one who knew where
Frances had been taken.

I was awakened from my revery by hearing George call in a low voice to
Frances, telling her to fasten the ends of the leathers to a bedpost or a
heavy piece of furniture, and asking her if she could come down hand
under hand. She answered that she could and took the end of the reins
from Betty. After a minute or two spent by Frances back in the room, she
reappeared, tossed her cloak down to us, climbed out the window, and
stood for a moment beside Betty on the lower window cap. I heard Betty
encouraging her, and presently Frances began her descent, reaching the
ground safely. George would have been demonstrative, but I interrupted
him, saying:--

"Be ready to help me catch Betty in case she falls!"

Betty started down, but George called to her, telling her to climb into
the room, loosen the reins, and throw them out.

"But how shall I go down?" asked Betty, whose nerve was deserting her.

"You must come down as you climbed up--by the vines," returned George.

Betty climbed in at the window, and presently the leathers fell at our
feet. In a moment she reappeared, put one foot out the window, hesitated,
and called to me:--

"I'm afraid, Baron Ned. It seems so far, looking down."

George started toward the coach with Frances, leaving me and one of the
drivers to care for the girl who had saved our expedition from failure.

I could help Betty only by encouraging her, so I spoke softly: "Be brave,
Betty. Go slowly. Don't lose your head."

"It is not my head I fear to lose; it is my footing," she answered,
sitting on the window-sill, one foot hanging outside.

"But you must come, Betty," I said encouragingly. "Now say a little
prayer to the Virgin, and you'll be all right."

I saw her bow her head and cross herself, and the prayer giving her
strength, she climbed to the lower window coping and began her descent
on the vine. When halfway down she fell, and though I caught her, partly
breaking her fall, I knew that she was hurt. I helped her to her feet,
and she said breathlessly:--

"I'm all right. I'm not hurt."

But when we started toward the coach, she clung to me, limping, and
began to cry from pain. When I saw that she was hurt, I caught her up
in my arms and carried her to the coach, followed by the driver, bearing
the reins and Betty's hood, cloak, gloves, and boots. Frances was already
inside the coach, and George was about to follow her, when I came up with
poor helpless Betty, and somewhat angrily ordered him to stand aside
while I made her comfortable. Frances began to soothe Betty, whose tears
flowed afresh under the sympathy. By the time George and I were in the
coach, the drivers were on the box, but before we started one of them
lifted the curtain and said:--

"I hear them moving in the house."

"Make the more haste," I answered.

"Shan't we stay for a fight, sir?" asked the driver, evidently
disappointed.

"We'll have it later on," said George, and the next moment the coach was
turned and we were on our homeward road.

When we reached the Oxford Road, the horses started at a smart gallop,
and we began to hope that we had not been discovered by the inmates of
Merlin House. But soon we heard horses galloping behind us. After a
consultation, George and I concluded to stop the coach. Frances and Betty
were much alarmed, and begged us to try to escape by whipping the horses.
But I knew that our pursuers, being on horseback, would soon overtake us,
and I was convinced that nothing could be gained by attempting flight. I
have seen a small dog stop a larger one by waiting for it.

So we waited, and when our pursuers, a half score of men on horseback,
came up to us, we met them with a fusillade of powder and shot, which
persuaded them to allow us to go our way and evidently made them content
to go theirs, for we saw nothing more of them.

On the way to London, Frances told us briefly the story of the day. She
had started to her father's house and had left the river at Baynard's
Castle stairs. It was near one o'clock when she left her boat, and the
snow, which had been falling for an hour or more, covered the ground.
When she reached the head of the narrow street leading to Upper Thames
Street from the river stairs, she found a coach waiting for her. The
driver touched his hat and asked if she was Mistress Jennings. When she
answered that she was, he said I had sent him to watch for her and to
take her to Sir Richard's house, the snow being deep and the storm
violent. My name and Sir Richard's fell so glibly from the fellow's
tongue that she, suspecting nothing, entered the coach. Within three or
four minutes the coach stopped, but she thought nothing of it, supposing
the way was blocked.

While waiting, two men wrapped to their eyes in greatcoats came up, one
on either side of the coach, entered, threw a cloak over her head, and
bound her hand and foot. Immediately the coach started, but presently it
stopped again, and Frances had an opportunity to speak to the girl who
had come to see Betty. Fortunately a buttonhole in the cloak which the
men had thrown over Frances's head happened to fall over one of her eyes,
and thus enabled her to see the girl.

       *       *       *       *       *

When our pursuers turned back, we reduced our speed, so that the journey
might be easier for Betty, who had moaned at every jolt, and when the
coach went smoother she fell asleep.

After we had all been silent for a long time, Frances said:--

"I have been thinking it all over, cousin Ned, and if Master Hamilton,
that is, George, wishes it, I will go with him, regardless of
consequences. I am tired of the fight."

"What?" I cried, startled almost to anger.

"Do not run me through, Ned," cried Hamilton. "This is the first
intimation I have had of her purpose, and to save myself from slaughter
at your hands, I hasten to say that I will not accept her sacrifice. It
were kinder in me to kill her than to marry her."

We all laughed to cover our embarrassment, and George said ruefully:
"The king, I fear, will settle the question without consulting us. De
Grammont tells me that his Majesty believes I am in London and that he
is eager to give a public entertainment on Tyburn Hill, wherein I shall
be the principal actor. Now our beloved monarch's hatred will be
redoubled, for he will suspect that I helped in the rescue to-night."

"Do you suspect him of being privy to the outrage tonight?" asked
Frances.

"I know it. There is no villainy he would not do, provided it required no
bravery," said George.

"But we must not let the king know that we suspect him," I suggested. "He
may be innocent of the crime. I shall know the truth before to-morrow
night."

"Did you see him at Merlin House?" asked George, turning to Frances.

"No," she answered. "It seems that the drivers of the coach lost their
way. The horses were poor beasts, and, owing to many halts on the road,
our progress was slow. When I first entered the house, an old woman led
me to the room in which you found me. The ropes on my wrists and ankles
had been removed soon after I left London, but I was not allowed to
remove the cloak until after the old woman had closed the door on me.
Then I sat down so stunned that I could hardly think. But it seemed only
a few minutes till I heard dear, brave Betty at the window.
You must have come rapidly."

When we told Frances our side of the story, how Betty had come to
Whitehall to see me and had been the real leader throughout it all,
Frances leaned forward and kissed the girl, saying:--

"God bless her, and you, too, Baron Ned. She is worthy of you, and you
have my consent."

In further discussing Frances's journey, she said that the men who were
with her in the coach were masked and that she did not know them, but she
was sure neither was the king. They did not speak, save to tell the
driver to travel slowly to avoid reaching the house too far ahead of the
"other coach."

The other coach, which Frances said she heard enter the gate, arrived not
more than ten minutes before we reached Merlin House, and it is probable
that we were undisturbed in our rescue because of the fact that supper
was in progress.

It was nearly three o'clock by George's watch when we reached the dark
clump of houses standing west of Covent Garden, and within less than half
an hour we were in the cozy courtyard of the Old Swan.

Pickering was waiting for us, having kept vigil alone since midnight.
When he saw me carrying Betty from the coach, he ran to us with a cry and
snatched her from my arms. We followed him into the house where we found
him weeping over the girl, and kissing her hands as she lay on a bench
near the fire.

"What have you been doing? Have you killed my little girl?" he asked
sorrowfully.

"I hope not, Pickering," I answered. "She had a fall of not more than
eight or ten feet, and although I fear she is hurt, I am sure the injury
is not serious, as I caught her and broke the fall."

"Let us take her to bed," suggested Frances.

George went to fetch Doctor Price, the surgeon, and I carried Betty
upstairs. I laid her on the bed, and after I had talked a few minutes
with Pickering, explaining to him the events of the night, and telling
him of Betty's glorious part in our success, I went downstairs to wait in
the tap-room for George and the surgeon.

Presently they came, and George and I followed the surgeon to Betty's
door, where we waited in the hallway outside to hear his report.
Presently Frances came out to tell us that Betty's injuries were no
greater than a few sprains and bruises, and that the surgeon said she
would be well in a few days.

I could have shouted for joy on hearing the news, but restrained myself,
and suggested to Frances that she go at once to her father's house and
that I go to Whitehall to be there before its awakening.

If I learned that the king had been absent during the night, I should
know with reasonable certainty that he had been privy to the outrage
perpetrated on Frances. If he has been at the palace all night, he might
be innocent of the crime.

"In neither case will I return to Whitehall," declared Frances,
indignantly, when I spoke of the possibility of the king's innocence.

"But you must," I replied insistently. "We must say nothing of your
terrible experience. Publicity of this sort ruins a woman's fair name,
but the result in this case would be far more disastrous. Fear will drive
the king to further acts of villainy to protect himself if he learns that
we suspect him, and your life and mine, as well as George's, may be in
peril. I shall go to my bedroom in the Wardrobe, and no one shall know
that I have not been there all night."

Frances seemed stubborn, but knowing her danger, I continued: "Let
us have a conference with your father and your sister. I deem it best
that we let it be known abroad that you were at your father's house all
night. Since the king did not see you at Merlin House, he may come
to suspect that his agents kidnapped the wrong person. Later on you may
leave court with honor; now you would leave in disgrace. Right or wrong,
the king can do no wrong, and even were it known that he had kidnapped
you, every one would laugh at you as the victim of a royal prank. Many
would say that you were willing to be kidnapped, and the court hussies
would rejoice at your downfall."

Frances and George saw the force of my argument, and we agreed to act
accordingly, George, of course, having little to do in the premises save
to remain hidden.

In a few minutes Pickering brought us a coach, and Frances and I drove to
Temple Bar, where I dismissed the coach and walked with my cousin to her
father's house.

I went in with Frances, and we aroused Sir Richard to tell him of his
daughter's experience, and of the plan of action agreed upon, though we
did not mention the king's name, leading Sir Richard to believe that we
did not know the guilty persons.

Sir Richard and Sarah readily agreed that secrecy was our only means of
saving Frances from ruinous publicity. Sarah especially grasped the point
and cleared the situation of all cloud by suggesting:--

"My sister has been here ever since yesterday noon, as my father, John
Churchill, and I will testify."

That was a very long speech for Sarah, but it was a helpful one. I, too,
might add my testimony and thus furnish enough evidence to convince any
reasonable person that Frances had not been kidnapped, but had remained
safe and well in her father's house through all this terrible night.

Just as soon as our plans were completed, I left my uncle's house and
took another coach for Charing Cross, dismissed the coach, ran down to
Whitehall, and climbed over the balcony to my closet, glad to find myself
once more at home. I did not permit myself to sleep, but rose at the
usual hours and was at my post ready for duty when the others arrived.

I soon learned that the king had been away from the palace all night,
having left in a coach near the hour of five the preceding afternoon, so
that he must have been not far ahead of George, Betty, and me on the way
to Merlin House. When I learned that he was away, and that I would not be
needed that morning at the Wardrobe, I went to seek Frances.

Before ten o'clock, the hour at which the maids assembled to greet the
duchess in her closet, Frances was on hand, looking pale, and explaining
that she had been ill at her father's house over night.

Near the hour of four that afternoon, while I was looking out the window,
I saw a coach approach from the direction of Charing Cross, and seemed to
know that the king was in it. I hastened to Frances and told her to
station herself where the king could see her before he went to his
closet, and perhaps speak to her. I stood near by, and when the king
entered I noticed him start on seeing Frances. When he came up to us, she
smiled and made so deep a courtesy that one would have thought she was
overjoyed to see him.

The king stopped before us for a moment, saying, "We have had a terrible
storm, baron."

"Indeed we have, your Majesty," I answered, bowing, "though I have not so
much as thrust my head out-of-doors save to go down to Sir Richard's
yesterday evening to fetch Mistress Jennings home."

"Did she come--I mean, would she face the storm?" asked the king.

"No, no," answered Frances, laughing. "Why face the storm to return to
Whitehall when the king was away? I remained with my father, and was so
ill that a physician was called at seven o'clock."

"I hope you are well again," said the king.

"Not entirely. But now I shall be," she answered, laughing.

"You mean now that I am at home?" asked the king, shaking his head
doubtfully.

"Yes, your Majesty."

"If your heart were as kind as your tongue, I should be a much happier
man than I am."

His Majesty sighed as he turned away, and the expression on his face was
as an open book to me, knowing as I did that he had just failed in
perpetrating an act of villainy which would have hanged any other man in
England.

One of the king's greatest misfortunes was his mouth. He could never keep
it closed. A secret seemed to disagree with him, physically and mentally;
therefore he relieved himself of it as soon as possible by telling any
one that would listen. Knowing this royal weakness, I was not at all
surprised to learn, two or three days after our adventure, that it was
being talked about by the court.

One evening at the queen's ball, my Lady Castlemain, a very cat of a
woman, came up to a group consisting of the king, the duchess, Frances,
myself, and three or four others who were standing near the king's chair.
Elbowing her way to the king, near whom Frances was standing, Lady
Castlemain said:--

"Ah, la Belle Jennings, tell us of your adventure Sunday night!"

"Of what adventure, la Belle Castlemain?" asked Frances, smiling sweetly.

"Why, when you were kidnapped and carried to a country house for the
night," returned Castlemain, with a vindictive gleam in her eyes and an
angry toss of her head.

"I kidnapped Sunday night?" asked Frances, in well-feigned surprise. "No
such romantic adventure has befallen me."

"Yes, kidnapped Sunday night," returned Castlemain, showing her teeth.
"Of course you were kidnapped! I'm sure nothing would induce so modest a
lady as the fair Jennings to go of her own free will. She would insist on
being taken by force. Ha! ha! Force!"

She laughed as though speaking in jest, but her real intent was plain to
every one that heard her. Frances, too, laughed so merrily that one might
have supposed she considered it all a joke, and her acting was far better
than Castlemain's.

"But one must keep up an appearance of virtue and must insist on being
kidnapped," said Frances, banteringly. "It not only enhances one's value,
but excuses one's fault. All these little subterfuges are necessary until
one reaches a point where one is both brazen and cheap."

Castlemain's life of shame at court had long ceased to be even a matter
of gossip, but at this time she was notoriously involved with one Jacob
Hall, a common rope dancer. Therefore my cousin's thrust went home.

"So you admit having been kidnapped?" asked Castlemain, with little
effort to conceal her vindictiveness.

"Sunday, say you?" asked Frances.

"Yes, Sunday noon, in the public streets, and Sunday night in a country
house," returned Castlemain.

"Let me see," said Frances, pausing for a moment to recall what she
had been doing at the time of the supposed kidnapping. Then turning
to the Duchess of York, who stood beside her, and who, she felt sure,
would catch the hint and help her out, she asked, "Were we not playing
at cards in your Grace's parlor Sunday afternoon?"

"Sunday afternoon?" repeated the duchess, quite willing to thwart
Castlemain's design. "Yes, my dear, Sunday afternoon. Yes, we began just
after dinner, and it was almost dark when we stopped. Don't you remember
I said, after we had lighted the candles, that I wished my husband could
afford to give me wax in place of tallow?"

We all laughed except the king, who became very much interested, and of
course, excepting Castlemain, who was rapidly losing her head in anger.

After the duchess had spoken, the king asked, with as careless an air as
he could assume:--

"At what hour, sister, did Mistress Jennings leave your parlor?"

"I think it was about four o'clock," replied her Grace. "She asked
permission to spend the night with her father, and Baron Clyde called
about four o'clock to escort her. Was not that the hour, baron?"

"Yes, your Grace," I answered, bowing. "I accompanied my cousin to
her father's house, returned later to fetch her back to the palace,
but she did not care to face the storm, so I remained till ten o'clock,
returned to Whitehall, and slept till morning. Here is another witness,"
I continued, laughing, as I turned to John Churchill, who was standing
near the king. "Step forward, Churchill, and testify. I left him making
his suit to one of the most interesting ladies in London."

The king turned with an inquiring look, and Churchill answered: "Yes,
your Majesty, it is all true. I was making my suit until near the hour
of eleven, when Mistress Jennings, who was ill, told me it was time to
go home. If she was kidnapped Sunday night, it was before five o'clock
or after eleven."

I flattered myself that we had all done a neat bit of convincing lying in
a good cause.

"Odds fish!" mumbled the king, pulling his chin beard, evidently puzzled.

"Odds fish!" exclaimed Frances, mimicking the king's tone of voice and
twisting an imaginary beard. "Some one has been hoaxing Jacob Hall's
friend."

It was a bold speech, but Frances carried it off splendidly by turning to
the king and speaking in mock seriousness:--

"Your Majesty should put a check on Rochester and the wags. It is a shame
to permit them to work upon the credulity of one who is growing weak in
mind by reason of age."

The country girl had vanquished the terror of the court, and all who had
witnessed the battle rejoiced; that is, all save the king and Castlemain.
She glared at Frances, and her face, usually beautiful despite the lack
of youth, became hideous with rage. She was making ready for another
attack of words, if not of finger nails, when the duchess interposed,
saying:--

"Evidently some one has been hoaxing you, Lady Castlemain. Mistress
Jennings was not kidnapped Sunday nor any other day. She has been with
me constantly of late, excepting Sunday after four o'clock, and she has
accounted for herself from that time till her return to my closet."

Castlemain was whipped out, so she turned the whole matter off with a
forced laugh, saying:--

"It was that fool Rochester who set the rumor afloat."

After standing through an awkward minute or two, Castlemain bowed stiffly
to the king and the duchess, turned away from our group, and soon left
the ballroom.

When Castlemain was gone, we all laughed save the king. Presently he left
us, and I saw him beckon Wentworth and Berkeley to his side. I followed
him as though going to the other side of the gallery, but walked slowly
when I approached him and the two worthy villains. I was rewarded by
hearing his Majesty say:--

"Odds fish! But you made a mess of it! You got the wrong woman! Who in
the devil's name did you pick up?"

I could not stop to hear the rest of this interesting conversation, but
two days later I heard from Rochester, who had it from Wentworth, that
the following occurred:--

"We thought we had her," answered Berkeley, nodding towards Frances, "but
the woman wore a full vizard and was wrapped in furs to her ears, so that
we did not see her face."

"Do you suppose we could have made a mistake?" asked Wentworth.

"You surely did," answered the king. "She has established an alibi. At
what hour did you leave Baynard's Castle?"

"Near one o'clock," returned Berkeley.

"One o'clock! She was playing cards with the duchess till four,"
exclaimed the king, impatiently. "You picked up the wrong woman. But
I'm glad you did. I suppose the lampooners will get hold of the story
and will set every one laughing at me. Kidnapped the wrong woman and
lost her! Odds fish! But you're a pair of wise ones. I see I shall have
to find me a new Lord High Kidnapper."

The king was right concerning the lampooners, for soon they had the
story, and he became the laughing-stock of London, though Frances's name
was not mentioned.

It is a significant index to the morals of our time that the king's
attempt to kidnap a woman in the streets of London should have aroused
laughter rather than indignation.

As it was, the kidnapping episode brought no harm to my cousin, but she
did not want it to happen again, and so was careful to take a trusted
escort with her when she went abroad thereafter.




CHAPTER X

AT THE MAID'S GARTER


Betty was confined to her room during the greater part of the next month,
and Frances visited her frequently. Notwithstanding my vows not to see
Betty, I was compelled to go with Frances as her body-guard. I even went
so far in my feeble effort to keep my resolution as to suggest Churchill
as a body-guard, but Frances objected, and the quality of my good intent
was not enduring. So I went with my cousin, and the joy in Betty's eyes
whenever we entered her room was not the sort that would come because she
was glad to see Frances.

       *       *       *       *       *

During the first week of Bettina's illness she was too sick to talk,
therefore we did not remain long with her. But as she grew better our
visits lengthened, and my poor resolutions grew weaker day by day because
my love for the girl was growing stronger and stronger hour by hour.

On one occasion while Frances's back was turned, Betty impulsively
snatched up my hand and kissed it, dropping it instantly, blushing
intensely and covering her tracks by humming the refrain of a French
lullaby. I longed to return the caress, but did not, and took great
credit to myself because of my self-denial. Betty understood my sacrifice
and appreciated it, feeling sure that she need not thereafter restrain
herself for the purpose of restraining me.

During those times I was making an honest effort to do the right by this
beautiful child-woman and to save my own honor unsullied from the sin of
making her unhappy for life through winning her love beyond her power to
recall; and my effort toward the right, like all such efforts, achieved
at least a part of the good for which I strove.

One day after our visit to Betty's room, Frances asked me to take her to
see George. I suspected that she had seen him frequently, but was not
sure. I objected, but changed my mind when she said:--

"Very well. I prefer going alone."

I shall not try to describe the scene between them. We found George
alone, and she sprang to him as the iron springs to the magnet.

I knew then, if never before, that there could be no happiness in this
world for her away from him. Whether she would find it with him was
impossible for me to know, but I saw that she was in the grip of a mighty
passion, and I could only hope that a way would open to save her.

Hamilton's fortunes would need to mend a great deal before he could
or would ask her to be his wife, for now he was at the bottom of the
ladder. He lost no opportunity to impress this disagreeable truth upon
her, but his honest efforts to hold himself aloof only increased her
respect and love for him. It not only convinced her that notwithstanding
his past life, he was a man of honor capable of resisting himself and of
protecting her, but it gave him the quality so irresistible to a
woman--unattainability.

Taking it all in all, my poor beautiful cousin was falling day by
day deeper into an abyss of love from which she could in no way
extricate herself. In short, level-headed Frances had got far out
of plumb, and, though she struggled desperately, she could not right
herself, nor could any one help her. I fully realized that the small
amount of self-restraint and passivity she still retained would give
way to disastrous activity when the time should come for her to part
with George and lose him forever. But I could see no way to save her
unless I could induce George to leave England at once, for good and
all.

At times the fates seem to fly to a man's help, and in this instance they
came to me most graciously that same day in Whitehall, in the person of
my friend the Count de Grammont.

Soon after leaving Frances in the maids' apartments, I met that most
interesting gentleman roue, his Grace de Grammont, coming from the king's
closet. As already stated, he had been banished from the French court by
Louis XIV because of a too great friendliness for one of the king's
sweethearts, and was living in exile in London till Louis should forgive
his interference. The French king really liked De Grammont and trusted
him when his Majesty's lady-loves were not concerned, so the count had
been sent to England in honorable exile, and was employed in certain
cases as a spy and in others as a means of secret communication between
the French king and persons connected with the court of Charles II.

When De Grammont saw me, he came forward, holding out both hands in his
effusive French manner, apparently overjoyed at finding a long-lost
brother.

"Come with me, my dear baron," he cried, bending so close to me that I
feared he was going to kiss me. "Come with me! You are the very man of
all the world I want, I need, I must have!"

"You have me, my dear count," said I, "but I cannot go with you. I am
engaged elsewhere."

"No, no, let me whisper!" He brought his lips close to my ear and
continued almost inaudibly: "You may please me. You may help a friend.
You may oblige--a king."

The last, of course, was the _ne plus ultra_ of inducement according to
the count's way of thinking, and he supposed the mere suggestion would
vanquish me. Still I pleaded my engagement. He insisted, however,
repeating in my ear:--

"Oblige a king! A real king! Not a flimsy fool of bourgeois, who makes of
himself the laughing-stock of his people, but a real king. I cannot name
him now, but you must know."

We were in a narrow passage leading to the Stone Gallery in Whitehall. He
looked about him a moment, then taking me by the arm, led me to the Stone
Gallery and thence to the garden. I wanted to stop, but he kept his grasp
on my arm, repeating now and then the word "Come" in whispers, till we
reached a lonely spot in St. James Park. There he halted, and though
there was not a living creature in sight, he brought his lips to my ear
and breathed the name, "'Sieur George Hamilton."

I tried not to show that I was startled, but the quickwitted, sharp-eyed
Frenchman read me as though I were an open book, and grasping my hand,
cried out:--

"Ah, I knew you could tell me. It is to rejoice! I knew it!"

"Tell you what, count?" I asked.

"Tell me where your friend and mine is, or if you will not tell me, take
to him a letter. I have been trying to find him this fortnight."

"I cannot tell you where he is, my dear count--"

"Of course not! I do not ask," he interrupted.

"--But I may be able to forward your letter to him. I heard only the
other day that he was in France."

"Of course, of course, he is in France! Not in England at all! Good,
good! I see you are to be trusted. But I must have your word of honor
that the letter will be delivered."

"I shall send it by none but a trusted messenger," I answered, "and shall
return it to you unopened unless I am convinced beyond a doubt that it
will reach our friend."

"Good, good! Come to my hotel. I will trust you."

We went to De Grammont's house, and after taking great precautions
against discovery, he gave me a small wooden box wound with yards of tape
and sealed with quantities of wax. I put the box in my pocket, saying:--

"I accept the trust on my honor, dear count, and though the package bears
no name nor address, I shall deliver it to the person for whom it is
intended."

De Grammont said he knew nothing of the contents of the box except that
it contained a message for a friend, and I believed him.

When I left his house he came to the door with me, murmuring: "My
gratitude! My gratitude! Also the gratitude of my king, which I hope may
prove of far greater value to your friend than my poor offering of
words."

I lost no time in seeking George, except to make sure that I was not
followed. I trusted De Grammont and felt sure that the box he had given
me contained a personal communication from no less a person than Louis
XIV of France, but I wanted to take no risk of betraying Hamilton by
leading De Grammont or any one else to his hiding-place.

Since Frances's providential escape, the king had suspected the right
persons of her rescue. At least he suspected Hamilton, and was seeking
him more diligently than ever before. His Majesty had not shown me any
mark of disfavor, but I feared he suspected me, and was sure he was not
convinced that Frances's alibi had been proved by unsuborned testimony.
If he was sure that she was the one who had been kidnapped, his
suspicious nature would connect George with the rescue, and would lead
him to conclude that Hamilton must be in England.

A maid of Lady Castlemain's told Rochester, who in turn told me, that the
king had again set his men to work searching for Hamilton. That being the
case, George was in danger, and should he be found by the king's secret
agents, who, I understood, were prowling all over England in the hope of
obtaining a reward, his life would not be worth a week's purchase.

George knew the risk he ran by remaining in England, but it was a part of
his reckless courage to take delight in it. Later on this recklessness of
disposition induced him to take a far greater risk. But of that in its
turn.

       *       *       *       *       *

After supper, I found Hamilton in his bedroom, which was connected
by a hidden stairway with the room of the sinking floor. He wore his
Quaker's disguise, and on the table beside him were the Bible and a few
theological works dear to the hearts of his sect. I gave him the box,
telling him its history. The letter was brief and was written in cipher.

George translated it thus:--

"MASTER GEORGE HAMILTON:

"Monsieur le Grand wishes you to pay him a visit immediately.

"DE CATANET."

"You probably know Monsieur le Grand?" I asked.

"Yes," he answered, "and I shall visit him without delay."

"In Paris?" I asked, not quite sure that Monsieur le Grand was King Louis
of France, and not desiring to know certainly.

"In Paris," he answered, giving me to understand by his manner that he
must tell me nothing more definite of Le Grand's identity.

"Don't tell me what you know of the business this letter refers to, but
tell me whether you know," I said, hoping that George might at least tell
me it meant good fortune for him.

"I cannot even conjecture the business upon which I am wanted," he said,
"but I hope that it may give me an opportunity to be of service to the
writer."

Thus I was relieved of the disagreeable task of trying to induce George
to leave England, and was very thankful to escape it.

After a long silence, during which he read the one-line letter many
times, he asked:--

"Are you willing to bring Frances to me early to-morrow morning, if she
will come?"

"Doubtless I can," I answered. "Her willingness to come has been shown
all too plainly of late; but ought I bring her?"

"Yes. It will be the last time I shall ever see her unless good fortune
lies in this letter, and for that I hardly dare hope. You know that when
a man's luck has been against him for a long time, it kills the very
roots of hope and brings him almost to doubt certainty. Soon after I have
seen my friend, Le Grand, I shall write to you in cipher, of which I
shall leave you the key. If I see a prospect of fortune worthy of
Frances, I shall ask her to wait a time for me, but if my ill fortune
pursues me, I shall never again be heard from by any one in England. Are
you satisfied with the conditions?"

I gave him my hand for answer, and told him I would bring Frances to him
early the following morning.

I hastened back to Whitehall, and coming upon Frances unengaged, asked
her to go to her parlor with me. When she had closed the door, she turned
to me, asking:--

"What is it, Baron Ned? Tell me quickly. I know there is something wrong
with George."

"Will you go with me early to-morrow morning to see Betty--very early?"
I asked.

Her eyes opened in wonder, and she answered, somewhat amused: "You have
been acting as my guardian for a long time, cousin Ned, and now I think I
owe it to you to return the favor. You should not see so much of Betty. I
know you mean no wrong to her, but you will cause her great suffering if
you continue to see her, for you must know that already the girl is
almost mad with love of you. Yet you cannot marry her."

"Nor can you marry some one else," I retorted, almost angrily, for a man
dislikes to be prodded by a painful truth.

"Ah, well, I suppose we are a pair of fools," she said.

"You're right, Frances," I answered philosophically, "and the only
consolation we can find lies in the fact that we know it."

"Most fools lack that flattering unction," returned Frances, musingly.

"Perhaps you will take more interest in this matter when I tell you
that it is not Betty I propose to see," I answered. "I am deliberately
offering to take you to see some one else who is about to leave England."

She stood on tiptoe and kissed my lips for answer, then sank into a
chair, covering her face with her hands to hide the sudden tears.

I went to the window and waited till she was calm. I longed to comfort
her by telling of the faint prospect of good fortune that lay in Le
Grand's letter, but I hesitated raising a hope which might never be
realized.

At the end of five minutes I went to her and said: "Let me ask the
duchess to excuse you for to-night, and in the morning I'll meet you on
Bowling Green stairs, at, say, seven o'clock."

"I'll be there," she answered, smiling through her tears.

The next morning we took boat, and the tide running out, made good speed
to the Bridge, hastened to the Old Swan, and found George in his printing
shop awaiting us. I remained in the old tapestried room, leaving Frances
and George to say their farewells. In the course of a few minutes he
called me in. He had donned his Quaker disguise, and on the floor near
him was a small bundle of linen. Frances was weeping, and George's voice
was choked with emotion.

"Well, at last, Baron Ned, you are to be rid of me," he said, glancing
toward the bundle at his feet.

"What are your plans of escape?" I asked.

"I shall work my way down to Sheerness, where I hope to find a boat
for The Hague or the French coast. Lilly, who seems to know everything,
past, present and future, came last night to tell me that the king has
fifty men seeking me in various parts of England, especially the
seaports, and has offered a reward of two hundred pounds for me, dead
or alive, preferably dead, I suppose. If I go direct to Sheerness and try
to take a boat, I am sure to be examined, and I'm not prepared for the
ordeal. So I intend to preach my way down the river and induce the king's
officers to send me abroad by force."

"How are you off for money, George?" I asked.

"I borrowed ten guineas from Lilly," he answered.

"I thought you might be in need of money, so I brought fifty guineas from
the strong box under my bed," I said, offering him the little bag of
gold.

He hesitated, saying: "If I take the money, you may never again see a
farthing of it."

"In that case, I'll take my pay in abusing you," I replied.

"Do you believe he would, Frances?" asked George, turning to my cousin.
Then continuing thoughtfully:

"It is strange that I should have found such a friend at the bottom of a
quarrel, all because I allowed him to abuse me. Truly forbearance is a
profitable virtue. The 'other cheek' is the better of the two."

Upon my insistence, he accepted the gold and gave me the ten guineas he
had borrowed from Lilly, asking me to return them.

Frances was making an entire failure of her effort to hold herself in
check, and George was having difficulty in restraining himself, so, to
bring the interview to an end, he gave me his hand, saying:--

"Thank you, Ned, and good-by. I wish I could hope ever to see you again,
but if Le Grand fails me, I shall go to the new world and lose myself in
the Canadian woods."

"No, no!" cried Frances, imploringly.

"I hope not," began George, but he could not finish, so he took Frances
in his arms for a moment, and when he released her, thrust us both out
the door, saying: "Please leave me at once. If you do not, I fear I shall
never let her go. Take care of her, Ned. Good-by!"

The door closed on us, and when Frances had put on her vizard, she
followed me upstairs to see Betty.

I was not admitted to Betty's room, so I went back to the printing shop
for a moment, and George gave me the key to the cipher, in which we were
to write to each other. His letters were to be sent under cover to Lilly,
and mine were to go to an address in Paris which George would send to me.

Long afterwards George told me of his adventures in making his escape,
but I shall give them now in the order of their happening rather than in
the order of time in which I learned them.

Leaving the Old Swan within ten minutes after I had said good-by to him,
George crossed London Bridge, attired in his Quaker disguise, and made
his way to Deptford, where he preached in the streets. From Deptford
he followed the river by easy stages to Sheerness, where he lodged nearly
a week, awaiting a boat that would answer his purpose. Had he attempted
to board a vessel, he would have been seized and examined; therefore his
plan was to grow violent in his preaching, and, if possible, provoke the
authorities to place him on board one of the outgoing crafts; that being
a favorite method of the king's men in getting rid of the too blatant
fanatics in Sheerness.

The Dutch sea captains were fanatics almost to a man, and the exiled
exhorters found them always willing to help their persecuted brethren of
the faith.

And so it happened with George in Sheerness. He was on the dock exhorting
vehemently against the evils of the time, laying great stress on the
wickedness of the king and denouncing the vileness of the court. Two of
the king's officers tried to silence him, but failing, ordered him to
leave England by a certain Dutch boat then waiting in the harbor with its
pennant up. He protested and struggled, but at last was forced aboard,
raving against those godless Balaamites, the clergy of the Established
Church, who, with the devil, he declared, were behind his persecution.

So well did George play his part that a collection was taken up among the
passengers of the Dutch boat to help the good man so vilely put upon.
There was a sweet bit of irony in the fact, learned afterwards, that the
officers who forced George aboard the Dutch ship were at Sheerness for
the purpose of winning the two hundred pounds reward offered for his
capture.

The goodness of God occasionally takes a whimsical form.

A month later I received a letter from George, written in cipher, which I
here give translated:--

"DEAR FRIEND:

"I reached Paris three weeks ago and was received by Monsieur Le G.
most graciously. Although I cannot give definite news, I hope for great
improvement in my fortune soon, and perhaps may write you more fully
thereof before the week is spent.

"Good fortune has but one meaning for me, of which you already know. I
beg you to say to one that a letter from her hand would give me greater
joy than she can know, and that I would now send one to her if I felt
safe in so doing. Please send all letters in cipher, addressed: 'Monsieur
le Blanc, in care of 'Sieur de Catanet, at the sign of the Double Arrow
on the Rue St. Antoine, counting nine doors from the street corner
nearest the Bastile.'

"Your friend,

"LE BLANC."

When George wrote that he hoped for good fortune, I knew he had
sound reason to expect it, for he was one who never permitted a mere
possibility to take the form of hope, nor hope, however assuring, to
take the aspect of certainty. Knowing this to be true, I found great
joy in the letter, and when I told Frances, she did not pause even to
give me one smile of thanks, but broke into a flood of tears and seemed
to take great happiness in her tribulation.

I told Frances that we should answer the letter at once, and suggested
that she have hers ready in my hands the following day, if she wished to
write one. I also suggested that we meet in Bettina's parlor, where
Frances's letter could be rewritten in cipher. We trusted Bettina as we
trusted ourselves, and when we told her the good news, she clapped her
hands for joy, laughing, yet ready to weep, and was as happy as even she
could be, which was very happy indeed.

After we had talked, laughed, and cried a reasonable time in Betty's
parlor, Frances handed me her letter, which was a bulky document, well
taped and waxed.

"It will require a week for me to translate this," I remarked, weighing
the letter in my hand.

"What do you mean by translating it?" she asked in surprise.

"I must write it out in cipher. Hamilton directed that all letters should
be sent in that form," I answered, amused at her alarm.

"No, no!" she cried, snatching the letter from me, pressing it to her
breast and blushing to her ears. "You shall not see my letter!"

"Why?" I asked.

"Because," she answered.

"That is no reason," I replied. "Of course you have written nothing that
you would not want me or your father to see?"

"Well, yes, I have," she returned emphatically. "A great deal. Would you,
Betty, want any one to see such a letter written by yourself?"

"I suppose I could write a letter which I should want but one person in
all the world to see," returned Betty, arching her eyebrows.

"To whom would it be directed, Betty?" I asked, to tease her.

A faint expression of reproach came to her eyes, but after a moment of
pretty hesitancy, she answered boldly:--

"Since you are so unwise as to ask, I'll answer in like folly. The letter
could be directed to but one person in the world--you."

I had received more than I had expected, and though I longed to make a
suitable return, I dared not for the sake of my vows, so we all remained
silent, and somewhat embarrassed, for a minute or two.

Turning to Frances, I said: "If you don't want me to read your letter,
I'll give you the key, and you may make it into cipher." But after
examining the key, she declared that she could never learn to use it, and
I suggested that she write a shorter letter in terms fit for a modest man
to read.

The next day she handed me a shorter letter, saying that she had cut and
pruned it till there was nothing left worth sending, but I assured her
that George would think otherwise.

When I read the letter, my eyes were opened to the fact that there was
more fire in Frances's heart than I had supposed any woman capable of
holding in subjection. But that is a mistake often made by men.

This was my cousin's "cut and pruned" letter:--

"DEAR ONE:

"Baron Ned says my letter must be short, so I smother what remnant of
modesty I have, covering nothing with the veil of circumlocution, but
telling you plainly what I know you want to hear. I love only you and am
true to you in every thought, word, and deed. I long for you, yearn for
you, pray for you, and be your fortune good or ill, I would share it and
give you a part of the bliss of life which you would give to me.

"So I pray you, do not desert me in case your present hope of good
fortune fails you, but let me know at any time, and I will go to you, and
will go with you wherever you will take me.

"You will say, I fear, that none but a crazy woman would write such a
letter as this, but if that be true, the world doubtless is and always
has been populated by maniacs, and I pray God always will be. I pray you,
remember, in judging me, that you are you and that I am but a woman
by whom the good or evil of life is reckoned in the measure of her love;
her joy or misery being only a matter of down weight or light weight more
in the love she gives than in that which she receives. Remember, also,
that in this letter I must condense when I might easily be prolix, and
that after all is written, probably I shall have left unsaid the very
thing I most wished to say. But these three words will tell it all and
bear repeating: I love you.

"FRANCES."

And this from my sensible cousin! What would it be if her heart were not
balanced by a wise head?

Our letters being written, I became alarmed about posting them in London,
not knowing when a messenger would start for France, nor who he would be.
The next day Frances and I talked it over, and she suggested that as the
king and most of the court were about to visit Bath for a season, and as
neither she nor I cared to go, we should take the letters to Dover, cross
to Calais, and post them in France.

I sprang at the idea, but immediately sprang back, saying: "But it is not
entirely proper for us to travel to Calais together, even though you are
my sister-cousin."

"We may take father," she suggested. "Sarah wants to visit Lady St.
Albans, and she can go if we take father with us. And, Baron Ned; I have
another suggestion to offer. Let us take Bettina."

I sprang at that proposal and did not spring back. So we went first to my
uncle, who said he would go with us, and then we went to see Bettina. She
had recovered from her sprains and bruises, although she was still pale
and not quite strong.

When Frances asked her to go with us, she answered, "Ay, gladly, if
father consents."

Pickering, who was sitting with us at the time in Bettina's cozy parlor,
turned to me, laughing, and said:--

"You would suppose, from Betty's remark, that I am master here, but the
truth is my soul is not my own, and now her modest request for permission
is made for effect on the company."

Betty ran to her father, sat on his knee, twined her arm about his neck,
and kissed him as a protest against the unjust insinuation.

"You see how she does it," said Pickering. "No hammer and tongs for
Betty; just oil and honey."

"And lots and lots of love, father," interrupted Betty.

       *       *       *       *       *

Well, our journey was soon arranged on a grand scale. Pickering lent us
his new coach, just home from the makers in Cow Street. It was cushioned
and curtained and had springs in place of thorough-braces. It also had
glass in the windows and doors; a luxury then little known in England
even among the nobles. There was a prejudice against its use in coach
windows because of the fact that two or three old ladies had cut their
faces in trying to thrust their heads through it.

The new coach was a wonderful vehicle, and Frances and I, as well as
Betty, were very proud of our grandeur. Pickering sent along with the
coach and horses two lusty fellows as drivers, and gave us a hamper
almost large enough to feed a company of soldiers. I was to pay all
expenses on the road.

Almost at the last hour Sir Richard concluded not to go, but insisted
that Frances, Bettina, and I take the journey by ourselves. As Pickering
offered no objection, Frances shrugged her shoulders in assent, I
shrugged mine, and Betty laughed, whereby we all, in our own way, agreed
to the new arrangement, and preparations went forward rapidly.

By the time we were ready to start, the king, the duke, the duchess, and
many ladies and gentlemen of the court circle had gone to Bath, thus
giving us an opportunity to make our journey without the knowledge of any
one in Whitehall; a consideration of vast importance to us under the
circumstances. Some of our grand friends at court might have laughed at
our taking the journey with an innkeeper's daughter, in an innkeeper's
coach, but Frances and I laughed because we were happy.

There are distinct periods of good and bad luck in every man's life,
which may be felt in advance by one sensitive to occult influences,
if one will but keep good watch on one's intuitions and leave them
untrammelled by will or reason. At this time "I felt it in my bones,"
as Betty would have said, that the day of our good luck was at hand.

All conditions seemed to combine to our pleasure when, on a certain
bright spring morning, Betty, Frances, and I went down to the courtyard
of the Old Swan, where we found the coach, the horses, and even the
drivers all glittering in the sunshine.

There was ample room in the back seat of the coach for the three of us,
so Betty took one corner, Frances made herself comfortable in another,
and I took what was left, the pleasant place between them.

After Betty had kissed her father at least a dozen times, and had shed a
few tears just to make her happiness complete, the driver cracked his
whip and away we went, out through the courtyard gate, down Gracious Hill
and across London Bridge before a sleepy man could have winked his eyes.

At first we thought we were in haste, but when we got out of Southwark
and into the country, the dark green grass, the flowering hedges, the
whispering leaves of the half-fledged trees, the violets by the roadside,
and the smiling sun in the blue above, all invited us to linger. So we
told the driver to slow his pace, and we lowered every window in the
coach, there being no one in the country whose wonder and envy we cared
to arouse by a display of our glass.

There was not room in Betty's little heart for all the great flood of
happiness that had poured into it, so presently, to give it vent, she
began to sing the little French lullaby we had so often heard, whereupon
Frances and I ceased listening to the birds, and I was more thoroughly
convinced than ever before that there were at least distinct periods of
_good_ fortune in every man's life.

Before reaching Gravesend, we halted at a grassy spot near the river
bank, where we ate our dinner. When the horses had rested, we set off for
Rochester, in which place we expected to spend the night at the Maid's
Garter, a famous old inn kept by a friend of Pickerings.

I had noticed a twinkle in Pickering's eyes when he directed us to go to
this tavern, but did not understand the cause of his merriment until I
learned that by a curious old custom, a maid seeking entrance for the
first time must contribute one of her garters before being admitted. The
worst feature of the usage was that the garter must be taken off at the
door, and then and there presented to the porter, who received it on the
point of his official staff.

After entering Rochester, we went to the Maid's Garter and at once drove
into the courtyard, as the custom is with travellers intending to remain
all night.

When we left the coach and started to climb the steps to the great door,
we found the landlord and his retinue waiting to receive us. Frances was
in the lead, and when we reached the broad, flat stone in front of the
door, the head porter stepped before her, bowed, and asked humbly:--

"Is my lady maid or madam?"

Frances looked up in surprise, and he repeated his question.

"What is that to you, fellow?" asked Frances.

"It is this, my lady," returned the porter. "If my lady be a maid, she
must pay me one of her garters as her admission fee to this inn. If she
be madam, she enters free. It is a privilege conferred on the Maid's
Garter by good St. Augustine when he was Bishop of Canterbury, so long
ago that the memory of man runneth not to the contrary."

"What nonsense is this?" asked Frances, turning to me, and Bettina asked
the same question with her eyes. I explained the matter, and Frances,
turning to the porter, said:--

"I'll buy you off with a jacobus or a guinea."

"Not a hundred guineas would buy me off, my lady," answered the porter,
bowing, "though I might say that a shilling usually goes with the
garter."

"Well, I'll send you both the shilling and the garter from my room," said
Frances, moving toward the inn door.

"The garter must be paid here, my lady. The shilling may be paid at any
time," returned the porter, with polite insistence.

Frances was about to protest, but Betty, more in sympathy with the
eccentric customs of inns, modestly lifted her skirts, untied her garter
and offered it to the porter, telling him very seriously:--

"I am a maid."

The porter thanked her gravely, whereupon Frances, turning her back on
the audience in the doorway, brought forth her garter, gave it to the
porter, and we were admitted.

Our supper, beds, and breakfast were all so good that they reconciled
Frances and Bettina to the payment of the extraordinary admission fee,
and when we left the next morning, curiosity prompted them to pass near
the garter rack in the tap-room, where garters were hanging which had
been taken from maids whose great granddaughters had become great
grandmothers. The garters that had belonged to Frances and Bettina, being
the latest contributions, hung at the bottom of the rack, neatly dated
and labelled, and, as I left the room, I overheard Bettina whisper to
Frances:--

"I'm glad mine was of silk."

We made a short drive to Maidstone, where we stopped over night. The next
day a longer journey brought us to Canterbury, where we spent two nights
and a day, visiting the cathedral both by sunlight and moonlight; the
combination of moonlight and Bettina being very trying to me.

From Canterbury we drove in the rain to Dover, where we lodged at that
good inn, the Three Anchors, to await a fair wind for Calais.

During the next three days the wind was fair, but it was blowing half a
gale, and therefore the passage was not to be attempted. Though I was
enjoying myself, I was anxious to post our letters, as mine gave a full
account of several matters at court concerning which I knew George ought
to be informed.

Among other news, I told him that King Charles had sent a messenger
into France carrying a personal letter to King Louis, asking his help
in finding the man Hamilton, who had threatened Charles's life. I also
suggested in my letter that the king of France was trying to buy the
city of Dunkirk from King Charles, and that because of the friendly
negotiations then pending, Louis might give heed to our king's request.
In that case, it might be well, I thought, for Hamilton to leave France
at once.

With this urgency in mind, I suggested to Frances and Betty that I
cross to Calais alone, regardless of the weather, leaving them at Dover
till my return. But they would not be left behind, so we all set sail on
a blustery morning and paid for our temerity with a day of suffering. In
Calais we posted our letters, having learned that a messenger would leave
that same day for Paris, and two days later we returned to Dover.

Our journey home was made in the rain, Bettina sleeping with her head on
my shoulder a great part of the way. And I enjoyed the rain even more
than I had enjoyed the sunshine.

We reached London nearly a week before the king's return, so that nothing
was known of our journey at court.




CHAPTER XI

"ALL SUNSHINE MAKES THE DESERT"


Whatever faults Whitehall may have had as a place of residence, dulness
was not among them. There were balls, games with high stakes, theatres,
gossip, scandals, and once in a long while an affair of state to interest
us. In order to interest the court thoroughly, an affair of state must
have involved the getting of money for the privy purse; that is, for the
king's personal use, for out of it the courtesans were fed and gambling
debts were paid.

The time of our Dover journey was one of extreme depletion in the privy
purse. The king had borrowed from every person and every city within the
realm who, by threats or cajolery, could be induced to part with money.
But now he had reached the end of his tether.

When matters were thus in extremis, some one, probably Castlemain,
suggested the sale of England's possessions on the continent, chief of
which was the rich city of Dunkirk, situate on the French side of the
Straits of Dover. This fortified city, within a few leagues of Calais,
had cost the English nation heavily in blood and gold to gain, and still
more heavily to hold, but its value to England commercially and
politically was beyond measure.

Since Queen Mary had lost Calais, Dunkirk was the only important foothold
England had on continental soil; therefore it was almost as dear to the
English people as the city of London itself. Because of its importance,
it was greatly coveted by the French king, who shortly before the time
of our journey to Dover had made overtures to buy it.

Charles turned a deaf ear to King Louis's first proposal to buy Dunkirk,
not because he loved the city, or cared a farthing for its value to his
people, but because he feared the storm of indignation its sale would
raise. The Lord Chancellor objected to the sale of Dunkirk, and tried
to show Charles the great folly of entertaining the offer. He was the
only wise, honest man in the king's council, and, by reason of his
wonderful knowledge of mankind, was called "the Chancellor of Human
Nature." But the king needed money, so after a time he listened to
Berkeley, Crofts, Castlemain, and others of like character, whose
strongest argument consisted in accusing the king, most offensively,
of being afraid of his people.

"Are you not king?" asked Castlemain. "Does not Dunkirk belong to you,
and may you not sell that which is your property? Are not these dogs,
the people, your slaves, your property? Yet you stand in cowardly fear
of a rabble which quakes if you but crook your finger. A like fear of his
subjects cost your father his head. The people will crawl before you if
you kick them, but let them see that you fear them, and you will learn
that there is no cruelty like that of the good people."

De Grammont, the French exile, called attention to the French king's
successful tyranny, declaring that his master would sell Paris if he
chose. De Grammont was acting secretly in the French king's interest.

A weak man easily finds logic to justify the course he desires to take,
so Charles turned a deaf ear to Clarendon, and, listening to Castlemain,
announced that Dunkirk was for sale. As expected, a strong protest came
from the people, but no one is so stubborn as a fool in the wrong, so
Charles remained firm in his determination.

Finding that protest would avail nothing, the people of London offered to
buy Dunkirk, and began to bid for it against the French king. Louis,
knowing that London was a rich city, and believing that its people would
run up the price of Dunkirk to an exorbitant figure, took counsel with
himself--his only adviser--and determined to employ other means than gold
alone to obtain the coveted city.

My first definite knowledge of the French king's new plan to buy Dunkirk
at his own price came in a letter from Hamilton, which reached me at
Lilly's house two or three weeks after my return from Dover. Like the
others, it was written in cipher, but, translated, was as follows:--

DEAR FRIEND:

"Your warning letter reached me nearly a week ago, and I thank you for
your watchfulness. I had full information of King Charles's design upon
my life from no less a person than Monsieur le Grand himself, who showed
me the letter asking that I be returned to England.

"I explained to Monsieur le Grand that the English king sought my life,
not because he is in fear of me, but because he thought I stood between
him and a lady who despises him. While Monsieur le Grand was much in
sympathy with the English king's grievance, his contempt for Charles,
his regard for me, which seems to be sincere, and his longing to possess
Dunkirk all induced him to laugh at the request, the nature of which he
had imparted to no one save me.

"My account of the lady who despised King Charles's love gave Monsieur le
Grand a new idea, and suggested a method of purchasing Dunkirk which he
hopes will save the heavy cost of bidding against the citizens of London.
I had no hint of what he intended till one day he took me to his closet
and began to question me.

"'Do you possess the love of the lady who despises King Charles?' he
asked.

"'I do, your Majesty,' I answered.

"'Do you know you possess it?' he asked.

"'As well as a man who is not a king may know,' I returned.

"'Tush, tush! Kings are no more certain than other men.'

"'I know I possess this woman's love,' I said.

"'Would she be willing to make a great sacrifice to help you?'

"'Anything that I should ask,' I replied.

"'Ah, I see, I see! Should ask? I take it there are certain sacrifices
you would not ask,' returned the king. 'We here in France would say that
your position was Quixotic. However, your King Charles is a weak fool,
easily imposed upon. Is the lady quick and resourceful in expedients,
calm and thoughtful in emergencies, and silent on great occasions?'

"To all of which I answered, 'Yes.'

"'Surely the lady is not La Belle Jennings?' asked the king.

"'Yes,' I replied.

"'In that case you are the very man I want, and your lady-love can help
me buy Dunkirk. It is easy to lead a fool to do the wrong thing, and I'm
sure La Belle Jennings will find a way to gain her end and ours. If,
through her, you induce King Charles to sell Dunkirk to me on my own
terms, I'll make you its governor and a rich man. I'll put you in a
position to marry this paragon, Mam'selle Jennings, if, as I take it,
lack of fortune is all that stands between you. I do not mind telling you
now that De Grammont had given me full information concerning the king's
view of La Belle Jennings and your relations to her before I wrote my
first letter, inviting you to visit me.'

"I am loath to undertake so mean an office as that of inducing King
Charles to sell an English city, but I cannot save Dunkirk, and I may
profit by helping what I cannot prevent. So I beg you broach the subject
to Frances, cautioning her for me to take no risk, and if she is willing
to use and to hoodwink the man who would not hesitate to take her life,
let me know, and I shall write to you again with further instructions.

"With gratitude,

"Your friend,

"LE BLANC."

I sought Frances, and when I told her the substance of George's letter,
she was almost wild with joy.

"Am I willing to try?" she exclaimed, laughing while tears were hanging
in her eyes. "I am not only willing to try, but am determined to succeed.
Ay, I'd sell England itself in the same cause. Of all the men I have ever
known, this king of ours is the greatest dupe. Since the return of the
court to Whitehall, he has been growing more importunate every day. He
seems to have lost what little wits he had, and does and says the
silliest things one can imagine."

"And you do not fear attempting to lead him on to sell Dunkirk? You do
not fear going too near the precipice?" I asked, wishing to weigh her
self-confidence more by the manner of her reply than by her words.

She laughed and answered: "There is no precipice, cousin Ned; nothing to
fear save kidnapping, and I am always guarded against that danger;
nothing to do of which I need feel ashamed, save the acting of a lie, and
surely one may lie to the father of lies without sin."

"But the lie may be recognized," I suggested, "if one be too bold about
it."

"My lie will go little beyond a smile or two. The king's vanity will do
the rest. He will make himself believe that I mean more than I say."

Frances and I felt that we were traitors to our country in helping the
French king, but we knew that in the end he would buy Dunkirk from our
spendthrift monarch, and that out country's loss would be no greater by
reason of our gain. Therefore I wrote George as follows:--

"DEAR FRIEND:

"The Duchess of Hearts is eager and confident. Write at once, giving full
directions.

"YOUR FRIEND."

Frances added a postscript in cipher, but I shall not translate it.

One morning, some three weeks after sending my letter, Frances came to me
in my closet in the Wardrobe, and I saw at once she was in great trouble.
Her eyes were red with weeping, and the woebegone expression of her face
would have been amusing had I not known that some good cause was back of
it. As soon as she entered I saw that she was going to speak, but closets
in Whitehall have ears, so I placed my finger on my lips to enjoin
silence, and spoke loud enough to be heard if any one was listening:--

"Ah, Frances, I forgot that I had promised to go with you to your
father's this morning. Wait for me at Holbein's Gate. I'll be there in
ten minutes."

Within the promised time I found Frances at Holbein's Gate, and we walked
up to Charing Cross, thence down the Strand toward Temple Bar.

"What is the trouble, Frances?" I asked, anxious to hear her news, which
I feared was bad. She was in great distress, and I saw that a flood of
tears was ready to accompany her tale of woe, so I said hurriedly: "Don't
cry. Laugh while you speak. You will attract less attention."

She tried to laugh, but the effort was piteous and became a failure, as
she said:--

"George Hamilton has sailed for Canada, and my heart is broken."

Again she tried to smile, but the smile never reached her eyes, for they
were full of tears.

"How do you know?" I asked, almost stunned by the news.

She tried to stay her tears, but failed, and answered between sobs: "Last
night at the queen's ball, the king showed me a letter sent by order of
the French king, saying that George had sailed from Bordeaux for Canada
nearly a fortnight ago. I could not help showing my grief, and the king,
who was boisterously happy, said: 'Now you will forget him and listen to
me.' I smiled, but it was a poor effort, and he smiled, showing his
yellow fangs as he left me. I pray God that I may never be called upon to
hate another man as I hate him."

"I can hardly believe that George has gone to Canada without notifying
us," I said.

"Yes, I fear it is true," she returned. "But if I am ever so fortunate
as to find him again, I intend to go with him whether he consents or no,
regardless of father and all the world. Just as soon as I learn where he
is in Canada, I will go to him. You will take me, won't you, Baron Ned?"

"I'll not give that promise," I answered. "But I am sure there is
something back of King Louis's letter of which we do not know. Surely
George would not have sailed without notifying us."

"He may have feared to betray himself by writing," she suggested, "since
King Charles had asked King Louis to detain him."

"That is true," I returned. "But the occasion must have been urgent
indeed if he could not have sent us word in some manner."

But I could find no comfort for her, for I really believed that George
had gone to Canada, and there was a certain relief to me in knowing that
he had passed out of Frances's life.

After along silence this feeling of relief found unintentional expression
when I said:--

"Time heals all wounds, Frances. One of these days you will find a man
who will make amends for your present loss, and then--"

"No, no, Baron Ned. Your words are spoken in kindness, but what you
suggest is impossible. Perhaps if there had been fewer obstacles between
us, or if I had not misjudged him so cruelly, I might have found my heart
more obedient to my will."

The only comfort I could give my beautiful cousin was that a letter would
soon come explaining everything. In default of a letter, I promised to go
to Paris and learn the truth from George's friends, if possible.

Frances did not go back to Whitehall that day, but remained at home,
pretending to be ill of an ague.

At the end of a week, Frances not having returned to Whitehall, Sir
Richard was honored by a visit from no less a person than the king,
accompanied by the duchess and a gentleman in waiting. The visit was made
incognito.

As a result of this royal visit, which was made for the purpose of seeing
Frances, a part of Sir Richard's estates near St. Albans were restored to
him, and from poverty he rose at once to a comfortable income of, say, a
thousand or twelve hundred pounds a year.

Immediately all of Sir Richard's hatred of Charles II fell away, and once
more the king shone in the resplendent light of his divine appointment.

While Frances estimated the king's generosity at its true value, she was
glad her father had received even a small part of what was his just due,
and although she knew the restoration had been made to please, and, if
possible, to win her, she was glad to have spoiled the royal Philistine,
and despised him more than ever before, if that were possible.

Sir Richard's good fortune brought a gleam of joy to Frances, but it also
brought a pang of regret, because it had come too late. Her only purpose
in going to Whitehall had been to marry a rich nobleman and thereby raise
the fallen fortunes of her house. Now that reason existed no longer, and
if George were here, she could throw herself away upon him with injury to
no one but herself. But George was not here, and liberty to throw herself
away had come too late to be of any value.

Every day during the fortnight that Frances remained at home, she asked
if I had any news from court, meaning the French court, but using the
form of inquiry to avoid acquainting her father and Sarah with the real
cause of her solicitude.

But my answers were always, "Oh, nothing but Castlemain's new tantrum,"
or "The duke's defeat at pall-mall."

Frances was the last girl in the world, save, perhaps Sarah, who I should
have supposed capable of languishing and dying of love, but the former
she did before my eyes, and the latter I almost began to fear if news did
not reach us soon from George.

Betty came up to see Frances nearly every day, and the kissing and
embracing that ensued disgusted Sarah.

"Now, if Frances were a man, I could understand it," said Sarah. "The
little barmaid must be tempting to a man, being pretty and--"

"Beautiful, Sarah!" I interrupted.

"Yes, beautiful, if you will."

"Her eyes--" I began, again interrupting Sarah.

"Oh, yes!" cried Sarah, impatiently. "Her eyes are fine enough, but their
expression comes from their color, their size, and their preposterously
long eyelashes. Black long lashes often give a radiance to the eyes which
passes for expressiveness, and I doubt not--"

"Nonsense, Sarah!" I cried, half angrily. "Bettina's eyes are expressive
in themselves. As you say, their soft dark brown is the perfection of
color, and they certainly are large. But aside from all that, their
expression is--"

"There is no intellect in them!" cried Sarah.

"There is tenderness, gentleness, love, and truth in them," I answered,
with as careless an air as I could assume.

"Yes, there may be for a man, but I insist there is no real intellect."

"Well, Sarah," I answered, showing irritation despite an effort to appear
indifferent, "it is my opinion that the possession of great intellectual
power by a woman is the one virtue with which men, as a rule, find
themselves most willing to dispense. It gives her too great an
advantage."

"Yes, a soft, plump figure like Betty's, long lashes and red lips,
surrounded by dimples, are apt to please a fool."

"But they're good in their way, Sarah, you'll admit--excellent!"
I retorted sharply, caring little if she saw that I was angry.

"And men are fools, so there! Not another word about the barmaid!" cried
Sarah, dismissing the subject with a wave of her hand.

But men, too, sometimes like to have the last word, so I remarked: "The
mother of the Duchess of York was a barmaid, at least, a barmistress."

"Yes, but is that any reason why Frances should be kissing this one?
Doubtless your friend Betty finds men enough to do the office."

"Sarah!" I cried, springing to my feet, now thoroughly angry. "If you
were a man, I'd give you the lie direct!"

Sarah began to laugh and clapped her hands, saying: "I was leading you
on. I suspected you were fond of her. Now I know it."

But Sarah's remark, being so near the truth, did nothing to allay my
anger, so I told her she was a fool, and went into an adjoining room,
where I found Frances and Bettina luxuriating in tearful sympathy.

I walked home with Bettina, and she invited me to go to her parlor to
have a cup of tea. To see Bettina boil the tea (steep it or draw it, she
said was the proper phrase) was as pretty a sight as one could wish to
behold, and when she poured it out in thin china cups, handing one to
me and taking one herself, her pride in following the fashion of modish
ladies was as touching as it was simple and beautiful. It was almost more
than my feeble resolutions could withstand, so when I was about to leave
I had a great battle with myself and was defeated, for I seized her
hands, and although I said nothing, she knew what was in my mind, so she
hung her head, murmuring:--

"If you are willing to make me more unhappy than I am."

"Not for the world, Bettina," I answered, rallying against myself.
"Goodnight."

"Good night. Now I know you are my friend," she answered softly, holding
my hands for a moment, then dropping them suddenly and turning from me.

I have refrained from speaking of Mary Hamilton of late, partly because
I did not see her frequently at this time, and partly because the shame I
felt at the time of which I am now writing comes surging over me whenever
I touch upon the subject. Not that I did anything of which I need be
ashamed, but because I remember so vividly my motives and desires that
the old sensations return, even at this distant day, as a perfume, a
strain of music, the soft balminess of spring, or the sharp bite of
winter's frost may recall a moment of the past, and set the heart
throbbing or still it as of yore.

After leaving Bettina, I went back to Whitehall and dressed for a ball
which the queen was giving that night. It was an unfortunate time for me
to see Mary. My heart was full, not to overflowing, but to sinking, with
my love of Bettina and her love of me. There was nothing I would not have
given at that time to be able to take her as my wife. I should have been
glad to give my title, estates, and position--everything--to be a simple
tradesman or an innkeeper so that I might take Bettina with happiness to
her and without the damning sin of losing caste to me.

It was true the king's brother had made a marriage of comparatively the
same sort, but it is almost as impossible for a prince to lose caste as
it is difficult for a mere baron to keep it. Bettina would not be happy
in my sphere of life, nor could I live in hers, so what was there for me
to do but to keep my engagement with Mary Hamilton and, if I could, lose
my love for Bettina.

       *        *        *        *        *

The queen's ball was to be held that night at St. James's Palace, and
I was glad to have the walk from Whitehall across the park. The night was
perfect. A slim moon hung in the west, considerately withholding a part
of her light that the stars might twinkle the brighter in their vain
effort to rival Bettina's eyes. The night wind came to me, odor-laden
from the roses, only to show me how poor a thing it was compared with
Bettina's breath upon my cheek and its sweetness in my nostrils. Now and
then a belated bird sang its sleepy song, only to remind me of the melody
of her lullabies, and the cooing dove moaned out its plaintive call lest
I forget the pain in her breast while selfishly remembering the ache in
my own. Then I thought of what the Good Book says about "bright clouds,"
and I prayed that my pain might make me a better man and might lead me to
help Bettina in the days of her sorrowing, which I knew were at hand.

Soon after I had kissed the hands of the king and the queen, I met
George's brother, Count Anthony Hamilton. He had never been friendly to
his younger brother, and had ceased to look upon him as a brother at all
after his disgraceful reformation. Then when the king turned against
George, Anthony, good courtier that he was, turned likewise, and there is
no bitterness that may be compared with that of an apostate brother.

After we had talked for a minute or two, Count Anthony asked if I knew
anything of "the fool," as he was pleased to call his brother.

"I know nothing of your brother George, my lord, if it is him you mean."

"He is no brother of mine, and if you wish to become a member of our
family, you will cease to consider him your friend," returned his
Lordship, making an effort to conceal his anger.

I was not in the mood to take his remark kindly, therefore I answered
warmly:--

"Shall my entering the ranks of your noble family curtail my privilege of
choosing my own friends?"

"No, with one exception," he replied.

"The honor of the alliance is great, my lord, but I shall not consent to
even one exception at your dictation. Your sister, my future wife, loves
her brother, and if she does not object to my friendship for him, your
Lordship oversteps your authority, as head of your house, by protesting."

He turned angrily upon me, saying: "You have been paying your court with
lukewarm ardor of late, Baron Clyde. Perhaps you would not grieve if your
friendship for a family outcast were to bar you from the family."

"If your Lordship means to say that I wish to withdraw dishonorably from
my engagement with your sister, I crave the privilege of telling you that
you lie!"

I never was more calm in my life, and my words brought a cold smile to
Hamilton's lips.

"My friend De Grammont will have the honor of waiting on you to-morrow
morning," he answered, bowing politely.

"I shall be delighted to see his Grace," I answered. "Good night, my
lord!"

Here was a solution of my problem in so far as it concerned my engagement
with Mary Hamilton, for if I killed her brother, she would not marry
me, and if he killed me, I could not marry her. The fact that a gleam
of joy came to me because of my unexpected release caused me to feel
that I was a coward not to have broken the engagement in an honorable,
straightforward manner rather than to have seized this opportunity to
force a duel upon her brother. It is true I had not sought the duel
deliberately and had not thought it possible one second before uttering
the word that made it necessary. Still it was my act that brought it
about, and I felt that I had taken an unmanly course.

After leaving Count Anthony I walked across the room to where Mary
was standing at the outer edge of a circle of ladies and gentlemen who
surrounded De Grammont, listening to a narrative in broken English, of
his adventures, fancied or real, I know not which, but interesting,
and all of a questionable character.

When I spoke to Mary, she turned and gave me her hand. I had not
expected the least display of emotion on her part; therefore I was not
disappointed when the smile with which she greeted me was the same she
would have given to any other man. But Mary was Mary. Nature and art had
made her what she was--charming, quiescent, and calm, not cold, simply
lukewarm.

"I have seen little of you this last month," said Mary, taking my arm and
walking with me away from De Grammont's group. She might have remarked
with equal emotion that Cromwell was dead or the weather fine. She did
not wait for an explanation of my absence, but continued with a touch of
eager hesitancy and a fluttering show of anxiety, "Have you had news
recently of my brother George?"

Of course I could not tell her the truth, so I answered evasively: "I
suppose you have heard the news spread throughout the court that he has
gone to Canada? Doubtless you can tell me more than I know."

"That is all I know," she answered. "When he went, or where, I have been
unable to learn, for George is a forbidden topic in our household and
seems to be the same at court. What has he done, baron? I have heard it
hinted that he threatened to take the king's life. Surely he did nothing
of the sort."

"If he did, it was in a delirium of fever," I answered, hoping that she
would cease speaking of George and would ask a question or two concerning
myself.

But no. She turned again to me, asking, "Did you hear him?"

"I have been told that the accusation comes from his physician, and
perhaps from one who was listening at his door," I answered, avoiding a
direct reply.

"I suspect the informant is a wretched little hussy of whom I have
heard--the daughter of the innkeeper," remarked Mary, looking up to
me for confirmation.

"Suspect no longer," I answered, with sharper emphasis than I should have
used.

"Do you know her?" she asked.

"I do not know a 'wretched hussy' who is the daughter of the innkeeper,"
I answered sullenly. "I know a beautiful girl who watched devotedly at
your brother's bedside, day and night, and probably saved his life at a
time when he was deserted by his sisters and his mother."

"We often find that sort of kindness in those low creatures," she
answered, unaware of the tender spot she was touching, and ignoring
my reference to George's sisters and his mother.

Naturally Mary was kind of heart, but her mother was a hard, painted
old Jezebel, whose teachings would have led her daughter away from every
gentle truth and up to all that was hard, cruel, and selfish in life. A
woman in the higher walks of life is liable to become enamelled before
her twentieth year.

While I did not blame Mary for what she had said relating to Bettina,
still I was angry and longed to do battle with any one who could fight.

After we had been together perhaps ten minutes, some one claimed her for
a dance, and she left me, saying hurriedly in my ear:--

"I'll see you soon again. I want to ask you further about George." She
had not a question to ask about me.

She was not to see me again, for I asked permission of the queen to
withdraw, and immediately left the ball.

While I was crossing the park on my way back to Whitehall, the wind
moaned and groaned--it did not breathe. The stars did not twinkle--they
glared. The nightingales did not sing--they screamed. And the roses were
odorless. Perhaps all this change to gloom was within me rather than
without, but it existed just the same, and I went home and to bed, hating
all the world save Bettina, whom I vowed for the hundredth time never to
see again.

The next day at noon De Grammont came to my closet, where I had waited
for him all morning.

"Welcome to you, dear count!" I cried, leading him by the hand to a
chair.

"Perhaps you will not so warmly welcome me," he returned, "when you learn
my errand."

"I already know your errand, Count Grammont, and it makes you doubly
welcome," I answered, drawing a chair for myself and sitting down in
front of him.

"Ah, that is of good," he returned, rubbing his hands. "You already know
the purpose of my visit?"

"Yes, I do, my dear count, but any purpose would delight me which brings
the pleasure of your company."

"Ah, it is said like a civilized man," he returned, complimenting
me by speaking English, though I shall not attempt to reproduce his
pronunciation. "How far better it is to say: 'Monsieur, permit to me,'
before one runs a man through than to do it as though one were sticking
a mere pig. Is it not so?"

"True as sunshine, my dear count," I returned. "There's a vast difference
between the trade of butchering and the gentle art of murder."

De Grammont threw back his head, laughing softly. "Ah, good, good! Very
good, dear baron! The sentiment is beau-ti-ful and could not be better
expressed--in English. You should have been born across the channel."

"I wish I had been born any place, not excepting hell, rather than in
England," I answered.

"True, true, what a hole it is," returned the count, regretfully. "The
Englishman is one pig."

He saw by the expression of my face that while I might abuse my own
countrymen, I did not relish hearing it from others, so with true French
tact he held up his hand to keep me from speaking till he could correct
himself.

"Pardon, baron, I forgot the 'r,' The Englishman's affectation of a
virtue he despises makes of him a prig--not a pig. Non, non! Mon Dieu!
Not a pig--a prig! Is it not so?"

"True, true, count," I returned, unable to restrain a laugh. "It is the
affectation of virtue that makes frank vice attractive by comparison."

"Ah, true, true, my dear baron. May I proceed with my errand?"

"Proceed, count."

"Monsieur le Comte Hamilton begs me to say that he was called away from
London early to-day on the king's business, but that he will return
in four weeks. When he returns he will do himself the honor to send
me again, asking you to name a friend, unless you prefer to apologize,
which no gentleman would do in a case of this sort. You said, I am told,
that Monsieur le Comte lied. If you admit that he did not lie, of course
you admit that you did. So, im-pos-si-ble! There must be to fight!"

"Do you know, count, the cause of my having given Count Hamilton the
lie?" I asked.

"I did not inquire," he answered smilingly. "To me it was to carry the
message."

"George Hamilton is your friend, is he not?" I asked.

"Yes, but far more, he is the friend of my king, and will make entreaty
with my monarch for my return to France," answered De Grammont.

"It was because of Count Hamilton's insulting reference to his brother
that I used the ugly word," I returned.

"A-ah, that is different!" Then recovering himself quickly: "But I
undertook the mission. It is to finish. Monsieur George Hamilton? My
friend? My king's friend? If it had been known to me! But you have the
message of 'Sieur le Comte."

After a short silence he said, "When Monsieur le Comte Hamilton returns,
I shall ask him to relieve me of this duty."

As De Grammont was leaving my closet, he paused at the door, and, after a
moment's hesitancy, whispered:--

"You may expect a letter from France soon. It will come from M. l'Abbe du
Boise, who I hope will come soon to London on the business of my king.
You know him not--M. l'Abbe?" The eyebrows lifted questioningly. "No? You
soon will know him, yet you will not know him. You and perhaps a lady may
help him in his mission. I, too, shall help him, but I, too, know him
not. Yet I know him. If he succeed in his mission, he will be rich, he
will be powerful. And I? Mon Dieu, my friend! If he succeed, my decree of
banishment from Paris--it will be to revoke. I may return once more to
bask in the smile of my king. You must not speak; the lady must not
speak; I must not speak when Monsieur l'Abbe comes, nor before. It is to
silence. Stone walls have one ear."


"Two, sometimes, count," I suggested, laughing.

"Yes, I should have said one ears! Non, non! I forget this damnable
tongue of yours! When I arrive to great interest, it is to talk faster
than it is to think, and--" A shrug of the shoulders finished the
sentence.

"Let us speak French hereafter, my dear count," I suggested.

"Mon Dieu, mon Dieu! It is to me more of pain to hear my sweet language
murdered than to murder yours," answered Grammont, seriously.

"Ah, but I speak French quite as well as I speak English. Perhaps I shall
not murder it," I replied.

"Perhaps? We shall try," he said, though with little show of faith.

I began speaking French, but when I paused for his verdict, he shrugged
his shoulders, saying:--

"Ah, _oui, oui!_ It may be better than my English." But notwithstanding
his scant praise, we spoke the French language thereafter.

The count bowed himself out and left me to decipher, if I could, the
problem of M. l'Abbe du Boise. Presently I discovered the cue. The
Abbe was George Hamilton, and for the moment my heart almost stopped
beating. If he should come to England on the French king's business,
which could be nothing more nor less than the Dunkirk affair, and
should be discovered, there would be a public entertainment on Tyburn
Hill, with George as the central figure.

When I found a spare hour, I hastened to see Lilly and came upon the
good Doctor among the stars, as usual. There was a letter for me from
Hamilton. It was short and in cipher:--

"DEAR FRIEND:

"This is to tell you that M. l'Abbe du Boise will soon be in London. He
will be the guest of M. Comte de Grammont.

"You do not know him. Please call on him when he arrives. Tell the
Duchess of Hearts that he will want to see her. Ask her to be ready to
help him. He goes to buy Dunkirk for the French king, and his success
will mean good fortune for me.

"Your friend,

"LE BLANC."

After reading the letter, I felt sure that the Abbe du Boise was George
Hamilton. I could hardly bring myself to believe that he would be so
foolhardy as to visit Whitehall, though I knew the adventure was of a
nature likely to appeal to his reckless disregard of consequences. I
knew also that, if successful, he would win the reward without which
life had little value to him.

I was sure that Hamilton had fully weighed the danger of his perilous
mission, and that he was deliberately staking his life on a last
desperate chance to win fortune and Frances Jennings.

Though perhaps Lilly was a charlatan in many respects, he was to be
trusted; still I did not feel that it was my place to impart George's
secret to him, though I had in mind a plan whereby he might be of great
help to the Abbe du Boise in influencing King Charles. The king consulted
him secretly in many important affairs, and I was sure that if the good
Doctor should be called in by his Majesty in the Dunkirk affair, the
stars would tell a story in accord with our desires if we made it to
Lilly's interest.

However, all of that must wait for the Abbe du Boise. Of one thing I was
sure; I must tell Frances at once so that she might be paving the way to
the king with her smiles. It would be a disagreeable task, but I knew she
would do it gladly, and I also knew that no woman could do it better.

While I had expressed my doubts to Frances concerning Hamilton's
emigration to Canada, I had not felt entirely sure there was nothing in
it, and she, womanlike, taking the worst for granted, had accepted it as
true. But the coming of the Abbe du Boise changed everything, and when I
saw her at her father's house and told her of my suspicions, and showed
her Le Blanc's letter, she was so greatly alarmed that she said she would
rather know that George had gone to Canada than to fear his return to
England under the circumstances.

"The dastardly king will take his life if he comes," she said.

"I admit the danger," I answered, as hopefully as possible, "but I
believe, if George comes, he will be able to take care of himself."

"Danger!" she exclaimed. "It is certain death! George will find no
mercy."

"If he is caught," I answered. "But the letter from King Louis will
convince King Charles that Hamilton is in Canada and will throw our
jealous monarch off his guard. Perhaps Hamilton will be safer than we
suppose. He speaks French like a Parisian, but, above all, he is cool,
calm, and thoughtful in danger. The London merchants will be far more
dangerous than the king."

"It does seem that we are guilty of treason to our country in thus
helping France," she said. Then laughingly, "But I'll go back to the
palace at once and begin my task of wheedling the king." She paused for a
moment, then continued hesitatingly, "Do you suppose it possible that
George would doubt me afterwards?"

"Impossible," I answered, with emphasis that seemed to reassure her.

"I am doing it for him," she continued with a sigh. "God knows I would
do almost anything in the same cause. But I do not know men, and I fear
it is possible that he will doubt me after I have succeeded. Let us go
to see Betty. She is restful to me, and always soothes my nerves. But
besides, I want to have her help. I'll introduce her to the king--"

"No, by God, you'll not introduce her to the king! I'll explode the whole
affair, and Dunkirk may go to the devil before you shall introduce Betty
to the king," I answered.

"Yet you are willing that I should meddle in the dangerous affair?
Evidently you love her more than you love me?"

"Only a few hundred million times more," I answered sullenly.

"Is it that way with you, my dear brother?" she asked, coming to me as I
stood gazing out the window, seeing nothing save Bettina's face. Frances
put her hand on my shoulder and said coaxingly: "Forgive me. No harm
shall come to her through me."

Of course I was sorry that I had allowed myself to become angry, and at
once made my apology as well as I could.

"Let us go to see Betty, anyway," said Frances. And I assenting, she went
to fetch her cloak, hat, and vizard.

But when she returned, I had changed my mind and declined to go, telling
Frances that I must see Bettina no more.

"Why?" asked Frances.

"Because I would not win a love from her which I cannot accept."

"Baron Ned, there are few men who would be so considerate."

But I required little coaxing, and when Frances had made ready for the
journey, I buckled on my sword, which I had left standing in the corner,
took my hat from the floor, and started out with her.

While walking from the Bridge to the Old Swan, I remarked to Frances, "My
engagement with Mary Hamilton is likely to be broken by her family."

"Why, Baron Ned?" she asked in surprise.

"Count Hamilton has challenged me to a duel, to be fought when he
returns, and you see, if I kill him or if he kills me, well--" I
answered, shrugging my shoulders.

She was much alarmed at my disclosure, but was reassured when I made
light of the affair, probably because there was no danger in it to George
Hamilton, and, perhaps, because if I should kill Count Hamilton, George
would inherit the title and estates.

"But poor Mary! She will grieve," said Frances.

"I think you need waste no tears for her sake," I answered. "She is a
fine, pretty little creature, who will take what comes her way without
excess of pain or joy. She is incapable of feeling keenly. God has been
good to her in giving her numbness."

"No, no, cousin Ned, you are wrong!" she returned. "Life without pain
is not worth living. I have heard that the Arabs have a saying, 'All
sunshine makes the desert.' God is good to us when he darkens the sun
now and then and gives us the sunshine afterwards."

"Perhaps you are right, Frances," I returned. "But you and I are in the
cloud now, and a little sunshine would be most welcome."

"Not enough sunshine to make a desert," she answered.

"Ay! But enough to make a garden," I returned, as we climbed the narrow
flight of steps leading to the private entrance to the Old Swan.

When we paused at the door, Frances said, "Your garden is at hand." And
when she opened the door, there stood Betty, and I was in Eden. The moist
glow of her eyes, the faint blush of her cheeks, the nervous fluttering
of her voice, spoke more eloquently than all the tongues of Babel could
have spoken, and I could not help comparing her welcome with that which
Maxy Hamilton had given me at the queen's ball.

Bettina led us to the parlor, and while we were drinking a cup of tea,
we had the great pleasure of asking and answering questions of which we
always had a large supply in reserve.

When it was time to go, Bettina walked down to the Bridge with us. As it
was growing dark, Frances suggested that I walk back to the Old Swan with
Betty, which I did, she taking my arm of her own accord, and both of us
very happy, though we spoke not a word, for fear of saying too much, save
"good night" at the door.

"Good night at the door!" God gave its sweetness to youth right out of
the core of His infinite love.




CHAPTER XII

A PERILOUS EMBASSY


Four or five days after our visit to Bettina, I met De Grammont at
Charing Cross, and he surprised me with an invitation to his house
that night to meet Monsieur l'Abbe du Boise at supper.

"The king and a dozen other gentlemen will be present," he said, "but
there will be no ladies. Monsieur l'Abbe, being of the church, is not a
ladies' man, and besides, ladies have sharper eyes than men, and might
see much that is intended to remain unseen."

The count's remark seemed to settle the question of the Abbe's identity,
and I hastened to Frances with the news. She assured me that she was
ready to die of fright, but showed no outward sign of dissolution, and
when I complimented her on her power of self-control, said:--

"Fortunately, I am part hypocrite, and can easily act a part."

"You have a hard one ahead of you," I returned, "and will need all your
strength before it is played to the end."

       *       *       *       *       *

I was on hand early at De Grammont's supper, but found several gentlemen
ahead of me, awaiting, with the count in his parlor, the arrival of the
king. Soon after I entered the room, De Grammont presented me to the
Abbe. I was convinced at once that he was not George Hamilton. His beard,
worn a la Richelieu,--a mustache and a tuft on the chin,--was snow white,
and his hair, which was thin, hung in long white waves almost to his
shoulders. He walked with a stoop and wore spectacles, the glasses of
which were slightly colored. Being an ecclesiastic, though not a priest,
he wore no wig; but he was of the Order of the Cordon Bleu, and wore, in
addition to his badge and blue ribbon, a sword beneath his long coat. It
was the first time I had ever seen an ecclesiastic wearing a sword,
though it has since become common in France, where there are many "Abbes"
who are neither priests nor in orders.

The Abbe spoke poor English, therefore the conversation was carried on in
French, much to the annoyance of some of our guests, who pretended to a
greater knowledge of that language than they possessed.

Soon after my presentation to the Abbe, the king arrived, and we all went
out to the supper table, where the Abbe's chair was on the king's right,
with De Grammont on his Majesty's left. After the king had been seated a
moment, he rose and asked us to be seated; so we took our places, all
save the king dropping our hats beside us on the floor because of his
Majesty's presence.

I sat next to De Grammont, almost opposite the Abbe, and had a good
opportunity to observe the French emissary. The king's French was
excellent, and the dinner conversation was carried on largely between him
and the Abbe. All subjects were discussed, but the Abbe adroitly avoided
Dunkirk and seemed to prefer talking on religious and philosophical
topics, in which he took the liberty to disagree with the king in many
respects, politely though positively.

I listened attentively, hoping that some tone of the Abbe's voice, a pose
or a gesture, might reveal George Hamilton, if it were he, in the most
excellent disguise I had ever seen. But nothing of the sort occurred, and
before the dinner was over, I was still more convinced that whoever the
Abbe du Boise might be, he was not Hamilton.

After dinner came the heavy wines, of which the Abbe did not partake, and
of which De Grammont and I drank sparingly. All the others, including the
king, were gloriously drunk long before the night was over.

While smoking our pipes, the king, who was eager to get his hands
on French money, told the Abbe that he hoped to see him, with his
credentials, at Whitehall on the second morning following at ten o'clock,
and the Abbe said he would leave his credentials with my Lord Clarendon,
and would be at Whitehall at the hour suggested by the king, for the
purpose of making the French king's offer.

Most of the guests went home between two men, very late at night, but
fortunately I was able to walk home by myself.

I was both glad and disappointed not to find George in the gown of the
Abbe. I was glad because of the risk he would have taken had he come to
England, yet disappointed in missing what would have been the most
picturesque, daring personal exploit of English court history. But on the
whole it was better as it was.

The next morning the king sent for me to come to his closet, and asked if
I knew one Lilly, an astrologer. I answered that I knew little of him
personally, but had heard much of his wisdom and learning.

"Yes, yes, but you know where he lives, do you not? On the Strand, a
dozen houses this side of Temple Bar?" asked the king.

"I have seen the house often, your Majesty," I replied.

"Good! Now listen attentively to what I have to say," returned the king,
graciously taking my arm and leading me to a window overlooking the
river. "I hear from De Grammont that the Abbe du Boise is a firm believer
in the teachings of astrology. I want you to arrange, without letting any
one know that my finger is in the pie, to take Lilly to see the Abbe, or
the Abbe to see Lilly. I'll whisper a word in your ear. The stars will
tell our friend, the Abbe, a story to suit our purposes. The French king
and his ambassadors will find their match in me, I warrant you. I have
bought Lilly, body and soul--with promises." The king shrugged his
shoulders and whispered: "With promises, you understand, Baron Ned, with
promises. Now give him a chance at the Abbe."

Charles laughed and chuckled in self-gratulation, not the least
suspecting that he was talking to the wrong man and playing into the
French king's hand. I bore in mind the fact that the king had bought
Lilly with promises, and I determined to buy the good Doctor with ready
gold.

"I'll try to carry out your Majesty's commands," I answered, apparently
doubtful of my ability. "But of course you would not have me insist, if
the Abbe seems disinclined to consult Lilly."

"No, no! Odds fish, man, no! But find a way to bring them together,
and your reward will come later. I choose, you for this little piece of
business because you are in no way connected with the affair between the
French king and me, and because I know you are to be trusted."

I to be trusted! So was Brutus!

"I shall do my best, your Majesty, and if I fail, I shall notify you at
once," I said, taking my leave.

I hastened to De Grammont's house, which at that time was over near the
Mall, and told the count what the king had said.

"Ah, that is good!" cried De Grammont. "A fool, who knows himself to be a
fool, is likely to be wary, but one who deems himself wise is the easiest
dupe in the world. I'll see Monsieur l'Abbe. Wait."

De Grammont returned in a few minutes, saying that the Abbe would go with
me to see Doctor Lilly, and I suggested that I return for him in three
hours.

I went back to Whitehall, where I found Frances, and told her to be at
Lilly's house on the Strand within three hours, to meet the French king's
ambassador, and to receive the instructions which George's letter had
intimated the Abbe would give. I told her, also, that the Abbe was not
the person we had expected to see.

The evening before, she was ready to die of fright because we believed
that the Abbe was George Hamilton, and now, since I had found he was not,
she was ready to die of disappointment--so she assured me.

At the appointed time, De Grammont, the Abbe, and I took the count's
barge and went down to the water stairs nearest Temple Bar, where the
Abbe and I left De Grammont and walked up through the crowded streets to
Lilly's house. Owing to the crowded condition of the street, the Abbe and
I found no opportunity to exchange words until we were before Lilly's
house.

Lilly was at home, I having sent word of our coming, so when we knocked,
the servant opened and directed us to the waiting parlor, saying that the
Doctor would soon come down.

We started upstairs, I in the lead, the Abbe following ten paces behind.
When I entered the room, I found Bettina and Frances sitting by the
street window. They came to me quickly, and Frances explained Bettina's
presence.

"I did not like to come here alone, so I asked Betty to come with me. She
is to be trusted."

"You need not assure me of that," I answered, taking Betty's hand. "I
already know it. I am glad you--"

But here I was interrupted by a soft cry from Bettina, and by a
half-smothered scream from Frances, both of whom deserted me suddenly
and ran toward the door I had just entered. Turning, I saw Frances with
her arms about the Abbe's neck, and Bettina clasping one of his hands.
I thought the two had gone mad, but when Bettina saw my look of surprise
and inquiry, she dropped his hand, came to me, and asked:--

"Did you want us to pretend that we did not know him? If so, you should
have told us."

"But you don't know him," I declared.

"Perhaps I don't," she returned, laughing softly and shrugging her
shoulders, "but evidently your cousin does. If not, she should take her
arms from around his neck."

"But she is mistaken," I insisted.

"She seems to be convinced," answered Bettina, with a curious little
glance up to me, half laughing, half inquiring. Evidently she was
doubtful whether I spoke in jest or in earnest.

Frances still clung to the Abbe, her head resting on his shoulder, so I
started toward her, intending to correct her mistake. Bettina, seeing my
purpose, caught me by the arm, saying:--

"Don't you really know?"

The Abbe turned his face toward me, and when I caught a glimpse of his
eyes without spectacles, I recognized George Hamilton, and almost choked
myself in smothering a cry.

Frances turned to me, asking indignantly, "Why did not you tell me?"

"Because I did not know," I answered, hardly able to believe the truth.

But we had important business before us, and I knew that we should
prepare for it before Lilly came in. So George, Bettina, Frances, and
I went to a window at the far end of the room to hold a consultation.

"Since I did not recognize you, perhaps Lilly will not," I suggested. "I
trust the Doctor, but perhaps we had better leave him under the
impression that you are Monsieur l'Abbe du Boise and give no intimation
of the truth."

"I had not hoped that my disguise would deceive you, Baron Ned," said
George, "but since it has, it is just as well that we leave Lilly in the
dark if we can."

"But he will know. The stars will tell him," suggested Bettina, opening
her eyes very wide.

"The stars will tell him what he is paid to hear," I remarked. Then
turning to Frances, I asked, "How is it that you were able to recognize
him?"

"By his eyes!" exclaimed Frances and Bettina in concert.

"That gives me a valuable hint," said George, hastily adjusting his
colored spectacles. "Now, how about it?"

"I still should know you," answered Frances.

"Not I!" exclaimed Bettina.

Presently Lilly came in, and I presented him to Monsieur l'Abbe du Boise
and explained the presence of Frances and Bettina by saying:--

"A friend of ours in France has asked Mistress Jennings to render what
aid she can to Monsieur l'Abbe, and she is here at my request to receive
his commands."

"It is good!" exclaimed Lilly. "She has the king's ear if any one has,
and the ear is very close to the mind. What may I do to serve Monsieur
l'Abbe?"

"If I may see you privately---the baron and me--I shall tell you how you
may serve me," answered the Abbe.

The Abbe and I excused ourselves to Frances and Bettina, and went with
the Doctor to the room which he called his observatory, where we came to
the point very quickly:--

"I want to buy Dunkirk for my master for the sum of one hundred thousand
pounds," said the Abbe, by way of starting the consultation.

"But London has already offered that sum," returned Lilly, "and stands
ready to pay more."

"In payments," suggested the Abbe.

"Yes," returned Lilly. "But I see no way of bringing the king to accept
the sum you offer unless--unless Mistress Jennings can persuade him."

"She may be able to do so," answered the Abbe, shrugging his shoulders.
He spoke very bad English throughout the consultation. "But the stars,
too, may be very persuasive with King Charles. To be plain, he will
probably consult you, and if--"

"I am to see him to-night. That is why your visit was postponed until
to-morrow," interrupted Lilly.

"That is as I supposed," remarked the Abbe. "Now, if I buy Dunkirk for
one hundred thousand pounds, you shall receive two thousand pounds within
ten days after signing the treaty, and Baron Clyde will be my surety."

"Two thousand pounds?" mused Lilly. "That is rather a small sum in so
great a transaction."

"I doubt not the purchase may be made without the help of the stars if
you feel that two thousand pounds is too small a sum to be considered,"
returned the Abbe.

"No, no," said Lilly. "I understand that you wish me to set a figure and
work out the solution of this affair, and if I learn from the stars that
it is to King Charles's interest to accept your offer of one hundred
thousand pounds for the city of Dunkirk, I am to receive--"

"If King Charles accepts!" interrupted the Abbe.

"Ah, I see! Yes, yes, of course," returned Lilly. "I shall go to work
immediately and set my figure. Of course I do not know what I shall
learn, but I shall be glad to learn from the stars that which will enable
me to advise the king according to your wishes. Two thousand pounds are
two thousand pounds, and the word of a king is but a breath."

"What will the king give you for setting the figure and working it out?
What does he usually pay you in important affairs?" asked the Abbe.

"Ah--eh--I--I--In truth," returned Lilly, stammering, "the king, who is
so liberal with his lady friends, is--what shall I say?--close with me,
save in promises. He buys folly at the rate of hundreds of thousands of
pounds a year, while he pays for knowledge with large promises, and now
ten shillings and again five. On one occasion I assured him that he would
not fail if he attempted to put through a much-cherished plan of carrying
a lady to the country against her will. He was much pleased and gave me a
guinea, but borrowed it a week afterward, and--and still owes it."

George turned quickly to me, but, remembering that he was the Abbe du
Boise, said nothing. But I caught his meaning and, turning to Lilly,
asked:--

"Do you refer to the occasion of a certain kidnapping in which Hamilton
and I consulted you?"

"Yes," returned Lilly.

"And you allowed it to be carried out without telling us?" I asked
indignantly.

"I did not know who the lady was till you came to me for help," he
answered.

"And you were able to put us on the right track to find her because of
knowledge gained from the stars?" I asked, with a sharp note of sarcasm.

"No, no," he replied coolly. "Why trouble the stars for information that
may be had as easily and more definitely elsewhere?"

"Then why did you not tell us the true source of your knowledge?" I asked
warmly.

"Because I had neither right nor desire to betray the person most
actively engaged in the affair. To have done so might have cost me my
life. I gave you the information you asked, and you saved the lady
through my help, without which you would not have known where to turn.
You would have been helpless. You paid me ten guineas. Were my services
worth the fee?"

"Ah, richly," I returned, beginning to see the whole matter of astrology
in a new light.

"Then why do you complain?" he asked. "A man, naturally, wants to know
where his meat comes from, but knowledge, like a diamond, is good found
anywhere."

"I beg your pardon, Doctor Lilly," I answered, waving my hand as a
substitute for hauling down my colors. "I turn you over to Monsieur
l'Abbe once more."

"I think we understand each other," remarked the Abbe. "You say the king
has employed you to set a figure, and that you are to take the solution
to him to-night?"

"Monsieur l'Abbe is correct," returned Lilly.

"I hope the stars may see fit to advise the king to accept my first
offer, for it will be the last," said the Abbe. "Possibly the stars may
show that in case King Charles sells Dunkirk to London even for a much
larger sum than I shall offer, he may be compelled to spend the money and
a great deal more in defending the city."

"True, true," agreed Lilly.

"Possibly the stars may indicate that King Louis loves war," continued
the Abbe. "They may show that if King Charles refuses my master's offer,
England may be compelled to give up Dunkirk for nothing, or spend a vast
deal of money and blood in defending it. If the French king lays siege to
Dunkirk, the English people will force King Charles to take one of two
courses--defence or abdication. In the latter case he might lose his
head, as his father did before him. Furthermore, if King Charles refuses
my first offer, my master will withdraw, in which case London also will
withdraw. Is it not possible that the stars may tell you all this?"

"The conditions you suggest are so probable that one hardly need ask
confirmation of the stars, and so reasonably to be expected are the
events you predict that, beyond question, stellar revelation will be in
accord with your desires. But the stars will say what they will say, and
I shall give King Charles the truth from whatever source it comes," said
Lilly, lifting his head in righteousness and posing as the embodiment of
truth.

"That is all I can ask," returned the Abbe, rising to close the
interview.

"All exceedingly reasonable--reasonable," answered Lilly, bowing.

We returned to the parlor, where we found Frances and Bettina awaiting
us, not patiently, if I could judge by their looks. I asked Lilly to
allow us to occupy the room undisturbed for an hour while the Abbe gave
certain instructions to Frances, but the Doctor did better for us. He
took us to a room enclosed in glass on the roof of his house, where we
could be by ourselves with the sun and the sky overhead, and all London
beneath us.

To this day I am not sure that Lilly did not know Hamilton, but if he
did, he concealed his knowledge completely, feeling, doubtless, that it
would be a dangerous bit of information to himself and of no benefit to
any one else. If George should be discovered by the king, Lilly could
honestly disclaim knowing him. If affairs turned to our desire, the
Doctor could lose nothing by his ignorance whether pretended or real. So
I doubt not he thanked us for the imposture, if he discovered it.

It is needless to say that Bettina, Frances, George, and I were very
pleased to be together once more. We spent a delightful hour in Lilly's
observatory, where we made our plans for the following day, which will
unfold in the order of their occurrence. A great deal of the time we were
all talking at once, but for some strange reason we were all silent when
George said laughingly, though nervously, that the French king had sent
word to Frances that we would pay her ten thousand pounds if George's
mission proved successful.

Having anticipated the possible necessity for quick action at the proper
time, George had brought with him two copies of a treaty, written in
Latin. He brought also plenary authority from the French king, under
the great Seal of France, authorizing Monsieur l'Abbe du Boise to sign,
execute, and deliver the treaty on the part of France and to receive
in return the treaty to be executed by the English king. He also bore
authority to make and deliver to King Charles a bill of exchange on
Backwell, the goldsmith, for the purchase money of Dunkirk. Thus all
would be ready for immediate conclusion the moment King Charles accepted
the French king's offer.

That night near the hour of one o'clock, Lilly called by appointment to
see me at De Grammont's house, coming from Whitehall, where he had been
closeted with the king for three or four hours, explaining to his Majesty
the message of the stars as read by the light of two thousand pounds.

"I explained to his Majesty," said Lilly, "that in all my calculations
and observations, Mars intruded with alarming persistency in conjunction
with King Louis's star. I tried to show him that the recurrences of this
untoward conjunction were so rapid and constant as to denote war at a
very early date if conditions were not affected at once by the
intervention of the messenger, Mercury, whose sign fortunately
accompanied each unfortuitous conjunction. The king, though pretending
to be learned in the noble art of astrology, asked me to translate my
solution, and I did so, almost in the words of Monsieur l'Abbe this
afternoon."

"Thank you," remarked George.

"No, no, do not thank me," said Lilly, disclaiming all credit. "What
Monsieur said was so reasonable and fitted so aptly to the probable
conditions of the future, read in the terrestrial light of the present,
sound reason, that it was hardly necessary to ask the stars. But in
compliance with the king's request, I set my figure and found, as usual,
that the revelations of the stars coincided with the dictates of reason.
It is true the stars sometimes forecast events which seem almost
impossible in view of present conditions, but the questioner of the
heavens who does not use his reason to help his interpretation of the
stars is, to say the least, far from wise."

"Yes," interrupted the Abbe. "But come to the point! What did the king
say?"

"He did not entirely accept the message of the stars," returned Lilly.
"He does not seem to object to war. He says there is no time when it is
as easy to raise money from the people as in times of war. I suggested
that money in the nation's treasury was not in the privy purse, where the
king most wants it. But he said it was only a short journey from the
treasury to the privy purse, and--well, I agreed with him. If you want to
convert a vain, stubborn fool to your way of thinking, don't let him know
what your way is."

"So the stars have failed?" asked the Abbe.

"No," returned Lilly, "they have put the king to thinking, but more, they
have sowed the seeds of fear, a plant which grows rapidly in a coward's
heart by night."

"But not rapidly enough to suit our purposes, I fear," returned the Abbe.

"Yes," insisted Lilly. "If the king's inclination can be changed, fear
will sweep aside all other considerations in a moment, and he will accept
the one hundred thousand pounds which you will offer to-morrow morning.
But in case the king does conclude to accept the French king's offer, the
iron will at once take on a white heat, and--well, iron remains at white
heat only a short time. You must be ready to act quickly when the proper
moment comes, or London will spring between you and the king."

"I shall be ready," returned the Abbe. "The king shall be inclined to our
proposition before another day is past."

"Shall I tell you what the stars predict concerning the signing of the
treaty?" asked Lilly.

"Yes, yes," I answered eagerly.

"I have found Venus in conjunction with--" began Lilly.

"Oh, damn the stars!" cried the Abbe, most uncanonically. "Tell me what
you think about it!"

"The stars tell me that the treaty will be signed to-morrow night--that
is, to-night, this being the early morning," answered the Doctor,
persistently maintaining his attitude of stellar interpreter.

"Very well. Good night, Doctor," said the Abbe. "And may the shadow of
your discretion never grow less."

A moment later I conducted Lilly to the door, and when I returned to De
Grammont, who had not spoken a word during the entire interview, he
shrugged his shoulders and said:--

"Sacrament! What a wise man a fool may be! It is to admire!"

"I doubt if any man is beneficially wise unless he be in part a fool,"
said the Abbe, and I closed the symposium by remarking:--

"Folly tinctures wisdom with common sense, illumines it with imagination,
and gives it everyday usefulness. But best of all, it helps a man to
understand the motives of other fools who constitute the bulk of
mankind."

"Ah, baron," said De Grammont, yawning. "It is all doubtless true. Who
would have expected to find so much cynical wisdom in an Englishman? But
let us to bed!"

Hamilton and I were up by five o'clock the next morning, in consultation.
He was for dropping the matter in so far as it involved Frances, but I
insisted that while it was a disagreeable task for her, she was wise with
a woman's wisdom, calm with a woman's calmness, and bold with a woman's
boldness, which knows no equal when the motive springs from the heart
rather than the head.

We discussed the matter in all its phases, and then I went to the palace
to see Frances. When she arose, I was waiting to tell her that the Abbe
would see the king at ten o'clock and to ask her to wait in the anteroom
of the duchess's parlor. If Charles accepted the French king's offer, I
should pass by her wearing my hat, and she would know that her help would
not be needed. If the king refused, I should carry my hat in my hand, and
she could take her own course with Charles.

"Do you fear?" I asked, being myself very much afraid, for we were
dealing with an absolute monarch, devoid of conscience, devoid of caution
save when prompted by cowardice, but plenteously imbued with venom in his
heart and all things evil in his soul.

"I fear?" cried Frances, tossing her head defiantly.

I thought surely no woman ever was as beautiful as this one, in whose
heart there was no fear, no doubt of self, no faltering in the face of
danger. I asked her to tell me of her plans, and she answered:--

"I have no plan save to see the king. Then the plans will come of
themselves."




CHAPTER XIII

FRANCES DELIVERS THE TREATY


George went to the Shield Gallery in Whitehall at ten o'clock the next
morning, where he found his Majesty, the Lord Chancellor, and a half
score of the king's creatures, including Berkeley, Wentworth, Crofts,
Jermyn, and others of like quality.

These were the men with whom George had to deal. He was known intimately
to each of them, and was hated most heartily by all save the Chancellor.

When George entered the Gallery, the king took his seat in a great chair
of state on a dais at one end of the room, while his counsellors ranged
themselves on either side. I, with a dozen other gentlemen, had been
commanded to be present, not as advisers, but as attendants on the king
to give dignity to the occasion.

George, having been sent to England secretly, had brought no retinue,
since it was desired by every one connected with the affair that his
presence should attract as little attention as possible and thus avoid
alarming London. When George went to Whitehall, he was accompanied only
by De Grammont and a gentleman of the count's household.

While George knelt before his Majesty, asking leave to speak for the
French king, his master, I could not help thinking of the strange
contiguity of antagonisms so frequently observed in one's journey through
this life, nor could I help wondering what would be the fate of the bold
man kneeling before the king if his Majesty could but see through the
Abbe's disguise.

But I had little time for reflection, since George was not one who
allowed matters to drag. On receiving permission to speak, he rose
and went to the point at once in badly broken English, which I shall
not try to reproduce.

"I shall not take up your Majesty's time with idle words," said the
Abbe, glancing at a written memorandum which he held in his hand. "My
master, King Louis, sends greeting to his royal brother, and hopes that
no cause of difference may ever arise to darken the blue sky of peace
that now hangs over two kings, potent as are your Majesty and my master,
and two nations, happy, rich, and powerful as are the noble realms of
France and England. Believing the possession by either monarch of cities
or territory within the other's realm to be a constant menace to this
much-desired peace and amity, my master, the king of France, sends me,
his humble ambassador, with plenary authority, the instrument of which
now lies with your Majesty's noble Lord Chancellor, to make offer to your
Majesty of the great sum of one hundred thousand pounds for the good city
of Dunkirk, which is on territory contiguous to my master's domain."

"The great sum of one hundred thousand pounds!" demanded Charles,
contemptuously. "Does your master consider one hundred thousand pounds a
great sum to pay for so great a city as Dunkirk?"

"It is a great sum to pay, your Majesty," returned the Abbe, with
meekness in his manner, but boldness in his words, "when it is considered
that the king of France might have the city of Dunkirk for the mere
taking, did he not love your Majesty."

"Might have it for the mere taking, say you?" cried Charles, with a flash
of imitation fire. "Odds fish, man! What do you suppose we should be
doing while he was taking it?"

"Sending ships across the Channel at a great cost in money and life to
your people, your Majesty," coolly, though meekly, answered the Abbe.

"Of that my people will not complain," answered Charles, still burning a
pinch of red powder. "Their blood and their gold will be given gladly to
defend my possessions abroad. My people are brave and do not fear death
for the sake of their king, I would have you to know, Sir Abbe."

"Noble praise, your Majesty, and beautiful in the mouth of a king who
stands ready to march at the head of his own army, and to help fight the
good fight of his own cause," returned the Abbe, bowing with deep
humility.

"Sir, your words are bold and are in no way mitigated by your humble
mien!" exclaimed the king. "If you have no other offer to make, the
audience will end, at least for the present."

"May I crave one moment more?" asked the Abbe.

"Yes, but be brief," returned the king.

"My instructions, your Majesty, are to leave London not later than
sunrise on the day after making my king's offer. That will be to-morrow
morning, when I shall hasten back to Paris, whence no other messenger
will come. Twenty thousand troops are now within three hours' march of
Dunkirk. Your Majesty's ships cannot reach the city in time to save it. I
beg to say that I have delivered the entire message intrusted to me by my
august master, and therefore crave your royal permission to withdraw."

The king lifted his right hand in assent, and the Abbe moved backward,
bowing himself from the room. De Grammont, who had come with him, met him
at the door, and immediately they went to the count's house. When they
were gone, the king dismissed all save his counsellors, and I being at
liberty to leave, hastened to her Grace's anteroom. As I passed the door,
my hat in my hand, I bowed to Frances, who was watching me intently. She
smiled, glanced significantly toward my hat, nodded her head to let me
know that she understood, and I passed by, glad that she had the courage
which I so sadly lacked.

Evidently Frances lost no time in doing her part with the king, for two
hours later a page came to me in the Wardrobe, saying that the king
wished to see me immediately. I made all possible haste, and when I
entered the king's closet, he said:--

"Close the door, Clyde," but seemed unable for the moment to say more.

He could not hide his excitement, and presently began telling me in a
peremptory manner that he had a very delicate piece of business for my
hands. He did not seem to feel sure of his ground, and spoke with a
bravado altogether unnecessary, as though he would say I should do
his will whether it suited me or not, rather than in words of respectful
command. I could see easily that his bravado was assumed for the purpose
of forestalling any objection on my part. Of course he did not suspect
for one moment that I surmised what he wanted, or his words would have
been: "Odds fish! To the Tower with him!"

After several stammering efforts, he began: "I want you to see Du Boise,
whom you will find at De Grammont's house, and tell him that I accept
the offer he made this morning. I understand he brings the treaties
from France already written. At eight o'clock this evening they are to
be placed in the hands of your cousin, Mistress Jennings, together with
the bill drawn on Backwell of Lombard Street, for the sum of one hundred
thousand pounds. Deliver my message immediately and secretly. Let no
one know that I have spoken to you on the subject. After you have
seen Du Boise, go to Mistress Jennings and give her word from the Abbe
designating where and at what hour she is to receive the documents. I
suggest eight o'clock, that they may not be in her possession too long.
But wait a moment!"

He went to a writing desk standing near the river window, beckoned to me,
and continued excitedly, "Sit here and write at my dictation."

I sat down before the desk, took a quill, and awaited the king's
pleasure. After a moment's thought he dictated as follows:--

"To MONSIEUR L'ABBE DU BOISE,

"Ambassador Extraordinary from his Majesty,
King Louis of France:

"Out of love for my royal brother, King Louis, and for the purpose of
maintaining the peace and amity now existing between the glorious realms
of England and France, I accept his Majesty's offer to purchase the
city of Dunkirk, communicated to me at this morning's audience. You will
therefore place in the hands of the bearer, Baron Clyde, two copies of a
treaty consummating this transaction which I understand you have already
written out. With said copies you will also place a bill drawn in the
sum of one hundred thousand pounds on one, Edward Backwell, goldsmith,
Lombard Street, with whom I am told the funds lie, and for which this
writing shall be your full acquittance.

"The treaties shall be fully executed by you on the part of your master,
in accordance with the terms of your instrument of authority now resting
with my Lord Chancellor. When said treaties and said bill come to me, the
treaties will be signed, and the copy intended for your master will be
returned to you this evening so that you may carry out your instructions
by leaving at dawn tomorrow morning. To the which I give my reluctant
consent and request that you leave England without further ceremony,
believing that your duty to your master mounts superior to the mere
observation of courtly usage in formal leave-taking.

"Signed by the king's own hand,

"CHARLES R."

"You will see your cousin immediately after your consultation with Du
Boise, and arrange to deliver the documents to her hands privately at the
hour of eight o'clock."

"I beg your Majesty's indulgence for one question," I said, assuming as
well as I could a reluctant manner.

"Yes, yes, but be quick," returned the king.

"It is this," I continued stammeringly. "Is my cousin to deliver the
documents to you after the hour of eight o'clock?"

"That is no affair of yours, and your question is impertinent," answered
the king. "Obey my commands and keep your lips sealed, if you would
oblige your king, save trouble to yourself, and perhaps be rewarded. Hear
me, Clyde! I will brook no interference in this matter. Do you fully
understand?"

"Yes, your Majesty. To obey the king's command is the highest duty I
know," I answered, hanging my head.

"Ah, that is better. Now you may go," said the king, motioning his hand
toward the door.

Frances had been expeditious in doing her part, and I was wondering what
she had done to work so great a change in the king's mind in so short a
time. So I made all haste to see Du Boise in order that I might the
sooner see my cousin and question her. I found Hamilton downcast, but
when I gave him the king's letter, his gloom turned to anger.

"No, no!" he cried, springing from his chair. "Never! Never! Frances is
buying the king's complaisance, God knows at what price! It shall not be!
The cur! The coward! I'll kill him before the hour arrives!"

"Listen to me, George," I insisted, "and for once in your life, don't
be a fool. You will ruin us all if you lose your head at the moment
when success is waiting for us. You, yourself, suggested this plan, and,
thanks to my cousin's courage, it is working out beautifully. I don't
know what she has to propose, nor what she is going to do. I know nothing
of her plans, but I trust her. Can't you?"

"Yes, yes, I trust her," he replied, growing more calm. "But I do not
trust him. She will go to him alone, expecting, doubtless, to escape, but
she does not know the risk she is running."

"Do not fear for her," I answered assuringly. "She will be prepared to
defend herself. Make all things ready, and I'll go to learn of Frances's
plans. You may be sure she will provide some way for her own protection.
When a woman of brains sets out to hoodwink a man, he usually gets what
he deserves, even though he be an absolute king."

"Well, be off, and back again at the earliest possible moment," said
George, resigning himself, under compulsion, to the hard conditions the
situation imposed.

When I left Hamilton, I hastened to Frances and found her expecting me.
She told me her story in a few words:--"The treaty and the bill of
exchange, I believe you call it, are to be placed in my hands to-night
at eight o'clock," she said. "I am trembling now, but I shall be calm
when the time comes. I am to take the documents to the king's closet at
nine o'clock, and am to enter by way of the privy stairs from the river."

"Yes, yes, I know," I answered, and then I told her briefly of the king's
orders.

"You to bring me the papers!" she exclaimed, laughing softly.

"Yes," I answered. "It completes the jest, if it prove to be one. But
tell me, what do you propose to do when you go to the king's closet?"

"You see it was this way," she began, sitting down and smoothing out her
skirts; "I so arranged it that I met his Majesty soon after I saw you
pass with your hat in your hand. He was ready enough to take me for a
walk in the garden, and when he fell under the influence of the sun and
the flowers, he began, as usual, to protest his love. I gave him full
rein,--full rein, Baron Ned,--and after he had talked and protested a
great deal, I told him that he might prove his regard for me if he would.
He asked me in what manner, and said that he would do whatever I asked.

"'It is this, your Majesty,' I answered hesitatingly. 'By accident I met
the Abbe du Boise at Lilly's house yesterday. It seems he had heard of
the kind friendship your Majesty has shown me, and doubtless hoping to
use me, offered me ten thousand pounds if I succeeded in inducing your
Majesty to accept the French king's offer for the city of Dunkirk. Ever
since my interview with him, I have been trying to see your Majesty,
hoping that you might find the information useful, and desiring your
Majesty to know that I was to receive the money in case you accepted,
else I might seem false to my king.'"

I laughed and said: "I knew you would be able to wheedle him. A little
woman with a big motive is like faith, in that she can move mountains."

"Yes, yes, it is easy enough," she answered. "He took my hand, and I
permitted him to hold it for a moment, then withdrew it, you know, as
though impelled by modesty. After duly hanging my head and casting down
my eyes in a very spasm of shyness, I told the king that I hoped he would
accept the French king's offer, and reminded him that it might avert the
terrible consequences of war, in addition to putting ten thousand pounds
in my poor empty little purse. He said he would put the ten thousand
there for me, but I refused, saying that I had never before made a
request of him, and that if he did not see fit to grant this, I should
never make another, but should leave Whitehall at once."

"Ah! the little woman with a big motive pouts if the mountain moves too
slowly. I should like to have heard you talking to him," I said.

"And perhaps you would have spoiled it all," she answered. "We walked
down the path for perhaps three or four minutes, but at length the king
spoke, stammeringly, and said that if I would bring the treaty to his
closet this evening at nine o'clock, he would sign it."

"The dog!" I exclaimed.

"After a long pause, I answered hesitatingly, telling him that I could
not accede to his request, and that I withdrew my petition, craving
permission to leave Whitehall to-morrow. Thereupon he fell into an
ecstasy of entreaty, and when we parted he was very happy, for I had
promised to take the documents to him at nine o'clock. He said I was to
come to the privy stairs leading from the river to his closet and go up
to him for his signature and seal, when he would execute the treaty
immediately and send it by a trusted messenger to the Abbe du Boise."

"Ah, but how will you get away from the closet?" I asked.

"If he will permit me to be the messenger, I can easily escape, but
for fear he will not, you and George shall act as my watermen. Have a
boat waiting for me near the garden stairs at nine o'clock, and we'll go
by river to the king's private stairs. I'll go by myself to his closet
and will come back to you by some means with the signed treaty. And,
Baron Ned, have Betty with you. A woman is always braver with a woman
alongside, and Betty always brings us good luck. Then, too, she can steer
the boat; she knows the river as she knows her father's house. Remember,
nine o'clock, and be sure that Betty is with you."

I went back to George, and when I told him of Frances's plan, he said:--

"If she does not return from the king's closet as soon as we shall have
reason to expect her, we'll fetch her and make a page of history by
leaving a dead king."

"In which case the English people would hang us and then bless us. It is
their fashion. We should be as immortal as Guy Fawkes," I answered;
laughing to keep my courage up.

George stood in revery for a moment and answered as if he were speaking
to himself:--

"But what will happen if we are overpowered in the king's closet? He
always keeps a ruffian guard in his ante-chamber."

"In that sad case, Frances must kill herself and we shall die fighting
unless we preferred Tyburn Hill a day or two later," I answered. "It is
all as plain as day. Why do you not forget that failure is possible? I
have never known you to stand in doubt; why do it now on the eve of
victory?"

"Frances! Frances! Frances! She is why I stand in doubt. My own life is
not worth a farthing, but I have no right to bring her into this
frightful peril."

"She has no fear, and the sooner you drive it out of your heart the
better it will be for our cause."

"I suppose you are right, Baron Ned," he responded with a sigh; "if we go
at this without fear or doubt we can't fail. Go ahead, my friend. May God
forgive us if we are wrong and help us in any case." And I left him
hurriedly, lest I should be infected with his deadly fear.

I next saw Betty, much to my delight, and of course she was eager to help
us.

"Know the river?" she exclaimed, in answer to my question. "I know it as
well as I know Gracious Street. I have shot the arches of London Bridge
with the spring tide going out, and there is many a waterman who would
not dare try it. If need be, I'll take you through the middle arch, where
the flambeau hangs, and land you at Deptford or Sheerness, or Holland, I
care not which." So there was no fear in her heart. If courage was the
touchstone of fortune, we were sure to win, for there was no fear in any
heart save George's, and ordinarily he was the bravest of us all.

When all arrangements were made, even to engaging a small boat, which was
to wait for us at Westminster stairs, I took to my bed for the rest of
the day. At six o'clock I received the treaties and the bill of exchange
from Hamilton and delivered them to Frances. Then I went to fetch
Bettina.

Grammont had offered to go with us, when we explained what we were to do
and the danger in doing it, and we were glad to have him and his sword,
for we might find ourselves in straits where we should need both. He and
Hamilton were to meet me at the head of King's Street. Each of us was to
carry a long sword and to have a pistol, charged and primed, in his belt.

After leaving the parchments with Frances, I hastened to bring Betty up
to Whitehall, and, shortly after eight o'clock, met Du Boise and De
Grammont at King's Street arch, all of us wearing full vizards.

We walked down to the boat, De Grammont frequently taking notice of
Bettina, for, despite her full vizard and an enveloping cloak, she was
far too attractive not to rivet his attention.

When we reached Westminster stairs, we found the boat awaiting us. We did
not want the watermen to go with us, so I bought the boat and dismissed
them.

We entered the boat, and when Bettina took the stern oar, De Grammont
asked:--

"Who is she--the lady on the stern thwart? Can she steer the boat? Does
she know the river?"

"Yes, to all of your questions, count," I answered.

"'Yes' doesn't answer the first question," he returned.

"It isn't to be answered," I replied curtly, and he returned with an
apologetic "Pardon!"

Just before nine o'clock we took Frances aboard at Whitehall Garden
Stairs and drifted slowly down to the king's privy stairs, from which
the narrow flight of steps rose to the king's closet in the story above.

When we drew up at the privy stairs, Frances stepped out of the boat to
the landing and whispered:--

"I shall arrange in some way to return, just as soon as the king signs
the treaty, but if you hear me scream, come to my rescue. I am prepared
to defend myself, and shall give the signal only when I must."

After climbing the narrow steps, she entered the king's closet and found
him alone. Almost at the same instant she caught the sound of heavy steps
in the adjoining room and heard the clang of steel on a bare oak floor.
This demonstration was made, I suppose, by the king's order, for the
purpose of intimidating Frances lest she prove rebellious.

In response to her frightened look of inquiry, the king said, "Only a
half dozen troopers whom I always keep in my anteroom to be at hand if
needed."

"A wise precaution, your Majesty," returned Frances, bringing herself
together as quickly as possible. "Here are the copies of the treaty, your
Majesty, and here is the bill on Backwell. The Abbe du Boise instructed
me to ask your Majesty to sign his copy of the treaty immediately and
return it to him. He waits in a boat at the foot of the privy stairs, and
is anxious to go down the river to his ship before the tide turns."

"Waits at the foot of the stairs?" exclaimed the king. "Odds fish! What
is he doing there? But it shall be done at once. I had the Great Seal
brought to me, so that I might fully execute the treaty without delay. I
supposed the Abbe would desire its immediate return as soon as the money
was paid."

"Yes, your Majesty," answered Frances, growing short of breath from
excitement, "he is waiting below for it."

The king sat down at his desk, signed the treaty, affixed the Great Seal,
returned the parchment to its envelope, and, turning to Frances, said:--

"Now, the first kiss, my beauty!"

"Not now, your Majesty. Please wait till I return," she answered, taking
the treaty from the king's hand without his leave. "I do not want to
disarrange my vizard till after I have returned the parchment to the
Abbe. I fear the watermen will recognize me."

"Who is in the boat with the Abbe?" asked the king.

"His servant, a French gentleman, and two watermen. He insisted on
bringing me, reluctant, doubtless to trust me with the parchments and
the bill," she answered, lying with the ease of a Lombard Street hosier.

But the king, growing suspicious because of her haste, caught her by the
arm, saying: "You remain here. I'll return the treaty."

She drew her arm from the king's grasp and started so hurriedly toward
the door that the king took alarm and followed her, crying out:--

"I tell you I'll send the packet by other hands. You remain here."

She did not stop, so he caught her again by the arm, and spoke sharply:
"You are to remain with me. Do you hear? I'm not to be played with. I'll
send the packet--"

But she broke from his grasp, hastily opened the door, and found
herself not at the head of the privy stairs, but in the king's anteroom,
surrounded by a half dozen men in armor one of whom attempted to seize
her. Instantly she sprang back to the king's closet, screaming, not as a
signal to us, for she had forgotten our agreement in that respect, but in
genuine fright.

Her screams brought George, De Grammont, and myself to the door at the
head of the stairs in less time than one could count ten. We drew our
swords, and I tried to open the door, but found it locked.

"The oars! The heavy oars!" whispered De Grammont.

I ran down the stairs to the boat and was about to ask Bettina to hand me
the oars, when she, anticipating me, whispered:--

"I heard some one call for the oars, so I threw them out. There they
are!"

There they were, true enough, halfway up the water stairs, ready for my
hand, because of Betty's quickness.

In less than ten seconds I was at the top of the stairs again, and within
twenty seconds more we had battered down the door with our heavy ash
oars. In the king's closet we found Frances, surrounded by men at arms,
and the king crouching in a corner, barricaded by small pieces of
furniture.

George fired his pistol, and one of the six men fell, whereupon several
pistol shots were fired, filling the small room with powder smoke, but
injuring no one so far as we knew. De Grammont found an opening in
another man's armor, and four stood between us and Frances. Then the real
fight began--four against three. This would have been heavy odds in an
open field, but it was not so formidable in a small room almost dark with
smoke. Above all, the troopers were fighting for pay; we were fighting
for life.

The four men charged us fiercely, and while we were fighting just inside
the room, Frances worked her way from behind our antagonists toward the
battered door and was about to make her escape when one of the king's men
struck her a cowardly blow with the hilt of his sword, and she fell to
the floor at the head of the stairs.

"You and Hamilton take her to the boat," cried De Grammont, speaking to
me, but continuing to fence, as though by instinct. "I'll hold the door
till you call; then I'll run. The next best thing to fighting is
running."

I regretted the use of Hamilton's name, as it would betray his presence,
if overheard, which otherwise would not have been suspected, all of us
being well masked. But I had no time to waste in vain regrets, so George
and I lifted Frances from the floor and helped her down to the boat,
leaving De Grammont just outside the battered door, defending himself
nobly against four armed men and keeping them inside the king's closet.
He seemed to be enjoying himself, for he was laughing, bowing, parrying,
and thrusting, as though he were at a frolic rather than a fight. There
is but one people on earth in whose blood is mingled fire and ice--the
French.

When we reached the water, we found that the running tide had carried the
boat a short distance down-stream, but Bettina was standing on the stern
thwart, bending this way and that in her endeavor to scull back to the
landing by means of the steering oar. Every drop of blood in Bettina's
plump little body was worth its weight in triple fine gold to us that
night, for she brought the boat back to us without delay, and George
helped Frances aboard while I ran to the foot of the privy stairs,
shouting loudly:--

"Come on, Berkeley! Come quickly!"

Usually I think of the right thing to say a fortnight after the
opportunity, but this once the name Berkeley came to me in the nick of
time, and I evened my score with its possessor for many a dirty trick he
had put upon me. To suspect was to condemn with Charles, and I knew that
if he heard me call Berkeley's name, that consummate villain would suffer
the royal frown. And so he did, never having been able to explain, nor
deny, satisfactorily to the king, his presence at the head of the privy
stairs that night. But to return to the fight.

De Grammont heard my summons, came down the stairs three steps at a time,
and sprang into the boat from the landing.

"The oars! The oars!" cried Hamilton.

"Death is between them and us!" cried De Grammont.

"Let us go!" cried Betty. "I'll scull the boat with the steering oar!"

There was not a man in the boat who knew the art of propelling it with
one oar. Truly Betty was our salvation that night.

I shoved the boat off, Betty turned its head down-stream, and away we
shot. We were not ten paces from the water stairs when five men came
running from the privy stairs to the landing. I recognized the king, who
was in the lead. As they reached the water edge of the landing, I heard
a splash. Majesty, in his eagerness to overtake us, had gathered too
great headway and had landed, if I may use the word, in the water.

The other men, being in armor, were compelled to doff their iron before
jumping in to save the king. The night was dark, but we were so near the
landing that I saw two of the men begin to throw off their armor, and
presently I heard two splashes, followed quickly by two pistol shots in
our direction. In our direction, I say, because both of the balls struck
our boat.

After the pistol shots, all was quiet, but I knew that one of the king's
barges, with a dozen men at as many sweeps, and a score of men at arms,
would soon follow us. I made my way to the stern thwart of our boat,
where Betty was sculling for dear life, taking her course diagonally
across the river toward the Southwark bank. After we had passed the swift
current in the middle of the river, which I thought she had been seeking,
I asked:--

"Why do you not keep to the centre, Betty? You are making toward the
other bank."

"Yes," she replied, with what breath she could spare. "We'll find a stand
of boats tied to poles almost opposite Temple Bar stairs. There we may
take a pair of oars. I'm afraid I can't hold out at this much longer."

We soon found the boat stand, and, with little ceremony, appropriated a
pair of oars, leaving a crown on the thwart of the rifled boat.

Hamilton and I quickly adjusted the stolen sweeps in the oar-locks, Betty
sat down on the stern thwart, guided the boat to the swift water of the
centre, and immediately we sped toward London Bridge at a fine rate.
Presently, as we had expected, we heard the rapid, regular stroke of the
sweeps in the king's barge, and in a few minutes it was so close behind
us that we could see the men at the sweeps. When they saw us, they fired
their pistols at us, but we did not hear the bullets splash in the water,
so we knew they did not have our range.

My greatest fear of the bullets was for Bettina's sake, she being in the
rear and more exposed to the enemy's fire than we who were at the sweeps,
but I could not leave my oar to take her place, nor could I have steered
the boat had I done so, being unfamiliar with the river. All I could do
was to hasten our stroke, which George and I did to our utmost, and soon
the welcome beacon over the centre arch of London Bridge came into view,
dimly at first, but brightening with every stroke of our sweeps. As we
approached the Bridge, De Grammont nervously called our attention to the
danger ahead of us.

"Yes, we'll take the middle arch, and I shall enjoy seeing the king's
barge follow us," I answered, with what breath I could spare.

"Take the middle arch, and the tide running as a river in flood?" cried
De Grammont, speaking French, being too excited to sort out English
words. "Never! Never! Let me out!"

"Do not fear, count," I answered. "Our pilot--"

"Our pilot! Ah, sacrament! We are lost! Our pilot is a mere girl!"

"But a wonder, count, a wonder. There is no waterman on the river in
whose hands we should be safer," I replied, expressing my confidence in
stronger terms than it really deserved. To shoot London Bridge when the
tide was running out, as it then was, would give pause to the hardiest
waterman. A misstroke of the steering oar, the slightest faltering in the
hands that held it, the mere touch of the boat's nose against the jagged
rocks and logs of the pier, and all would be lost.

We could not stop to put De Grammont on shore, and presently recognizing
that fact, he sat down in resignation in the bow of the boat, remarking
with a sigh, as though speaking to himself:--

"Ah, the beautiful land!"

By that time the flambeau was blazing not two hundred yards ahead of us.
The current had caught us, and the waves of the running tide came almost
to the gunwale of the boat. Bettina had risen to her feet, leaving her
hat, vizard, and cloak in the bottom of the boat, and was standing on the
stern thwart, her back towards us and her face up-stream. Behind us,
perhaps three hundred yards, came the king's great barge, ablaze with
torches. The men in the barge had ceased firing, supposing, probably,
that we should be forced to land above the Bridge, and should then become
an easy prey. But we had Bettina with us; they had not. Besides ours,
there was not another one in the world.

On came the flambeau over the middle arch. It seemed to be coming toward
us rather than we going toward it. Nearer lowered the black dim outline
of the houses on the Bridge, with here and there the flicker of a candle
in a window, magnified to starlike brightness by distance.

Clearer and clearer came the dash and the splash, the roar and the
turmoil of the waters pouring through the terrible death's door, the
middle arch. Yet over the middle arch was the only flambeau on London
Bridge, placed there because it was the broadest of all the spans, and
we dared not attempt to pass under the Bridge in the dark.

But worse than the middle arch ahead of us was the king's barge following
close behind us. It, too, was in the current, though its twelve sweeps
could easily have taken it ashore. I suppose that pride and eagerness to
overtake us prompted its captain to follow in our wake. At any rate, he
continued and was narrowing the distance between us with each stroke of
the sweeps. When I asked Bettina if she thought they would attempt the
arch, she replied:--

"I hope not," then laughing softly, "--for their own sakes. The royal
barges are not built to shoot the bridge."

As we approached the bridge, Betty turned her eyes backward toward it
every few seconds, taking her bearings and bringing the boat's nose now
a little to the right, now to the left, and again holding it straight
ahead.

When we were within twenty yards of the middle arch, she told us to cease
rowing, and we obeyed, leaving the boat in her hands.

The roar of the falling waters, tumbling in a cataract on the further
side of the Bridge, frightened me, but if Betty heard it she did not fear
it, for she began to sing the plaintive little French lullaby we had so
often heard, and De Grammont, leaning forward, touched me on the back as
he whispered:--

"God gives us an angel to steer our boat."

The next moment the water caught us in its mighty suck, just under the
upper edge of the arch, and almost before we were aware that we had
started through, our boat made a plunge on the lower side, the perilous
moment was past, and we were floating in comparatively still water two
score yards below London Bridge.

Then Captain Bettina resumed her seat on the stern thwart, and we dipped
our oars.

We were turning about to get under way again, when De Grammont cried
out:--

"Mon Dieu! They are lost! There they go under! Ah, Jesu!"

We all turned our eyes toward the Bridge, but were too late to see the
barge. It had sunk in four fathoms of water, and every man aboard had
gone down with it.

We backed water, resting on our oars, and presently the overturned barge
came to the surface and floated past us, telling its sad story, "Perished
in a bad king's bad cause,"--a story written on almost every page of the
world's history.

A short distance below the Tower, we met a large boat belonging to
the ship in which George had come from France, which was waiting off
Sheerness to take him back. The boat had been plying between Deptford and
the Bridge, looking for George, since early evening. We recognized it by
its long sweeps, and when we hailed it, we received the password and drew
alongside.

All this time Frances had been allowed to sit in the bottom of the boat,
she having assured us that she had taken no injury, but as we approached
the French boat she arose, and when I asked her if she was hurt, she
said, "No."

When I asked her if she had the treaty, she replied, holding out her hand
to George:--

"Yes, here it is. It would have been a pity, indeed, to have lost it
after all our trouble."

As we drew alongside the French boat, Hamilton whispered to Frances:--

"You have nothing to fear from the king. This affair shows him in a light
so ridiculous that he will not care to make it public, and besides, he
will not want to return the hundred thousand pounds. You will be safe in
London, and I shall write to you just as soon as I return to France. If
King Louis's reward proves to be what I expect, I pray you come to me,
for, after this affair, I dare not set my foot in England."

At that moment we touched the other boat, and the Frenchmen grappled us
to hold us alongside. George had risen and was about to step aboard, when
Frances, catching him by the arm, drew him back and sprang aboard the
French boat ahead of him, saying:--

"I shall not wait for a letter. I am going with you now."

George followed her into the other boat, and as it drew away, I saw him
bending low to kiss her hand. Then he shouted "Good-by!" and soon we
could see nothing but the black water between us.

Betty began to weep, and after a moment I began to swear, for I did not
like to see my cousin go off in this manner. De Grammont relieved his
mind by a shrug of his shoulders, took the oar that George had abandoned,
and without a word we started up-stream again.




CHAPTER XIV

HER LADYSHIP'S SMILE


We landed at the Old Swan stairs below the Bridge on Lower Thames Street,
and went to the end of the Bridge, where De Grammont waited till I had
taken Bettina home.

When I returned to the Bridge, the count and I took coach, and after a
rapid journey across silent London, I arrived at the palace just as Old
Tom of Westminster was striking eleven.

I climbed over the porch to my closet and reached there none too soon,
for I was hardly in bed when my door opened and in walked the king
followed by two men bearing candles. I pretended to be in a deep sleep
and when aroused sprang from my bed seemingly half dazed and ready to
defend myself, till the king spoke, when, of course, I was humble enough.

"How long have you been here?" demanded the king.

"All night I suppose, your Majesty; what time is it now?"

"Past eleven!" the king answered.

"In what may I serve your Majesty?" I asked.

"By telling me the truth!" he said, glaring at me and whining out his
words. "Do you know anything about the attack on my closet this evening?"

Nothing is ever gained by denying, so I took a leaf from woman's logic,
and answered his question by another.

"An attack on your Majesty's closet?" I cried. Then after a long pause,
and with a manner of deep injury, I demanded: "Has anything untoward
befallen my cousin? I carried out your Majesty's instructions without
objection or protest. I intrusted her to your care, and it is my right
and my duty to demand an account of her and to hold your Majesty
responsible for her welfare."

He looked at me for a moment with a hang-dog expression on his face, but
he could not stand my gaze, so he turned on his heel and left the room
without another word.

He was not convinced of my guilt, nor would he believe me innocent.
Evidently the royal verdict was "not proven." But in any case I knew that
my favor at court was at an end.

During the next week I constantly importuned the king to tell me what
had become of my cousin, and intimated my intention to make trouble in
terms so plain--for I knew the king's favor was lost to me--that my Lord
Clarendon was instructed to offer me a sum of money to say nothing more
about the matter. I agreed to accept the money, it was paid, and I
remained silent.

Frequently the difference between an acted lie and a spoken lie is the
difference between success and failure. Then, too, the acted lie has this
advantage; there is no commandment against it. We should congratulate
ourselves that so many pleasant sins were omitted on Sinai.

At the end of a week after our great adventure I went to the country, and
within a fortnight returned to find that my place in the Wardrobe was
taken by another, and my place in the king's smile by the world at large;
at least, it was lost to me.

When a wise courtier loses his king's smile, he takes himself out of his
king's reach. Therefore I cast about in my mind for a London friend who
would like to possess my title. I thought of Sir William Wentworth,
rather of his wife, and suggested to her that for the sum of thirty
thousand pounds I would resign my estates and title to the king, if Sir
William would arrange for their transfer to himself. The transfer
directly from me to him was not within the limits of the law. It could
only be made through the king by forfeiture and grant. But the like had
happened many times before, and could be accomplished now if the king
were compensated for his trouble.

Wentworth broached the subject to our august sovereign who, in
consideration of the sum of ten thousand pounds "lent" by Sir William to
his Majesty, and because he was glad to conciliate a prominent citizen of
London, that city being very angry on account of the sale of Dunkirk,
agreed to the transfer, and the baronetcy of Clyde with the appurtenant
estates passed to the house of Wentworth, where, probably, they brought
trouble to Sir William and joyous discontent to his aspiring lady.

Aside from the fact that I knew the king's ill temper was cumulative, I
had received a hint, coming through Castlemain's maid to Rochester, that
if I remained in England, the king would despoil me. Then, too, I had
other reasons for making the sale. I was sick of England's fawning on a
poor weak creature, as cowardly as he was dull, and almost as dull as he
was vicious, and longed to flee to the despotism of strength as I should
find it in France under Louis XIV. There was still another reason, of
which I shall speak later.

Three days after the consummation of my sale to Sir William Wentworth,
Count Hamilton returned, and, learning of the manner in which I had
disgraced myself, withdrew his challenge, sending De Grammont to tell me
the sad news. He would not honor me by killing me.

"Why did you sell your title and estates?" asked De Grammont.

"I have several good reasons, my dear count," I answered. "The first
is that I should have lost them had I not sold them. While the king
does not know that I was connected with the fight on the privy stairs,
he doubtless suspected it, for I have lived in the royal frown ever
since. The second reason is that I hate Charles Stuart, and, admiring at
least the strength of your king's tyranny, desire to live in France. King
Louis says he is the state, and by heaven, he is! Charles Stuart knows
that he is nothing, and he is right!"

"Give me your hand, baron!" cried De Grammont, a smile of satisfaction
spreading over his face. "I now tell you my secret. No one else knows it.
The purchase of Dunkirk has bought for me the smile of my master. I have
been recalled to Versailles. I return to La Belle France within a
fortnight! Come with me! I'll show you a king in very deed, and promise
furthermore that his smile shall be for you!"

"I can't go with you, my dear count," I returned gratefully. "But I
promise to see you soon in Paris. I suppose you will take with you the
elder Mistress Hamilton, to whom I understand you have long been plighted
in marriage, or will you return for her?"

"O-o-oh! Return for her, dear baron, return for her!" answered the count,
shrugging his shoulders.

To close the chapter of De Grammont's life in England, I would say that
he kept the secret of his recall to France, and one night after dark left
his house near the Mall, taking a coach to Dover without saying to
Mistress Hamilton when he would return.

But Mistress Hamilton had two brothers still in England, Count Anthony
and James, who, catching wind of De Grammont's exodus, took horse and a
small escort, made all possible speed, and came up with De Grammont's
coach some six or eight leagues east of London.

Count Anthony rode up to one door of the coach, while James brought his
horse to the other.

"Good morning, count," said Anthony, bending down to the coach window.

"Good morning, my dear count," returned De Grammont, blandly.

"Is there not something you have forgotten, count?" asked Anthony.

"Odds fish! Yes! I forgot to marry your sister," answered De Grammont,
appropriating the king's oath, and apparently astounded at his own
forgetfulness. "Thank you, dear count, for reminding me. I'll go back
to London and do it at once."

"Your parole?" asked Anthony.

"Yes, the word of a De Grammont," answered the count, whereupon the
Hamiltons lifted their hats and galloped home, knowing certainly that De
Grammont would follow.

De Grammont reached London soon after sun-up, and, true to his word,
married Miss Hamilton, blessed his stars ever afterward for having done
so, and gave her no cause for unhappiness save a French one.

Soon after the sale to Wentworth, I received a letter from George telling
me that King Louis had not only made him rich, but had appointed him
Governor of Dunkirk, with promise of further advancement. George said,
also, that the French king, having heard of my part in the Dunkirk
transaction and my disgrace with my king, had offered to advance my
interest if I would go to France. In a postscript to the letter, which
was much longer than the letter itself, Frances told me how she and
George had been married immediately on landing in France, and were living
very happily in Paris, where they would remain until George should take
up the government of Dunkirk.

So it had all fallen out just as one might have expected to find it
in a story-book. George had been proved by Fortune's touchstone, and
her Ladyship had chosen him for her smile. He had won the long odds.

What remains to be told is simply the denouement of my own affairs.

       *       *       *       *       *

At the time of my transaction with Wentworth I said nothing to Bettina
about the sale of my title and estates, but when I heard that our friends
were safe and happy in France, I went down to the Old Swan, with more
fear than I should have thought possible, to broach a certain matter,
which was very near my heart, to Betty and her father.

I knew that in so far as Betty herself was concerned, I should find no
trouble, but I also knew that I might find difficulty in persuading her
to leave her father, for duty was a tremendous word in Betty's
vocabulary.

When I reached the Old Swan, policy and fear each told me that it
would be safer to attack Betty and her father separately. The odds of
two against one, in this case, I feared would be too great for me to
overcome. So I led Betty to her parlor,--rather she led me,--and after a
preliminary skirmish, I told her I had come to see her on a most
important piece of business.

"I'm glad to see you, whatever brings you, Baron Ned," she answered,
smoothing out her skirts in anticipation of an interesting budget of
news.

"But I'm no longer 'Baron Ned,' Betty," I informed her.

She asked a hundred questions with her eyes and eyebrows, and I hastily
answered them by telling of the sale to Wentworth.

"Ah, I'm so sorry," she answered, "and I'm so glad, too, that I could
cry. You don't seem so much above me nor so far away."

"That was my chief reason for selling my title and estates," I answered,
reaching forward and taking her hand, which for the first time she did
not withdraw. "I sold them, Betty, for a large price, but my reason for
so doing was one that could not be measured by money. I want you for my
wife, Betty, and my title, at least, stood between us. I should have
given it away if I could not have sold it, because I want you, Betty,
more than anything else in all the world."

"Ah, please don't, Baron Ned!" she cried, bringing her handkerchief to
her eyes. "It can't be. I'm not so selfish as to take you at your word."

I was sitting on the cushioned bench by the wall, and she was in a chair
facing me, within easy reach, so I caught her wrists and drew her to me,
whispering:--

"Sit here, Bettina, by my side, and tell me why it cannot be, for I
pledge you my honor I am not to be denied." She resisted for a moment,
but at last sat down beside me, and I put my arm about her, despite her
fluttering struggle. "Now, tell me why, Bettina. I need not tell you that
you have my love. You know it without the telling."

She nodded her head "Yes," and covered her face with her hands.

"And am I wrong in believing that I possess your love?" I asked.

She shook her head to indicate that I was not wrong, and the little
gesture was as good as an oath to me. After her confession, she would
not dare to resist me, nor did she, save to say pleadingly:--

"Please, Baron Ned, it cannot be."

Tears were trickling down her cheeks, and I could see that she was in
great trouble.

"I do not ask you to come to me now," I said, "but you may take a long
time, if you wish--a day, or two, or even three, if you insist. But
Betty, I am not to be refused, and you may as well understand now and for
all that you are to be my wife. But tell me, Betty, what is your reason
for denying me at this time?"

She dried her eyes, sat erect, and answered in a voice full of tears:
"Well, you are so far above me that the time might come when you would
be ashamed of me."

"Nothing of the sort, Betty. Drop that argument at once. You know you do
not mean it. You are not speaking the exact truth. There is no sweetness,
no beauty, like yours."

"Do you really mean it, Baron Ned?" she answered, smiling up to me.

"Yes, yes, every word and a thousand more," I answered.

"But I am so unworthy," she said.

"You're pretending, Betty," I answered, and I argued so well that she
abandoned her position.

"Now, give me another reason, Betty," I demanded, feeling encouraged by
the success of my first bout. To this she answered with great hesitancy,
murmuring her words almost inaudibly:--

"I could not leave father."

That was the reason I had feared, and when I drew away from her, showing
my great disappointment in my face, she took one of my hands in both of
hers, saying:--

"Not that I should not be happy to go with you anywhere, but you see I am
all the world to father. He would die without me."

Here, of course, I might expect tears, nor was I disappointed. I, too,
found the tears coming to my eyes, for her grief touched me keenly, and
her love for her father showed me even more plainly than I had ever
before known the unselfish tenderness of the girl I so longed to possess.
It was hard for me to speak against this argument of hers; for it was
like finding fault with the best part of her, so for a little time we
were silent. After a minute or two, she glanced up to me and, seeing my
great trouble, murmured brokenly:--

"If you think I am worth waiting for, and if you will wait till father is
gone, I will go with you, and your smallest and greatest wish alike shall
be mine. And when you become ashamed of me, I'll--"

"I'll not wait, Betty," I answered, ignoring the latter half of her
remark. "I have a far better plan. I am going to France, and you and
your father shall go with me."

"Ah, will you take him?" she cried, falling to the floor on her knees,
creeping between mine, and clasping her hands about my neck. Her sweet,
warm breath came to me like a waft from a field of roses, the fluffy
shreds of her hair tingled my cheek, thrilling me to the heart, while the
touch of her hand and the clasp of her arm carried me to heaven.

Then she laid her head on my breast, her lips came close to mine, and she
murmured with a sigh:--

"Now, Baron Ned, as you will."

I told Betty to call Pickering, and when he came in I related my story.
I told him how Betty and I were of one mind, how George had prospered in
France and had invited me to share his good fortune, how I wanted to go
to France and to take Bettina with me, and how I wanted him to sell the
Old Swan and go with us to the fair land across the Channel, where his
wealth would give him station such as he deserved.

Immediately he objected, saying that the scheme was impossible. He said
that he could sell the Old Swan for a great sum to Robbins, of the Dog's
Head, and that all he possessed, aside from the inn, was in gold, lodged
with Backwell, but for all that, my plan could not be considered for a
moment.

"My dear Pickering, hear my side of the case," I insisted, determined to
win this last bout as I had won the others. "You love your daughter and
would be unhappy if she were to leave you alone in the world?"

"Indeed I should be," he answered firmly. "I will not consider your
suggestion. I will not. I will not."

"She is more generous than you," I returned, "and refuses to leave you,
though she would be very unhappy if you force her to remain."

"I suppose you think so," he replied sullenly.

"I know so," I answered, "and can prove it by Betty." Betty nodded her
head "Yes," and I continued: "You will not be unhappy in France with us.
You will be happy. Yet you refuse to be happy save in your own stubborn
way, even though you bring grief to the tenderest heart in the world. But
come, come, Pickering! This will not do! I tell you, I'm not to be
refused!"

Pickering lapsed into stubborn silence, and as there is no arguing with a
man who will not argue, I determined to take another course; so I spoke
sharply:--

"Since you will not be reasonable, I have another plan to suggest: I
will give up my prospects of fortune in France, and will live here in
this rotten Old Swan as long as you live, never taking Betty from your
side. If you do not give her to me under these conditions, I will take
her away without any conditions. Eh, Betty?"

Betty hung in the wind for a moment, then nodded slowly:--

"Yes."

Pickering covered his face with his hands for a moment, then looked up to
me and asked:--

"Would you do that, baron? Would you come down from your high estate to
our lowly condition for the sake of my poor little girl?"

"Yes, Pickering," I answered.

Then after a moment's thought, he said: "I'll sell the Old Swan and go
with you to France."

Betty took my hand, then she grasped her father's, drew him down to her
and kissed him.

So Betty and I were married in the little chapel at the Southwark end
of London Bridge, and off we went to our friends in France, where
God blessed us and we were very happy. We had all been tried by the
Touchstone of Fortune, and had won her Ladyship's smile! May God comfort
those on whom she frowns!




NOTE


Baron Clyde seems to be the only writer of the period of Charles II who
mentions the part taken by George Hamilton and Frances Jennings in the
sale of the city of Dunkirk, but, of course, the particulars of that
disgraceful affair would have been kept a secret from all save those who
participated in it.

It is said that Nell Gwynn, John Churchill, and Sarah Jennings were
younger than Baron Clyde indicates. Therefore there are many discerning
persons who hold that he was "idealizing" when he wrote of them being at
court at the time Dunkirk was sold.

There appears to be some ground for the criticism.

But in all essential respects the baron's history is held, justly, to be
true to facts and conditions, and that, after all, is the main thing.
Exact truth is evasive; therefore the virtues of approximation are not to
be deprecated.



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE TOUCHSTONE OF FORTUNE***


******* This file should be named 14242.txt or 14242.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/1/4/2/4/14242



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.net/fundraising/pglaf.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://www.gutenberg.net/about/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.net/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit:
http://www.gutenberg.net/fundraising/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

