The Project Gutenberg EBook of MacMillan & Co.'s General Catalogue of
Works in the Departments of History, Biography, Travels, and Belles Lettres, December, 1869, by Unknown

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: MacMillan & Co.'s General Catalogue of Works in the Departments of History, Biography, Travels, and Belles Lettres, December, 1869

Author: Unknown

Release Date: December 15, 2004 [EBook #14359]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MACMILLAN & CO.'S CATALOGUE ***




Produced by Jonathan Ingram, Joshua Hutchinson and the PG Online
Distributed Proofreading Team.





The Project Gutenberg EBook of Macmillan & Co.'s General Catalogue

Works in the Departments of History, Biography, Travels, and Belles
Lettres, with some short Account of Critical Notice concerning each Book.




Contents
========


Contents
SECTION I--HISTORY, BIOGRAPHY, and TRAVELS
   Baker (Sir Samuel W.).
   R. Dudley, M.A.
   Bernard
   Blake
   Bright (John, M.P.)
   Bryce
   Clay
   Cooper
   Dilke
   Forbes
   Freeman
   French (George Russell)
   Gladstone (Right. Hon. W.E., M.P.)
   Guizot--(Author of "_John Halifax, Gentleman_.")
   Hole
   Hozier
   Irving
   Kingsley (Canon)
   Latham
   Law
   Liverpool
   Maclear
   Macmillan (Rev. Hugh)
   Martin
   Martineau
   Masson (Professor)
   Morison
   Morley (John)
   Mullinger
   Palgrave
   Palgrave (W.G.)
   Parkes (Henry)
   Ralegh
   Robinson (Crabb)
   Rogers (James E. Thorold)
   Smith (Professor Goldwin)
   Tacitus
   Taylor (Rev. Isaac)
   Trench (Archbishop)
   Trench (Mrs. R)
   Trench (Capt. F., F.R.G.S.)
   Trevelyan (G.O., M.P.)
   Vaughan (late Rev. Dr. Robert, of the British Quarterly)
   Wallace
   Ward (Professor)
   Warren.
   Wilson.
   Wilson (Daniel, LL.D.).
SECTION II.
   Allingham.
   Arnold (Matthew).
   Barnes (Rev. W.).
   Bell.
   Besant.
   Bradshaw.
   Brimley.
   Clough (Arthur Hugh).
   Dante
   De Vere
   Doyle (Sir F.H.).
   Evans
   Furnivall.
   Garnett.
   Hamerton.
   Helps
   Herschel
   Kennedy
   Kingsley (Canon).
   Kingsley (Henry).
   Lowell.
   Masson (Professor).
   Mistral (F.).
   Myers (Ernest).
   Myers (F.W.H.)
   Nettleship
   Noel
   Norton
   Orwell
   Palgrave (Francis T.).
   Patmore
   Rossetti
   Rossetti (W.M.).
   Roby
   Shairp (Principal).
   Smith
   Smith
   Smith (Rev. Walter).
   Stratford de Redcliffe (Viscount).
   Trench
   Turner
   Vittoria Colonna
   Webster
   Woolner
GLOBE EDITIONS.
   Shakespeare
   Morte D'Arthur
   Scott
   Burns
   Robinson Crusoe
   Goldsmith
   Pope
   Spenser
GOLDEN TREASURY SERIES.
   THE GOLDEN TREASURY OF THE BEST SONGS AND LYRICAL POEMS IN THE ENGLISH
   LANGUAGE.
   THE CHILDREN'S GARLAND FROM THE BEST POETS.
   THE BOOK OF PRAISE.
   THE FAIRY BOOK;
   THE BALLAD BOOK.
   THE JEST BOOK.
   BACON'S ESSAYS AND COLOURS OF GOOD AND EVIL.
   THE PILGRIM'S PROGRESS
   THE SUNDAY BOOK OF POETRY FOR THE YOUNG.
   A BOOK OF GOLDEN DEEDS
   THE POETICAL WORKS OF ROBERT BURNS.
   THE ADVENTURES OF ROBINSON CRUSOE.
   THE REPUBLIC OF PLATO. TRANSLATED
   THE SONG BOOK.
   LA LYRE FRANCAISE.
   TOM BROWN'S SCHOOL DAYS.





__Macmillan & Co.'s General Catalogue_ of Works in the Departments of
History, Biography, Travels, and Belles Lettres, with some short Account
or Critical Notice concerning each Book_.





SECTION I--HISTORY, BIOGRAPHY, and TRAVELS
==========================================




Baker (Sir Samuel W.).
----------------------


THE NILE TRIBUTARIES OF ABYSSINIA, and the Sword-Hunters of the Hamran
Arabs. By _Sir Samuel W. Baker_, M.A., F.R.C.S. With Portraits, Maps, and
Illustrations. Third Edition, 8vo. 21_s_.

_Sir Samuel Baker here describes twelve months' exploration, during which
he examined the rivers that are tributary to the Nile from Abyssinia,
including the Atbara, Settite, Royan, Salaam, Angrab, Rahad, Dinder, and
the Blue Nile. The interest attached to these portions of Africa differs
entirely from that of the White Nile regions, as the whole of Upper Egypt
and Abyssinia is capable of development, and is inhabited by races having
some degree of civilization; while Central Africa is peopled by a race of
savages, whose future is more problematical_.

THE ALBERT N'YANZA Great Basin of the Nile, and Exploration of the Nile
Sources. New and cheaper Edition, with Portraits, Maps, and Illustrations.
Two vols. crown 8vo. 16_s_.

"_Bruce won the source of the Blue Nile; Speke and Grant won the Victoria
source of the great White Nile; and I have been permitted to succeed in
completing the Nile Sources by the discovery of the great reservoir of the
equatorial waters, the Albert N'yanza, from which the river issues as the
entire White Nile_."--_Preface_.

CAST UP BY THE SEA; or, The Adventures of _Ned Grey_. By _Sir Samuel W.
Baker_, M.A., F.R.G.S. Second Edition. Crown 8vo. cloth gilt, 7_s_. 6_d_.

"_A story of adventure by sea and land in the good old style. It appears
to us to be the best book of the kind since 'Masterman Ready,' and it runs
that established favourite very close._"--_Pall Mall Gazette_.

"_No book written for boys has for a long time created so much interest,
or been so successful. Every parent ought to provide his boy with a
copy._"--_Daily Telegraph_.




R. Dudley, M.A.
---------------


THE TAXATION OF THE UNITED KINGDOM. By _R. Dudley Baxter_, M.A. 8vo.
cloth, 4_s_. 6_d_.

_The First Part of this work, originally read before the Statistical
Society of London, deals with the Amount of Taxation; the Second Part,
which now constitutes the main portion of the work, is almost entirely
new, and embraces the important questions of Rating, of the relative
Taxation of Land, Personalty, and Industry, and of the direct effect of
Taxes upon Prices. The author trusts that the body of facts here collected
may be of permanent value as a record of the past progress and present
condition of the population of the United Kingdom, independently of the
transitory circumstances of its present Taxation._

NATIONAL INCOME. With Coloured Diagrams. 8vo. 3_s_. 6_d_.

_Part I._--_Classification of the Population, Upper, Middle, and Labour
Classes_. II.--_Income of the United Kingdom_.

"_A painstaking and certainly most interesting inquiry._"--_Pall Mall
Gazette_.




Bernard
-------


FOUR LECTURES ON SUBJECTS CONNECTED WITH DIPLOMACY. By _Mountague
Bernard_, M.A., Chichele Professor of International Law and Diplomacy,
Oxford. 8vo. 9_s_.

_Four Lectures, dealing with_ (1) _The Congress of Westphalia_; (2)
_Systems of Policy_; (3) _Diplomacy, Past and Present_; (4) _The
Obligations of Treaties_.




Blake
-----


THE LIFE OF WILLIAM BLAKE, THE ARTIST. By _Alexander Gilchrist_. With
numerous Illustrations from Blake's designs, and Fac-similes of his
studies of the "Book of Job." Two vols. medium 8vo. 32_s_.

_These volumes contain a Life of Blake; Selections from his Writings,
including Poems; Letters; Annotated Catalogue of Pictures and Drawings;
List, with occasional notes, of Blake's Engravings and Writings. There are
appended Engraved Designs by Blake_: (1) _The Book of Job, twenty-one
photo-lithographs from the originals_; (2) _Songs of Innocence and
Experience, sixteen of the original Plates_.




Bright (John, M.P.)
-------------------


SPEECHES ON QUESTIONS OF PUBLIC POLICY. By _John Bright_, M.P. Edited by
Professor _Thorold Rogers_. Two Vols. 8vo. 25_s_. Second Edition, with
Portrait.

"_I have divided the Speeches contained in these volumes into groups. The
materials for selection are so abundant, that I have been constrained to
omit many a speech which is worthy of careful perusal. I have naturally
given prominence to those subjects with which Mr. Bright has been
especially identified, as, for example, India, America, Ireland, and
Parliamentary Reform. But nearly every topic of great public interest on
which Mr. Bright has spoken is represented in these volumes._"--_Editor's
Preface._

AUTHOR'S POPULAR EDITION. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth. Second Edition. 3_s_.
6_d_.




Bryce
-----


THE HOLY ROMAN EMPIRE. By _James Bryce_, B.C.L., Fellow of Oriel College,
Oxford. _[Reprinting._

CAMBRIDGE CHARACTERISTICS. _See_ _Mullinger_.




Clay
----


THE PRISON CHAPLAIN. A Memoir of the Rev. _John Clay_, B.D., late Chaplain
of the Preston Gaol. With Selections from his Reports and Correspondence,
and a Sketch of Prison Discipline in England. By his Son, the Rev. _W.L.
Clay_, M.A. 8vo. 15_s_.

_"Few books have appeared of late years better entitled to an attentive
perusal.... It presents a complete narrative of all that has been done and
attempted by various philanthropists for the amelioration of the condition
and the improvement of the morals of the criminal classes in the British
dominions."_--_London Review_.




Cooper
------


ATHENAE CANTABRIGIENSES. By _Charles Henry Cooper_, F.S.A., and _Thompson
Cooper_, F.S.A. Vol. I. 8vo., 1500-85, 18_s_. Vol. II., 1586-1609, 18_s_.

_This elaborate work, which is dedicated by permission to Lord Macaulay,
contains lives of the eminent men sent forth by Cambridge, after the
fashion of Anthony a Wood, in his famous "Athenae Oxonienses."_




Dilke
-----


GREATER BRITAIN. A Record of Travel in English-speaking Countries during
1866-7. (America, Australia, India.) By Sir _Charles Wentworth Dilke_,
M.P. Cheap Edition. Crown 8vo. 6_s_.

_"Mr. Dilke has written a book which is probably as well worth reading as
any book of the same aims and character that ever was written. Its merits
are that it is written in a lively and agreeable style, that it implies a
great deal of physical pluck, that no page of it fails to show an acute
and highly intelligent observer, that it stimulates the imagination as
well as the judgment of the reader, and that it is on perhaps the most
interesting subject that can attract an Englishman who cares about his
country."_--_SATURDAY REVIEW_.

EARLY EGYPTIAN HISTORY FOR THE YOUNG. _See_ "_Juvenile Section_."




Forbes
------


LIFE OF PROFESSOR EDWARD FORBES, F.R.S. By _George Wilson_, M.D.,
F.R.S.E., and _Archibald Geikie_, F.R.S. 8vo. with Portrait, 14_s_.

_"From the first page to the last the book claims careful reading, as
being a full but not overcrowded rehearsal of a most instructive life, and
the true picture of a mind that was rare in strength and
beauty."_--_EXAMINER_.




Freeman
-------


HISTORY OF FEDERAL GOVERNMENT, from the Foundation of the Achaian League
to the Disruption of the United States. By _Edward A. Freeman_, M.A. Vol.
I. General Introduction. History of the Greek Federations. 8vo. 21_s_.

_"The task Mr. Freeman has undertaken is one of great magnitude and
importance. It is also a task of an almost entirely novel character. No
other work professing to give the history of a political principle occurs
to us, except the slight contributions to the history of representative
government that is contained in a course of M. Guizof's lectures.... The
history of the development of a principle is at least as important as the
history of a dynasty, or of a race."_--_Saturday Review_.




French (George Russell)
-----------------------


SHAKSPEAREANA GENEALOGICA. 8vo. cloth extra, 15_s_. Uniform with the
"Cambridge Shakespeare."

_Part I.--Identification of the_ dramatis personae _in the historical
plays, from King John to King Henry VIII.; Notes on Characters in Macbeth
and Hamlet; Persons and Places belonging to Warwickshire alluded to. Part
II.--The Shakspeare and Arden families and their connexions, with Tables
of descent. The present is the first attempt to give a detailed
description, in consecutive order, of each of the_ dramatis personae _in
Shakspeare's immortal chronicle-histories, and some of the characters have
been, it is believed, herein identified for the first time. A clue is
furnished which, followed up with ordinary diligence, may enable any one,
with a taste for the pursuit, to trace a distinguished Shakspearean worthy
to his lineal representative in the present day._




Gladstone (Right. Hon. W.E., M.P.)
----------------------------------


JUVENTUS MUNDI. The Gods and Men of the Heroic Age. Crown 8vo. cloth
extra. With Map. 10_s_. 6_d_.

_This new work of Mr. Gladstone deals especially with the historic element
in Homer, expounding that element, and furnishing by its aid a full
account of the Homeric men and the Homeric religion. It starts, after the
introductory chapter, with a discussion of the several races then existing
in Hellas, including the influence of the Phoenicians and Egyptians. It
contains chapters on the Olympian system, with its several deities; on the
Ethics and the Polity of the Heroic age; on the geography of Homer; on the
characters of the Poems; presenting, in fine, a view of primitive life and
primitive society as found in the poems of Homer._

"GLOBE" ATLAS OF EUROPE. Uniform in size with Macmillan's Globe Series,
containing 45 Coloured Maps, on a uniform scale and projection; with Plans
of London and Paris, and a copious Index. Strongly bound in half-morocco,
with flexible back, 9_s_.

_This Atlas includes all the countries of Europe in a series of 48 Maps,
drawn on the same scale, with an Alphabetical Index to the situation of
more than ten thousand places, and the relation of the various maps and
countries to each other is defined in a general Key-map. All the maps
being on a uniform scale facilitates the comparison of extent and
distance, and conveys a just impression of the relative magnitude of
different countries. The size suffices to show the provincial divisions,
the railways and main roads, the principal rivers and mountain ranges.
"This atlas," writes the_ British Quarterly_, "will be an invaluable boon
for the school, the desk, or the traveller's portmanteau."_




Guizot--(Author of "_John Halifax, Gentleman_.")
------------------------------------------------


--M. DE BARANTE, A Memoir, Biographical and Autobiographical. By _M.
Guizot_. Translated by the Author of "_John Halifax, Gentleman_." Crown
8vo. 6_s_. 6_d_.

_"The highest purposes of both history and biography are answered by a
memoir so lifelike, so faithful, and so philosophical."_--_British
Quarterly Review_.

HISTORICAL SELECTIONS. Readings from the best Authorities on English and
European History. Selected and arranged by _E.M. Sewell_ and _C.M. Yonge_.
Crown 8vo. 6_s_.

_When young children have acquired the outlines of history from
abridgements and catechisms, and it becomes desirable to give a more
enlarged view of the subject, in order to render it really useful and
interesting, a difficulty often arises as to the choice of books. Two
courses are open, either to take a general and consequently dry history of
facts, such as Russell's Modern Europe, or to choose some work treating of
a particular period or subject, such as the works of Macaulay and Froude.
The former course usually renders history uninteresting; the latter is
unsatisfactory, because it is not sufficiently comprehensive. To remedy
this difficulty, selections, continuous and chronological, have in the
present volume been taken from the larger works of Freeman, Milman,
Palgrave, and others, which may serve as distinct landmarks of historical
reading. "We know of scarcely anything," says the_ Guardian, _of this
volume, "which is so likely to raise to a higher level the average
standard of English education."_




Hole
----


A GENEALOGICAL STEMMA OF THE KINGS OF ENGLAND AND FRANCE. By the Rev. _C.
Hole_, M.A., Trinity College, Cambridge. On Sheet, 1_s_.

_The different families are printed in distinguishing colours, thus
facilitating reference._

A BRIEF BIOGRAPHICAL DICTIONARY. Compiled and Arranged by the Rev.
_Charles Hole_, M.A. Second Edition. 18mo. neatly and strongly bound in
cloth, 4_s_. 6_d_.

_One of the most comprehensive and accurate Biographical Dictionaries in
the world, containing more than 18,000 persons of all countries, with
dates of birth and death, and what they were distinguished for. Extreme
care has been bestowed on the verification of the dates; and thus numerous
errors, current in previous works, have been corrected. Its size adapts it
for the desk, portmanteau, or pocket._

_"An invaluable addition to our manuals of reference, and, from its
moderate price, cannot fail to become as popular as it is
useful."_--_Times_.




Hozier
------


THE SEVEN WEEKS' WAR; its Antecedents and its Incidents. By _H.M. Hozier_.
With Maps and Plans. Two vols. 8vo. 28_s_.

_This work is based upon letters reprinted by permission from_ "The
Times." _For the most part it is a product of a personal eye-witness of
some of the most interesting incidents of a war which, for rapidity and
decisive results, may claim an almost unrivalled position in history._




Irving
------


THE ANNALS OF OUR TIME. A Diurnal of Events, Social and Political, which
have happened in or had relation to the Kingdom of Great Britain, from the
Accession of Queen Victoria to the Opening of the present Parliament. By
_Joseph Irving_. 8vo. half-bound. 18_s_.

_"We have before us a trusty and ready guide to the events of the past
thirty years, available equally for the statesman, the politician, the
public writer, and the general reader. If Mr. Irving's object has been to
bring before the reader all the most noteworthy occurrences which have
happened since the beginning of Her Majesty's reign, he may justly claim
the credit of having done so most briefly, succinctly, and simply, and in
such a manner, too, as to furnish him with the details necessary in each
case to comprehend the event of which he is in search in an intelligent
manner. Reflection will serve to show the great value of such a work as
this to the journalist and statesman, and indeed to every one who feels an
interest in the progress of the age; and we may add that its value is
considerably increased by the addition of that most important of all
appendices, an accurate and instructive index_."--_Times_.




Kingsley (Canon)
----------------


ON THE ANCIEN REGIME as it Existed on the Continent before the _French
Revolution_. Three Lectures delivered at the Royal Institution. By the
Rev. _C. Kingsley_, M.A., formerly Professor of Modern History in the
University of Cambridge. Crown 8vo. 6_s_.

_These three lectures discuss severally_ (1) _Caste_, (2)
_Centralization_, (3) _The Explosive Forces by which the Revolution was
superinduced. The Preface deals at some length with certain political
questions of the present day_.

THE ROMAN AND THE TEUTON. A Series of Lectures delivered before the
University of Cambridge. By Rev. _C. Kingsley_, M.A. 8vo. 12_s_.

_Contents_:--_Inaugural Lecture; The Forest Children; The Dying Empire;
The Human Deluge; The Gothic Civilizer; Dietrich's End; The Nemesis of the
Goths; Paulus Diaconus; The Clergy and the Heathen; The Monk a Civilizer;
The Lombard Laws; The Popes and the Lombards; The Strategy of Providence._




Latham
------


BLACK AND WHITE: a Journal of a Three Months' Tour in the United States.
By _Henry Latham_, M.A., Barrister-at-Law. 8vo. 10_s_. 6_d_.

"_The spirit in which Mr. Latham has written about our brethren in America
is commendable in high degree._"--_Athenaeum_.




Law
---


THE ALPS OF HANNIBAL. By _William John Law_, M.A., formerly Student of
Christ Church, Oxford. Two vols. 8vo. 21_s_.

"_No one can read the work and not acquire a conviction that, in addition
to a thorough grasp of a particular topic, its writer has at command a
large store of reading and thought upon many cognate points of ancient
history and geography._"--_Quarterly Review_.




Liverpool
---------


THE LIFE AND ADMINISTRATION OF ROBERT BANKS, SECOND EARL OF LIVERPOOL,
K.G. Compiled from Original Family Documents by _Charles Duke Yonge_,
Regius Professor of History and English Literature in Queen's College,
Belfast; and Author of "The History of the British Navy," "The History of
France under the Bourbons," etc. Three vols. 8vo. 42_s_.

_Since the time of Lord Burleigh no one, except the second Pitt, ever
enjoyed so long a tenure of power; with the same exception, no one ever
held office at so critical a time.... Lord Liverpool is the very last
minister who has been able fully to carry out his own political views; who
has been so strong that in matters of general policy the Opposition could
extort no concessions from him which were not sanctioned by his own
deliberate judgment. The present work is founded almost entirely on the
correspondence left behind him by Lord Liverpool, and now in the
possession of Colonel and Lady Catherine Harcourt._

"_Full of information and instruction._"--_Fortnightly Review_.




Maclear
-------


_See Section_, "_Ecclesiastical History_."




Macmillan (Rev. Hugh)
---------------------


HOLIDAYS ON HIGH LANDS; or, Rambles and Incidents in search of Alpine
Plants. By the Rev. _Hugh Macmillan_, Author of "Bible Teachings in
Nature," etc. Crown 8vo. cloth. 6_s_.

"_Botanical knowledge is blended with a love of nature, a pious
enthusiasm, and a rich felicity of diction not to be met with in any works
of kindred character, if we except those of Hugh Miller._"--_Daily
Telegraph_.

FOOT-NOTES FROM THE PAGE OF NATURE. With numerous Illustrations. Fcap.
8vo. 5_s_.

"_Those who have derived pleasure and profit from the study of flowers and
ferns_--_subjects, it is pleasing to find, now everywhere popular_--_by
descending lower into the arcana of the vegetable kingdom, will find a
still more interesting and delightful field of research in the objects
brought under review in the following pages_."--_Preface_.




Martin
------


THE STATESMAN'S YEAR BOOK FOR 1869. By FREDERICK MARTIN. (Sixth Annual
Publication.) A Statistical, Mercantile, and Historical Account of the
Civilized World for the Year 1868. Forming a Manual for Politicians and
Merchants. Published annually. Crown 8vo. 10s, 6_d_.

"_Everybody who knows this work is aware that it is a book that is
indispensable to writers, financiers, politicians, statesmen, and all who
are directly or indirectly interested in the political, social,
industrial, commercial, and financial condition of their fellow-creatures
at home and abroad. Mr. Martin deserves warm commendation for the care he
takes in making 'The Statesman's Year Book' complete and correct."_--
_Standard_.




Martineau
---------


BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCHES, 1852--1868. By _Harriet Martineau_. Third Edition,
with New Preface. Crown 8vo. 8s, 6_d_.

_A Collection of Memoirs under these several sections:--_(1)_Royal_, (2)
_Politicians_, (3)_Professional_, (4)_Scientific_, (5)_Social_,
(6)_Literary. These Memoirs appeared originally in the columns of the_
"Daily News."




Masson (Professor)
------------------


ESSAYS, BIOGRAPHICAL AND CRITICAL. _See Section headed_ "_Poetry And
Belles Lettres_"

LIFE OF JOHN MILTON. Narrated in connexion with the Political,
Ecclesiastical, and Literary History of his Time. By _David Masson_, M.A.,
LL.D., Professor of Rhetoric at Edinburgh. Vol. I. with Portraits. 8vo.
18_s_. Vol. II. in the Press.

_It is intended to exhibit Milton's life in its connexions with all the
more notable phenomena of the period of British history in which it was
cast--its state politics, its ecclesiastical variations, its literature
and speculative thought. Commencing in 1608, the Life of Milton proceeds
through the last sixteen years of the reign of James I., includes the
whole of the reign of Charles I. and the subsequent years of the
Commonwealth and the Protectorate, and then, passing the Restoration,
extends itself to 1674, or through fourteen years of the new state of
things under Charles II. The first volume deals with the life of Milton as
extending from 1608 to 1640, which was the period of his education and of
his minor poems._




Morison
-------


THE LIFE AND TIMES OF SAINT BERNARD, Abbot of Clairvaux. By _James Cotter
Morison_, M.A. New Edition, revised. Crown 8vo. 7_s_. 6_d_.

"_One of the best contributions in our literature towards a vivid,
intelligent, and worthy knowledge of European interests and thoughts and
feelings during the twelfth century. A delightful and instructive volume,
and one of the best products of the modern historic spirit_."--_Pall Mall
Gazette_.




Morley (John)
-------------


EDMUND BURKE, a Historical Study. By _John Morley_, B.A. Oxon. Crown 8vo.
7_s_. 6_d_.

"_The style is terse and incisive, and brilliant with epigram and point.
It contains pithy aphoristic sentences which Burke himself would not have
disowned. But these are not its best features: its sustained power of
reasoning, its wide sweep of observation and reflection, its elevated
ethical and social tone, stamp it as a work of high excellence, and as
such we cordially recommend it to our readers._"--_Saturday Review_.




Mullinger
---------


CAMBRIDGE CHARACTERISTICS IN THE SEVENTEENTH CENTURY. By _J.B. Mullinger_,
B.A. Crown 8vo. 4_s_. 6_d_.

"_It is a very entertaining and readable book._"--_Saturday Review_.

"_The chapters on the Cartesian Philosophy and the Cambridge Platonists
are admirable._"--_Athenaeum_.




Palgrave
--------


HISTORY OF NORMANDY AND OF ENGLAND. By Sir _Francis Palgrave_, Deputy
Keeper of Her Majesty's Public Records. Completing the History to the
Death of William Rufus. Four vols. 8vo. L4 4_s_.

_Volume I. General Relations of Mediaeval Europe--The Carlovingian
Empire--The Danish Expeditions in the Gauls--And the Establishment of
Rollo. Volume II. The Three First Dukes of Normandy; Rollo, Guillaume
Longue-Epee, and Richard Sans-Peur--The Carlovingian line supplanted by
the Capets. Volume III. Richard Sans-Peur--Richard Le-Bon--Richard
III.--Robert Le Diable--William the Conqueror. Volume IV. William
Rufus--Accession of Henry Beauclerc_.




Palgrave (W.G.)
---------------


A NARRATIVE OF A YEAR'S JOURNEY THROUGH CENTRAL AND EASTERN ARABIA,
1862-3. By _William Gifford Palgrave_, late of the Eighth Regiment Bombay
N.I. Fourth and cheaper Edition. With Maps, Plans, and Portrait of Author,
engraved on steel by Jeens. Crown 8vo. 7_s_. 6_d_.

"_Considering the extent of our previous ignorance, the amount of his
achievements, and the importance of his contributions to our knowledge, we
cannot say less of him than was once said of a far greater discoverer. Mr.
Palgrave has indeed given a new world to Europe._"--_Pall Mall Gazette_.




Parkes (Henry)
--------------


AUSTRALIAN VIEWS OF ENGLAND. By _Henry Parkes_. Crown 8vo. cloth. 3_s_.
6_d_.

"_The following letters were written during a residence in England, in the
years 1861 and 1862, and were published in the_ Sydney Morning Herald _on
the arrival of the monthly mails.... On re-perusal, these letters appear
to contain views of English life and impressions of English notabilities
which, as the views and impressions of an Englishman on his return to his
native country after an absence of twenty years, may not be without
interest to the English reader. The writer had opportunities of mixing
with different classes of the British people, and of hearing opinions on
passing events from opposite standpoints of observation._"--_Author's
Preface_.




Ralegh
------


THE LIFE OF SIR WALTER RALEGH, based upon Contemporary Documents. By
_Edward Edwards_. Together with Ralegh's Letters, now first collected.
With Portrait. Two vols. 8vo. 32_s_.

"_Mr. Edwards has certainly written the Life of Ralegh from fuller
information than any previous biographer. He is intelligent, industrious,
sympathetic: and the world has in his two volumes larger means afforded it
of knowing Ralegh than it ever possessed before. The new letters and the
newly-edited old letters are in themselves a boon._"--_Pall Mall Gazette_.




Robinson (Crabb)
----------------


DIARY, REMINISCENCES, AND CORRESPONDENCE OF CRABB ROBINSON. Selected and
Edited by Dr. _Sadler_. With Portrait. Three vols. 8vo. cloth. 36_s_.

_Mr. Crabb Robinson's Diary extends over the greater part of
three-quarters of a century. It contains personal reminiscences of some
of the most distinguished characters of that period, including Goethe,
Wieland, De Quincey, Wordsworth (with whom Mr. Crabb Robinson was on
terms of great intimacy), Madame de Stael, Lafayette, Coleridge, Lamb,
Milman, &c. &c.: and includes a vast variety of subjects, political,
literary, ecclesiastical, and miscellaneous._




Rogers (James E. Thorold)
-------------------------


HISTORICAL GLEANINGS: A Series of Sketches. Montague, Walpole, Adam Smith,
Cobbett. By Rev. _J.E.T. Rogers_. Crown 8vo. 4_s_. 6_d_.

_Professor Rogers's object in the following sketches is to present a set
of historical facts, grouped round a principal figure. The essays are in
the form of lectures._




Smith (Professor Goldwin)
-------------------------


THREE ENGLISH STATESMEN: PYM, CROMWELL, PITT. A Course of Lectures on the
Political History of England. By _Goldwin Smith_, M.A. Extra fcap. 8vo.
New and Cheaper Edition. 5_s_.

"_A work which neither historian nor politician can safely afford to
neglect._"--_Saturday Review_.




Tacitus
-------


THE HISTORY OF TACITUS, translated into English. By _A.J. Church_, M.A.
and _W.J. Brodribb_, M.A. With a Map and Notes. 8vo. 10_s_. 6_d_.

_The translators have endeavoured to adhere as closely to the original as
was thought consistent with a proper observance of English idiom. At the
same time it has been their aim to reproduce the precise expressions of
the author. This work is characterised by the_ Spectator _as "a scholarly
and faithful translation."_




Taylor (Rev. Isaac)
-------------------


WORDS AND PLACES; or Etymological Illustrations of History, Etymology, and
Geography. By the Rev. ISAAC TAYLOR. Second Edition. Crown 8vo. 12_s_.
6_d_.

"_Mr. Taylor has produced a really useful book, and one which stands alone
in our language._"--_Saturday Review_.

THE AGRICOLA AND GERMANIA. Translated into English by _A.J. Church_, M.A.
and _W.J. Brodribb_, M.A. With Maps and Notes. Extra fcap. 8vo. 2_s_.
6_d_.

_The translators have sought to produce such a version as may satisfy
scholars who demand a faithful rendering of the original, and English
readers who are offended by the baldness and frigidity which commonly
disfigure translations. The treatises are accompanied by introductions,
notes, maps, and a chronological summary. The_ Athenaeum _says of this
work that it is "a version at once readable and exact, which may be
perused with pleasure by all, and consulted with advantage by the
classical student."_




Trench (Archbishop)
-------------------


GUSTAVUS ADOLPHUS: Social Aspects of the Thirty Years' War. By _R.
Chenevix Trench_, D.D., Archbishop of Dublin. Fcap. 8vo. _2_s_. 6d_.

"_Clear and lucid in style, these lectures will be a treasure to many to
whom the subject is unfamiliar_."--_Dublin Evening Mail_.




Trench (Mrs. R)
---------------


Edited by ARCHBISHOP TRENCH. Remains of the late _Mrs. Richard Trench_.
Being Selections from her Journals, Letters, and other Papers. New and
Cheaper Issue, with Portrait, 8vo. _6s_.

_Contains notices and anecdotes illustrating the social life of the
period--extending over a quarter of a century (1799--1827). It includes
also poems and other miscellaneous pieces by Mrs. Trench_.




Trench (Capt. F., F.R.G.S.)
---------------------------


THE RUSSO-INDIAN QUESTION, Historically, Strategically, and Politically
considered. By Capt. _Trench_, F.R.G.S. With a Sketch of Central Asiatic
Politics and Map of Central Asia. Crown 8vo. _7_s_. 6d_.

"_The Russo-Indian, or Central Asian question has for several obvious
reasons been attracting much public attention in England, in Russia, and
also on the Continent, within the last year or two.... I have thought that
the present volume, giving a short sketch of the history of this question
from its earliest origin, and condensing much of the most recent and
interesting information on the subject, and on its collateral phases,
might perhaps be acceptable to those who take an interest in
it_."--_Author's Preface_.




Trevelyan (G.O., M.P.)
----------------------


CAWNPORE. Illustrated with Plan. By _G.O. Trevelyan_, M.P., Author of "The
Competition Wallah." Second Edition. Crown 8vo. _6_s_._

"_In this book we are not spared_ one fact _of the sad story; but our
feelings are not harrowed by the recital of imaginary outrages. It is good
for us at home that we have one who tells his tale so well as does Mr.
Trevelyan_."--_Pall Mall Gazette_.

THE COMPETITION WALLAH. New Edition. Crown 8vo, _6s_.

"_The earlier letters are especially interesting for their racy
descriptions of European life in India..... Those that follow are of more
serious import, seeking to tell the truth about the Hindoo character and
English influences, good and bad, upon it, as well as to suggest some
better course of treatment than that hitherto adopted_."--_Examiner_.




Vaughan (late Rev. Dr. Robert, of the British Quarterly)
--------------------------------------------------------


MEMOIR OF ROBERT A. VAUGHAN. Author of "Hours with the Mystics."
By _Robert Vaughan_, D.D. Second Edition, revised and enlarged.
Extra fcap. 8vo. _5s_.

"_It deserves a place on the same shelf with Stanley's 'Life of
Arnold', and Carlyle's 'Stirling'. Dr. Vaughan has performed his
painful but not all unpleasing task with exquisite good taste and
feeling_."--_Nonconformist_.




Wallace
-------


THE MALAY ARCHIPELAGO: the Land of the Orang Utan and the Bird of
Paradise. A Narrative of Travels with Studies of Man and Nature; By
_Alfred Russel Wallace_. With Maps and Illustrations. Second Edition.
Two vols. crown 8vo. _24s_.

"_A carefully and deliberately composed narrative.... We advise our
readers to do as we have done, read his book through_."--_Times_.




Ward (Professor)
----------------


THE HOUSE OF AUSTRIA IN THE THIRTY YEARS' WAR. Two Lectures, with Notes
and Illustrations. By _Adolphus W. Ward_, M.A., Professor of History in
Owens College, Manchester. Extra fcap. 8vo. _2_s_. 6d_.

"_Very compact and instructive_."--_Fortnightly Review_.




Warren.
-------


AN ESSAY ON GREEK FEDERAL COINAGE. By the Hon. _J. Leicester Warren_, M.A.
8vo. 2_s_. 6_d_.

"_The present essay is an attempt to illustrate Mr. Freeman's Federal
Government by evidence deduced from the coinage of the times and countries
therein treated of_."--_Preface_.




Wilson.
-------


A MEMOIR OF GEORGE WILSON, M. D., F.R.S.E., Regius Professor of Technology
in the University of Edinburgh. By his SISTER. New Edition. Crown 8vo.
6_s_.

"_An exquisite and touching portrait of a rare and beautiful spirit_."
_Guardian_.




Wilson (Daniel, LL.D.).
-----------------------


PREHISTORIC ANNALS OF SCOTLAND. By _Daniel Wilson_, LL.D., Professor of
History and English Literature in University College, Toronto. New
Edition, with numerous Illustrations. Two vols. demy 8vo. 36_s_.

_This elaborate and learned work is divided into four Parts. Part I. deals
with_ The Primeval or Stone Period: _Aboriginal Traces, Sepulchral
Memorials, Dwellings, and Catacombs, Temples, Weapons, &c. &c.; Part II.,_
The Bronze Period: _The Metallurgic Transition, Primitive Bronze, Personal
Ornaments, Religion, Arts, and Domestic Habits, with other topics; Part
III.,_ The Iron Period: _The Introduction of Iron, The Roman Invasion,
Strongholds, &c. &c.; Part IV.,_ The Christian Period: _Historical Data,
the Norrie's Law Relics, Primitive and Mediaeval Ecclesiology,
Ecclesiastical and Miscellaneous Antiquities. The work is furnished with
an elaborate Index._

PREHISTORIC MAN. New Edition, revised and partly re-written, with numerous
Illustrations. One vol. 8vo. 21_s_.

_This work, which carries out the principle of the preceding one, but with
a wider scope, aims to "view Man, as far as possible, unaffected by those
modifying influences which accompany the development of nations and the
maturity of a true historic period, in order thereby to ascertain the
sources from whence such development and maturity proceed." It contains,
for example, chapters on the Primeval Transition; Speech; Metals; the
Mound-Builders; Primitive Architecture; the American Type; the Red Blood
of the West, &c. &c._





SECTION II.
===========


                        POETRY AND BELLES LETTRES.




Allingham.
----------


--LAWRENCE BLOOMFIELD IN IRELAND; or, the New Landlord. By _William
Allingham_. New and cheaper issue, with a Preface. Fcap. 8vo. cloth, 4_s_.
6_d_.

_In the new Preface, the state of Ireland, with special reference to the
Church measure, is discussed._

"_It is vital with the national character.... It has something of Pope's
point and Goldsmiths simplicity, touched to a more modern
issue_."--ATHENAEUM.




Arnold (Matthew).
-----------------


--POEMS. By _Matthew Arnold_. Two vols. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 12_s_.
Also sold separately at 6_s_. each.

_Volume I. contains Narrative and Elegiac Poems; Volume II. Dramatic and
Lyric Poems. The two volumes comprehend the First and Second Series of the
Poems, and the New Poems._

NEW POEMS. Extra fcap. 8vo. 6_s_. 6_d_.

_In this volume will be found "Empedocles on Etna"; "Thyrsis" (written in
commemoration of the late Professor Clough); "Epilogue to Lessing's
Laocooen;" "Heine's Grave"; "Obermann once more." All these poems are also
included in the Edition (two vols.) above-mentioned._

ESSAYS IN CRITICISM. New Edition, with Additions. Extra fcap. 8vo. 6_s_.

CONTENTS:--_Preface; The Function of Criticism at the present time; The
Literary Influence of Academies; Maurice de Guerin; Eugenie die Guerin;
Heinrich Heine; Pagan and Mediaeval Religious Sentiment; Joubert; Spinoza
and the Bible; Marcus Aurelius._




Barnes (Rev. W.).
-----------------


--POEMS OF RURAL LIFE IN COMMON ENGLISH. By the REV. _W. Barnes_, Author
of "Poems of Rural Life in the Dorset Dialect." Fcap. 8vo. 6_s_.

_"In a high degree pleasant and novel. The book is by no means one which
the lovers of descriptive poetry can afford to lose."_--_Athenaeum_.




Bell.
-----


--ROMANCES AND MINOR POEMS. By _Henry Glassford Bell_. Fcap. 8vo. 6_s_.

"_Full of life and genius_."--_Court Circular_.




Besant.
-------


--STUDIES IN EARLY FRENCH POETRY. By _Walter Besant_, M.A. Crown. 8vo.
8_s_. 6_d_.

_A sort of impression rests on most minds that French literature begins
with the "siecle de Louis Quatorze;" any previous literature being for the
most part unknown or ignored. Few know anything of the enormous literary
activity that began in the thirteenth century, was carried on by Rulebeuf,
Marie de France, Gaston de Foix, Thibault de Champagne, and Lorris; was
fostered by Charles of Orleans, by Margaret of Valois, by Francis the
First; that gave a crowd of versifiers to France, enriched, strengthened,
developed, and fixed the French language, and prepared the way for
Corneille and for Racine. The present work aims to afford information and
direction touching the early efforts of France in poetical literature._

"_In one moderately sized volume he has contrived to introduce us to the
very best, if not to all of the early French poets_."--_Athenaeum_.




Bradshaw.
---------


--AN ATTEMPT TO ASCERTAIN THE STATE OF CHAUCER'S WORKS, AS THEY WERE LEFT
AT HIS DEATH. With some Notes of their Subsequent History. By _Henry
Bradshaw_, of King's College, and the University Library, Cambridge. [_In
the Press_.




Brimley.
--------


--ESSAYS BY THE LATE GEORGE BRIMLEY, M.A. Edited by the Rev. _W.G. Clark_,
M.A. With Portrait, Cheaper Edition. Fcap. _3_s_. 6_d_._

_Essays on literary topics, such as Tennyson's "Poems" Carlyle's "Life of
Stirling," "Bleak House," &c., reprinted from_ Fraser, _the_ Spectator,
_and like periodicals_.




Clough (Arthur Hugh).
---------------------


--THE POEMS AND PROSE REMAINS OF ARTHUR HUGH CLOUGH. With a Selection from
his Letters and a Memoir. Edited by his Wife. With Portrait. Two vols.
crown 8vo. _21_s_._. Or Poems separately, as below.

_The late Professor Clough is well known as a graceful, tender poet, and
as the scholarly translator of Plutarch. The letters possess high
interest, not biographical only, but literary--discussing, as they do, the
most important questions of the time, always in a genial spirit. The
"Remains" include papers on "Retrenchment at Oxford;" on Professor F.W.
Newmarfs book "The Soul;" on Wordsworth; on the Formation of Classical
English; on some Modern Poems (Matthew Arnold and the late Alexander
Smith), &c. &c._

THE POEMS OF ARTHUR HUGH CLOUGH, sometime Fellow of Oriel College, Oxford.
With a Memoir by _F.T. Palgrave_. Second Edition. Fcap. 8vo. _6_s_._

_"From the higher mind of cultivated, all-questioning, but still
conservative England, in this our puzzled generation, we do not know of
any utterance in literature so characteristic as the poems of Arthur Hugh
Clough."_--_Fraser's Magazine_.




Dante
-----


DANTE'S COMEDY, THE HELL. Translated by _W.M. Rossetti_. Fcap. 8vo. cloth.
5_s_.

"_The aim of this translation of Dante may be summed up in one
word--Literality.... To follow Dante sentence for sentence, line for line,
word for word--neither more nor less--has been my strenuous endeavour_."
--_Author's Preface_.




De Vere
-------


THE INFANT BRIDAL, and other Poems. By _Aubrey De Vere_. Fcap. 8vo. 7_s_
6_d_.

"_Mr. De Vere has taken his place among the poets of the day. Pure and
tender feeling, and that polished restraint of style which is called
classical, are the charms of the volume_."--_Spectator_.




Doyle (Sir F.H.).
-----------------


--Works by Sir _Francis Hastings Doyle_, Professor of Poetry in the
University of Oxford:--

THE RETURN OF THE GUARDS, AND OTHER POEMS. Fcap. 8vo. 7_s_.

"_Good wine needs no bush, nor good verse a preface; and Sir Francis
Doyle's verses run bright and clear, and smack of a classic vintage....
His chief characteristic, as it is his greatest charm, is the simple
manliness which gives force to all he writes. It is a characteristic in
these days rare enough_."--_Examiner_.

LECTURES ON POETRY, delivered before the University of Oxford in 1868.
Extra crown 8vo. 3_s_. 6_d_.

THREE LECTURES:--(1) _Inaugural_; (2) _Provincial Poetry_; (3) _Dr.
Newman's "Dream of Gerontius_."

"_Full of thoughtful discrimination and fine insight: the lecture on
'Provincial Poetry' seems to us singularly true, eloquent, and
instructive_."--_Spectator_.




Evans
-----


BROTHER FABIAN'S MANUSCRIPT, AND OTHER POEMS. By _Sebastian Evans_. Fcap.
8vo. cloth. 6_s_.

"_In this volume we have full assurance that he has 'the vision and the
faculty divine.'... Clever and full of kindly humour_."--_Globe_.




Furnivall.
----------


--_Le Morte D'Arthur_. Edited from the _Harleian_ M.S. 2252, in the
British Museum. By _F.J. Furnivall_, M.A. With Essay by the late _Herbert
Coleridge_. Fcap. 8vo. 7_s_. 6_d_.

_Looking to the interest shown by so many thousands in Mr. Tennyson's
Arthurian poems, the editor and publishers have thought that the old
version would possess considerable interest. It is a reprint of the
celebrated Harleian copy; and is accompanied by index and glossary_.




Garnett.
--------


--IDYLLS AND EPIGRAMS. Chiefly from the Greek Anthology. By _Richard
Garnett_. Fcap. 8vo. 2_s_. 6_d_.

"_A charming little book. For English readers, Mr. Garnett's translations
will open a new world of thought_."--_Westminster Review_.

GUESSES AT TRUTH. By _Two Brothers_. With Vignette, Title, and
Frontispiece. New Edition, with Memoir. Fcap. 8vo. 6_s_.

"_ The following year was memorable for the commencement of the 'Guesses
at Truth.' He and his Oxford brother, living as they did in constant and
free interchange of thought on questions of philosophy and literature and
art; delighting, each of them, in the epigrammatic terseness which is the
charm of the 'Pensees' of Pascal, and the 'Caracteres' of La
Bruyere--agreed to utter themselves in this form, and the book appeared,
anonymously, in two volumes, in 1827_."--_Memoir_.




Hamerton.
---------


--A PAINTER'S CAMP. By _Philip Gilbert Hamerton_. Second Edition, revised.
Extra fcap. 8vo. 6_s_.

BOOK I. _In England_; BOOK II. _In Scotland_; BOOK III. _In France. This
is the story of an Artist's encampments and adventures. The headings of a
few chapters may serve to convey a notion of the character of the book: A
Walk on the Lancashire Moors; the Author his own Housekeeper and Cook;
Tents and Boats for the Highlands; The Author encamps on an uninhabited
Island; A Lake Voyage; A Gipsy Journey to Glen Coe; Concerning Moonlight
and Old Castles; A little French City: A Farm in the Autunois, &c., &c._

"_His pages sparkle with happy turns of expression, not a few well-told
anecdotes, and many observations, which are the fruit of attentive study
and wise reflection on the complicated phenomena of human life, as well as
of unconscious nature_."--_Westminster Review_.




Helps
-----


REALMAH. By _Arthur Helps_. Two Vols. Crown 8vo. 16_s_.

_Of this work, by the Author of "Friends in Council," the_ Saturday Review
_says: "Underneath the form (that of dialogue) is so much shrewdness,
fancy, and above all, so much wise kindliness, that we should think all
the better of a man or woman who likes the book_."




Herschel
--------


THE ILIAD OF HOMER. Translated into English Hexameters. By Sir _John
Herschel_, Bart. 8vo. 18_s_.

_A version of the Iliad in English Hexameters. The question of Homeric
translation is fully discussed in the Preface_.

"_It is admirable, not only for many intrinsic merits, but as a great
man's tribute to Genius_."--_Illustrated London News_.

HIATUS: the Void in Modern Education. Its Cause and Antidote. By _Outis_.
8vo. 8_s_. 6_d_.

_The main object of this Essay is to point out how the emotional element
which underlies the Fine Arts is disregarded and undeveloped at this time
so far as (despite a pretence at filling it up) to constitute an
Educational Hiatus_.

HYMNI ECCLESIAE. _See_ "_Theological Section_."




Kennedy
-------


LEGENDARY FICTIONS OF THE IRISH CELTS. Collected and Narrated by _Patrick
Kennedy_. Crown 8vo. 7_s_. 6_d_.

"_A very admirable popular selection of the Irish fairy stories and
legends, in which those who are familiar with Mr. Croker's, and other
selections of the same kind, will find much that is fresh, and full of the
peculiar vivacity and humour, and sometimes even of the ideal beauty, of
the true Celtic Legend_."--_Spectator_.




Kingsley (Canon).
-----------------


--_See also_ "_Historic Section_," "_Works Of Fiction_," _and_
"_Philosophy_;" _also_ "_Juvenile Books_," _and_ "_Theology_."

THE SAINTS' TRAGEDY: or, The True Story of Elizabeth of Hungary. By the
Rev. _Charles Kingsley_. With a Preface by the Rev. _F.D. Maurice_. Third
Edition. Fcap. 8vo. 5_s_.

ANDROMEDA, AND OTHER POEMS. Third Edition. Fcap. 8vo. 5_s_.

PHAETHON; or, Loose Thoughts for Loose Thinkers. Third Edition. Crown 8vo.
2_s_.




Kingsley (Henry).
-----------------


--_See_ "WORKS OF FICTION."




Lowell.
-------


--UNDER THE WILLOWS, AND OTHER POEMS By _James Russell Lowell_. Fcap. 8vo.
6_s_.

"Under the Willows _is one of the most admirable bits of idyllic work,
short as it is, or perhaps because it is short, that have been done in our
generation_."--_Saturday Review_.




Masson (Professor).
-------------------


--ESSAYS, BIOGRAPHICAL AND CRITICAL. Chiefly on the British Poets. By
_David Masson_, LL.D., Professor of Rhetoric in the University of
Edinburgh. 8vo. 12_s_. 6_d_.

"_Distinguished by a remarkable power of analysis, a clear statement of
the actual facts on which speculation is based, and an appropriate beauty
of Language. These essays should be popular with serious men_."--
_Athenaeum_.

BRITISH NOVELISTS AND THEIR STYLES. Being a Critical Sketch of the History
of British Prose Fiction. Crown 8vo. 7_s_. 6_d_.

"_Valuable for its lucid analysis of fundamental principles, its breadth
of view, and sustained animation of style_."--_Spectator_.




Mistral (F.).
-------------


--MIRELLE: a Pastoral Epic of Provence. Translated by _H. Crichton_. Extra
fcap. 8vo. 6_s_.

"_This is a capital translation of the elegant and richly-coloured
pastoral epic poem of M. Mistral which, in_ 1859, _he dedicated in
enthusiastic terms to Lamartine... It would be hard to overpraise the
sweetness and pleasing freshness of this charming epic_."--_Athenaeum_.




Myers (Ernest).
---------------


--THE PURITANS. By _Ernest Myers_. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth. 2_s_. 6_d_.

"_It is not too much to call it a really grand poem, stately and
dignified, and showing not only a high poetic mind, but also great power
over poetic expression_."--_Literary Churchman_.




Myers (F.W.H.)
--------------


--ST. PAUL. A Poem. By _F.W.H. Myers_. Second Edition. Extra fcap. 8vo.
2_s_. 6_d_.

"_It breathes throughout the spirit of St. Paul, and with a singular
stately melody of verse_."--_Fortnightly Review_.




Nettleship
----------


ESSAYS ON ROBERT BROWNING'S POETRY. By _John T. Nettleship_. Extra fcap.
8vo. 6_s_. 6_d_.




Noel
----


BEATRICE, AND OTHER POEMS. By the Hon. _Roden Noel_. Fcap. 8vo. 6_s_.

"Beatrice _is in many respects a noble poem; it displays a splendour of
landscape painting, a strong definite precision of highly-coloured
description, which has not often been surpassed_."--_Pall Mall Gazette_.




Norton
------


THE LADY OF LA GARAYE. By the _Hon. Mrs Norton_. With Vignette and
Frontispiece. Sixth Edition Fcap. 8vo. 4_s_. 6_d_.

"_There is no lack of vigour, no faltering of power, plenty of passion,
much bright description, much musical verse... Full of thoughts
well-expressed, and may be classed among her best works_."--_Times_.




Orwell
------


--THE BISHOP'S WALK AND THE BISHOP'S TIMES. Poems on the days of
Archbishop Leighton and the Scottish Covenant. By _Orwell_. Fcap.
8vo. 5_s_.

"_Pure taste and faultless precision of language, the fruits
of deep thought, insight into human nature, and lively
sympathy_."--_Nonconformist_.




Palgrave (Francis T.).
----------------------


--ESSAYS ON ART. By _Francis Turner Palgrave_, M.A., late Fellow of Exeter
College, Oxford. Extra fcap. 8vo. 6_s_.

_Mulready_--_Dyce_--_Holman Hunt_--_Herbert_--_Poetry, Prose, and
Sensationalism in Art_--_Sculpture in England_--_The Albert Cross, &c_.

SHAKESPEARE'S SONNETS AND SONGS. Edited by _F.T. Palgrave_. Gem Edition.
With Vignette Title by _Jeens_. 3_s_. 6_d_.

"_For minute elegance no volume could possibly excel the 'Gem
Edition.'"_--_Scotsman_.




Patmore
-------


Works by COVENTRY PATMORE:

THE ANGEL IN THE HOUSE.

BOOK I. _The Betrothal_; BOOK II. _The Espousals_; BOOK III. _Faithful for
Ever. With Tamerton Church Tower. Two vols. fcap._ 8_vo_. 12_s_.

_A New and Cheap Edition in one vol._ 18_mo., beautifully printed on
toned paper, price_ 2_s_. 6_d_.

THE VICTORIES OF LOVE. Fcap. 8vo. 4_s_. 6_d_.

"_The intrinsic merit of his poem will secure it a permanent place in
literature.... Mr. Patmore has fully earned a place in the catalogue of
poets by the finished idealization of domestic life_."--_Saturday Review_.




Rossetti
--------


Works by CHRISTINA ROSSETTI:--

GOBLIN MARKET, AND OTHER POEMS. With two Designs by _D.G. Rossetti_.
Second Edition. Fcap. 8vo. 5_s_.

"_She handles her little marvel with that rare poetic discrimination which
neither exhausts it of its simple wonders by pushing symbolism too far,
nor keeps those wonders in the merely fabulous and capricious stage. In
fact she has produced a true children's poem, which is far more delightful
to the mature than to children, though it would be delightful to
all_."--_Spectator_.

THE PRINCE'S PROGRESS, AND OTHER POEMS. With two Designs by _D.G.
Rossetti_. Fcap. 8vo. 6_s_.

"_Miss Rossetti's poems are of the kind which recalls Shelley's definition
of Poetry as the record of the best and happiest moments of the best and
happiest minds.... They are like the piping of a bird on the spray in the
sunshine, or the quaint singing with which a child amuses itself when it
forgets that anybody is listening."_--_Saturday Review_.




Rossetti (W.M.).
----------------


--DANTE'S HELL. _See_ "_Dante_."

FINE ART, chiefly Contemporary. By _William M. Rossetti_. Crown 8vo.
10_s_. 6_d_.

_This volume consists of Criticism on Contemporary Art, reprinted from_
Fraser, The Saturday Review, The Pall Mall Gazette, _and other
publications_.




Roby
----


STORY OF A HOUSEHOLD, AND OTHER POEMS. By _Mary K. Roby_. Fcap. 8vo. 5_s_.




Shairp (Principal).
-------------------


--KILMAHOE, a Highland Pastoral, with other Poems. By _John Campbell
Shairp_. Fcap. 8vo. 5_s_.

"_Kilmahoe is a Highland Pastoral, redolent of the warm soft air of the
Western Lochs and Moors, sketched out with remarkable grace and
picturesqueness."_--_Saturday Review_.




Smith
-----


Works by ALEXANDER SMITH:--

A LIFE DRAMA, AND OTHER POEMS. Fcap. 8vo. 2_s_. 6_d_.

CITY POEMS. Fcap. 8vo. 5_s_.

EDWIN OF DEIRA. Second Edition. Fcap. 8vo. 5_s_.

"_A poem which is marked by the strength, sustained sweetness, and compact
texture of real life_."--_North British Review_.




Smith
-----


POEMS. By CATHERINE BARNARD SMITH. Fcap. 8vo. 5_s_.

"_Wealthy in feeling, meaning, finish, and grace; not without passion,
which is suppressed, but the keener for that_."--_Athenaeum_.




Smith (Rev. Walter).
--------------------


--HYMNS OF CHRIST AND THE CHRISTIAN LIFE. By the Rev. _Walter C. Smith_,
M.A. Fcap. 8vo. 6_s_.

"_These are among the sweetest sacred poems we have read for a long time.
With no profuse imagery, expressing a range of feeling and expression by
no means uncommon, they are true and elevated, and their pathos is
profound and simple_."--_Nonconformist_.




Stratford de Redcliffe (Viscount).
----------------------------------


--SHADOWS OF THE PAST, in Verse. By _Viscount Stratford De Redcliffe_.
Crown 8vo. 10_s_. 6_d_.

"_The vigorous words of one who has acted vigorously. They combine the
fervour of politician and poet_."--_Guardian_.




Trench
------


Works by R. CHENEVIX TRENCH, D.D., Archbishop of Dublin. See also Sections
"_Philosophy_," "_Theology_," &c.

POEMS. Collected and arranged anew. Fcap. 8vo. 7_s_. 6_d_.

ELEGIAC POEMS. Fcap. 8vo. 2_s_. 6_d_.

CALDERON'S LIFE'S A DREAM: The Great Theatre of the World. With an Essay
on his Life and Genius. Fcap. 8vo. 4_s_. 6_d_.

HOUSEHOLD BOOK OF ENGLISH POETRY. Selected and arranged, with Notes, by
_R.C. Trench_, D.D., Archbishop of Dublin. Extra fcap. 8vo. 5_s_. 6_d_.

_This volume is called a "Household Book," by this name implying that it
is a book for all_--_that there is nothing in it to prevent it from being
confidently placed in the hands of every member of the household.
Specimens of all classes of poetry are given, including selections from
living authors. The Editor has aimed to produce a book "which the
emigrant, finding room for little not absolutely necessary, might yet find
room for in his trunk, and the traveller in his knapsack, and that on some
narrow shelves where there are few books this might be one_."

"_The Archbishop has conferred in this delightful volume an important gift
on the whole English-speaking population of the world_."--_Pall Mall
Gazette_.

SACRED LATIN POETRY, Chiefly Lyrical. Selected and arranged for Use.
Second Edition, Corrected and Improved. Fcap. 8vo. 7_s_.

"_The aim of the present volume is to offer to members of our English
Church a collection of the best sacred Latin poetry, such as they shall be
able entirely and heartily to accept and approve_--_a collection, that is,
in which they shall not be evermore liable to be offended, and to have the
current of their sympathies checked, by coming upon that which, however
beautiful as poetry, out of higher respects they must reject and
condemn_--_in which, too, they shall not fear that snares are being laid
for them, to entangle them unawares in admiration for ought which is
inconsistent with their faith and fealty to their own spiritual
mother_."--_Preface_.




Turner
------


SONNETS. By the Rev. _Charles Tennyson Turner_. Dedicated to his brother,
the Poet Laureate. Fcap. 8vo. 4_s_. 6_d_.

"_The Sonnets are dedicated to Mr. Tennyson by his brother, and have,
independently of their merits, an interest of association. They both love
to write in simple expressive Saxon; both love to touch their imagery in
epithets rather than in formal similes; both have a delicate perception of
rythmical movement, and thus Mr. Turner has occasional lines which, for
phrase and music, might be ascribed to his brother.... He knows the haunts
of the wild rose, the shady nooks where light quivers through the leaves,
the ruralities, in short, of the land of imagination_"--_Atheneum_.

SMALL TABLEAUX. Fcap. 8vo. 4_s. 6d_.

"_These brief poems have not only a peculiar kind of interest for the
student of English poetry, but are intrinsically delightful, and will
reward a careful and frequent perusal. Full of naivete, piety, love, and
knowledge of natural objects, and each expressing a single and generally a
simple subject by means of minute and original pictorial touches, these
sonnets have a place of their own_."--_Pall Mall Gazette_.




Vittoria Colonna
----------------


LIFE AND POEMS. By Mrs. _Henry Roscoe_. Crown 8vo. 9_s_.

_The life of Vittoria Colonna, the celebrated Marchesa di Pescara, has
received but cursory notice from any English writer, though in every
history of Italy her name is mentioned with great honour among the poets
of the sixteenth century. "In three hundred and fifty years," says her
biographer Visconti, "there has been no other Italian lady who can be
compared to her."_

"_It is written with good taste, with quick and intelligent sympathy,
occasionally with a real freshness and charm of style_"--_Pall Mall
Gazette_.




Webster
-------


Works by AUGUSTA WEBSTER:--

DRAMATIC STUDIES. Extra fcap. 8vo. 5_s_.

"_A volume as strongly marked by perfect taste as by poetic power_."
_Nonconformist_.

PROMETHEUS BOUND OF AESCHYLUS. Literally translated into English Verse.
Extra fcap. 8vo. 3_s. 6d_.

"_Closeness and simplicity combined with literary skill_."--_Athenaeum_.

MEDEA OF EURIPIDES. Literally translated into English Verse. Extra fcap.
8vo. 3_s. 6d_.

"_Mrs. Webster's translation surpasses our utmost expectations. It is a
photograph of the original without any of that harshness which so often
accompanies a photograph_."--_Westminster Review_.

A WOMAN SOLD, AND OTHER POEMS. Crown 8vo. 7_s. 6d_.

"_Mrs. Webster has shown us that she is able to draw admirably from the
life; that she can observe with subtlety, and render her observations with
delicacy; that she can impersonate complex conceptions, and venture into
which few living writers can follow her_."--_Guardian_.




Woolner
-------


MY BEAUTIFUL LADY. By THOMAS WOOLNER. With a Vignette by _Arthur Hughes_.
_Third Edition_. Fcap. 8vo. 5_s_.

"_It is clearly the product of no idle hour, but a highly-conceived and
faithfully-executed task, self-imposed, and prompted by that inward
yearning to utter great thoughts, and a wealth of passionate feeling which
is poetic genius. No man can read this poem without being struck by the
fitness and finish of the workmanship, so to speak, as well as by the
chastened and unpretending loftiness of thought which pervades the
whole_." _Globe_.

WORDS FROM THE POETS. Selected by the Editor of "Rays of Sunlight." With a
Vignette and Frontispiece. 18mo. Extra cloth gilt, 2_s. 6d_. _Cheaper
Edition_, 18mo. limp., 1_s_.





GLOBE EDITIONS.
===============


Under the title GLOBE EDITIONS, the Publishers are issuing a uniform
Series of Standard English Authors, carefully edited, clearly and
elegantly printed on toned paper, strongly bound, and at a small cost. The
names of the Editors whom they have been fortunate enough to secure
constitute an indisputable guarantee as to the character of the Series.
The greatest care has been taken to ensure accuracy of text; adequate
notes, elucidating historical, literary, and philological points, have
been supplied; and, to the older Authors, glossaries are appended. The
series is especially adapted to Students of our national Literature; while
the small price places good editions of certain books, hitherto popularly
inaccessible, within the reach of all.




Shakespeare
-----------


THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE. Edited by _W.G. Clark_ and _W.
Aldis Wright_. Ninety-first Thousand. Globe 8vo. 3_s. 6d_.

"_A marvel of beauty, cheapness, and compactness. The whole works_--
_poems, and sonnets_--_are contained in one small volume: yet the page is
perfectly clear and readable... For the busy man, above all for the
working Student, the Globe Edition is the best of all existing Shakespeare
books_."--_Athenaeum_.




Morte D'Arthur
--------------


SIR THOMAS MALORY'S BOOK OF KING ARTHUR AND OF HIS NOBLE KNIGHTS OF THE
ROUND TABLE. The Edition of _Caxton_, revised for Modern Use. With an
Introduction by _Sir Edward Strachey_, Bart. Globe 8vo. 3_s. 6d_. Third
Edition.

"_It is with the most perfect confidence that we recommend this edition of
the old romance to every class of readers_."--_Pall Mall Gazette_.




Scott
-----


THE POETICAL WORKS OF SIR WALTER SCOTT. With Biographical Essay, by _F.T.
Palgrave_. Globe 8vo. 3_s. 6d_.

"_As a popular edition it leaves nothing to be desired. The want of such
an one has long been felt, combining real excellence with cheapness_."--
_Spectator_.




Burns
-----


THE POETICAL WORKS AND LETTERS OF ROBERT BURNS. Edited, with Life, by
_Alexander Smith_. Globe 8vo. 4_s. 6d_.

"_The works of the bard have never been offered in such a complete form in
a single volume_."--_Glasgow Daily Herald_.

"_Admirable in all respects_."--_Spectator_.




Robinson Crusoe
---------------


THE ADVENTURES OF ROBINSON CRUSOE. By _Defoe_. Edited, from the Original
Edition, by _J.W. Clark_, M.A., Fellow of Trinity College, Cambridge. With
Introduction by HENRY KINGSLEY. Globe 8vo. 3_s. 6d_.

"_The Globe Edition of Robinson Crusoe is a book to have and to keep. It
is printed after the original editions, with the quaint old spelling, and
is published in admirable style as regards type, paper, and binding. A
well-written and genial biographical introduction, by Mr. Henry Kingsley,
is likewise an attractive feature of this edition_."--_Morning Star_.




Goldsmith
---------


GOLDSMITH'S MISCELLANEOUS WORKS. With Biographical Essay by Professor
_Masson_. Globe 8vo. _3_s_. 6_d_._

_This edition includes the whole of Goldsmith's Miscellaneous Works_--_the
Vicar of Wakefield, Plays, Poems, &c. Of the memoir the_ _Scotsman_
_newspaper writes: "Such an admirable compendium of the facts of
Goldsmith's life, and so careful and minute a delineation of the mixed
traits of his peculiar character, as to be a very model of a literary
biography."_




Pope
----


THE POETICAL WORKS OF ALEXANDER POPE. Edited, with Memoir and Notes, by
Professor _Ward_. Globe 8vo. _3_s_. 6_d_._

"_The book is handsome and handy.... The notes are many, and the matter of
them is rich in interest_."--_Athenaeum_.




Spenser
-------


THE POETICAL WORKS OF EDMUND SPENSER. Edited by _R. Morris_, King's
College, London. Globe 8vo. _3_s_. 6_d_._




Other Standard Works are in the Press.





GOLDEN TREASURY SERIES.
=======================


Uniformly printed in 18mo., with Vignette Titles by _Sir Noel Paton_, _T.
Woolner_, _W. Holman Hunt_, _J.E. Millais_, _Arthur Hughes_, &c. Engraved
on Steel by _Jeens_. Bound in extra cloth, _4_s_. 6_d_._; morocco plain,
_7_s_. 6_d_._ morocco extra, _10_s_. 6_d_._ each volume.

"_Messrs. Macmillan have, in their Golden Treasury Series especially,
provided editions of standard works, volumes of selected poetry, and
original compositions, which entitle this series to be called classical.
Nothing can be better than the literary execution, nothing more elegant
than the material workmanship_."--_British Quarterly Review_.




THE GOLDEN TREASURY OF THE BEST SONGS AND LYRICAL POEMS IN THE ENGLISH
LANGUAGE.
---------


Selected and arranged, with Notes, by _Francis Turner Palgrave_.

"_This delightful little volume, the Golden Treasury, which contains many
of the best original lyrical pieces and songs in our language, grouped
with care and skill, so as to illustrate each other like the pictures in a
well-arranged gallery_."--_Quarterly Review_.




THE CHILDREN'S GARLAND FROM THE BEST POETS.
-------------------------------------------


Selected and arranged by _Coventry Patmore_.

"_It includes specimens of all the great masters in the art of poetry,
selected with the matured judgment of a man concentrated on obtaining
insight into the feelings and tastes of childhood, and desirous to awaken
its finest impulses, to cultivate its keenest sensibilities."_--_Morning
Post_.




THE BOOK OF PRAISE.
-------------------


From the Best English Hymn Writers. Selected and arranged by _Sir Roundell
Palmer_. _A New and Enlarged Edition_.

"_All previous compilations of this kind must undeniably for the present
give place to the Book of Praise.... The selection has been made
throughout with sound judgment and critical taste. The pains involved in
this compilation must have been immense, embracing, as it does, every
writer of note in this special province of English literature, and ranging
over the most widely divergent tracts of religious thought."_--_Saturday
Review_.




THE FAIRY BOOK;
---------------


the Best Popular Fairy Stories. Selected and rendered anew by the Author
of "_John Halifax, Gentleman_."

"_A delightful selection, in a delightful external form; full of
the physical splendour and vast opulence of proper fairy
tales_."--_Spectator_.




THE BALLAD BOOK.
----------------


A Selection of the Choicest British Ballads. Edited by _William
Allingham_.

"_His taste as a judge of old poetry will be found, by all acquainted with
the various readings of old English ballads, true enough to justify his
undertaking so critical a task_."--_Saturday Review_.




THE JEST BOOK.
--------------


The Choicest Anecdotes and Sayings. Selected and arranged by _Mark Lemon_.

"_The fullest and best jest book that has yet appeared._"--_Saturday
Review_.




BACON'S ESSAYS AND COLOURS OF GOOD AND EVIL.
--------------------------------------------


With Notes and Glossarial Index. By _W. Aldis Wright_, M.A.

"_The beautiful little edition of Bacon's Essays, now before us, does
credit to the taste and scholarship of Mr. Aldis Wright.... It puts the
reader in possession of all the essential literary facts and chronology
necessary for reading the Essays in connexion with Bacon's life and
times."_--_Spectator_.

"_By far the most complete as well as the most elegant edition we
possess."_--_Westminster Review_.




THE PILGRIM'S PROGRESS
----------------------


from this World to that which is to come. By _John Bunyan_.

"_A beautiful and scholarly reprint_."--_Spectator_.




THE SUNDAY BOOK OF POETRY FOR THE YOUNG.
----------------------------------------


Selected and arranged by _C.F. Alexander_.

"_A well-selected volume of sacred poetry_."--_Spectator_.




A BOOK OF GOLDEN DEEDS
----------------------


of all Times and all Countries. Gathered and narrated anew. By the Author
of "_The Heir Of Redclyffe_."

"... _To the young, for whom it is especially intended, as a most
interesting collection of thrilling tales well told; and to their elders,
as a useful handbook of reference, and a pleasant one to take up when
their wish is to while away a weary half-hour. We have seen no prettier
gift-book for a long time."_--_Athenaeum_.




THE POETICAL WORKS OF ROBERT BURNS.
-----------------------------------


Edited, with Biographical Memoir, Notes, and Glossary, by _Alexander
Smith_. Two Vols.

"_Beyond all question this is the most beautiful edition of Burns yet
out_."--_Edinburgh Daily Review_.




THE ADVENTURES OF ROBINSON CRUSOE.
----------------------------------


Edited from the Original Edition by _J.W. Clark_, M.A., Fellow of Trinity
College, Cambridge.

"_Mutilated and modified editions of this English classic are so much the
rule, that a cheap and pretty copy of it, rigidly exact to the original,
will be a prize to many book-buyers_."--_Examiner_.




THE REPUBLIC OF PLATO. TRANSLATED
---------------------------------


into _English_, with Notes, by _J. Li. Davies_, M.A. and _D.J. Vaughan_,
M.A.

"_A dainty and cheap little edition_."--_Examiner_.




THE SONG BOOK.
--------------


Words and Tunes from the best Poets and Musicians. Selected and arranged
by _John Hullah_, Professor of Vocal Music in King's College, London.

"_A choice collection of the sterling songs of England, Scotland, and
Ireland, with the music of each prefixed to the words. How much true
wholesome pleasure such a book can diffuse, and will diffuse, we trust,
through many thousand families_."--_Examiner_.




LA LYRE FRANCAISE.
------------------


Selected and arranged, with Notes, by _Gustave Masson_, French Master in
Harrow School.

_A selection of the best French songs and lyrical pieces._




TOM BROWN'S SCHOOL DAYS.
------------------------


By an _Old Boy_.

"_A perfect gem of a book. The best and most healthy book about boys for
boys that ever was written_."--_Illustrated Times_.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of MacMillan & Co.'s General Catalogue of
Works in the Departments of History, Biography, Travels, and Belles Lettres, December, 1869, by Unknown

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MACMILLAN & CO.'S CATALOGUE ***

***** This file should be named 14359.txt or 14359.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/1/4/3/5/14359/

Produced by Jonathan Ingram, Joshua Hutchinson and the PG Online
Distributed Proofreading Team.


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
