The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Mystery of Mary, by Grace Livingston Hill

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Mystery of Mary

Author: Grace Livingston Hill

Release Date: January 7, 2005 [EBook #14632]
[Date last updated: January 15, 2005]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MYSTERY OF MARY ***




Produced by Charles Aldarondo, Emmy and the PG Online Distributed
Proofreading Team






THE MYSTERY
OF MARY

BY
GRACE LIVINGSTON HILL LUTZ

AUTHOR OF

MARCIA SCHUYLER,
PHOEBE DEANE, ETC.

FRONTISPIECE BY

ANNA W. SPEAKMAN

[Illustration]

GROSSET & DUNLAP

PUBLISHERS NEW YORK

       *       *       *       *       *

Made in the United States of America

COPYRIGHT, 1910, BY J.B. LIPPINCOTT COMPANY

COPYRIGHT, 1912, BY J.B. LIPPINCOTT COMPANY





THE MYSTERY OF MARY


[Illustration: THEY STRUGGLED UP, SCARCELY PAUSING FOR BREATH _Page 8_]




The Mystery _of_ Mary




I


He paused on the platform and glanced at his watch. The train on which he
had just arrived was late. It hurried away from the station, and was
swallowed up in the blackness of the tunnel, as if it knew its own
shortcomings and wished to make up for them.

It was five minutes of six, and as the young man looked back at the long
flight of steps that led to the bridge across the tracks, a delicate
pencilling of electric light flashed into outline against the city's
deepening dusk, emphasizing the lateness of the hour. He had a dinner
engagement at seven, and it was yet some distance to his home, where a
rapid toilet must be made if he were to arrive on time.

The stairway was long, and there were many people thronging it. A shorter
cut led down along the tracks under the bridge, and up the grassy
embankment. It would bring him a whole block nearer home, and a line of
cabs was standing over at the corner just above the bridge. It was against
the rules to walk beside the tracks--there was a large sign to that effect
in front of him--but it would save five minutes. He scanned the platform
hastily to see if any officials were in sight, then bolted down the
darkening tracks.

Under the centre of the bridge a slight noise behind him, as of soft,
hurrying footsteps, caught his attention, and a woman's voice broke upon
his startled senses.

"Please don't stop, nor look around," it said, and the owner caught up
with him now in the shadow. "But will you kindly let me walk beside you
for a moment, till you can show me how to get out of this dreadful place?
I am very much frightened, and I'm afraid I shall be followed. Will you
tell me where I can go to hide?"

After an instant's astonished pause, he obeyed her and kept on, making
room for her to walk beside him, while he took the place next to the
tracks. He was aware, too, of the low rumble of a train, coming from the
mouth of the tunnel.

His companion had gasped for breath, but began again in a tone of apology:

"I saw you were a gentleman, and I didn't know what to do. I thought you
would help me to get somewhere quickly."

Just then the fiery eye of the oncoming train burst from the tunnel ahead.
Instinctively, the young man caught his companion's arm and drew her
forward to the embankment beyond the bridge, holding her, startled and
trembling, as the screaming train tore past them.

The pent black smoke from the tunnel rolled in a thick cloud about them,
stifling them. The girl, dazed with the roar and blinded by the smoke,
could only cling to her protector. For an instant they felt as if they
were about to be drawn into the awful power of the rushing monster. Then
it had passed, and a roar of silence followed, as if they were suddenly
plunged into a vacuum. Gradually the noises of the world began again: the
rumble of a trolley-car on the bridge; the "honk-honk" of an automobile;
the cry of a newsboy. Slowly their breath and their senses came back.

The man's first thought was to get out of the cut before another train
should come. He grasped his companion's arm and started up the steep
embankment, realizing as he did so that the wrist he held was slender, and
that the sleeve which covered it was of the finest cloth.

They struggled up, scarcely pausing for breath. The steps at the side of
the bridge, made for the convenience of railroad hands, were out of the
question, for they were at a dizzy height, and hung unevenly over the
yawning pit where trains shot constantly back and forth.

As they emerged from the dark, the man saw that his companion was a young
and beautiful woman, and that she wore a light cloth gown, with neither
hat nor gloves.

At the top of the embankment they paused, and the girl, with her hand at
her throat, looked backward with a shudder. She seemed like a young bird
that could scarcely tell which way to fly.

Without an instant's hesitation, the young man raised his hand and hailed
a four-wheeler across the street.

"Come this way, quick!" he urged, helping her in. He gave the driver his
home address and stepped in after her. Then, turning, he faced his
companion, and was suddenly keenly aware of the strange situation in which
he had placed himself.

"Can you tell me what is the matter," he asked, "and where you would like
to go?"

The girl had scarcely recovered breath from the long climb and the fright,
and she answered him in broken phrases.

"No, I cannot tell you what is the matter"--she paused and looked at him,
with a sudden comprehension of what he might be thinking about
her--"but--there is nothing--that is--I have done nothing wrong--" She
paused again and looked up with eyes whose clear depths, he felt, could
hide no guile.

"Of course," he murmured with decision, and then wondered why he felt so
sure about it.

"Thank you," she said. Then, with frightened perplexity: "I don't know
where to go. I never was in this city before. If you will kindly tell me
how to get somewhere--suppose to a railroad station--and yet--no, I have
no money--and"--then with a sudden little movement of dismay--"and I have
no hat! Oh!"

The young man felt a strong desire to shield this girl so unexpectedly
thrown on his mercy. Yet vague fears hovered about the margin of his
judgment. Perhaps she was a thief or an adventuress. It might be that he
ought to let her get out of the odd situation she appeared to be in, as
best she might. Yet even as the thought flashed through his mind he seemed
to hear an echo of her words, "I saw you were a gentleman," and he felt
incapable of betraying her trust in him.

The girl was speaking again: "But I must not trouble you any more. You
have been very kind to get me out of that dreadful place. If you will
just stop the carriage and let me out, I am sure I can take care of
myself."

"I could not think of letting you get out here alone. If you are in
danger, I will help you." The warmth of his own words startled him. He
knew he ought to be more cautious with a stranger, but impetuously he
threw caution to the winds. "If you would just tell me a little bit about
it, so that I should know what I ought to do for you----"

"Oh, I must not tell you! I couldn't!" said the girl, her hand fluttering
up to her heart, as if to hold its wild beating from stifling her. "I am
sorry to have involved you for a moment in this. Please let me out here. I
am not frightened, now that I got away from that terrible tunnel. I was
afraid I might have to go in there alone, for I didn't see any way to get
up the bank, and I couldn't go back."

"I am glad I happened to be there," breathed the young man fervently. "It
would have been dangerous for you to enter that tunnel. It runs an entire
block. You would probably have been killed."

The girl shut her eyes and pressed her fingers to them. In the light of
the street lamps, he saw that she was very white, and also that there were
jewels flashing from the rings on her fingers. It was apparent that she
was a lady of wealth and refinement. What could have brought her to this
pass?

The carriage came to a sudden stop, and, looking out, he saw they had
reached his home. A new alarm seized him as the girl moved as if to get
out. His dignified mother and his fastidious sister were probably not in,
but if by any chance they should not have left the house, what would they
think if they saw a strange, hatless young woman descend from the carriage
with him? Moreover, what would the butler think?

"Excuse me," he said, "but, really, there are reasons why I shouldn't like
you to get out of the carriage just here. Suppose you sit still until I
come out. I have a dinner engagement and must make a few changes in my
dress, but it will take me only a few minutes. You are in no danger, and I
will take you to some place of safety. I will try to think what to do
while I am gone. On no account get out of the carriage. It would make the
driver suspicious, you know. If you are really followed, he will let no
one disturb you in the carriage, of course. Don't distress yourself. I'll
hurry. Can you give me the address of any friend to whom I might 'phone or
telegraph?"

She shook her head and there was a glitter of tears in her eyes as she
replied:

"No, I know of no one in the city who could help me."

"I will help you, then," he said with sudden resolve, and in a tone that
would be a comfort to any woman in distress.

His tone and the look of respectful kindliness he gave her kept the girl
in the carriage until his return, although in her fear and sudden distrust
of all the world, she thought more than once of attempting to slip away.
Yet without money, and in a costume which could but lay her open to
suspicion, what was she to do? Where was she to go?

As the young man let himself into his home with his latch-key, he heard
the butler's well trained voice answering the telephone. "Yes, ma'am;
this is Mrs. Dunham's residence.... No, ma'am, she is not at home.... No,
ma'am, Miss Dunham is out also.... Mr. Dunham? Just wait a moment, please
I think Mr. Dunham has just come in. Who shall I say wishes to speak to
him?... Mrs. Parker Bowman?... Yes, ma'am; just wait a minute, please.
I'll call Mr. Dunham."

The young man frowned. Another interruption! And Miss Bowman! It was at
her house that he was to dine. What could the woman want? Surely it was
not so late that she was looking him up. But perhaps something had
happened, and she was calling off her dinner. What luck if she was! Then
he would be free to attend the problem of the young woman whom fate, or
Providence, had suddenly thrust upon his care.

He took the receiver, resolved to get out of going to the dinner if it
were possible.

"Good evening, Mrs. Bowman."

"Oh, is that you, Mr. Dunham? How relieved I am! I am in a bit of
difficulty about my dinner, and called up to see if your sister couldn't
help me out. Miss Mayo has failed me. Her sister has had an accident, and
she cannot leave her. She has just 'phoned me, and I don't know what to
do. Isn't Cornelia at home? Couldn't you persuade her to come and help me
out? She would have been invited in Miss Mayo's place if she had not told
me that she expected to go to Boston this week. But she changed her plans,
didn't she? Isn't she where you could reach her by 'phone and beg her to
come and help me out? You see, it's a very particular dinner, and I've
made all my arrangements."

"Well, now, that's too bad, Mrs. Bowman," began the young man, thinking he
saw a way out of both their difficulties. "I'm sorry Cornelia isn't here.
I'm sure she would do anything in her power to help you. But she and
mother were to dine in Chestnut Hill to-night, and they must have left the
house half an hour ago. I'm afraid she's out of the question. Suppose you
leave me out? You won't have any trouble then except to take two plates
off the table"--he laughed pleasantly--"and you would have even couples.
You see," he hastened to add, as he heard Mrs. Parker Bowman's preliminary
dissent--"you see, Mrs. Bowman, I'm in somewhat of a predicament myself.
My train was late, and as I left the station I happened to meet a young
woman--a--a friend." (He reflected rapidly on the old proverb, "A friend
in need is a friend indeed." In that sense she was a friend.) "She is
temporarily separated from her friends, and is a stranger in the city. In
fact, I'm the only acquaintance or friend she has, and I feel rather under
obligation to see her to her hotel and look up trains for her. She leaves
the city to-night."

"Now, look here, Tryon Dunham, you're not going to leave me in the lurch
for any young woman. I don't care how old an acquaintance she is! You
simply bring her along. She'll make up my number and relieve me
wonderfully. No, don't you say a word. Just tell her that she needn't
stand on ceremony. Your mother and I are too old friends for that. Any
friend of yours is a friend of mine, and my house is open to her. She
won't mind. These girls who have travelled a great deal learn to step over
the little formalities of calls and introductions. Tell her I'll call on
her afterwards, if she'll only remain in town long enough, or I'll come
and take dinner with her when I happen to be in her city. I suppose she's
just returned from abroad--they all have--or else she's just going--and if
she hasn't learned to accept things as she finds them, she probably will
soon. Tell her what a plight I'm in, and that it will be a real blessing
to me if she'll come. Besides--I didn't mean to tell you--I meant it for a
surprise, but I may as well tell you now--Judge Blackwell is to be here,
with his wife, and I especially want you to meet him. I've been trying to
get you two together for a long time."

"Ah!" breathed the young man, with interest. "Judge Blackwell! I have
wanted to meet him."

"Well, he has heard about you, too, and I think he wants to meet you. Did
you know he was thinking of taking a partner into his office? He has
always refused--but that's another story, and I haven't time to talk. You
ought to be on your way here now. Tell your friend I will bless her
forever for helping me out, and I won't take no for an answer. You said
she'd just returned from abroad, didn't you? Of course she's musical. You
must make her give us some music. She will, won't she? I was depending on
Miss Mayo for that this evening."

"Well, you might be able to persuade her," murmured the distracted young
man at the 'phone, as he struggled with one hand to untie his necktie and
unfasten his collar, and mentally calculated how long it would take him to
get into his dress suit.

"Yes, of course. You'd better not speak of it--it might make her decline.
And don't let her stop to make any changes in her dress. Everybody will
understand when I tell them she's just arrived--didn't you say?--from the
other side, and we caught her on the wing. There's some one coming now.
Do, for pity's sake, hurry, Tryon, for my cook is terribly cross when I
hold up a dinner too long. Good-by. Oh, by the way, what did you say was
her name?"

"Oh--ah!" He had almost succeeded in releasing his collar, and was about
to hang up the receiver, when this new difficulty confronted him.

"Oh, yes, of course; her name--I had almost forgotten," he went on wildly,
to make time, and searched about in his mind for a name--any name--that
might help him. The telephone book lay open at the r's. He pounced upon it
and took the first name his eye caught.

"Yes--why--Remington, Miss Remington."

"Remington!" came in a delighted scream over the phone. "Not Carolyn
Remington? That would be too good luck!"

"No," he murmured distractedly; "no, not Carolyn. Why, I--ah--I
think--Mary--Mary Remington."

"Oh, I'm afraid I haven't met her, but never mind. Do hurry up, Tryon. It
is five minutes of seven. Where did you say she lives?" But the receiver
was hung up with a click, and the young man tore up the steps to his room
three at a bound. Dunham's mind was by no means at rest. He felt that he
had done a tremendously daring thing, though, when he came to think of it,
he had not suggested it himself; and he did not quite see how he could get
out of it, either, for how was he to have time to help the girl if he did
not take her with him?

Various plans floated through his head. He might bring her into the house,
and make some sort of an explanation to the servants, but what would the
explanation be? He could not tell them the truth about her, and how would
he explain the matter to his mother and sister? For they might return
before he did, and would be sure to ask innumerable questions.

And the girl--would she go with him? If not, what should he do with her?
And about her dress? Was it such as his "friend" could wear to one of Mrs.
Parker Bowman's exclusive dinners? To his memory, it seemed quiet and
refined. Perhaps that was all that was required for a woman who was
travelling. There it was again! But he had not said she was travelling,
nor that she had just returned from abroad, nor that she was a musician.
How could he answer such questions about an utter stranger, and yet how
could he not answer them, under the circumstances?

And she wore no hat, nor cloak. That would be a strange way to arrive at a
dinner How could she accept? He was settling his coat into place when a
queer little bulge attracted his attention to an inside pocket.
Impatiently he pulled out a pair of long white gloves. They were his
sister's, and he now remembered she had given them to him to carry the
night before, on the way home from a reception, she having removed them
because it was raining. He looked at them with a sudden inspiration. Of
course! Why had he not thought of that? He hurried into his sister's room
to make a selection of a few necessities for the emergency--only to have
his assurance desert him at the very threshold. The room was immaculate,
with no feminine finery lying about. Cornelia Dunham's maid was well
trained. The only article that seemed out of place was a hand-box on a
chair near the door. It bore the name of a fashionable milliner, and
across the lid was pencilled in Cornelia's large, angular hand, "To be
returned to Madame Dollard's." He caught up the box and strode over to the
closet. There was no time to lose, and this box doubtless contained a hat
of some kind. If it was to be returned, Cornelia would think it had been
called for, and no further inquiry would be made about the matter. He
could call at Madame's and settle the bill without his sister's knowledge.

He poked back into the closet and discovered several wraps and evening
cloaks of more or less elaborate style, but the thought came to him that
perhaps one of these would be recognized as Cornelia's. He closed the door
hurriedly and went down to a large closet under the stairs, from which he
presently emerged with his mother's new black rain-coat. He patted his
coat-pocket to be sure he had the gloves, seized his hat, and hurried
back to the carriage, the hat-box in one hand and his mother's rain-coat
dragging behind him. His only anxiety was to get out before the butler saw
him.

As he closed the door, there flashed over him, the sudden possibility that
the girl had gone. Well, perhaps that would be the best thing that could
happen and would save him a lot of trouble; yet to his amazement he found
that the thought filled him with a sense of disappointment. He did not
want her to be gone. He peered anxiously into the carriage, and was
relieved to find her still there, huddled into the shadow, her eyes
looking large and frightened. She was seized with a fit of trembling, and
it required all her strength to keep him from noticing it. She was half
afraid of the man, now that she had waited for him. Perhaps he was not a
gentleman, after all.

[Illustration]




II


"I am afraid I have been a long time," he said apologetically, as he
closed the door of the carriage, after giving Mrs. Parker Bowman's address
to the driver. In the uncertain light of the distant arc-lamp, the girl
looked small and appealing. He felt a strong desire to lift her burdens
and carry them on his own broad shoulders.

"I've brought some things that I thought might help," he said. "Would you
like to put on this coat? It may not be just what you would have selected,
but it was the best I could find that would not be recognized. The air is
growing chilly."

He shook out the coat and threw it around her.

"Oh, thank you," she murmured gratefully, slipping her arms into the
sleeves.

"And this box has some kind of a hat, I hope," he went on. "I ought to
have looked, but there really wasn't time." He unknotted the strings and
produced a large picture hat with long black plumes. He was relieved to
find it black. While he untied the strings, there had been a growing
uneasiness lest the hat be one of those wild, queer combinations of colors
that Cornelia frequently purchased and called "artistic."

The girl received the hat with a grateful relief that was entirely
satisfactory to the young man.

"And now," said he, as he pulled out the gloves and laid them gravely in
her lap, "we're invited out to dinner."

"Invited out to dinner!" gasped the girl.

"Yes. It's rather a providential thing to have happened, I think. The
telephone was ringing as I opened the door, and Mrs. Parker Bowman, to
whose house I was invited, was asking for my sister to fill the place of
an absent guest. My sister is away, and I tried to beg off. I told her I
had accidentally met--I hope you will pardon me--I called you a friend."

"Oh!" she said. "That was kind of you."

"I said you were a stranger in town, and as I was your only acquaintance,
I felt that I should show you the courtesy of taking you to a hotel, and
assisting to get you off on the night train; and I asked her to excuse me,
as that would give her an even number. But it seems she had invited some
one especially to meet me, and was greatly distressed not to have her full
quota of guests, so she sent you a most cordial invitation to come to her
at once, promising to take dinner with you some time if you would help her
out now. Somehow, she gathered from my talk that you were travelling, had
just returned from abroad, and were temporarily separated from your
friends. She is also sure that you are musical, and means to ask you to
help her out in that way this evening. I told her I was not sure whether
you could be persuaded or not, and she mercifully refrained from asking
whether you sang or played. I tell you all this so that you will be
prepared for anything. Of course I didn't tell her all these things. I
merely kept still when she inferred them. Your name, by the way, is Miss
Remington--Mary Remington. She was greatly elated for a moment when she
thought you might be Carolyn Remington--whoever she may be. I suppose she
will speak of it. The name was the first one that my eye lit upon in the
telephone-book. If you object to bearing it for the evening, it is easy to
see how a name could be misunderstood over the 'phone. But perhaps you
would better give me a few pointers, for I've never tried acting a part,
and can't be sure how well I shall do it."

The girl had been silent from astonishment while the man talked.

"But I cannot possibly go there to dinner," she gasped, her hand going to
her throat again, as if to pluck away the delicate lace about it and give
more room, for breathing. "I must get away somewhere at once. I cannot
trouble you in this way. I have already imposed upon your kindness. With
this hat and coat and gloves, I shall be able to manage quite well, and I
thank you so much! I will return them to you as soon as possible."

The cab began to go slowly, and Tryon Dunham noticed that another
carriage, just ahead of theirs, was stopping before Mrs. Bowman's house.
There was no time for halting decision.

"My friend," he said earnestly, "I cannot leave you alone, and I do not
see a better way than for you to go in here with me for a little while,
till I am free to go with you. No one can follow you here, or suspect that
you had gone out to dinner at a stranger's house. Believe me, it is the
very safest thing you could do. This is the house. Will you go in with me?
If not, I must tell the driver to take us somewhere else."

"But what will she think of me," she said in trepidation, "and how can I
do such a thing as to steal into a woman's house to a dinner in this way!
Besides, I am not dressed for a formal occasion."

The carriage had stopped before the door now, and the driver was getting
down from his seat.

"Indeed, she will think nothing about it," Dunham assured her, "except to
be glad that she has the right number of guests. Her dinners are
delightful affairs usually, and you have nothing to do but talk about
impersonal matters for a little while and be entertaining. She was most
insistent that you take no thought about the matter of dress. She said it
would be perfectly understood that you were travelling, and that the
invitation was unexpected. You can say that your trunk has not come, or
has gone on ahead. Will you come?"

Then the driver opened the carriage door.

In an instant the girl assumed the self-contained manner she had worn when
she had first spoken to him. She stepped quietly from the carriage, and
only answered in a low voice, "I suppose I'd better, if you wish it."

Dunham paused for a moment to give the driver a direction about carrying
the great pasteboard box to his club. This idea had come as a sudden
inspiration. He had not thought of, the necessity of getting rid of that
box before.

"If it becomes necessary, where shall I say you are going this evening?"
he asked in a low tone, as they turned to go up the steps. She summoned a
faint, flickering smile.

"When people have been travelling abroad and are stopping over in this
city, they often go on to Washington, do they not?" she asked half shyly.

He smiled in response, and noted with pleasure that the black hat was
intensely becoming. She was not ill-dressed for the part she had to play,
for the black silk rain-coat gave the touch of the traveller to her
costume.

The door swung open before they could say another word, and the young man
remembered that he must introduce his new friend. As there was no further
opportunity to ask her about her name, he must trust to luck.

The girl obeyed the motion of the servant and slipped up to the
dressing-room as if she were a frequent guest in the house, but it was in
some trepidation that Tryon Dunham removed his overcoat and arranged his
necktie. He had caught a passing glimpse of the assembled company, and
knew that Mr. Bowman was growing impatient for his dinner. His heart
almost failed him now that the girl was out of sight. What if she should
not prove to be accustomed to society, after all, and should show it? How
embarrassing that would be! He had seen her only in a half-light as yet.
How had he dared?

But it was too late now, for she was coming from the dressing-room, and
Mrs. Bowman was approaching them with outstretched hands, and a welcome in
her face.

"My dear Miss Remington, it is so good of you to help me out! I can see by
the first glance that it is going to be a privilege to know you. I can't
thank you enough for waiving formalities."

"It was very lovely of you to ask me," said the girl, with perfect
composure, "a stranger----"

"Don't speak of it, my dear. Mr. Dunham's friends are not strangers, I
assure you. Tryon, didn't you tell her how long we have known each other?
I shall feel quite hurt if you have never mentioned me to her. Now, come,
for my cook is in the last stages of despair over the dinner. Miss
Remington, how do you manage to look so fresh and lovely after a long sea
voyage? You must tell me your secret."

The young man looked down at the girl and saw that her dress was in
perfect taste for the occasion, and also that she was very young and
beautiful. He was watching her with a kind of proprietary pride as she
moved forward to be introduced to the other guests, when he saw her sweep
one quick glance about the room, and for just an instant hesitate and draw
back. Her face grew white; then, with a supreme effort, she controlled her
feelings, and went through her part with perfect ease.

When Judge Blackwell was introduced to the girl, he looked at her with
what seemed to Dunham to be more than a passing interest; but the keen
eyes were almost immediately transferred to his own face, and the young
man had no further time to watch his protege, as dinner was immediately
announced.

Miss Remington was seated next to Dunham at the table, with the Judge on
her other side. The young man was pleased with the arrangement, and sat
furtively studying the delicate tinting of her face, the dainty line of
cheek and chin and ear, the sweep of her dark lashes, and the ripple of
her brown hair, as he tried to converse easily with her, as an old friend
might.

At length the Judge turned to the girl and said:

"Miss Remington, you remind me strongly of a young woman who was in my
office this afternoon."

The delicate color flickered out of the girl's face entirely, leaving even
her lips white, but she lifted her dark eyes bravely to the kindly blue
ones, and with sweet dignity baffled the questioned recognition in his
look.

"Yes, you are so much like her that I would think you were--her sister
perhaps, if it were not for the name," Judge Blackwell went on. "She was a
most interesting and beautiful young lady." The old gentleman bestowed
upon the girl a look that was like a benediction. "Excuse me for speaking
of it, but her dress was something soft and beautiful, like yours, and
seemed to suit her face. I was deeply interested in her, although until
this afternoon she was a stranger. She came to me for a small matter of
business, and after it was attended to, and before she received the
papers, she disappeared! She had removed her hat and gloves, as she was
obliged to wait some time for certain matters to be looked up, and these
she left behind her. The hat is covered with long, handsome plumes of the
color of rich cream in coffee."

Young Dunham glanced down at the cloth of the girl's gown, and was
startled to find the same rich creamy-coffee tint in its silky folds; yet
she did not show by so much as a flicker of an eyelash that she was
passing under the keenest inspection. She toyed with the salted almonds
beside her plate and held the heavy silver fork as firmly as if she were
talking about the discovery of the north pole. Her voice was steady and
natural as she asked, "How could she disappear?"

"Well, that is more than I can understand. There were three doors in the
room where she sat, one opening into the inner office where I was at work,
and two opening into a hall, one on the side and the other on the end
opposite the freight elevator. We searched the entire building without
finding a clew, and I am deeply troubled."

"Why should she want to disappear?" The question was asked coolly and with
as much interest as a stranger would be likely to show.

"I cannot imagine," said the old man speculatively. "She apparently had
health and happiness, if one may judge from her appearance, and she came
to me of her own free will on a matter of business. Immediately after her
disappearance, two well-dressed men entered my office and inquired for
her. One had an intellectual head, but looked hard and cruel; the other
was very handsome--and disagreeable. When he could not find the young
lady, he laid claim to her hat, but I had it locked away. How could I know
that man was her friend or her relative? I intend to keep that hat until
the young woman herself claims it. I have not had anything happen that
has so upset me in years."

"You don't think any harm has come to her?" questioned the girl.

"I cannot think what harm could, and yet--it is very strange. She was
about the age of my dear daughter when she died, and I cannot get her out
of my mind. When you first appeared in the doorway you gave me quite a
start. I thought you were she. If I can find any trace of her, I mean to
investigate this matter. I have a feeling that that girl needs a friend."

"I am sure she would be very happy to have a friend like you," said the
girl, and there was something in the eyes that were raised to his that
made the Judge's heart glow with admiration.

"Thank you," said he warmly. "That is most kind of you. But perhaps she
has found a better friend by this time. I hope so."

"Or one as kind," she suggested in a low voice.

The conversation then became general, and the girl did not look up for
several seconds; but the young man on her right, who had not missed a word
of the previous tete-a-tete, could not give attention to the story Mrs.
Blackwell was telling, for pondering what he had heard.

The ladies now left the table, and though this was the time that Dunham
had counted upon for an acquaintance with the great judge who might hold a
future career in his power, he could not but wish that he might follow
them to the other room. He felt entire confidence in his new friend's
ability to play her part to the end, but he wanted to watch her, to study
her and understand her, if perchance he might solve the mystery that was
ever growing more intense about her.

As she left the room, his eyes followed her. His hostess, in passing
behind his chair, had whispered:

"I don't wonder you feel so about her. She is lovely. But please don't
begrudge her to us for a few minutes. I promise you that you shall have
your innings afterwards."

Then, without any warning and utterly against his will, this young man of
much experience and self-control blushed furiously, and was glad enough
when the door closed behind Mrs. Bowman.

Miss Remington walked into the drawing-room with a steady step, but with a
rapidly beating heart. Her real ordeal had now come. She cast about in her
mind for subjects of conversation which should forestall unsafe topics,
and intuitively sought the protection of the Judge's wife. But immediately
she saw her hostess making straight for the little Chippendale chair
beside her.

"My dear, it is too lovely," she began. "So opportune! Do tell me how long
you have known Tryon?"

The girl caught her breath and gathered her wits together. She looked up
shyly into the pleasantly curious eyes of Mrs. Bowman, and a faint gleam
of mischief came into her face.

"Why----" Her hesitation seemed only natural, and Mrs. Bowman decided that
there must be something very special between these two. "Why, not so very
long, Mrs. Bowman--not as long as you have known him." She finished with a
smile which Mrs. Bowman decided was charming.

"Oh, you sly child!" she exclaimed, playfully tapping the round cheek with
her fan. "Did you meet him when he was abroad this summer?"

"Oh, no, indeed!" said the girl, laughing now in spite of herself. "Oh,
no; it was after his return."

"Then it must have been in the Adirondacks," went on the determined
interlocutor. "Were you at----" But the girl interrupted her. She could
not afford to discuss the Adirondacks, and the sight of the grand piano
across the room had given her an idea.

"Mr. Dunham told me that you would like me to play something for you, as
your musician friend has failed you. I shall be very glad to, if it will
help you any. What do you care for? Something serious or something gay?
Are you fond of Chopin, or Beethoven, or something more modern?"

Scenting a possible musical prodigy, and desiring most earnestly to give
her guests a treat, Mrs. Bowman exclaimed in enthusiasm:

"Oh, how lovely of you! I hardly dared to ask, as Tryon was uncertain
whether you would be willing. Suppose you give us something serious now,
and later, when the men come in, we'll have the gay music. Make your own
choice, though I'm very fond of Chopin, of course."

Without another word, the girl moved quietly over to the piano and took
her seat. For just a moment her fingers wandered caressingly over the
keys, as if they were old friends and she were having an understanding
with them, then she began a Chopin Nocturne. Her touch was firm and
velvety, and she brought out a bell-like tone from the instrument that
made the little company of women realize that the player was mistress of
her art. Her graceful figure and lovely head, with its simple ripples and
waves of hair, were more noticeable than ever as she sat there,
controlling the exquisite harmonies. Even Mrs. Blackwell stopped fanning
and looked interested. Then she whispered to Mrs. Bowman: "A very sweet
young girl. That's a pretty piece she's playing." Mrs. Blackwell was sweet
and commonplace and old-fashioned.

Mrs. Parker Bowman sat up with a pink glow in her cheeks and a light in
her eyes. She began to plan how she might keep this acquisition and
exploit her among her friends. It was her delight to bring out new
features in her entertainments.

"We shall simply keep you playing until you drop from weariness," she
announced ecstatically, when the last wailing, sobbing, soothing chord had
died away; and the other ladies murmured, "How delightful!" and whispered
their approval.

The girl smiled and rippled into a Chopin Valse, under cover of which
those who cared to could talk in low tones. Afterwards the musician dashed
into the brilliant movement of a Beethoven Sonata.

It was just as she was beginning Rubinstein's exquisite tone portrait,
Kamennoi-Ostrow, that the gentlemen came in.

Tryon Dunham had had his much desired talk with the famous judge, but it
had not been about law.

They had been drawn together by mutual consent, each discovering that the
other was watching the young stranger as she left the dining-room.

"She is charming," said the old man, smiling into the face of the younger.
"Is she an intimate friend?"

"I--I hope so," stammered Dunham. "That is, I should like to have her
consider me so."

"Ah!" said the old man, looking deep into the other's eyes with a kindly
smile, as if he were recalling pleasant experiences of his own. "You are a
fortunate fellow. I hope you may succeed in making her think so. Do you
know, she interests me more than most young women, and in some way I
cannot disconnect her with an occurrence which happened in my office this
afternoon."

The young man showed a deep interest in the matter, and the Judge told the
story again, this time more in detail.

They drew a little apart from the rest of the men. The host, who had been
warned by his wife to give young Dunham an opportunity to talk with the
Judge, saw that her plans were succeeding admirably.

When the music began in the other room the Judge paused a moment to
listen, and then went on with his story.

"There is a freight elevator just opposite that left door of my office,
and somehow I cannot but think it had something to do with the girl's
disappearance, although the door was closed and the elevator was down on
the cellar floor all the time, as nearly as I can find out."

The young man asked eager questions, feeling in his heart that the story
might in some way explain the mystery of the young woman in the other
room.

"Suppose you stop in the office to-morrow," said the Judge. "Perhaps
you'll get a glimpse of her, and then bear me out in the statement that
she's like your friend. By the way, who is making such exquisite music?
Suppose we go and investigate. Mr. Bowman, will you excuse us if we follow
the ladies? We are anxious to hear the music at closer range."

The other men rose and followed.

The girl did not pause or look up as they came in, but played on, while
the company listened with the most rapt and wondering look. She was
playing with an _empressement_ which could not fail to command attention.

Tryon Dunham, standing just behind the Judge, was transfixed with
amazement. That this delicate girl could bring forth such an entrancing
volume of sound from the instrument was a great surprise. That she was so
exquisite an artist filled him with a kind of intoxicating elation--it was
as though she belonged to him.

At last she played Liszt's brilliant Hungarian Rhapsody, her slender hands
taking the tremendous chords and octave runs with a precision and rapidity
that seemed inspired. The final crash came in a shower of liquid jewels of
sound, and then she turned to look at him, her one friend in that company
of strangers.

He could see that she had been playing under a heavy strain. Her face
looked weary and flushed, and her eyes were brilliant with feverish
excitement. Those eyes seemed to be pleading with him now to set her free
from the kindly scrutiny of these good-hearted, curious strangers. They
gathered about her in delight, pouring their questions and praises upon
her.

"Where did you study? With some great master, I am sure. Tell us all about
yourself. We are dying to know, and will sit at your feet with great
delight while you discourse."

Tryon Dunham interrupted these disquieting questions, by drawing his watch
from his pocket with apparent hasty remembrance, and giving a well feigned
exclamation of dismay.

"I'm sorry, Mrs. Bowman; it is too bad to interrupt this delightful
evening," he apologized; "but I'm afraid if Miss Remington feels that she
must take the next train, we shall have to make all possible speed. Miss
Remington, can you get your wraps on in three minutes? Our carriage is
probably at the door now."

With a look of relief, yet keeping up her part of dismay over the lateness
of the hour, the girl sprang to her feet, and hurried away to get her
wraps, in spite of her protesting hostess. Mrs. Bowman was held at bay
with sweet expressions of gratitude for the pleasant entertainment. The
great black picture hat was settled becomingly on the small head, the
black cloak thrown over her gown, and the gloves fitted on hurriedly to
hide the fact that they were too large.

"And whom did you say you studied with?" asked the keen hostess,
determined to be able to tell how great a guest she had harbored for the
evening.

"Oh, is Mr. Dunham calling me, Mrs. Bowman? You will excuse me for
hurrying off, won't you? And it has been so lovely of you to ask
me--perfectly delightful to find friends this way when I was a stranger."

She hurried toward the stairway and down the broad steps, and the hostess
had no choice but to follow her.

The other guests crowded out into the hall to bid them good-by and to tell
the girl how much they had enjoyed the music. Mrs. Blackwell insisted upon
kissing the smooth cheek of the young musician, and whispered in her ear:
"You play very nicely, my dear. I should like to hear you again some
time." The kindness in her tone almost brought a rush of tears to the eyes
of the weary, anxious girl.

[Illustration]




III


Dunham hurried her off amid the goodbyes of the company, and in a moment
more they were shut into the semi-darkness of the four-wheeler and whirled
from the too hospitable door.

As soon as the door was shut, the girl began to tremble.

"Oh, we ought not to have done that!" she exclaimed with a shiver of
recollection. "They were so very kind. It was dreadful to impose upon
them. But--you were not to blame. It was my fault. It was very kind of
you."

"We did not impose upon them!" he exclaimed peremptorily. "You are my
friend, and that was all that we claimed. For the rest, you have certainly
made good. Your wonderful music! How I wish I might hear more of it some
time!"

The carriage paused to let a trolley pass, and a strong arc-light beat in
upon the two. A passing stranger peered curiously at them, and the girl
shrank back in fear. It was momentary, but the minds of the two were
brought back to the immediate necessities of the occasion.

"Now, what may I do for you?" asked Dunham in a quiet, business-like tone,
as if it were his privilege and right to do all that was to be done. "Have
you thought where you would like to go?"

"I have not been able to do much thinking. It required all my wits to act
with the present. But I know that I must not be any further trouble to
you. You have done more already than any one could expect. If you can have
the carriage stop in some quiet, out-of-the-way street where I shall not
be noticed, I will get out and relieve you. If I hadn't been so frightened
at first, I should have had more sense than to burden you this way. I hope
some day I shall be able to repay your kindness, though I fear it is too
great ever to repay."

"Please don't talk in that way," said he protestingly. "It has been a
pleasure to do the little that I have done, and you have more than repaid
it by the delight you have given me and my friends. I could not think of
leaving you until you are out of your trouble, and if you will only give
me a little hint of how to help, I will do my utmost for you. Are you
quite sure you were followed? Don't you think you could trust me enough to
tell me a little more about the matter?"

She shuddered visibly.

"Forgive me," he murmured. "I see it distresses you. Of course it is
unpleasant to confide in an utter stranger. I will not ask you to tell me.
I will try to think for you. Suppose we go to the station and get you a
ticket to somewhere. Have you any preference? You can trust me not to tell
any one where you have gone, can you not?" There was a kind rebuke in his
tone, and her eyes, as she lifted them to his face, were full of tears.

"Oh, I do trust you!" she cried, distressed "You must not think that,
but--you do not understand."

"Forgive me," he said again, holding out his hand in appeal. She laid her
little gloved hand in his for an instant.

"You are so kind!" she murmured, as if it were the only thing she could
think of. Then she added suddenly:

"But I cannot buy a ticket. I have no money with me, and I----"

"Don't think of that for an instant. I will gladly supply your need. A
little loan should not distress you."

"But I do not know when I shall be able to repay it," she faltered,
"unless"--she hastily drew off her glove and slipped a glittering ring
from her finger--"unless you will let this pay for it. I do not like to
trouble you so, but the stone is worth a good deal."

"Indeed," he protested, "I couldn't think of taking your ring. Let me do
this. It is such a small thing. I shall never miss it. Let it rest until
you are out of your trouble, at least."

"Please!" she insisted, holding out the ring. "I shall get right out of
this carriage unless you do."

"But perhaps some one gave you the ring, and you are attached to it."

"My father," she answered briefly, "and he would want me to use it this
way." She pressed the ring into his hand almost impatiently.

His fingers closed over the jewel impulsively. Somehow, it thrilled him to
hold the little thing, yet warm from her fingers. He had forgotten that
she was a stranger. His mind was filled with the thought of how best to
help her.

"I will keep it until you want it again," he said kindly.

"You need not do that, for I shall not claim it," she declared. "You are
at liberty to sell it. I know it is worth a good deal."

"I shall certainly keep it until I am sure you do not want it yourself,"
he repeated. "Now let us talk about this journey of yours. We are almost
at the station. Have you any preference as to where you go? Have you
friends to whom you could go?"

She shook her head.

"There are trains to New York every hour almost."

"Oh, no!" she gasped in a frightened tone.

"And to Washington often."

"I should rather not go to Washington," she breathed again.

"Pittsburg, Chicago?" he hazarded.

"Chicago will do," she asserted with relief. Then the carriage stopped
before the great station, ablaze with light and throbbing with life.
Policemen strolled about, and trolley-cars twinkled in every direction.
The girl shrank back into the shadows of the carriage for an instant, as
if she feared to come out from the sheltering darkness. Her escort half
defined her hesitation.

"Don't feel nervous," he said in a low tone. "I will see that no one harms
you. Just walk into the station as if you were my friend. You are, you
know, a friend of long standing, for we have been to a dinner together. I
might be escorting you home from a concert. No one will notice us.
Besides, that hat and coat are disguise enough."

He hurried her through the station and up to the ladies' waiting-room,
where he found a quiet corner and a large rocking-chair, in which he
placed her so that she might look out of the great window upon the
panorama of the evening street, and yet be thoroughly screened from all
intruding glances by the big leather and brass screen of the "ladies'
boot-black."

He was gone fifteen minutes, during which the girl sat quietly in her
chair, yet alert, every nerve strained. At any moment the mass of faces
she was watching might reveal one whom she dreaded to see, or a detective
might place his hand upon her shoulder with a quiet "Come with me."

When Dunham came back, the nervous start she gave showed him how tense and
anxious had been her mind. He studied her lovely face under the great hat,
and noted the dark shadows beneath her eyes. He felt that he must do
something to relieve her. It was unbearable to him that this young girl
should be adrift, friendless, and apparently a victim to some terrible
fear.

Drawing up a chair beside her, he began talking about her ticket.

"You must remember I was utterly at your mercy," she smiled sadly. "I
simply had to let you help me."

"I should be glad to pay double for the pleasure you have given me in
allowing me to help you," he said.

Just at that moment a boy in a blue uniform planted a sole-leather
suit-case at his feet, and exclaimed: "Here you are, Mr. Dunham. Had a
fierce time findin' you. Thought you said you would be by the elevator
door."

"So I did," confessed the young man. "I didn't think you had time to get
down yet. Well, you found me anyhow, Harkness."

The boy took the silver given him, touched his hat, and sauntered off.

"You see," explained Dunham, "it wasn't exactly the thing for you to be
travelling without a bit of baggage. I thought it might help them to trace
you if you really were being followed. So I took the liberty of 'phoning
over to the club-house and telling the boy to bring down the suit-case
that I left there yesterday. I don't exactly know what's in it. I had the
man pack it and send it down to me, thinking I might stay all night at
the club. Then I went home, after all, and forgot to take it along. It
probably hasn't anything very appropriate for a lady's costume, but there
may be a hair-brush and some soap and handkerchiefs. And, anyhow, if
you'll accept it, it'll be something for you to hitch on to. One feels a
little lost even for one night without a rag one can call one's own except
a Pullman towel. I thought it might give you the appearance of a regular
traveller, you know, and not a runaway."

He tried to make her laugh about it, but her face was deeply serious as
she looked up at him.

"I think this is the kindest and most thoughtful thing you have done yet,"
she said. "I don't see how I can ever, ever thank you!"

"Don't try," he returned gaily. "There's your train being called. We'd
better go right out and make you comfortable. You are beginning to be very
tired."

She did not deny it, but rose to follow him, scanning the waiting-room
with one quick, frightened look. An obsequious porter at the gate seized
the suit-case and led them in state to the Pullman.

The girl found herself established in the little drawing-room compartment,
and her eyes gave him thanks again. She knew the seclusion and the
opportunity to lock the compartment door would give her relief from the
constant fear that an unwelcome face might at any moment appear beside
her.

"The conductor on this train is an old acquaintance of mine," he explained
as that official came through the car. "I have taken this trip with him a
number of times. Just sit down a minute. I am going to ask him to look out
for you and see that no one annoys you."

The burly official looked grimly over his glasses at the sweet face under
the big black hat, while Tryon Dunham explained, "She's a friend of mine.
I hope you'll be good to her." In answer, he nodded grim assent with a
smileless alacrity which was nevertheless satisfactory and comforting.
Then the young man walked through the train to interview the porter and
the newsboy, and in every way to arrange for a pleasant journey for one
who three hours before had been unknown to him. As he went, he reflected
that he would rather enjoy being conductor himself just for that night. He
felt a strange reluctance toward giving up the oversight of the young
woman whose destiny for a few brief hours had been thrust upon him, and
who was about to pass out of his world again.

When he returned to her he found the shades closely drawn and the girl
sitting in the sheltered corner of the section, where she could not be
seen from the aisle, but where she could watch in the mirror the approach
of any one. She welcomed him with a smile, but instantly urged him to
leave the train, lest he be carried away.

He laughed at her fears, and told her there was plenty of time. Even after
the train had given its preliminary shudder, he lingered to tell her that
she must be sure to let him know by telegraph if she needed any further
help; and at last swung himself from the platform after the train was in
full motion.

Immediately he remembered that he had not given her any money. How could
he have forgotten? And there was the North Side Station yet to be passed
before she would be out of danger. Why had he not remained on the train
until she was past that stop, and then returned on the next train from the
little flag-station a few miles above, where he could have gotten the
conductor to slow up for him? The swiftly moving cars asked the question
as the long train flew by him. The last car was almost past when he made a
daring dash and flung himself headlong upon the platform, to the horror of
several trainmen who stood on the adjoining tracks.

"Gee!" said one, shaking his head. "What does that dude think he is made
of, any way? Like to got his head busted that time, fer sure."

The brakeman, coming out of the car door with his lantern, dragged him to
his feet, brushed him off, and scolded him vigorously. The young man
hurried through the car, oblivious of the eloquent harangue, happy only to
feel the floor jolting beneath his feet and to know that he was safe on
board.

He found the girl sitting where he had left her, only she had flung up the
shade of the window next her, and was gazing with wide, frightened eyes
into the fast flying darkness. He touched her gently on the shoulder, and
she turned with a cry.

"Oh, I thought you had fallen under the train!" she said in an awed voice.
"It was going so fast! But you did not get off, after all, did you? Now,
what can you do? It is too bad, and all on my account."

"Yes, I got off," he said doggedly, sitting down opposite her and pulling
his tie straight. "I got off, but it wasn't altogether satisfactory, and
so I got on again. There wasn't much time for getting on gracefully, but
you'll have to excuse it. The fact is, I couldn't bear to leave you alone
just yet. I couldn't rest until I knew you had passed the North Side
Station. Besides, I had forgotten to give you any money."

"Oh, but you mustn't!" she protested, her eyes eloquent with feeling.

"Please don't say that," he went on eagerly. "I can get off later and take
the down train, you know. Really, the fact is, I couldn't let you go
right out of existence this way without knowing more about you."

"Oh!" she gasped, turning a little white about the lips, and drawing
closer into her corner.

"Don't feel that way," he said. "I'm not going to bother you. You couldn't
think that of me, surely. But isn't it only fair that you should show me a
little consideration? Just give me an address, or something, where I could
let you know if I heard of anything that concerned you. Of course it isn't
likely I shall, but it seems to me you might at least let me know you are
safe."

"I will promise you that," she said earnestly. "You know I'm going to send
you back these things." She touched the cloak and the hat. "You might need
them to keep you from having to explain their absence," she reminded him.

The moments fairly flew. They passed the North Side Station, and were
nearing the flag station. After that there would be no more stops until
past midnight. The young man knew he must get off.

"I have almost a mind to go on to Chicago and see that you are safely
located," he said with sudden daring. "It seems too terrible to set you
adrift in the world this way."

"Indeed, you must not," said the young woman, with a gentle dignity. "Have
you stopped to think what people--what your mother, for instance--would
think of me if she were ever to know I had permitted such a thing? You
know you must not. Please don't speak of it again."

"I cannot help feeling that I ought to take care of you," he said, but
half convinced.

"But I cannot permit it," she said firmly, lifting her trustful eyes to
smile at him.

"Will you promise to let me know if you need anything?"

"No, I'm afraid I cannot promise even that," she answered, "because, while
you have been a true friend to me, the immediate and awful necessity is, I
hope, past."

"You will at least take this," he said, drawing from his pocket an
inconspicuous purse of beautiful leather, and putting into it all the
money his pockets contained. "I saw you had no pocketbook," he went on,
"and I ventured to get this one in the drug-store below the station. Will
you accept it from me? I have your ring, you know, and when you take the
ring back you may, if you wish, return the purse. I wish it were a better
one, but it was the most decent one they had. You will need it to carry
your ticket. And I have put in the change. It would not do for you to be
entirely without money. I'm sorry it isn't more. There are only nine
dollars and seventy-five cents left. Do you think that will see you
through? If there had been any place down-town here where I could cash a
check at this time of night, I should have made it more."

He looked at her anxiously as he handed over the pocketbook. It seemed a
ridiculously small sum with which to begin a journey alone, especially for
a young woman of her apparent refinement. On the other hand, his friends
would probably say he was a fool for having hazarded so much as he had
upon an unknown woman, who was perhaps an adventuress. However, he had
thrown discretion to the winds, and was undeniably interested in his new
acquaintance.

"How thoughtful you are!" said the girl. "It would have been most
embarrassing not to have a place to put my ticket, nor any money. This
seems a fortune after being penniless"--she smiled ruefully. "Are you sure
you have not reduced yourself to that condition? Have you saved enough to
carry you home?"

"Oh, I have my mileage book with me," he said happily. It pleased him
absurdly that she had not declined the pocketbook.

"Thank you so much. I shall return the price of the ticket and this money
as soon as possible," said the girl earnestly.

"You must not think of that," he protested. "You know I have your ring.
That is far more valuable than anything I have given you."

"Oh, but you said you were going to keep the ring, so that will not pay
for this, I want to be sure that you lose nothing."

He suddenly became aware that the train was whistling and that the
conductor was motioning him to go.

"But you have not told me your name," he cried in dismay.

"You have named me," she answered, smiling. "I am Mary Remington."

"But that is not your real name."

"You may call me Mary if you like," she said. "Now go, please, quick! I'm
afraid you'll get hurt."

"You will remember that I am your friend?"

"Yes, thank you. Hurry, please!"

The train paused long enough for him to step in front of her window and
wave his hat in salute. Then she passed on into the night, and only two
twinkling lights, like diminishing red berries, marked the progress of the
train until it disappeared in the cut. Nothing was left but the hollow
echoes of its going, which the hills gave back.

[Illustration]




IV


Dunham listened as long as his ear could catch the sound, then a strange
desolation settled down upon him. How was it that a few short hours ago he
had known nothing, cared nothing, about this stranger? And now her going
had left things blank enough! It was foolish, of course--just highly
wrought nerves over this most extraordinary occurrence. Life had
heretofore run in such smooth, conventional grooves as to have been almost
prosaic; and now to be suddenly plunged into romance and mystery
unbalanced him for the time. To-morrow, probably, he would again be able
to look sane living in the face, and perhaps call himself a fool for his
most unusual interest in this chance acquaintance; but just at this moment
when he had parted from her, when the memory of her lovely face and pure
eyes lingered with him, when her bravery and fear were both so fresh in
his mind, and the very sound of her music was still in his brain, he
simply could not without a pang turn back again to life which contained no
solution of her mystery, no hope of another vision of her face.

The little station behind him was closed, though a light over the desk
shone brightly through its front window and the telegraph sounder was
clicking busily. The operator had gone over the hill with an important
telegram, leaving the station door locked. The platform was windy and
cheerless, with a view of a murky swamp, and the sound of deep-throated
inhabitants croaking out a late fall concert. A rusty-throated cricket in
a crack of the platform wailed a plaintive note now and then, and off
beyond the swamp, in the edge of the wood, a screech-owl hooted.

Turning impatiently from the darkness, Dunham sought the bright window, in
front of which lay a newspaper. He could read the large headlines of a
column--no more, for the paper was upside down, and a bunch of bill-heads
lay partly across it. It read:

    MYSTERIOUS DISAPPEARANCE OF YOUNG AND PRETTY WOMAN

His heart stood still, and then went thudding on in dull, horrid blows.
Vainly he tried to read further. He followed every visible word of that
paper to discover its date and origin, but those miserable bill-heads
frustrated his effort. He felt like dashing his hand through the glass,
but reflected that the act might result in his being locked up in some
miserable country jail. He tried the window and gave the door another
vicious shake, but all to no purpose. Finally he turned on his heel and
walked up and down for an hour, tramping the length of the shaky platform,
back and forth, till the train rumbled up. As he took his seat in the car
he saw the belated agent come running up the platform with a lighted
lantern on his arm, and a package of letters, which he handed to the
brakeman, but there was not time to beg the newspaper from him. Dunham's
indignant mind continued to dwell upon the headlines, to the annoying
accompaniment of screech-owl and frog and cricket. He resented the
adjective "pretty." Why should any reporter dare to apply that word to a
sweet and lovely woman? It seemed so superficial, so belittling, and--but
then, of course, this headline did not apply to his new friend. It was
some other poor creature, some one to whom perhaps the word "pretty"
really applied; some one who was not really beautiful, only pretty.

At the first stop a man in front got out, leaving a newspaper in the seat.
With eager hands, Dunham leaned forward and grasped it, searching its
columns in vain for the tantalizing headlines. But there were others
equally arrestive. This paper announced the mysterious disappearance of a
young actress who was suspected of poisoning her husband. When seen last,
she was boarding a train en route to Washington. She had not arrived
there, however, so far as could be discovered. It was supposed that she
was lingering in the vicinity of Philadelphia or Baltimore. There were
added a few incriminating details concerning her relationship with her
dead husband, and a brief sketch of her sensational life. The paragraph
closed with the statement that she was an accomplished musician.

The young man frowned and, opening his window, flung the scandalous sheet
to the breeze. He determined to forget what he had read, yet the lines
kept coming before his eyes.

When he reached the city he went to the news-stand in the station, where
was an agent who knew him, and procured a copy of every paper on sale.
Then, instead of hurrying home, he found a seat in a secluded corner and
proceeded to examine his purchases.

In large letters on the front page of a New York paper blazed:

    HOUSE ROBBED OF JEWELS WORTH TEN THOUSAND DOLLARS BY BEAUTIFUL
    YOUNG ADVENTURESS MASQUERADING AS A PARLOR MAID

He ran his eye down the column and gathered that she was still at large,
though the entire police force of New York was on her track. He shivered
at the thought, and began to feel sympathy for all wrong-doers and truants
from the law. It was horrible to have detectives out everywhere watching
for beautiful young women, just when this one in whom his interest
centred was trying to escape from something.

He turned to another paper, only to be met by the words:

    ESCAPE OF FAIR LUNATIC

and underneath:

    Prison walls could not confine Miss Nancy Lee, who last week
    threw a lighted lamp at her mother, setting fire to the house,
    and then attempted suicide. The young woman seems to have
    recovered her senses, and professes to know nothing of what
    happened, but the physicians say she is liable to another attack
    of insanity, and deem it safe to keep her confined. She escaped
    during the night, leaving no clew to her whereabouts. How she
    managed to get open the window through which she left the asylum
    is still a mystery.

In disgust he flung the paper from him and took up another.

    FOUL PLAY SUSPECTED! BEAUTIFUL YOUNG HEIRESS MISSING

His soul turned sick within him. He looked up and saw a little procession
of late revellers rushing out to the last suburban train, the girls
leaving a trail of orris perfume and a vision of dainty opera cloaks. One
of the men was a city friend of his. Dunham half envied him his
unperturbed mind. To be sure, he would not get back to the city till three
in the morning, but he would have no visions of robberies and fair
lunatics and hard pressed maidens unjustly pursued, to mar his rest.

Dunham buttoned his coat and turned up his collar as he started out into
the street, for the night had turned cold, and his nerves made him chilly.
As he walked, the blood began to race more healthily in his veins, and the
horrors of the evening papers were dispelled. In their place came pleasant
memories of the evening at Mrs. Bowman's, of the music, and of their ride
and talk together. In his heart a hope began to rise that her dark days
would pass, and that he might find her again and know her better.

His brief night's sleep was cut short by a sharp knock at his door the
next morning. He awoke with a confused idea of being on a sleeping-car,
and wondered if he had plenty of time to dress, but his sister's voice
quickly dispelled the illusion.

"Tryon, aren't you almost ready to come down to breakfast? Do hurry,
please. I've something awfully important to consult you about."

His sister's tone told him there was need for haste if he would keep in
her good graces, so he made a hurried toilet and went down, to find his
household in a state of subdued excitement.

"I'm just as worried as I can be," declared his mother. "I want to consult
you, Tryon. I have put such implicit confidence in Norah, and I cannot
bear to accuse her unjustly, but I have missed a number of little things
lately. There was my gold link bag----"

"Mother, you know you said you were sure you left that at the Century
Club."

"Don't interrupt, Cornelia. Of course it is possible I left it at the club
rooms, but I begin to think now I didn't have it with me at all. Then
there is my opal ring. To be sure, it isn't worth a great deal, but one
who will take little things will take large ones."

"What's the matter, Mother? Norah been appropriating property not her
own?"

"I'm very much afraid she has, Tryon. What would you do about it? It is so
unpleasant to charge a person with stealing. It is such a vulgar thing to
steal. Somehow I thought Norah was more refined."

"Why, I suppose there's nothing to do but just charge her with it, is
there? Are you quite sure it is gone? What is it, any way? A ring, did you
say?"

"No, it's a hat," said Cornelia shortly. "A sixty-dollar hat. I wish I'd
kept it now, and then she wouldn't have dared. It had two beautiful willow
ostrich plumes on it, but mother didn't think it was becoming. She wanted
some color about it instead of all black. I left it in my room, and
charged Norah to see that the man got it when he called, and now the man
comes and says he wants the hat, and it is _gone_! Norah insists that when
she last saw it, it was in my room. But of course that's absurd, for there
was nobody else to take it but Thompson, and he's been in the family for
so long."

"Nonsense!" said her brother sharply, dropping his fruit knife in his
plate with a rattle that made the young woman jump. "Cornelia, I'm
ashamed of you, thinking that poor, innocent girl has stolen your hat.
Why, she wouldn't steal a pin, I am sure. You can tell she's honest by
looking into her eyes. Girls with blue eyes like that don't lie and
steal."

"Really!" Cornelia remarked haughtily. "You seem to know a great deal
about her eyes. You may feel differently when I find the hat in her
possession."

"Cornelia," interrupted Tryon, quite beside himself, "don't think of such
a thing as speaking to that poor girl about that hat. I know she hasn't
stolen it. The hat will probably be found, and then how will you feel?"

"But I tell you the hat cannot be found!" said the exasperated sister.
"And I shall just have to pay for a hat that I can never wear."

"Mother, I appeal to you," said the son earnestly. "Don't allow Cornelia
to speak of the hat to the girl. I wouldn't have such an injustice done in
our house. The hat will turn up soon if you just go about the matter
calmly. You'll find it quite naturally and unexpectedly, perhaps. Any way,
if you don't, I'll pay for the hat, rather than have the girl suspected."

"But, Tryon," protested his mother, "if she isn't honest, you know we
wouldn't want her about."

"Honest, Mother? She's as honest as the day is long. I am certain of
that."

The mother rose reluctantly.

"Well, we might let it go another day," she consented. Then, looking up at
the sky, she added, "I wonder if it is going to rain. I have a Reciprocity
meeting on for to-day, and I'm a delegate to some little unheard-of place.
It usually does rain when one goes into the country, I've noticed."

She went into the hall, and presently returned with a distressed look upon
her face.

"Tryon, I'm afraid you're wrong," she said. "Now my rain-coat is missing.
My new rain-coat! I hung it up in the hall-closet with my own hands, after
it came from the store. I really think something ought to be done!"

"There! I hope you see!" said Cornelia severely. "I think it's high time
something was done. I shall 'phone for a detective at once!"

"Cornelia, you'll do nothing of the kind," her brother protested, now
thoroughly aroused. "I'll agree to pay for the hat and the rain-coat if
they are not forthcoming before a fortnight passes, but you simply shall
not ruin that poor girl's reputation. I insist, Mother, that you put a
stop to such rash proceedings. I'll make myself personally responsible for
that girl's honesty."

"Well, of course, Tryon, if you wish it----" said his mother, with anxious
hesitation.

"I certainly do wish it, Mother. I shall take it as personal if anything
is done in this matter without consulting me. Remember, Cornelia, I will
not have any trifling. A girl's reputation is certainly worth more than
several hats and rain-coats, and I _know_ she has not taken them."

He walked from the dining-room and from the house in angry dignity, to the
astonishment of his mother and sister, to whom he was usually courtesy
itself. Consulting him about household matters was as a rule merely a
form, for he almost never interfered. The two women looked at each other
in startled bewilderment.

"Mother," said Cornelia, "you don't suppose he can have fallen in love
with Norah, do you? Why, she's Irish and freckled! And Tryon has always
been so fastidious!"

"Cornelia! How dare you suggest such a thing? Tryon is a _Dunham_.
Whatever else a Dunham may or may not do, he never does anything low or
unrefined."

The small, prim, stylish mother looked quite regal in her aristocratic
rage.

"But, Mother, one reads such dreadful things in the papers now. Of course
Tryon would never _marry_ any one like that, but----"

"Cornelia!"--her mother's voice had almost reached a patrician scream--"I
forbid you to mention the subject again. I cannot think where you learned
to voice such thoughts."

"Well, my goodness, Mother, I don't mean anything, only I do wish I had
my hat. I always did like all black. I can't imagine what ails Try, if it
isn't that."

Tryon Dunham took his way to his office much perturbed in mind.
Perplexities seemed to be thickening about him. With the dawn of the
morning had come that sterner common-sense which told him he was a fool
for having taken up with a strange young woman on the street, who was so
evidently flying from justice. He had deceived not only his intimate
friends by palming her off as a fit companion for them, but his mother and
sister. He had practically stolen their garments, and had squandered more
than fifty dollars of his own money. And what had he to show for all this?
The memory of a sweet face, the lingering beauty of the name "Mary" when
she bade him good-by, and a diamond ring. The cool morning light presented
the view that the ring was probably valueless, and that he was a fool.

Ah, the ring! A sudden warm thrill shot through him, and his hand searched
his vest pocket, where he had hastily put the jewel before leaving his
room. That was something tangible. He could at least know what it was
worth, and so make sure once for all whether he had been deceived. No,
that would not be fair either, for her father might have made her think it
was valuable, or he might even have been taken in himself, if he were not
a judge of jewels.

Dunham examined it as he walked down the street, too perplexed with his
own tumultuous thoughts to remember his usual trolley. He slipped the ring
on his finger and let it catch the morning sunlight, now shining broad and
clear in spite of the hovering rain-clouds in the distance. And gloriously
did the sun illumine the diamond, burrowing into the great depths of its
clear white heart, and causing it to break into a million fires of glory,
flashing and glancing until it fairly dazzled him. The stone seemed to be
of unusual beauty and purity, but he would step into the diamond shop as
he passed and make sure. He had a friend there who could tell him all
about it. His step quickened, and he covered the distance in a short
time.

After the morning greeting, he handed over his ring.

"This belongs to a friend of mine," he said, trying to look unconcerned.
"I should like to know if the stone is genuine, and about what it is
worth."

His friend took the ring and retired behind a curious little instrument
for the eye, presently emerging with a respectful look upon his face.

"Your friend is fortunate to have such a beautiful stone. It is unusually
clear and white, and exquisitely cut. I should say it was worth at
least"--he paused and then named a sum which startled Dunham, even
accustomed as he was to counting values in high figures. He took the jewel
back with a kind of awe. Where had his mysterious lady acquired this
wondrous bauble which she had tossed to him for a trifle? In a tumult of
feeling, he went on to his office more perplexed than ever. Suspicions of
all sorts crowded thickly into his mind, but for every thought that
shadowed the fair reputation of the lady, there came into his mind her
clear eyes and cast out all doubts. Finally, after a bad hour of trying
to work, he slipped the ring on his little finger, determined to wear it
and thus prove to himself his belief in her, at least until he had
absolute proof against her. Then he took up his hat and went out, deciding
to accept Judge Blackwell's invitation to visit his office. He found a
cordial reception, and the Judge talked business in a most satisfactory
manner. His proposals bade fair to bring about some of the dearest wishes
of the young man's heart, and yet as he left the building he was thinking
more about the mysterious stranger who had disappeared from the Judge's
office the day before than about the wonderful good luck that had come to
him in a business way.

They had not talked much about her. The Judge had brought out her hat--a
beautiful velvet one, with exquisite plumes--her gloves, a costly leather
purse, and a fine hemstitched handkerchief, and as he put them sadly away
on a closet shelf, he said no trace of her had as yet been found.

On his way toward his own office, Tryon Dunham pondered the remarkable
coincidence which had made him the possessor of two parts of the same
mystery--for he had no doubt that the hat belonged to the young woman who
had claimed his help the evening before.

       *       *       *       *       *

Meantime, the girl who was speeding along toward Chicago had not forgotten
him. She could not if she would, for all about her were reminders of him.
The conductor took charge of her ticket, telling her in his gruff, kind
way what time they would arrive in the city. The porter was solicitous
about her comfort, the newsboy brought the latest magazines and a box of
chocolates and laid them at her shrine with a smile of admiration and the
words, "Th' g'n'lmun sent 'em!" The suit-case lay on the seat opposite,
the reflection of her face in the window-glass, as she gazed into the inky
darkness outside, was crowned by the hat he had provided, and when she
moved the silken rustle of the rain-coat reminded her of his kindness and
forethought. She put her head back and closed her eyes, and for just an
instant let her weary, overwrought mind think what it would mean if the
man from whom she was fleeing had been such as this one seemed to be.

By and by, she opened the suit-case, half doubtfully, feeling that she was
almost intruding upon another's possessions.

There were a dress-suit and a change of fine linen, handkerchiefs,
neckties, a pair of gloves, a soft, black felt negligee hat folded, a
large black silk muffler, a bath-robe, and the usual silver-mounted
brushes, combs, and other toilet articles. She looked them over in a
business-like way, trying to see how she could make use of them. Removing
her hat, she covered it with the silk muffler, to protect it from dust.
Then she took off her dress and wrapped herself in the soft bath-robe,
wondering as she did so at her willingness to put on a stranger's
garments. Somehow, in her brief acquaintance with this man, he had
impressed her with his own pleasant fastidiousness, so that there was a
kind of pleasure in using his things, as if they had been those of a
valued friend.

She touched the electric button that controlled the lights in the little
apartment, and lay down in the darkness to think out her problem of the
new life that lay before her.

[Illustration]




V


Beginning with the awful moment when she first realized her danger and the
necessity for immediate flight, she lived over every perilous instant, her
nerves straining, her breath bated as if she were experiencing it all once
more. The horror of it! Her own hopeless, helpless condition! But finally,
because her trouble was new and her body and mind, though worn with
excitement, were healthy and young, she sank into a deep sleep, without
having decided at all what she should do.

At last she woke from a terrible dream, in which the hand of her pursuer
was upon her, and her preserver was in the dark distance. With that
strange insistence which torments the victim of such dreams, she was
obliged to lie still and imagine it out, again and again, until the face
and voice of the young man grew very real in the darkness, and she longed
inexpressibly for the comfort of his presence once more.

At length she shook off these pursuing thoughts and deliberately roused
herself to plan her future.

The first necessity, she decided, was to change her appearance so far as
possible, so that if news of her escape, with full description, had been
telegraphed, she might evade notice. To that end, she arose in the early
dawning of a gray and misty morning, and arranged her hair as she had
never worn it before, in two braids and wound closely about her head. It
was neat, and appropriate to the vocation which she had decided upon, and
it made more difference in her appearance than any other thing she could
have done. All the soft, fluffy fulness of rippling hair that had framed
her face was drawn close to her head, and the smooth bands gave her the
simplicity and severity of a saint in some old picture. She pinned up her
gown until it did not show below the long black coat, and folded a white
linen handkerchief about her throat over the delicate lace and garniture
of the modish waist. Then she looked dubiously at the hat.

With a girl's instinct, her first thought was for her borrowed plumage. A
fine mist was slanting down and had fretted the window-pane until there
was nothing visible but dull gray shadows of a world that flew
monotonously by. With sudden remembrance, she opened the suit-case and
took out the folded black hat, shook it into shape, and put it on. It was
mannish, of course, but girls often wore such hats.

As she surveyed herself in the long mirror of her door, the slow color
stole into her cheeks. Yet the costume was not unbecoming, nor unusual.
She looked like a simple schoolgirl, or a young business woman going to
her day's work.

But she looked at the fashionable proportions of the other hat with
something like alarm. How could she protect it? She did not for a moment
think of abandoning it, for it was her earnest desire to return it at
once, unharmed, to its kind purloiner.

She summoned the newsboy and purchased three thick newspapers. From these,
with the aid of a few pins, she made a large package of the hat. To be
sure, it did not look like a hat when it was done, but that was all the
better. The feathers were upheld and packed softly about with bits of
paper crushed together to make a springy cushion, and the whole built out
and then covered over with paper. She reflected that girls who wore their
hair wound about their heads and covered by plain felt hats would not be
unlikely to carry large newspaper-wrapped packages through the city
streets.

She decided to go barehanded, and put the white kid gloves in the
suit-case, but she took off her beautiful rings, and hid them safely
inside her dress.

When the porter came to announce that her breakfast was waiting in the
dining-car, he looked at her almost with a start, but she answered his
look with a pleasant, "Good morning. You see I'm fixed for a damp day."

"Yes, miss," said the man deferentially. "It's a nasty day outside. I
'spect Chicago'll be mighty wet. De wind's off de lake, and de rain's
comin' from all way 'twoncet."

She sacrificed one of her precious quarters to get rid of the attentive
porter, and started off with a brisk step down the long platform to the
station. It was part of her plan to get out of the neighborhood as quickly
as possible, so she followed the stream of people who instead of going
into the waiting-room veered off to the street door and out into the
great, wet, noisy world. With the same reasoning, she followed a group of
people into a car, which presently brought her into the neighborhood of
the large stores, as she had hoped it would. It was with relief that she
recognized the name on one of the stores as being of world-wide
reputation.

Well for her that she was an experienced shopper. She went straight to the
millinery department and arranged to have the hat boxed and sent to the
address Dunham had given her. Her gentle voice and handsome rain-coat
proclaimed her a lady and commanded deference and respectful attention. As
she walked away, she had an odd feeling of having communicated with her
one friend and preserver.

It had cost less to express the hat than she had feared, yet her stock of
money was woefully small. Some kind of a dress she must have, and a wrap,
that she might be disguised, but what could she buy and yet have something
left for food? There was no telling how long it would be before she could
replenish her purse. Life must be reduced to its lowest terms. True, she
had jewelry which might be sold, but that would scarcely be safe, for if
she were watched, she might easily be identified by it. What did the very
poor do, who were yet respectable?

The ready-made coats and skirts were entirely beyond her means, even those
that had been marked down. With a hopeless feeling, she walked aimlessly
down between the tables of goods. The suit-case weighed like lead, and she
put it on the floor to rest her aching arms. Lifting her eyes, she saw a
sign over a table--"Linene Skirts, 75 cts. and $1.00."

Here was a ray of hope. She turned eagerly to examine them. Piles of
sombre skirts, blue and black and tan. They were stout and coarse and
scant, and not of the latest cut, but what mattered it? She decided on a
seventy-five cent black one. It seemed pitiful to have to economize in a
matter of twenty-five cents, when she had been used to counting her money
by dollars, yet there was a feeling of exultation at having gotten for
that price any skirt at all that would do. A dim memory of what she had
read about ten-cent lodging-houses, where human beings were herded like
cattle, hovered over her.

Growing wise with experience, she discovered that she could get a black
sateen shirt-waist for fifty cents. Rubbers and a cotton umbrella took
another dollar and a half. She must save at least a dollar to send back
the suit-case by express.

A bargain-table of odds and ends of woollen jackets, golf vests, and old
fashioned blouse sweaters, selling off at a dollar apiece, solved the
problem of a wrap. She selected a dark blouse, of an ugly, purply blue,
but thick and warm. Then with her precious packages she asked a
pleasant-faced saleswoman if there were any place near where she could
slip on a walking skirt she had just bought to save her other skirt from
the muddy streets. She was ushered into a little fitting-room near by. It
was only about four feet square, with one chair and a tiny table, but it
looked like a palace to the girl in her need, and as she fastened the door
and looked at the bare painted walls that reached but a foot or so above
her head and had no ceiling, she wished with all her heart that such a
refuge as this might be her own somewhere in the great, wide, fearful
world.

Rapidly she slipped off her fine, silk-lined cloth garments, and put on
the stiff sateen waist and the coarse black skirt. Then she surveyed
herself, and was not ill pleased. There was a striking lack of collar and
belt. She sought out a black necktie and pinned it about her waist, and
then, with a protesting frown, she deliberately tore a strip from the edge
of one of the fine hem-stitched handkerchiefs, and folded it in about her
neck in a turn-over collar. The result was quite startling and unfamiliar.
The gown, the hair, the hat, and the neat collar gave her the look of a
young nurse-girl or upper servant. On the whole, the disguise could not
have been better. She added the blue woollen blouse, and felt certain that
even her most intimate friends would not recognize her. She folded the
rain-coat, and placed it smoothly in the suit-case, then with dismay
remembered that she had nothing in which to put her own cloth dress, save
the few inadequate paper wrappings that had come about her simple
purchases. Vainly she tried to reduce the dress to a bundle that would be
covered by the papers. It was of no use. She looked down at the suit-case.
There was room for the dress in there, but she wanted to send Mr. Dunham's
property back at once. She might leave the dress in the store, but some
detective with an accurate description of that dress might be watching,
find it, and trace her. Besides, she shrank from leaving her garments
about in public places. If there had been any bridge near at hand where
she might unobserved throw the dress into a dark river, or a consuming
fire where she might dispose of it, she would have done it. But whatever
she was to do with it must be done at once. Her destiny must be settled
before the darkness came down. She folded the dress smoothly and laid it
in the suit-case, under the rain-coat.

She sat down at a writing-desk, in the waiting-room, and wrote: "I am
safe, and I thank you." Then she paused an instant, and with nervous haste
wrote "Mary" underneath. She opened the suit-case and pinned the paper to
the lapel of the evening coat. Just three dollars and sixty-seven cents
she had left in her pocket-book after paying the expressage on the
suit-case.

She felt doubtful whether she might not have done wrong about thus sending
her dress back, but what else could she have done? If she had bought a box
in which to put it, she would have had to carry it with her, and perhaps
the dress might have been found during her absence from her room, and she
suspected because of it. At any rate, it was too late now, and she felt
sure the young man would understand. She hoped it would not inconvenience
him especially to get rid of it. Surely he could give it to some
charitable organization without much trouble.

At her first waking, in the early gray hours of the morning, she had
looked her predicament calmly in the face. It was entirely likely that it
would continue indefinitely; it might be, throughout her whole life. She
could now see no way of help for herself. Time might, perhaps, give her a
friend who would assist her, or a way might open back into her old life in
some unthought-of manner, but for a time there must be hiding and a way
found to earn her living.

She had gone carefully over her own accomplishments. Her musical
attainments, which would naturally have been the first thought, were out
of the question. Her skill as a musician was so great, and so well known
by her enemy, that she would probably be traced by it at once. As she
looked back at the hour spent at Mrs. Bowman's piano, she shuddered at the
realization that it might have been her undoing, had it chanced that her
enemy passed the house, with a suspicion that she was inside. She would
never dare to seek a position as accompanist, and she knew how futile it
would be for her to attempt to teach music in an unknown city, among
strangers. She might starve to death before a single pupil appeared.
Besides, that too would put her in a position where she would be more
easily found. The same arguments were true if she were to attempt to take
a position as teacher or governess, although she was thoroughly competent
to do so. Rapidly rejecting all the natural resources which under ordinary
circumstances she would have used to maintain herself, she determined to
change her station entirely, at least for the present. She would have
chosen to do something in a little, quiet hired room somewhere, sewing or
decorating or something of the sort, but that too would be hopelessly out
of her reach, without friends to aid her. A servant's place in some one's
home was the only thing possible that presented itself to her mind. She
could not cook, nor do general housework, but she thought she could fill
the place of waitress.

With a brave face, but a shrinking heart, she stepped into a drug-store
and looked up in the directory the addresses of several employment
agencies.

[Illustration]




VI


It was half past eleven when she stepped into the first agency on her
list, and business was in full tide.

While she stood shrinking by the door the eyes of a dozen women fastened
upon her, each with keen scrutiny. The sensitive color stole into her
delicate cheeks. As the proprietress of the office began to question her,
she felt her courage failing.

"You wish a position?" The woman had a nose like a hawk, and eyes that
held no sympathy. "What do you want? General housework?"

"I should like a position as waitress." Her voice was low and sounded
frightened to herself.

The hawk nose went up contemptuously.

"Better take general housework. There are too many waitresses already."

"I understand the work of a waitress, but I never have done general
housework," she answered with the voice of a gentlewoman, which somehow
angered the hawk, who had trained herself to get the advantage over people
and keep it or else know the reason why.

"Very well, do as you please, of course, but you bite your own nose off.
Let me see your references."

The girl was ready for this.

"I am sorry, but I cannot give you any. I have lived only in one home,
where I had entire charge of the table and dining-room, and that home was
broken up when the people went abroad three years ago. I could show you
letters written by the mistress of that home if I had my trunk here, but
it is in another city, and I do not know when I shall be able to send for
it."

"No references!" screamed the hawk, then raising her voice, although it
was utterly unnecessary: "Ladies, here is a girl who has no references. Do
any of you want to venture?" The contemptuous laugh that followed had the
effect of a warning to every woman in the room. "And this girl scorns
general housework, and presumes to dictate for a place as waitress," went
on the hawk.

"I want a waitress badly," said a troubled woman in a subdued whisper,
"but I really wouldn't dare take a girl without references. She might be a
thief, you know, and then--really, she doesn't look as if she was used to
houses like mine. I must have a neat, stylish-looking girl. No
self-respecting waitress nowadays would go out in the street dressed like
that."

All the eyes in the room seemed boring through the poor girl as she stood
trembling, humiliated, her cheeks burning, while horrified tears demanded
to be let up into her eyes. She held her dainty head proudly, and turned
away with dignity.

"However, if you care to try," called out the hawk, "you can register at
the desk and leave two dollars, and if in the meantime you can think of
anybody who'll give us a reference, we'll look it up. But we never
guarantee girls without references."

The tears were too near the surface now for her even to acknowledge this
information flung at her in an unpleasant voice. She went out of the
office, and immediately,--surreptitiously,--two women hurried after her.

One was flabby, large, and overdressed, with a pasty complexion and eyes
like a fish, in which was a lack of all moral sense. She hurried after the
girl and took her by the shoulder just as she reached the top of the
stairs that led down into the street.

The other was a small, timid woman, with anxiety and indecision written
all over her, and a last year's street suit with the sleeves remodelled.
When she saw who had stopped the girl, she lingered behind in the hall and
pretended there was something wrong with the braid on her skirt. While she
lingered she listened.

"Wait a minute, Miss," said the flashy woman. "You needn't feel bad about
having references. Everybody isn't so particular. You come with me, and
I'll put you in the way of earning more than you can ever get as a
waitress. You weren't cut out for work, any way, with that face and voice.
I've been watching you. You were meant for a lady. You need to be dressed
up, and you'll be a real pretty girl----"

As she talked, she had come nearer, and now she leaned over and whispered
so that the timid woman, who was beginning dimly to perceive what manner
of creature this other woman was, could not hear.

But the girl stepped back with sudden energy and flashing eyes, shaking
off the be-ringed hand that had grasped her shoulder.

"Don't you dare to speak to me!" she said in a loud, clear voice. "Don't
you dare to touch me! You are a wicked woman! If you touch me again, I
will go in there and tell all those women how you have insulted me!"

"Oh, well, if you're a saint, starve!" hissed the woman.

"I should rather starve ten thousand times than take help from you," said
the girl, and her clear, horrified eyes seemed to burn into the woman's
evil face. She turned and slid away, like the wily old serpent that she
was.

Down the stairs like lightning sped the girl, her head up in pride and
horror, her eyes still flashing. And down the stairs after her sped the
little, anxious woman, panting and breathless, determined to keep her in
sight till she could decide whether it was safe to take a girl without a
character--yet who had just shown a bit of her character unaware.

Two blocks from the employment office the girl paused, to realize that she
was walking blindly, without any destination. She was trembling so with
terror that she was not sure whether she had the courage to enter another
office, and a long vista of undreamed-of fears arose in her imagination.

The little woman paused, too, eying the girl cautiously, then began in an
eager voice:

"I've been following you."

The girl started nervously, a cold chill of fear coming over her. Was this
a woman detective?

"I heard what that awful woman said to you, and I saw how you acted. You
must be a good girl, or you wouldn't have talked to her that way. I
suppose I'm doing a dangerous thing, but I can't help it. I believe you're
all right, and I'm going to try you, if you'll take general housework. I
need somebody right away, for I'm going to have a dinner party to-morrow
night, and my girl left me this morning."

The kind tone in the midst of her troubles brought tears to the girl's
eyes.

"Oh, thank you!" she said as she brushed the tears away. "I'm a stranger
here, and I have never before been among strangers this way. I'd like to
come and work for you, but I couldn't do general housework, I'm sure. I
never did it, and I wouldn't know how."

"Can't you cook a little? I could teach you my ways."

"I don't know the least thing about cooking. I never cooked a thing in my
life."

"What a pity! What was your mother thinking about? Every girl ought to be
brought up to know a little about cooking, even if she does have some
other employment."

"My mother has been dead a good many years." The tears brimmed over now,
but the girl tried to smile. "I could help you with your dinner party,"
she went on. "That is, I know all about setting the tables and arranging
the flowers and favors. I could paint the place-cards, too--I've done it
many a time. And I could wait on the table. But I couldn't cook even an
oyster."

"Oh, place-cards!" said the little woman, her eyes brightening. She caught
at the word as though she had descried a new star in the firmament. "I
wish I could have them. They cost so much to buy. I might have my
washerwoman come and help with the cooking. She cooks pretty well, and I
could help her beforehand, but she couldn't wait on table, to save her
life. I wonder if you know much about menus. Could you help me fix out the
courses and say what you think I ought to have, or don't you know about
that? You see, I have this very particular company coming, and I want to
have things nice. I don't know them very well. My husband has business
relations with them and wants them invited, and of all times for Betty to
leave this was the worst!" She had unconsciously fallen into a tone of
equality with the strange girl.

"I should like to help you," said the girl, "but I must find somewhere to
stay before night, and if I find a place I must take it. I just came to
the city this morning, and have nowhere to stay overnight."

The troubled look flitted across the woman's face for a moment, but her
desire got the better of her.

"I suppose my husband would think I was crazy to do it," she said aloud,
"but I just can't help trusting you. Suppose you come and stay with me
to-day and to-morrow, and help me out with this dinner party, and you can
stay overnight at my house and sleep in the cook's room. If I like your
work, I'll give you a recommendation as waitress. You can't get a good
place anywhere without it, not from the offices, I'm sure. A
recommendation ought to be worth a couple of days' work to you. I'd pay
you something besides, but I really can't afford it, for the washerwoman
charges a dollar and a half a day when she goes out to cook; but if you
get your board and lodging and a reference, that ought to pay you."

"You are very kind," said the girl. "I shall be glad to do that."

"When will you come? Can you go with me now, or have you got to go after
your things?"

"I haven't any things but these," she said simply, "and perhaps you will
not think I am fine enough for your dinner party. I have a little money. I
could buy a white apron. My trunk is a good many miles away, and I was in
desperate straits and had to leave it."

"H'm! A stepmother, probably," thought the kindly little woman. "Poor
child! She doesn't look as if she was used to roughing it. If I could only
hold on to her and train her, she might be a treasure, but there's no
telling what John will say. I won't tell him anything about her, if I can
help it, till the dinner is over."

Aloud she said: "Oh, that won't be necessary. I've got a white apron I'll
lend you--perhaps I'll give it to you if you do your work well. Then we
can fix up some kind of a waitress's cap out of a lace-edged handkerchief,
and you'll look fine. I'd rather do that and have you come right along
home with me, for everything is at sixes at sevens. Betty went off without
washing the breakfast dishes. You can wash dishes, any way."

"Why, I can try," laughed the girl, the ridiculousness of her present
situation suddenly getting the better of other emotions.

And so they got into a car and were whirled away into a pretty suburb. The
woman, whose name was Mrs. Hart, lived in a common little house filled
with imitation oriental rugs and cheap furniture.

The two went to work at once, bringing order out of the confusion that
reigned in the tiny kitchen. In the afternoon the would-be waitress sat
down with a box of water-colors to paint dinner-cards, and as her skilful
brush brought into being dainty landscapes, lovely flowers, and little
brown birds, she pondered the strangeness of her lot.

The table the next night was laid with exquisite care, the scant supply of
flowers having been used to best advantage, and everything showing the
touch of a skilled hand. The long hours that Mrs. Hart had spent
puckering her brow over the household department of fashion magazines
helped her to recognize the fact that in her new maid she had what she was
pleased to call "the real thing."

She sighed regretfully when the guest of honor, Mrs. Rhinehart, spoke of
the deftness and pleasant appearance of her hostess's waitress.

"Yes," Mrs. Hart said, swelling with pride, "she is a treasure. I only
wish I could keep her."

"She's going to get married, I suppose. They all do when they're good,"
sympathized the guest.

"No, but she simply won't do cooking, and I really haven't work enough for
two servants in this little house."

The guest sat up and took notice.

"You don't mean to tell me that you are letting a girl like that slip
through your fingers? I wish I had known about her. I have spent three
days in intelligence offices. Is there any chance for me, do you think?"

Then did the little woman prove that she should have had an _e_ in her
name, for she burst into a most voluble account of the virtues of her new
maid, until the other woman was ready to hire her on the spot. The result
of it all was that "Mary" was summoned to an interview with Mrs. Rhinehart
in the dining-room, and engaged at four dollars a week, with every other
Sunday afternoon and every other Thursday out, and her uniforms furnished.

The next morning Mr. Hart gave her a dollar-bill and told her that he
appreciated the help she had given them, and wanted to pay her something
for it.

She thanked him graciously and took the money with a kind of awe. Her
first earnings! It seemed so strange to think that she had really earned
some money, she who had always had all she wanted without lifting a
finger.

She went to a store and bought a hair-brush and a few little things that
she felt were necessities, with a fifty-cent straw telescope in which to
put them. Thus, with her modest baggage, she entered the home of Mrs.
Rhinehart, and ascended to a tiny room on the fourth floor, in which were
a cot and a washstand, a cracked mirror, one chair, and one window. Mrs.
Rhinehart had planned that the waitress should room with the cook, but the
girl had insisted that she must have a room alone, no matter how small,
and they had compromised on this unused, ill-furnished spot.

As she took off the felt hat, she wondered what its owner would think if
he could see her now, and she brushed a fleck of dust gently from the
felt, as if in apology for its humble surroundings. Then she smoothed her
hair, put on the apron Mrs. Hart had given her, and descended to her new
duties as maid in a fashionable home.

[Illustration]




VII


Three days later Tryon Dunham entered the office of Judge Blackwell by
appointment. After the business was completed the Judge said with a smile,
"Well, our mystery is solved. The little girl is all safe. She telephoned
me just after you had left the other day, and sent her maid after her hat.
It seems that while she stood by the window, looking down into the street,
she saw an automobile containing some of her friends. It stopped at the
next building. Being desirous of speaking with a girl friend who was
seated in the auto, she hurried out to the elevator, hoping to catch them.
The elevator boy who took her down-stairs went off duty immediately, which
accounts for our not finding any trace of her, and he was kept at home by
illness the next morning. The young woman caught her friends, and they
insisted that she should get in and ride to the station with one of them
who was leaving the city at once. They loaned her a veil and a wrap, and
promised to bring her right back for her papers and other possessions, but
the train was late, and when they returned the building was closed. The
two men who called for her were her brother and a friend of his, it seems.
I must say they were not so attractive as she is. However, the mystery is
solved, and I got well laughed at by my wife for my fears."

But the young man was puzzling how this all could be if the hat belonged
to the girl he knew--to "Mary." When he left the Judge's office, he went
to his club, determined to have a little quiet for thinking it over.

Matters at home had not been going pleasantly. There had been an ominous
cloud over the breakfast table. The bill for the hat had arrived from
Madame Dollard's, and Cornelia had laid it impressively by his plate. Even
his mother had looked at him with a glance that spoke volumes as she
remarked that it would be necessary for her to have a new rain-coat before
another storm came.

There had been a distinct coolness between Tryon Dunham and his mother
and sister ever since the morning when the loss of the hat and rain-coat
was announced. Or did it date from the evening of that day when both
mother and sister had noticed the beautiful ring which he wore? They had
exclaimed over the flash of the diamond, and its peculiar pureness and
brilliancy, and Cornelia had been quite disagreeable when he refused to
take it off for her to examine. He had replied to his mother's question by
saying that the ring belonged to a friend of his. He knew his mother was
hurt by the answer, but what more could he do at present? True, he might
have taken the ring off and prevented further comment, but it had come to
him to mean loyalty to and belief in the girl whom he had so strangely
been permitted to help. It was therefore in deep perplexity that he betook
himself to his club and sat down in a far corner to meditate. He was
annoyed when the office-boy appeared to tell him, there were some packages
awaiting him in the office. "Bring them to me here, Henry."

The boy hustled away, and soon came back, bearing two hat-boxes--one of
them in a crate--and the heavy leather suit-case.

With a start of surprise, Dunham sat up in his comfortable chair.

"Say, Henry, those things ought not to come in here." He glanced anxiously
about, and was relieved to find that there was only one old gentleman in
the room, and that he was asleep. "Suppose we go up to a private room with
them. Take them out to the elevator, and I'll come in a moment."

"All right, sah."

"And say, Henry, suppose you remove that crate from the box. Then it won't
be so heavy to carry."

"All right, sah. I'll be thah in jest a minute."

The young man hurried out to the elevator, and he and Henry made a quick
ascent to a private room. He gave the boy a round fee, and was left in
quiet to examine his property.

As he fumbled with the strings of the first box his heart beat wildly, and
he felt the blood mounting to his face. Was he about to solve the mystery
which had surrounded the girl in whom his interest had now grown so deep
that he could scarcely get her out of his mind for a few minutes at a
time?

But the box was empty, save for some crumpled white tissue-paper. He took
up the cover in perplexity and saw his own name written by himself. Then
he remembered. This was the box he had sent down to the club by the
cabman, to get it out of his way. He felt disappointed, and turned quickly
to the other box and cut the cord. This time he was rewarded by seeing the
great black hat, beautiful and unhurt in spite of its journey to Chicago.
The day was saved, and also the reputation of his mother's maid. But was
there no word from the beautiful stranger? He searched hurriedly through
the wrappings, pulled out the hat quite unceremoniously, and turned the
box upside down, but nothing else could he find. Then he went at the
suit-case. Yes, there was the rain-coat. He took it out triumphantly, for
now his mother could say nothing, and, moreover, was not his trust in the
fair stranger justified? He had done well to believe in her. He began to
take out the other garments, curious to see what had been there for her
use.

A long, golden brown hair nestling on the collar of the bathrobe gleamed
in a chance ray of sunlight. He looked at it reverently, and laid the
garment down carefully, that it might not be disturbed. As he lifted the
coat, he saw the little note pinned to the lapel, and seized it eagerly.
Surely this would tell him something!

But no, there was only the message that she had arrived safely, and her
thanks. Stay, she had signed her name "Mary." She had told him he might
call her that. Could it be that it was her real name, and that she had
meant to trust him with so much of her true story?

He pondered the delicate writing of the note, thinking how like her it
seemed, then he put the note in an inner pocket and thoughtfully lifted
out the evening clothes. It was then that he touched the silken lined
cloth of her dress, and he drew back almost as if he had ventured roughly
upon something sacred. Startled, awed, he looked upon it, and then with
gentle fingers lifted it and laid it upon his knee. Her dress! The one she
had worn to the dinner with him! What did it all mean? Why was it here,
and where was she?

He spread it out across his lap and looked at it almost as if it hid her
presence. He touched with curious, wistful fingers the lace and delicate
garniture about the waist, as if he would appeal to it to tell the story
of her who had worn it.

What did its presence here mean? Did it bear some message? He searched
carefully, but found nothing further. Had she reached a place of safety
where she did not need the dress? No, for in that case, why should she
have sent it to him? Had she been desperate perhaps, and----? But no, he
would not think such things of her.

Gradually, as he looked, the gown told its own story, as she had thought
it would: how she had been obliged to put on a disguise, and this was the
only way to hide her own dress. Gradually he came to feel a great pleasure
in the fact that she had trusted him with it. She had known he would
understand, and perhaps had not had time to make further explanation. But
if she had need of a disguise, she was still in danger! Oh, why had she
not given him some clue? He dropped his head upon his hand in troubled
perplexity.

A faint perfume of violets stole upon his senses from the dress lying
across his knee. He touched it tenderly, and then half shamefacedly laid
his cheek against it, breathing in the perfume. But he put it down
quickly, looking quite foolish, and reminded himself that the girl was
still a stranger, and that she might belong to another.

Then he thought again of the story the Judge had told him, and of his own
first conviction that the two young women were identical. Could that be?
Why could he not discover who the other girl was, and get some one to
introduce him? He resolved to interview the Judge about it at their next
meeting. In the meantime, he must wait and hope for further word from
Mary. Surely she would write him again, and claim her ring perhaps, and,
as she had been so thoughtful about returning the hat and coat at once,
she would probably return the money he had loaned her. At least, he would
hear from her in that way. There was nothing to do but be patient.

Yes, there was the immediate problem of how he should restore his sister's
hat and his mother's coat to their places, unsuspected.

With a sigh, he carefully folded up the cloth gown, wrapped it in folds of
tissue paper from the empty hat-box, and placed it in his suit-case. Then
he transferred the hat to its original box, rang the bell, and ordered the
boy to care for the box and suit-case until he called for them.

During the afternoon he took occasion to run into the Judge's office about
some unimportant detail of the business they were transacting, and as he
was leaving he said:

"By the way, Judge, who was your young woman who gave you such a fright by
her sudden disappearance? You never told me her name. Is she one of my
acquaintances, I wonder?"

"Oh, her name is Mary Weston," said the Judge, smiling. "I don't believe
you know her, for she was from California, and was visiting here only for
a few days. She sailed for Europe the next day."

That closed the incident, and, so far as the mystery was concerned, only
added perplexity to it.

Dunham purposely remained down-town, merely having a clerk telephone home
for him that he had gone out of the city and would not be home until late,
so they need not wait up. He did this because he did not wish to have his
mother or his sister ask him any more questions about the missing hat and
coat. Then he took a twenty-mile trolley ride into the suburbs and back,
to make good his word that he had gone out of town; and all the way he
kept turning over and over the mystery of the beautiful young woman, until
it began to seem to him that he had been crazy to let her drift out into
the world alone and practically penniless. The dress had told its tale. He
saw, of course, that if she were afraid of detection, she must have found
it necessary to buy other clothing, and how could she have bought it with
only nine dollars and seventy-five cents? He now felt convinced that he
should have found some way to cash a check and thus supply her with what
she needed. It was terrible. True, she had those other beautiful rings,
which were probably valuable, but would she dare to sell them? Perhaps,
though, she had found some one else as ready as he had been to help her.
But, to his surprise, that thought was distasteful to him. During his
long, cold ride in solitude he discovered that the thing he wanted most in
life was to find that girl again and take care of her.

Of course he reasoned with himself most earnestly from one end of the
trolley line to the other, and called himself all kinds of a fool, but it
did not the slightest particle of good. Underneath all the reasoning, he
knew he was glad that he had found her once, and he determined to find her
again, and to unravel the mystery. Then he sat looking long and earnestly
into the depths of the beautiful white stone she had given to him, as if
he might there read the way to find her.

A little after midnight he arrived at the club-house, secured his
suit-case and the hat-box, and took a cab to his home. He left the vehicle
at the corner, lest the sound of it waken his mother or sister.

He let himself silently into the house with his latch-key, and tiptoed up
to his room. The light was burning low. He put the hat-box in the farthest
corner of his closet, then he took out the rain-coat, and, slipping off
his shoes, went softly down to the hall closet.

In utter darkness he felt around and finally hung the coat on a hook under
another long cloak, then gently released the hanging loop and let the
garment slip softly down in an inconspicuous heap on the floor. He stole
upstairs as guiltily as if he had been a naughty boy stealing sugar. When
he reached his room, he turned up his light, and, pulling out the hat-box,
surveyed it thoughtfully. This was a problem which he had not yet been
able to solve. How should he dispose of the hat so that it would be
discovered in such a way as to cast no further suspicion upon the maid?
How would it do to place the hat in the hall-closet, back among the coats?
No, it might excite suspicion to find them together. Could he put it in
his own closet and profess to have found it there? No, for that might lead
to unpleasant questioning, and perhaps involve the servants again. If he
could only put it back where he had found it! But Cornelia, of course,
would know it had not been there in her room all this week. It would be
better to wait until the coast was clear and hide it in Cornelia's closet,
where it might have been put by mistake and forgotten. It was going to be
hard to explain, but that was the best plan he could evolve.

He took the hat out and held it on his hand, looking at it from different
angles and trying to remember just how the girl had looked out at him from
under its drooping plumes. Then with a sigh he laid it carefully in its
box again and went to bed.

The morning brought clearer thought, and when the summons to breakfast
pealed through the hall he took the box boldly in his hand and descended
to the dining-room, where he presented the hat to his astonished sister.

"I am afraid I am the criminal, Cornelia," he said in his pleasantest
manner. "I'm sorry I can't explain just how this thing got on my
closet-shelf. I must have put it there myself through some unaccountable
mix-up. It's too bad I couldn't have found it before and so saved you a
lot of worry. But you are one hat the richer for it, for I paid the bill
yesterday. Please accept it with my compliments."

Cornelia exclaimed with delight over the recovered hat.

"But how in the world could it have got into your closet, Tryon? It was
impossible. I left it my room, I know I did, for I spoke to Norah about it
before I left. How do you account for it?"

"Oh, I don't attempt to account for it," he said, with a gay wave of his
hand. "I've been so taken up with other things this past week, I may have
done almost anything. By the way, Mother, I'm sure you'll be glad to hear
that Judge Blackwell has made me a most generous offer of business
relations, and that I have decided to accept it."

Amid the exclamations of delight over this bit of news, the hat was
forgotten for a time, and when the mother and sister finally reverted to
it and began to discuss how it could have gotten on the closet shelf, he
broke in upon their questions with a suggestion.

"I should advise, Mother, that you make a thorough search for your
rain-coat. I am sure now that you must have overlooked it. Such things
often happen. We were so excited the morning Cornelia missed the hat that
I suppose no one looked thoroughly."

"But that is impossible, Tryon," said his mother, with dignity. "I had
that closet searched most carefully."

"Nevertheless, Mother, please me by looking again. That closet is dark,
and I would suggest a light."

"Of course, if you wish it," said his mother stiffly. "You might look,
yourself."

"I'm afraid I shall not have time this morning," professed the coward.
"But suppose you look in your own closets, too, Mother. I'm sure you'll
find it somewhere. It couldn't get out of the house of itself, and Norah
is no thief. The idea is preposterous. Please have it attended to
carefully to-day. Good-by. I shall have to hurry down-town, and I can't
tell just what time I shall get back this evening. 'Phone me if you find
the coat anywhere. If you don't find it, I'll buy you another this
afternoon."

"I shall _not_ find the rain-coat," said his mother sternly, "but of
course I will look to satisfy you. I _know_ it is not in this house."

He beat a hasty retreat, for he did not care to be present at the finding
of the rain-coat.

"There is something strange about this," said Mrs. Dunham, as with ruffled
dignity she emerged from the hall closet, holding her lost rain-coat at
arm's length. "You don't suppose your brother could be playing some kind
of a joke on us, do you, Cornie? I never did understand jokes."

"Of course not," said practical Cornelia, with a sniff. "It's my opinion
that Norah knows all about the matter, and Tryon has been helping her out
with a few suggestions."

"Now, Cornelia, what do you mean by that? You surely don't suppose your
brother would try to deceive us--his mother and sister?"

"I didn't say that, Mother," answered Cornelia, with her head in the air.
"You've got your rain-coat back, but you'd better watch the rest of your
wardrobe. I don't intend to let Norah have free range in my room any
more."

[Illustration]




VIII


Meantime, the girl in Chicago was walking in a new and hard way. She
brought to her task a disciplined mind, a fine artistic taste, a delicate
but healthy body, and a pair of willing, if unskilled, hands. To her
surprise, she discovered that the work for which she had so often lightly
given orders was beyond her strength. Try as she would, she could not
accomplish the task of washing and ironing table napkins and delicate
embroidered linen pieces in the way she knew they should be done. Will
power can accomplish a good deal, but it cannot always make up for
ignorance, and the girl who had mastered difficult subjects in college,
and astonished music masters in the old world with her talent, found that
she could not wash a window even to her own satisfaction, much less to
that of her new mistress. That these tasks were expected of her was a
surprise. Yet with her ready adaptability and her strong good sense, she
saw that if she was to be a success in this new field she had chosen, she
must be ready for any emergency. Nevertheless, as the weary days succeeded
each other into weeks, she found that while her skill in table-setting and
waiting was much prized, it was more than offset by her discrepancies in
other lines, and so it came about that with mutual consent she and Mrs.
Rhinehart parted company.

This time, with her reference, she did not find it so hard to get another
place, and, after trying several, she learned to demand certain things,
which put her finally into a home where her ability was appreciated, and
where she was not required to do things in which she was unskilled.

She was growing more secure in her new life now, and less afraid to
venture into the streets lest some one should be on the watch for her. But
night after night, as she climbed to her cheerless room and crept to her
scantily-covered, uncomfortable couch, she shrank from all that life could
now hold out to her. Imprisoned she was, to a narrow round of toil, with
no escape, and no one to know or care.

And who knew but that any day an enemy might trace her?

Then the son of the house came home from college in disgrace, and began to
make violent love to her, until her case seemed almost desperate. She
dreaded inexpressibly to make another change, for in some ways her work
was not so hard as it had been in other places, and her wages were better;
but from day to day she felt she could scarcely bear the hourly
annoyances. The other servants, too, were not only utterly
uncompanionable, but deeply jealous of her, resenting her gentle breeding,
her careful speech, her dainty personal ways, her room to herself, her
loyalty to her mistress.

Sometimes in the cold and darkness of the night-vigils she would remember
the man who had helped her, who had promised to be her friend, and had
begged her to let him know if she ever needed help. Her hungry heart cried
out for sympathy and counsel. In her dreams she saw him coming to her
across interminable plains, hastening with his kindly sympathy, but she
always awoke before he reached her.

[Illustration]




IX


It was about this time that the firm of Blackwell, Hanover & Dunham had a
difficult case to work out which involved the gathering of evidence from
Chicago and thereabouts, and it was with pleasure that Judge Blackwell
accepted the eager proposal from the junior member of the firm that he
should go out and attend to it.

As Tryon Dunham entered the sleeper, and placed his suit-case beside him
on the seat, he was reminded of the night when he had taken this train
with the girl who had come to occupy a great part of his thoughts in these
days. He had begun to feel that if he could ever hope to shake off his
anxiety and get back to his normal state of mind, he must find her and
unravel the mystery about her. If she were safe and had friends, so that
he was not needed, perhaps he would be able to put her out of his
thoughts, but if she were not safe----He did not quite finish the
sentence even in his thoughts, but his heart beat quicker always, and he
knew that if she needed him he was ready to help her, even at the
sacrifice of his life.

All during the journey he planned a campaign for finding her, until he
came to know in his heart that this was the real mission for which he had
come to Chicago, although he intended to perform the other business
thoroughly and conscientiously.

Upon his arrival in Chicago, he inserted a number of advertisements in the
daily papers, having laid various plans by which she might safely
communicate with him without running the risk of detection by her enemy.

    If M.R. is in Chicago, will she kindly communicate with T.
    Dunham, General Delivery? Important.

    Mrs. Bowman's friend has something of importance to say to the
    lady who dined with her October 8th. Kindly send address to T.D.,
    Box 7 _Inter-Ocean_ office.

    "Mary," let me know where and when I can speak with you about a
    matter of importance. Tryon D., _Record-Herald_ L.

These and others appeared in the different papers, but when he began to
get communications from all sorts of poor creatures, every one demanding
money, and when he found himself running wild-goose chases after different
Marys and M.R.s, he abandoned all hope of personal columns in the
newspapers. Then he began a systematic search for music teachers and
musicians, for it seemed to him that this would be her natural way of
earning her living, if she were so hard pressed that this was necessary.

In the course of his experiments he came upon many objects of pity, and
his heart was stirred with the sorrow and the misery of the human race as
it had never been stirred in all his happy, well-groomed life. Many a poor
soul was helped and strengthened and put into the way of doing better
because of this brief contact with him. But always as he saw new miseries
he was troubled over what might have become of her--"Mary." It came to
pass that whenever he looked upon the face of a young woman, no matter how
pinched and worn with poverty, he dreaded lest _she_ might have come to
this pass, and be in actual need. As these thoughts went on day by day, he
came to feel that she was his by a God-given right, his to find, his to
care for. If she was in peril, he must save her. If she had done
wrong--but this he could never believe. Her face was too pure and lovely
for that. So the burden of her weighed upon his heart all the days while
he went about the difficult business of gathering evidence link by link in
the important law case that had brought him to Chicago.

Dunham had set apart working hours, and he seemed to labor with double
vigor then because of the other task he had set himself. When at last he
finished the legal business he had come for, and might go home, he
lingered yet a day, and then another, devoting himself with almost
feverish activity to the search for his unknown friend.

It was the evening of the third day after his law work was finished that
with a sad heart he went toward the hotel where he had been stopping. He
was obliged at last to face the fact that his search had been in vain.

He had almost reached the hotel when he met a business acquaintance, who
welcomed him warmly, for far and wide among legal men the firm of which
Judge Blackwell was the senior member commanded respect.

"Well, well!" said the older man. "Is this you, Dunham? I thought you were
booked for home two days ago. Suppose you come home to dinner with me.
I've a matter I'd like to talk over with you before you leave. I shall
count this a most fortunate meeting if you will."

Just because he caught at any straw to keep him longer in Chicago, Dunham
accepted the invitation. Just as the cab door was flung open in front of
the handsome house where he was to be a guest, two men passed slowly by,
like shadows out of place, and there floated to his ears one sentence
voiced in broadest Irish: "She goes by th' name of Mary, ye says? All
roight, sorr. I'll keep a sharp lookout."

Tryon Dunham turned and caught a glimpse of silver changing hands. One man
was slight and fashionably dressed, and the light that was cast from the
neighboring window showed his face to be dark and handsome. The other was
short and stout, and clad in a faded Prince Albert coat that bagged at
shoulders and elbows. He wore rubbers over his shoes, and his footsteps
sounded like those of a heavy dog. The two passed around the corner, and
Dunham and his host entered the house.

They were presently seated at a well appointed table, where an elaborate
dinner was served. The talk was of pleasant things that go to make up the
world of refinement; but the mind of the guest was troubled, and
constantly kept hearing that sentence, "She goes by the name of Mary."

Then, suddenly, he looked up and met her eyes!

She was standing just back of her mistress's chair, with quiet, watchful
attitude, but her eyes had been unconsciously upon the guest, until he
looked up and caught her glance.

She turned away, but the color rose in her cheeks, and she knew that he
was watching her.

Her look had startled him. He had never thought of looking for her in a
menial position, and at first he had noticed only the likeness to her for
whom he was searching. But he watched her furtively, until he became more
and more startled with the resemblance.

She did not look at him again, but he noticed that her cheeks were
scarlet, and that the long lashes drooped as if she were trying to hide
her eyes. She went now and again from the room on her silent, deft
errands, bringing and taking dishes, filling the glasses with ice water,
seeming to know at a glance just what was needed. Whenever she went from
the room he tried to persuade himself that it was not she, and then became
feverishly impatient for her return that he might anew convince himself
that it _was_. He felt a helpless rage at the son of the house for the
familiar way in which he said: "Mary, fill my glass," and could not keep
from frowning. Then he was startled at the similarity of names. Mary! The
men on the street had used the name, too! Could it be that her enemy had
tracked her? Perhaps he, Dunham, had appeared just in time to help her!

His busy brain scarcely heard the questions with which his host was plying
him, and his replies were distraught and monosyllabic. At last he broke in
upon the conversation:

"Excuse me, but I wonder if I may interrupt you for a moment. I have
thought of something that I ought to attend to at once. I wonder if the
waitress would be kind enough to send a 'phone message for me. I am afraid
it will be too late if I wait."

"Why, certainly," said the host, all anxiety. "Would you like to go to the
'phone yourself, or can I attend to it for you? Just feel perfectly at
home."

Already the young man was hastily writing a line or two on a card he had
taken from his pocket, and he handed it to the waitress, who at his
question had moved silently behind his chair to do his bidding.

"Just call up that number, please, and give the message below. They will
understand, and then you will write down their answer?"

He handed her the pencil and turned again to his dessert, saying with a
relieved air:

"Thank you. I am sorry for the interruption. Now will you finish that
story?" Apparently his entire attention was devoted to his host and his
ice, but in reality he was listening to the click of the telephone and the
low, gentle voice in an adjoining room. It came after only a moment's
pause, and he wondered at the calmness with which the usual formula of the
telephone was carried on. He could not hear what she said, but his ears
were alert to the pause, just long enough for a few words to be written,
and then to her footsteps coming quietly back.

His heart was beating wildly. It seemed to him that his host must see the
strained look in his face, but he tried to fasten his interest upon the
conversation and keep calm.

He had applied the test. There was no number upon the card, and he knew
that if the girl were not the one of whom he was in search, she would
return for an explanation.

    If you are "Mary Remington," tell me where and when I can talk
    with you. Immediately important to us both!

This was what he had written on the card. His fingers trembled as he took
it from the silver tray which she presented to him demurely. He picked it
up and eagerly read the delicate writing--hers--the same that had
expressed her thanks and told of her safe arrival in Chicago. He could
scarcely refrain from leaping from his chair and shouting aloud in his
gladness.

The message she had written was simple. No stranger reading it would have
thought twice about it. If the guest had read it aloud, it would have
aroused no suspicion.

    Y.W.C.A. Building, small parlor, three to-morrow.

He knew the massive building, for he had passed it many times, but never
had he supposed it could have any interest for him. Now suddenly his heart
warmed to the great organization of Christian women who had established
these havens for homeless ones in the heart of the great cities.

He looked up at the girl as she was passing the coffee on the other side
of the table, but not a flicker of an eyelash showed she recognized him.
She went through her duties and withdrew from the room, but though they
lingered long over the coffee, she did not return. When they went into
the other room, his interest in the family grew less and less. The
daughter of the house sat down at the piano, after leading him up to ask
her to sing, and chirped through several sentimental songs, tinkling out a
shallow accompaniment with her plump, manicured fingers. His soul revolted
at the thought that she should be here entertaining the company, while
that other one whose music would have thrilled them all stayed humbly in
the kitchen, doing some menial task.

He took his leave early in the evening and hurried back to his hotel. As
he crossed the street to hail a cab, he thought he saw a short, baggy
figure shambling along in the shadow on the other side, looking up at the
house.

He had professed to have business to attend to, but when he reached his
room he could do nothing but sit down and think. That he had found her for
whom he had so long sought filled him with a deeper joy than any he had
ever known before. That he had found her in such a position deepened the
mystery and filled him with a nameless dread. Then out of the shadow of
his thoughts shambled the baggy man in the rubbers, and he could not rest,
but took his hat and walked out again into the great rumbling whirl of the
city night, walking on and on, until he again reached the house where he
had dined.

He passed in front of the building, and found lights still burning
everywhere. Down the side street, he saw the windows were brightly lighted
in the servants' quarters, and loud laughter was sounding. Was she in
there enduring such company? No, for there high in the fourth story
gleamed a little light, and a shadow moved about across the curtain.
Something told him that it was her room. He paced back and forth until the
light went out, and then reverently, with lifted hat, turned and found his
way back to the main avenue and a car line. As he passed the area gate a
bright light shot out from the back door, there was a peal of laughter, an
Irish goodnight, and a short man in baggy coat and rubbers shambled out
and scuttled noiselessly down to the back street.

[Illustration]




X


Dunham slept very little that night. His soul was hovering between joy and
anxiety. Almost he was inclined to find some way to send her word about
the man he had seen lingering about the place, and yet perhaps it was
foolish. He had doubtless been to call on the cook, and there might be no
connection whatever between what Dunham had heard and seen and the lonely
girl.

Next day, with careful hands, the girl made herself neat and trim with the
few materials she had at hand. Her own fine garments that had lain
carefully wrapped and hidden ever since she had gone into service were
brought forth, and the coarse ones with which she had provided herself
against suspicion were laid aside. If any one came into her room while she
was gone, he would find no fine French embroidery to tell tales. Also, she
wished to feel as much like herself as possible, and she never could feel
quite that in her cheap outfit. True, she had no finer outer garments
than a cheap black flannel skirt and coat which she had bought with the
first money she could spare, but they were warm, and answered for what she
had needed. She had not bought a hat, and had nothing now to wear upon her
head but the black felt that belonged to the man she was going to meet.
She looked at herself pityingly in the tiny mirror, and wondered if the
young man would understand and forgive? It was all she had, any way, and
there would be no time to go to the store and buy another before the
appointed hour, for the family had brought unexpected company to a late
lunch and kept her far beyond her hour for going out.

She looked down dubiously at her shabby shoes, their delicate kid now
cracked and worn. Her hands were covered by a pair of cheap black silk
gloves. It was the first time that she had noticed these things so keenly,
but now it seemed to her most embarrassing to go thus to meet the man who
had helped her.

She gathered her little hoard of money to take with her, and cast one
look back over the cheerless room, with a great longing to bid it farewell
forever, and go back to the world where she belonged; yet she realized
that it was a quiet refuge for her from the world that she must hereafter
face. Then she closed her door, went down the stairs and out into the
street, like any other servant on her afternoon out, walking away to meet
whatever crisis might arise. She had not dared to speculate much about the
subject of the coming interview. It was likely he wanted to inquire about
her comfort, and perhaps offer material aid. She would not accept it, of
course, but it would be a comfort to know that some one cared. She longed
inexpressibly for this interview, just because he had been kind, and
because he belonged to that world from which she had come. He would keep
her secret. He had true eyes. She did not notice soft, padded feet that
came wobbling down the street after her, and she only drew a little
further out toward the curbing when a blear-eyed, red face peered into
hers as she stood waiting for the car. She did not notice the shabby man
who boarded the car after she was seated.

Tryon Dunham stood in the great stone doorway, watching keenly the passing
throng. He saw the girl at once as she got out of the car, but he did not
notice the man in the baggy coat, who lumbered after her and watched with
wondering scrutiny as Dunham came forward, lifted his hat, and took her
hand respectfully. Here was an element he did not understand. He stood
staring, puzzled, as they disappeared into the great building; then
planted himself in a convenient place to watch until his charge should
come out again. This was perhaps a gentleman who had come to engage her to
work for him. She might be thinking of changing her place. He must be on
the alert.

Dunham placed two chairs in the far corner of the inner parlor, where they
were practically alone, save for an occasional passer through the hall. He
put the girl into the most comfortable one, and then went to draw down the
shade, to shut a sharp ray of afternoon sunlight from her eyes. She sat
there and looked down upon her shabby shoes, her cheap gloves, her coarse
garments, and honored him for the honor he was giving her in this attire.
She had learned by sharp experience that such respect to one in her
station was not common. As he came back, he stood a moment looking down
upon her. She saw his eye rest with recognition upon the hat she wore, and
her pale cheeks turned pink.

"I don't know what you will think of my keeping this," she said shyly,
putting her hand to the hat, "but it seemed really necessary at the time,
and I haven't dared spend the money for a new one yet. I thought perhaps
you would forgive me, and let me pay you for it some time later."

"Don't speak of it," he broke in, in a low voice. "I am so glad you could
use it at all. It would have been a comfort to me if I had known where it
was. I had not even missed it, because at this time of year I have very
little use for it. It is my travelling hat."

He looked at her again as though the sight of her was good to him, and his
gaze made her quite forget the words she had planned to say.

"I am so glad I have found you!" he went on. "You have not been out of my
thoughts since I left you that night on the train. I have blamed myself
over and over again for having gone then. I should have found some way to
stand by you. I have not had one easy moment since I saw you last."

His tone was so intense that she could not interrupt him; she could only
sit and listen in wonder, half trembling, to the low-spoken torrent of
feeling that he expressed. She tried to protest, but the look in his face
stopped her. He went on with an earnestness that would not be turned aside
from its purpose.

"I came to Chicago that I might search for you. I could not stand the
suspense any longer. I have been looking for you in every way I could
think of, without openly searching, for that I dared not do lest I might
jeopardize your safety. I was almost in despair when I went to dine with
Mr. Phillips last evening. I felt I could not go home without knowing at
least that you were safe, and now that I have found you, I cannot leave
you until I know at least that you have no further need for help."

She summoned her courage now, and spoke in a voice full of feeling:

"Oh, you must not feel that way. You helped me just when I did not know
what to do, and put me in the way of helping myself. I shall never cease
to thank you for your kindness to an utter stranger. And now I am doing
very well." She tried to smile, but the tears came unbidden instead.

"You poor child!" His tone was full of something deeper than compassion,
and his eyes spoke volumes. "Do you suppose I think you are doing well
when I see you wearing the garb of a menial and working for people to whom
you are far superior--people who by all the rights of education and
refinement ought to be in the kitchen serving you?"

"It was the safest thing I could do, and really the only thing I could get
to do at once," she tried to explain. "I'm doing it better every day."

"I have no doubt. You can be an artist at serving as well as anything
else, if you try. But now that is all over. I am going to take care of
you. There is no use in protesting. If I may not do it in one way, I will
in another. There is one question I must ask first, and I hope you will
trust me enough to answer it. Is there any other--any other man who has
the right to care for you, and is unable or unwilling to do it?"

She looked up at him, her large eyes still shining with tears, and
shuddered slightly.

"Oh, no!" she said. "Oh, no, I thank God there is not! My dear uncle has
been dead for four years, and there has never been any one else who cared
since Father died."

He looked at her, a great light beginning to come into his face; but she
did not understand and turned her head to hide the tears.

"Then I am going to tell you something," he said, his tone growing lower,
yet clear enough for her to hear every word distinctly.

A tall, oldish girl with a discontented upper lip stalked through the
hall, glanced in at the door, and sniffed significantly, but they did not
see her. A short, baggy-coated man outside hovered anxiously around the
building and passed the very window of that room, but the shade opposite
them was down, and they did not know. The low, pleasant voice went on:

"I have come to care a great deal for you since I first saw you, and I
want you to give me the right to care for you always and protect you
against the whole world."

She looked up, wondering.

"What do you mean?"

"I mean that I love you, and I want to make you my wife. Then I can defy
the whole world if need be, and put you where you ought to be."

"Oh!" she breathed softly.

"Wait, please," he pleaded, laying his hand gently on her little,
trembling one. "Don't say anything until I have finished. I know of course
that this will be startling to you. You have been brought up to feel that
such things must be more carefully and deliberately done. I do not want
you to feel that this is the only way I can help you, either. If you are
not willing to be my wife, I will find some other plan. But this is the
best way, if it isn't too hard on you, for I love you as I never dreamed
that I could love a woman. The only question is, whether you can put up
with me until I can teach you to love me a little."

She lifted eloquent eyes to his face.

"Oh, it is not that," she stammered, a rosy light flooding cheek and brow.
"It is not that at all. But you know nothing about me. If you knew, you
would very likely think as others do, and----"

"Then do not tell me anything about yourself, if it will trouble you. I do
not care what others think. If you have poisoned a husband, I should know
that he needed poisoning, and any way I should love you and stand by you."

"I have not done anything wrong," she said gravely.

"Then if you have done nothing wrong, we will prove it to the world, or,
if we cannot prove it, we will fly to some desert island and live there in
peace and love. That is the way I feel about you. I know that you are good
and true and lovely! Any one might as well try to prove to me that you
were crazy as that you had done wrong in any way."

Her face grew strangely white.

"Well, suppose I was crazy?"

"Then I would take you and cherish you and try to cure you, and if that
could not be done, I should help you to bear it."

"Oh, you are wonderful!" she breathed, the light of a great love growing
in her eyes.

The bare, prosaic walls stood stolidly about them, indifferent to romance
or tragedy that was being wrought out within its walls. The whirl and hum
of the city without, the grime and soil of the city within, were alike
forgotten by these two as their hearts throbbed in the harmony of a great
passion.

"Do you think you could learn to love me?" said the man's voice, with the
sweetness of the love song of the ages in its tone.

"I love you now," said the girl's low voice. "I think I have loved you
from the beginning, though I never dared to think of it in that way. But
it would not be right for me to become your wife when you know practically
nothing about me."

"Have you forgotten that you know nothing of me?"

"Oh, I do know something about you," she said shyly. "Remember that I have
dined with your friends. I could not help seeing that they were good
people, especially that delightful old man, the Judge. He looked
startlingly like my dear father. I saw how they all honored and loved you.
And then what you have done for me, and the way that you treated an
utterly defenceless stranger, were equal to years of mere acquaintance. I
feel that I know a great deal about you."

He smiled. "Thank you," he said, "but I have not forgotten that something
more is due you than that slight knowledge of me, and before I came out
here I went to the pastor of the church of which my mother is a member,
and which I have always attended and asked him to write me a letter. He is
so widely known that I felt it would be an introduction for me."

He laid an open letter in her lap, and, glancing down, she saw that it was
signed by the name of one of the best known pulpit orators in the land,
and that it spoke in highest terms of the young man whom it named as "my
well-loved friend."

"It is also your right to know that I have always tried to live a pure and
honorable life. I have never told any woman but you that I loved
her--except an elderly cousin with whom I thought I was in love when I was
nineteen. She cured me of it by laughing at me, and I have been
heart-whole ever since."

She raised her eyes from reading the letter.

"You have all these, and I have nothing." She spread out her hands
helplessly. "It must seem strange to you that I am in this situation. It
does to me. It is awful."

She put her hands over her eyes and shuddered.

"It is to save you from it all that I have come." He leaned over and spoke
tenderly, "Darling!"

"Oh, wait!" She caught her breath as if it hurt her, and put out her hand
to stop him, "Wait! You must not say any more until I have told you all
about it. Perhaps when I have told you, you will think about me as others
do, and I shall have to run from you."

"Can you not trust me?" he reproached her.

"Oh, yes, I can trust you, but you may no longer trust me, and that I
cannot bear."

"I promise you solemnly that I will believe every word you say."

"Ah, but you will think I do not know, and that it is your duty to give me
into the hands of my enemies."

"That I most solemnly vow I will never do," he said earnestly. "You need
not fear to tell me anything. But listen, tell me this one thing: in the
eyes of God, is there any reason, physical, mental, or spiritual, why you
should not become my wife?"

She looked him clearly in the eyes.

"None at all."

"Then I am satisfied to take you without hearing your story until
afterwards."

"But I am not satisfied. If I am to see distrust come into your eyes, it
must be now, not afterwards."

"Then tell it quickly."

He put out his hand and took hers firmly into his own, as if to help her
in her story.

[Illustration]




XI


"My father died when I was only a young girl. We had not much money, and
my mother's older brother took us to his home to live. My mother was his
youngest sister, and he loved her more than any one else living. There was
another sister, a half-sister, much older than my mother, and she had one
son. He was a sulky, handsome boy, with a selfish, cruel nature. He seemed
to be happy only when he was tormenting some one. He used to come to
Uncle's to visit when I was there, and he delighted in annoying me. He
stretched barbed wire where he knew I was going to pass in the dark, to
throw me down and tear my clothes. He threw a quantity of burrs in my
hair, and once he led me into a hornet's nest. After we went to live at my
uncle's, Richard was not there so much. He had displeased my uncle, and he
sent him away to school; but at vacation times he came again, and kept the
house in discomfort. He seemed always to have a special spite against me.
Once he broke a rare Dresden vase that Uncle prized, and told him I had
done it.

"Mother did not live long after Father died, and after she was gone, I had
no one to stand between me and Richard. Sometimes I had to tell my uncle,
but oftener I tried to bear it, because I knew Richard was already a great
distress to him.

"At last Richard was expelled from college, and Uncle was so angry with
him that he told him he would do nothing more for him. He must go to work.
Richard's father and mother had not much money, and there were other
children to support. Richard threatened me with all sorts of awful things
if I did not coax Uncle to take him back into his good graces again. I
told him I would not say a word to Uncle. He was very angry and swore at
me. When I tried to leave the room he locked the door and would not let me
go until I screamed for help. Then he almost choked me, but when he heard
Uncle coming he jumped out of the window. The next day he forged a check
in my uncle's name, and tried to throw suspicion on me, but he was
discovered, and my uncle disinherited him. Uncle had intended to educate
Richard and start him well in life, but now he would have nothing further
to do with him. It seemed to work upon my uncle's health, all the disgrace
to the family name, although no one ever thought of my uncle in connection
with blame. As he paid Richard's debts, it was not known what the boy had
done, except by the banker, who was a personal friend.

"We went abroad then, and everywhere Uncle amused himself by putting me
under the best music masters, and giving me all possible advantages in
languages, literature, and art. Three years ago he died at Carlsbad, and
after his death I went back to my music studies, following his wishes in
the matter, and staying with a dear old lady in Vienna, who had been kind
to us when we were there before.

"As soon as my uncle's death was known at home, Richard wrote the most
pathetic letter to me, professing deep contrition, and saying he could
never forgive himself for having quarrelled with his dear uncle. He had a
sad tale of how the business that he had started had failed and left him
with debts. If he had only a few hundred dollars, he could go on with it
and pay off everything. He said I had inherited all that would have been
his if he had done right, and he recognized the justice of it, but begged
that I would lend him a small sum until he could get on his feet, when he
would repay me.

"I had little faith in his reformation, but felt as if I could not refuse
him when I was enjoying what might have been his, so I sent him all the
money I had at hand. As I was not yet of age, I could not control all the
property, but my allowance was liberal. Richard continued to send me
voluminous letters, telling of his changed life, and finally asked me to
marry him. I declined emphatically, but he continued to write for money,
always ending with a statement of his undying affection. In disgust, I at
last offered to send him a certain sum of money regularly if he would stop
writing to me on this subject, and finally succeeded in reducing our
correspondence to a check account. This has been going on for three
years, except that he has been constantly asking for larger sums, and
whenever I would say that I could not spare more just then he would begin
telling me how much he cared for me, and how hard it was for him to be
separated from me. I began to feel desperate about him, and made up my
mind that when I received the inheritance I should ask the lawyers to make
some arrangement with him by which I should no longer be annoyed.

"It was necessary for me to return to America when I came of age, in order
to sign certain papers and take full charge of the property. Richard knew
this. He seems to have had some way of finding out everything my uncle
did.

"He wrote telling me of a dear friend of his mother, who was soon to pass
through Vienna, and who by some misfortune had been deprived of a position
as companion and chaperon to a young girl who was travelling. He said it
had occurred to him that perhaps he could serve us both by suggesting to
me that she be my travelling companion on the voyage. He knew I would not
want to travel alone, and he sent her address and all sorts of
credentials, with a message from his mother that she would feel perfectly
safe about me if I went in this woman's guardianship.

"I really did need a travelling companion, of course, having failed to get
my dear old lady to undertake the voyage, so I thought it could do no
harm. I went to see her, and found her pretty and frail and sad. She made
a piteous appeal to me, and though I was not greatly taken with her, I
decided she would do as well as any one for a companion.

"She did not bother me during the voyage, but fluttered about and was
quite popular on board, especially with a tall, disagreeable man with a
cruel jaw and small eyes, who always made me feel as if he would gloat
over any one in his power. I found out that he was a physician, a
specialist in mental diseases, so Mrs. Chambray told me, and she talked a
great deal about his skill and insight into such maladies.

"At New York my cousin Richard met us and literally took possession of us.
Without my knowledge, the cruel-looking doctor was included in the party.
I did not discover it until we were on the train, bound, as I supposed,
for my old home just beyond Buffalo. It was some time since I had been in
New York, and I naturally did not notice much which way we were going. The
fact was, every plan was anticipated, and I was told that all arrangements
had been made. Mrs. Chambray began to treat me like a little child and
say: 'You see we are going to take good care of you, dear, so don't worry
about a thing.'

"I had taken the drawing-room compartment, not so much because I had a
headache, as I told them, as because I wanted to get away from their
society. My cousin's marked devotion became painful to me. Then, too, the
attentions and constant watchfulness of the disagreeable doctor became
most distasteful.

"We had been sitting on the observation platform, and it was late in the
afternoon, when I said I was going to lie down, and the two men got up to
go into the smoker. In spite of my protests, Mrs. Chambray insisted upon
following me in, to see that I was perfectly comfortable. She fussed
around me, covering me up and offering smelling salts and eau de cologne
for my head. I let her fuss, thinking that was the quickest way to get rid
of her. I closed my eyes, and she said she would go out to the observation
platform. I lay still for awhile, thinking about her and how much I wanted
to get rid of her. She acted as if she had been engaged to stay with me
forever, and it suddenly became very plain to me that I ought to have a
talk with her and tell her that I should need her services no longer after
this journey was over. It might make a difference to her if she knew it at
once, and perhaps now would be as good a time to talk as any, for she was
probably alone out on the platform. I got up and made a few little changes
in my dress, for it would soon be time to go into the dining-car. Then I
went out to the observation platform, but she was not there. The chairs
were all empty, so I chose the one next to the railing, away from the car
door, and sat down to wait for her, thinking she would soon be back.

"We were going very fast, through a pretty bit of country. It was dusky
and restful out there, so I leaned back and closed my eyes. Presently I
heard voices approaching, above the rumble of the train, and, peeping
around the doorway, I saw Mrs. Chambray, Richard, and the doctor coming
from the other car. I kept quiet, hoping they would not come out, and they
did not. They settled down near the door, and ordered the porter to put up
a table for them to play cards.

"The train began to slow down, and finally came to a halt for a longer
time on a sidetrack, waiting for another train to pass. I heard Richard
ask where I was. Mrs. Chambray said laughingly that I was safely asleep.
Then, before I realized it, they began to talk about me. It happened there
were no other passengers in the car. Richard asked Mrs. Chambray if she
thought I had any suspicion that I was not on the right train, and she
said, 'Not the slightest,' and then by degrees there floated to me through
the open door the most diabolical plot I had ever heard of. I gathered
from it that we were on the way to Philadelphia, would reach there in a
little while, and would then proceed to a place near Washington, where the
doctor had a private insane asylum, and where I was to be shut up. They
were going to administer some drug that would make me unconscious when I
was taken off the train. If they could not get me to take it for the
headache I had talked about, Mrs. Chambray was to manage to get it into my
food or give it to me when asleep. Mrs. Chambray, it seems, had not known
the entire plot before leaving Europe, and this was their first chance of
telling her. They thought I was safely in my compartment, asleep, and she
had gone into the other car to give the signal as soon as she thought she
had me where I would not get up again for a while.

"They had arranged every detail. Richard had been using as models the
letters I had written him for the last three years, and had constructed a
set of love letters from me to him, in perfect imitation of my
handwriting. They compared the letters and read snatches of the sentences
aloud. The letters referred constantly to our being married as soon as I
should return from abroad, and some of them spoke of the money as
belonging to us both, and that now it would come to its own without any
further trouble.

"They even exhibited a marriage certificate, which, from what they said,
must have been made out with our names, and Mrs. Chambray and the doctor
signed their names as witnesses. As nearly as I could make out, they were
going to use this as evidence that Richard was my husband, and that he had
the right to administer my estate during the time that I was incapable.
They had even arranged that a young woman who was hopelessly insane should
take my place when the executors of the estate came to see me, if they
took the trouble to do that. As it was some years since either of them had
seen me, they could easily have been deceived. And for their help Mrs.
Chambray and the doctor were to receive a handsome sum.

"I could scarcely believe my ears at first. It seemed to me that I must be
mistaken, that they could not be talking about me. But my name was
mentioned again and again, and as each link in the horrible plot was made
plain to me, my terror grew so great that I was on the verge of rushing
into the car and calling for the conductor and porter to help me. But
something held me still, and I heard Richard say that he had just informed
the trainmen that I was insane, and that they need not be surprised if I
had to be restrained. He had told them that I was comparatively harmless,
but he had no doubt that the conductor had whispered it to our
fellow-passengers in the car, which explained their prolonged absence in
the smoker. Then they all laughed, and it seemed to me that the cover to
the bottomless pit was open and that I was falling in.

"I sat still, hardly daring to breathe. Then I began to go over the story
bit by bit, and to put together little things that had happened since we
landed, and even before I had left Vienna; and I saw that I was caught in
a trap. It would be no use to appeal to any one, for no one would believe
me. I looked wildly out at the ground and had desperate thoughts of
climbing over the rail and jumping from the train. Death would be better
than what I should soon have to face. My persecutors had even told how
they had deceived my friends at home by sending telegrams of my mental
condition, and of the necessity for putting me into an asylum. There would
be no hope of appealing to them for help. The only witnesses to my sanity
were far away in Vienna, and how could I reach them if I were in Richard's
power?

"I watched the names of the stations as they flew by, but it gradually
grew dark, and I could hardly make them out. I thought one looked like the
name of a Philadelphia suburb, but I could not be sure.

"I was freezing with horror and with cold, but did not dare to move, lest
I attract their attention.

"We began to rush past rows of houses, and I knew we were approaching a
city. Then, suddenly, the train slowed down and stopped, with very little
warning, as if it intended to halt only a second and then hurry on.

"There was a platform on one side of the train, but we were out beyond the
car-shed, for our train was long. I could not climb over the rail to the
platform, for I was sitting on the side away from the station, and would
have had to pass the car door in order to do so. I should be sure to be
seen.

"On the other side were a great many tracks separated by strong picket
fences as high as the car platform and close to the trains, and they
reached as far as I could see in either direction. I had no time to think,
and there was nothing I could do but climb over the rail and get across
those tracks and fences somehow.

"My hands were so cold and trembling that I could scarcely hold on to the
rail as I jumped over.

"I cannot remember how I got across. Twice I had to cling to a fence while
an express train rushed by, and the shock and noise almost stunned me. It
was a miracle that I was not killed, but I did not think of that until
afterwards. I was conscious only of the train I had left standing by the
station. I glanced back once, and thought I saw Richard come to the door
of the car. Then I stumbled on blindly. I don't remember any more until I
found myself hurrying along that dark passage under the bridge and saw you
just ahead. I was afraid to speak to you, but I did not know what else to
do, and you were so good to me----!" Her voice broke in a little sob.

All the time she had been talking, he had held her hand firmly. She had
forgotten that any one might be watching; he did not care.

The tall girl with the discontented upper lip went to the matron and told
her that she thought the man and the woman in the parlor ought to be made
to go. She believed the man was trying to coax the girl to do something
she didn't want to do. The matron started on a voyage of discovery up the
hall and down again, with penetrating glances into the room, but the two
did not see her.

"Oh, my poor dear little girl!" breathed the man. "And you have passed
through all this awful experience alone! Why did you not tell me about
it? I could have helped you. I am a lawyer."

"I thought you would be on your guard at once and watch for evidences of
my insanity. I thought perhaps you would believe it true, and would feel
it necessary to return me to my friends. I think I should have been
tempted to do that, perhaps, if any one had come to me with such a story."

"One could not do that after seeing and talking with you. I never could
have believed it. Surely no reputable physician would lend his influence
to put you in an asylum, yet I know such things have been done. Your
cousin must be a desperate character. I shall not feel safe until you
belong to me. I saw two men hanging about Mr. Phillips's house last
evening as I went in. They were looking up at the windows and talking
about keeping a close watch on some one named Mary. One of the men was
tall and slight and handsome, with dark hair and eyes; the other was
Irish, and wore a coat too large for him, and rubbers. I went back later
in the evening, and the Irishman was hovering about the house."

The girl looked up with frightened eyes and grasped the arms of her chair
excitedly.

"Will you go with me now to a church not far away, where a friend of mine
is the pastor, and be married? Then we can defy all the cousins in
creation. Can't you trust me?" he pleaded.

"Oh, yes, but----"

"Is it that you do not love me?"

"No," she said, and her eyes drooped shyly. "It seems strange that I dare
to say it to you when I have known you so little." She lifted her eyes,
full of a wonderful love light, and she was glorified to him, all meanly
dressed though she was. The smooth Madonna braids around the shapely head,
covered by the soft felt hat, seemed more beautiful to him than all the
elaborate head-dresses of modern times.

"Where is the 'but' then, dear? Shall we go now?"

"How can I go in this dress?" She looked down at her shabby shoes, rough
black gown, and cheap gloves in dismay, and a soft pink stole into her
face.

"You need not. Your own gown is out in the office in my suit-case. I
brought it with me, thinking you might need it--_hoping_ you might, I
mean;" and he smiled. "I have kept it always near me; partly because I
wanted the comfort of it, partly because I was afraid some one else might
find it, and desecrate our secret with their common-place wondering."

It was at this moment that the matron of the building stepped up to the
absorbed couple, resolved to do her duty. Her lips were pursed to their
thinnest, and displeasure was in her face.

The young man arose and asked in a grave tone:

"Excuse me, but can you tell me whether this lady can get a room here to
rest for a short time, while I go out and attend to a matter of business?"

The matron noticed his refined face and true eyes, and she accepted with a
good grace the ten-dollar bill he handed to her.

"We charge only fifty cents a night for a room," she said, glancing at the
humble garments of the man's companion. She thought the girl must be a
poor dependent or a country relative.

"That's all right," said the young man. "Just let the change help the good
work along."

That made a distinct change in the atmosphere. The matron smiled, and
retired to snub the girl with the discontented upper lip. Then she sent
the elevator boy to carry the girl's suit-case. As the matron came back to
the office, a baggy man with cushioned tires hustled out of the open door
into the street, having first cast back a keen, furtive glance that
searched every corner of the place.

"Now," said Dunham reassuringly, as the matron disappeared, "you can go up
to your room and get ready, and I will look after a few little matters. I
called on my friend, the minister, this morning, and I have looked up the
legal part of this affair. I can see that everything is all right in a few
minutes. Is there anything you would like me to do for you?"

"No," she answered, looking up half frightened; "but I am afraid I ought
not to let you do this. You scarcely know me."

"Now, dear, no more of that. We have no time to lose. How long will it
take you to get dressed? Will half an hour do? It is getting late."

"Oh, it will not take long." She caught her breath with gladness. Her
companion's voice was so strong and comforting, his face so filled with a
wonderful love, that she felt dazed with the sudden joy of it all.

The elevator boy appeared in the doorway with the familiar suit-case.

"Don't be afraid, dear heart," whispered the young man, as he attended her
to the elevator. "I'll soon be back again, and then, _then_, we shall be
together!"

It was a large front room to which the boy took her. The ten-dollar bill
had proven effective. It was not a "fifty-cents-a-night" room. Some
one--some guest or kindly patron--had put a small illuminated text upon
the wall in a neat frame. It met her eye as she entered--"Rejoice and be
glad." Just a common little picture card, it was, with a phrase that has
become trite to many, yet it seemed a message to her, and her heart leaped
to obey. She went to the window to catch a glimpse of the man who would
soon be her husband, but he was not there, and the hurrying people
reminded her that she must hasten. Across the street a slouching figure in
a baggy coat looked fixedly up and caught her glance. She trembled and
drew back out of the sunshine, remembering what Dunham had told her about
the Irishman of the night before. With a quick instinct, she drew down the
shade, and locked her door.

[Illustration]




XII


The rubbered feet across the way hurried their owner into the cigar-store
in front of which he had been standing, and where he had a good view of
the Y.W.C.A. Building. He flung down some change and demanded the use of
the telephone. Then, with one eye on the opposite doorway, he called up a
number and delivered his message.

"Oi've treed me bird. She's in a room all roight at the Y.W.C.A. place,
fer I seed her at the winder. She come with a foine gintlemin, but he's
gahn now, an' she's loike to stay a spell. You'd best come at once.... All
roight. Hurry up!" He hung up the telephone-receiver and hurried back to
his post in front of the big entrance. Meanwhile the bride-elect upstairs,
with happy heart and trembling fingers, was putting on her own beautiful
garments once more, and arranging the waves of lovely hair in their old
accustomed way.

Tryon Dunham's plans were well laid. He first called up his friend the
minister and told him to be ready; then a florist not far from the church;
then a large department store where he had spent some time that morning.
"Is that Mr. Hunter, head of the fur department? Mr. Hunter, this is Mr.
Dunham. You remember our conversation this morning? Kindly send the coat
and hat I selected to the Y.W.C.A. Building at once. Yes, just send them
to the office. You remember it was to be C.O.D., and I showed you my
certified check this morning. It's all right, is it? How long will it take
you to get it there?... All right. Have the boy wait if I'm not there.
Good-by."

His next move was to order a carriage, and have it stop at the florist's
on the way. That done, he consulted his watch. Seventeen minutes of his
precious half-hour were gone. With nervous haste he went into a telephone
booth and called up his own home on the long-distance.

To his relief, his mother answered.

"Is that you, Mother? This is Tryon. Are you all well? That's good. Yes,
I'm in Chicago, but will soon be home. Mother, I've something to tell you
that may startle you, though there is nothing to make you sad. You have
known that there was something on my mind for some time." He paused for
the murmur of assent.

He knew how his mother was looking, even though he could not see her--that
set look of being ready for anything. He wanted to spare her as much as
possible, so he hastened on:

"You remember speaking to me about the ring I wore?"

"Tryon! Are you engaged?" There was a sharp anxiety in the tone as it came
through the hundreds of miles of space.

"One better, Mother. I'm just about to be married!"

"My son! What have you done? Don't forget the honorable name you bear!"

"No, Mother, I don't forget. She's fine and beautiful and sweet. You will
love her, and our world will fall at her feet!"

"But who is she? You must remember that love is very blind. Tryon, you
must come home at once. I shall die if you disgrace us all. Don't do
anything to spoil our lives. I know it is something dreadful, or you would
not do it in such haste."

"Nothing of the kind, Mother. Can't you trust me? Let me explain. She is
alone, and legal circumstances which it would take too long for me to
explain over the 'phone have made it desirable for her to have my
immediate protection. We are going at once to Edwin Twinell's church, and
he will marry us. It is all arranged, but I felt that you ought to be told
beforehand. We shall probably take the night express for home. Tell
Cornelia that I shall expect congratulations telegraphed to the hotel here
inside of two hours."

"But, Tryon, what will our friends think? It is most extraordinary! How
can you manage about announcements?"

"Bother the red tape, Mother! What difference does that make? Put it in
the society column if you want to."

"But, Tryon, we do not want to be conspicuous!"

"Well, Mother, I'm not going to put off my wedding at the last minute for
a matter of some bits of pasteboard. I'll do any reasonable thing to
please you, but not that."

"Couldn't you get a chaperon for her, and bring her on to me? Then we
could plan the wedding at our leisure."

"Impossible, Mother! In the first place, she never would consent. Really,
I cannot talk any more about it. I must go at once, or I shall be late.
Tell me you will love her for my sake, until you love her for her own."

"Tryon, you always were unreasonable. Suppose you have the cards engraved
at once, and I will telegraph our list to the engraver if you will give me
his address. If you prefer, you can get them engraved and sent out from
there. That will keep tongues still."

"All right, I'll do it. I'll have the engraver telegraph his address to
you within two hours. Have your list ready. And, Mother, don't worry.
She's all right. You couldn't have chosen better yourself. Say you will
love her, Mother dear."

"Oh, I suppose I'll try," sighed the wires disconsolately; "but I never
thought you would be married in such a way. Why, you haven't even told me
who she is."

"She's all right, Mother--good family and all. I really must hurry----"

"But what is her name, Tryon?"

"Say, Mother, I really must go. Ask Mrs. Parker Bowman what she thinks of
her. Good-by! Cheer up, it'll be all right."

"But, Tryon, her name----"

The receiver was hung up with a click, and Dunham looked at his watch
nervously. In two minutes his half-hour would be up, yet he must let Judge
Blackwell know. Perhaps he could still catch him at the office. He
sometimes stayed down-town late. Dunham rang up the office. The Judge was
still there, and in a moment his cheery voice was heard ringing out,
"Hello!"

"Hello, Judge! Is that you?... This is Dunham.... Chicago. Yes, the
business is all done, and I'm ready to come home, but I want to give you a
bit of news. Do you remember the young woman who dined with us at Mrs.
Bowman's and played the piano so well?... Yes, the night I met you....
Well, you half guessed that night how it was with us, I think. And now she
is here, and we are to be married at once, before I return. I am just
about to go to the church, but I wanted your blessing first."

"Blessings and congratulations on you both!" came in a hearty voice over
the phone. "Tell her she shall be at once taken into the firm as chief
consultant on condition that she plays for me whenever I ask her."

A great gladness entered the young man's heart as he again hung up the
receiver, at this glimpse into the bright vista of future possibilities.
He hurried into the street, forgetful of engravers. The half-hour was up
and one minute over.

In the meantime, the girl had slipped into her own garments once more with
a relief and joy she could scarcely believe were her own. Had it all been
an ugly dream, this life she had been living for the past few months, and
was she going back now to rest and peace and real life? Nay, not going
back, but going forward. The sweet color came into her beautiful face at
thought of the one who, though not knowing her, yet had loved her enough
to take her as she was, and lift her out of her trouble. It was like the
most romantic of fairy tales, this unexpected lover and the joy that had
come to her. How had it happened to her quiet, conventional life? Ah, it
was good and dear, whatever it was! She pressed her happy eyes with her
fluttering, nervous fingers, to keep the glad tears back, and laughed out
to herself a joyful ripple such as she had not uttered since her uncle's
death.

A knock at the door brought her back to realities again. Her heart
throbbed wildly. Had he come back to her already? Or had her enemy found
her out at last?

Tryon Dunham hurried up the steps of the Y.W.C.A. Building, nearly
knocking over a baggy individual in rubbers, who was lurking in the
entrance. The young man had seen a boy in uniform, laden with two enormous
boxes, run up the steps as he turned the last corner. Hastily writing a
few lines on one of his cards and slipping it into the largest box, he
sent them both up to the girl's room. Then he sauntered to the door to see
if the carriage had come. It was there. He glanced inside to see if his
orders about flowers had been fulfilled, and spoke a few words of
direction to the driver. Turning back to the door, he found the small, red
eyes of the baggy Irishman fixed upon him. Something in the slouch of the
figure reminded Dunham strongly now of the man he had noticed the night
before, and as he went back into the building he looked the man over well
and determined to watch him. As he sat in the office waiting, twice he saw
the bleary eyes of the baggy man applied to the glass panes in the front
door and as suddenly withdrawn. It irritated him, and finally he strode to
the door and asked the man if he were looking for some one.

"Just waitin' fer me sweetheart," whined the man, with a cringing
attitude. "She has a room in here, an' I saw her go in a while back."

"Well, you'd better move on. They don't care to have people hanging around
here."

The man slunk away with a vindictive glance, and Tryon Dunham went back to
the office, more perturbed at the little incident than he could
understand.

Upstairs the girl had dared to open her door and had been relieved to find
the elevator boy there with the two boxes.

"The gentleman's below, an' he says he'll wait, an' he sent these up,"
said the boy, depositing his burden and hurrying away.

She locked her door once more, for somehow a great fear had stolen over
her now that she was again dressed in her own garments and could easily be
recognized.

She opened the large box and read the card lying on the top:

    These are my wedding gifts to you, dear. Put them on and come as
    soon as possible to the one who loves you better than anything
    else in life.

                                                TRYON

Her eyes shone brightly and her cheeks grew rosy red as she lifted out
from its tissue-paper wrappings a long, rich coat of Alaska seal, with
exquisite brocade lining. She put it on and stood a moment looking at
herself in the glass. She felt like one who had for a long time lost her
identity, and has suddenly had it restored. Such garments had been
ordinary comforts of her former life. She had not been warm enough in the
coarse black coat.

The other box contained a beautiful hat of fur to match the coat. It was
simply trimmed with one long, beautiful black plume, and in shape and
general appearance was like the hat he had borrowed for her use in the
fall. She smiled happily as she set it upon her head, and then laughed
outright as she remembered her shabby silk gloves. Never mind. She could
take them off when she reached the church.

She packed the little black dress into the suit-case, folded the felt hat
on the top with a tender pat, and, putting on her gloves, hurried down to
the one who waited for her.

The matron had gone upstairs to the linen closet and left the girl with
the discontented upper lip in charge in the office. The latter watched the
elegant lady in the rich furs come down the hall from the elevator, and
wondered who she was and why she had been upstairs. Probably to visit
some poor protegee, she thought. The girl caught the love-light in the
eyes of Tryon Dunham as he rose to meet his bride, and she recognized him
as the same man who had been in close converse with the cheaply dressed
girl in the parlor an hour before, and sneered as she wondered what the
fine lady in furs would think if she knew about the other girl. Then they
went out to the carriage, past the baggy, rubbered man, who shrank back
suddenly behind a stone column and watched them.

As Dunham shut the door, he looked back just in time to see a slight man,
with dark eyes and hair, hurry up and touch the baggy man on the shoulder.
The latter pointed toward their carriage.

"See!" said Dunham. "I believe those are the men who were hovering around
the house last night."

The girl leaned forward to look, and then drew back with an exclamation of
horror as the carriage started.

"Oh, that man is my cousin Richard," she cried.

"Are you sure?" he asked, and a look of determination settled into his
face.

"Perfectly," she answered, looking out again. "Do you suppose he has seen
me?"

"I suppose he has, but we'll soon turn the tables." He leaned out and
spoke a word to the driver, who drew up around the next corner in front of
a telephone pay-station.

"Come with me for just a minute, dear. I'll telephone to a detective
bureau where they know me and have that man watched. He is unsafe to have
at large." He helped her out and drew her arm firmly within his own.
"Don't be afraid any more. I will take care of you."

He telephoned a careful description of the two men and their whereabouts,
and before he had hung up the receiver a man had started post-haste for
the Y.W.C.A. Building.

Then Tryon Dunham put the girl tenderly into the carriage, and to divert
her attention he opened the box of flowers and put a great sheaf of white
roses and lilies-of-the-valley into the little gloved hands. Then, taking
her in his arms for the first time, he kissed her. He noticed the shabby
gloves, and, putting his hand in his breast pocket, drew out the white
gloves she had worn before, saying, "See! I have carried them there ever
since you sent them back! My sister never asked for them. I kept them for
your sake."

The color had come back into her cheeks when they reached the church, and
he thought her a beautiful bride as he led her into the dim aisle. Some
one up in the choir loft was playing the wedding march, and the minister's
wife and young daughter sat waiting to witness the ceremony.

The minister met them at the door with a welcoming smile and hand-shake,
and led them forward. As the music hushed for the words of the ceremony,
he leaned forward to the young man and whispered:

"I neglected to ask you her name, Tryon."

"Oh, yes." The young man paused in his dilemma and looked for an instant
at the sweet face of the girl beside him. But he could not let his friend
see that he did not know the name of his wife-to-be, and with quick
thought he answered, "Mary!"

The ceremony proceeded, and the minister's voice sounded out solemnly in
the empty church: "Do you, Tryon, take this woman whom you hold by the
hand to be your lawful wedded wife?"

The young man's fingers held the timid hand of the woman firmly as he
answered, "I do."

"Do you, Mary, take this man?" came the next question, and the girl looked
up with clear eyes and said, "I do."

Then the minister's wife, who knew and prized Tryon Dunham's friendship,
said to herself: "It's all right. She loves him."

When the solemn words were spoken that bound them together through life,
and they had thanked their kind friends and were once more out in the
carriage, Tryon said:

"Do you know you haven't told me your real name yet?"

She laughed happily as the carriage started on its way, and answered,
"Why, it is Mary!"

As the carriage rounded the first corner beyond the church, two breathless
individuals hurried up from the other direction. One was short and baggy,
and the sole of one rubber flopped dismally as he struggled to keep up
with the alert strides of the other man, who was slim and angry. They had
been detained by an altercation with the matron of the Y.W.C.A. Building,
and puzzled by the story of the plainly dressed girl who had taken the
room, and the fine lady who had left the building in company with a
gentleman, until it was settled by the elevator boy, who declared the two
women to be one and the same.

A moment later a man in citizen's clothing, who had keen eyes, and who was
riding a motor-cycle, rounded the corner and puffed placidly along near
the two. He appeared to be looking at the numbers on the other side of the
street, but he heard every word that they said as they caught sight of the
disappearing carriage and hurried after it. He had been standing in the
entrance of the Y.W.C.A. Building, an apparently careless observer, while
the elevator boy gave his evidence.

The motor-cycle shot ahead a few rods, passed the carriage, and discovered
by a keen glance who were the occupants. Then it rounded the block and
came almost up to the two pursuers again.

When the carriage stopped at the side entrance of a hotel the man on the
motor-cycle was ahead of the pursuers and discovered it first, long enough
to see the two get out and go up the marble steps. The carriage was
driving away when the thin man came in sight, with the baggy man
struggling along half a block behind, his padded feet coming down in
heavy, dragging thuds, like a St. Bernard dog in bedroom slippers.

One glimpse the pursuers had of their prey as the elevator shot upward.
They managed to evade the hotel authorities and get up the wide staircase
without observation. By keeping on the alert, they discovered that the
elevator had stopped at the second floor, so the people they were tracking
must have apartments there. Lurking in the shadowy parts of the hall, they
watched, and soon were rewarded by seeing Dunham come out of a room and
hurry to the elevator. He had remembered his promise to his mother about
the engravers. As soon as he was gone, they presented themselves boldly at
the door.

Filled with the joy that had come to her and feeling entirely safe now in
the protection of her husband, Mary Dunham opened the door. She supposed,
of course, it was the bell-boy with a pitcher of ice-water, for which she
had just rung.

"Ah, here you are at last, my pretty cousin!" It was the voice of Richard
that menaced her, with all the stored-up wrath of his long-baffled search.

At that moment the man from the motor-cycle stepped softly up the top
stair and slid unseen into the shadows of the hall.

For an instant it seemed to Mary Dunham that she was going to faint, and
in one swift flash of thought she saw herself overpowered and carried into
hiding before her husband should return. But with a supreme effort she
controlled herself, and faced her tormentor with unflinching gaze. Though
her strength had deserted her at first, every faculty was now keen and
collected. As if nothing unusual were happening, she put out her cold,
trembling fingers, and laid them firmly over the electric button on the
wall. Then with new strength coming from the certainty that some one would
soon come to her aid, she opened her lips to speak.

"What are you doing here, Richard?"

"I've come after you, my lady. A nice chase you've led me, but you shall
pay for it now."

The cruelty in his face eclipsed any lines of beauty which might have been
there. The girl's heart froze within her as she looked once more into
those eyes, which had always seemed to her like sword-points.

"I shall never go anywhere with you," she answered steadily.

He seized her delicate wrist roughly, twisting it with the old wrench with
which he had tormented her in their childhood days. None of them saw the
stranger who was quietly walking down the hall toward them.

"Will you go peaceably, or shall I have to gag and bind you?" said
Richard. "Choose quickly. I'm in no mood to trifle with you any longer."

Although he hurt her wrist cruelly, she threw herself back from him and
with her other hand pressed still harder against the electric button. The
bell was ringing furiously down in the office, but the walls were thick
and the halls lofty. It could not be heard above.

"Catch that other hand, Mike," commanded Richard, "and stuff this in her
mouth, while I tie her hands behind her back."

It was then that Mary screamed. The man in the shadow stepped up behind
and said in a low voice:

"What does all this mean?"

The two men, startled, dropped the girl's hands for the instant. Then
Richard, white with anger at this interference, answered insolently: "It
means that this girl's an escaped lunatic, and we're sent to take her
back. She's dangerous, so you'd better keep out of the way."

Then Mary Dunham's voice, clear and penetrating, rang through the halls:

"Tryon, Tryon! Come quick! Help! Help!"

As if in answer to her call, the elevator shot up to the second floor, and
Tryon Dunham stepped out in time to see the two men snatch Mary's hands
again and attempt to bind them behind her back.

In an instant he had seized Richard by the collar and landed him on the
hall carpet, while a well directed blow sent the flabby Irishman sprawling
at the feet of the detective, who promptly sat on him and pinioned his
arms behind him.

"How dare you lay a finger upon this lady?" said Tryon Dunham, as he
stepped to the side of his wife and put a strong arm about her, where she
stood white and frightened in the doorway.

No one had noticed that the bell-boy had come to the head of the stairs
and received a quiet order from the detective.

In sudden fear, the discomfited Richard arose and attempted to bluff the
stranger who had so unwarrantly interfered just as his fingers were about
to close over the golden treasure of his cousin's fortune.

"Indeed, sir, you wholly misunderstand the situation," he said to Dunham,
with an air of injured innocence, "though perhaps you can scarcely be
blamed. This girl is an escaped lunatic. We have been searching for her
for days, and have just traced her. It is our business to take her back at
once. Her friends are in great distress about her. Moreover, she is
dangerous and a menace to every guest in this house. She has several times
attempted murder----"

"Stop!" roared Dunham, in a thunderous voice of righteous anger. "She is
my wife. And you are her cousin. I know all about your plot to shut her up
in an insane asylum and steal her fortune. I have found you sooner than I
expected, and I intend to see that the law takes its full course with
you."

Two policemen now arrived on the scene, with a number of eager bell-boys
and porters in their wake, ready to take part in the excitement.

Richard had turned deadly white at the words, "She is my wife!" It was the
death-knell of his hopes of securing the fortune for which he had not
hesitated to sacrifice every particle of moral principle. When he turned
and saw impending retribution in the shape of the two stalwart
representatives of the law, a look of cunning came into his face, and with
one swift motion he turned to flee up the staircase close at hand.

"Not much you don't," said an enterprising bell-boy, flinging himself in
the way and tripping up the scoundrel in his flight.

The policemen were upon him and had him handcuffed in an instant. The
Irishman now began to protest that he was but an innocent tool, hired to
help discover the whereabouts of an escaped lunatic, as he supposed. He
was walked off to the patrol wagon without further ceremony.

It was all over in a few minutes. The elevator carried off the detective,
the policemen, and their two prisoners. The door closed behind Dunham and
his bride, and the curious guests who had peered out, alarmed by the
uproar, saw nothing but a few bell-boys standing in the hall, describing
to one another the scene as they had witnessed it.

"He stood here and I stood right there," said one, "and the policeman, he
come----"

The guests could not find out just what had happened, but supposed there
had been an attempted robbery, and retired behind locked doors to see that
their jewels were safely hidden.

Dunham drew the trembling girl into his arms and tried to soothe her. The
tears rained down the white cheeks as her head lay upon his breast, and he
kissed them away.

"Oh!" she sobbed, shuddering. "If you had not come! It was terrible,
_terrible_! I believe he would have killed me rather than have let me go
again."

Gradually his tender ministrations calmed her, but she turned troubled
eyes to his face.

"You do not know yet that I am all I say. You have nothing to prove it. Of
course, by and by, when I can get to my guardians, and with your help
perhaps make them understand, you will know, but I don't see how you can
trust me till then."

For answer he brought his hand up in front of her face and turned the
flashing diamond--her diamond--so that its glory caught the single ray of
setting sun that filtered into the hotel window.

"See, darling," he said. "It is your ring. I have worn it ever since as an
outward sign that I trusted you."

"You are taking me on trust, though, in spite of all you say, and it is
beautiful."

He laid his lips against hers. "Yes," he said; "it is beautiful, and it is
best."

It was very still in the room for a moment while she nestled close to him
and his eyes drank in the sweetness of her face.

"See," said he, taking a tiny velvet case from his pocket and touching the
spring that opened it. "I have amused myself finding a mate to your stone.
I thought perhaps you would let me wear your ring always, while you wear
mine."

He lifted the jewel from its white velvet bed and showed her the
inscription inside: "Mary, from Tryon." Then he slipped it on her finger
to guard the wedding ring he had given her at the church. His arm that
encircled her clasped her left wrist, and the two diamonds flashed side by
side. The last gleam of the setting sun, ere it vanished behind the tall
buildings on the west, glanced in and blazed the gems into tangled beams
of glory, darting out in many colored prisms to light the vision of the
future of the man and the woman. He bent and kissed her again, and their
eyes met like other jewels, in which gleamed the glory of their love and
trust.

THE END.





End of Project Gutenberg's The Mystery of Mary, by Grace Livingston Hill

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MYSTERY OF MARY ***

***** This file should be named 14632.txt or 14632.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/1/4/6/3/14632/

Produced by Charles Aldarondo, Emmy and the PG Online Distributed
Proofreading Team


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
