The Project Gutenberg EBook of Notes & Queries No. 29, Saturday, May 18,
1850, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Notes & Queries No. 29, Saturday, May 18, 1850
       A Medium Of Inter-Communication For Literary Men, Artists,
       Antiquaries, Genealogists, Etc.


Author: Various

Release Date: February 28, 2005 [EBook #15197]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NOTES & QUERIES NO. 29, ***




Produced by The Internet Library of Early Journals, Jon Ingram,
William Flis, and the PG Online Distributed Proofreading Team.





NOTES AND QUERIES:

A MEDIUM OF INTER-COMMUNICATION FOR LITERARY MEN, ARTISTS,
ANTIQUARIES, GENEALOGISTS, ETC.

       *       *       *       *       *

"When found, make a note of."--CAPTAIN CUTTLE.

       *       *       *       *       *

No. 29] SATURDAY, MAY 18. 1850 {Price Threepence. Stamped Edition 4d.

       *       *       *       *       *

CONTENTS

                                                          Page
  NOTES:--
    Oliver Cromwell as a Feoffee of Parson's Charity, Ely  465
    Dr. Parr and Dr. John Taylor                           466
    Provincial Words                                       467
    Folk Lore:--Death Bed Superstition--May Marriages
      --Throwing old Shoes--Sir Thomas Boleyn's Spectre
      --Shuck the Dog-fiend                                467

  QUERIES:--
    Numismatic Queries                                     468
    Queries Proposed, No. 2., by Bolton Corney             469
    Authors who have privately printed, by E.F. Rimbault   469
    Minor Queries:--Seager a Painter--Marlow's Autograph
      --MS. Diary of the Convention Parliament of
      1660--Etymology of Totnes--Dr. Maginn--Poor
      Robin's Almanack--The Camp in Bulstrode Park         469

  REPLIES:--
    Dr. Percy and the Poems of the Earl of Surrey by
      J Payne Collier                                      471
    Symbols of the Four Evangelists                        471
    Complexion                                             472
    Ballad of Dick and the Devil                           473
    Replies to Minor Queries:--Cavell--Gootet--Christian
      Captives--Pamphlets respecting Ireland--Pimlico--
      Bive and Chute Lambs--Latin Names of Towns--Le
      Petit Albert--Walker Lynne--Emancipation of the
      Jews--As lazy as Ludlum's Dog--St. Winifreda--Vert
      Vert--"Esquire" and "Gentleman"--Pope Felix
      and Pope Gregory--Love's last Shift--Quem
      Deus--Dayrolles--Emerods--Military Execution--
      "M. or N."--Sapcote Motto--Finkle &c.                473

  MISCELLANIES:--
    Dr. Sclater's Works--Runes                             478

  MISCELLANEOUS:--
    Notes on Books, Catalogues, Sales, &c.                 479
    Books and Odd Volumes wanted                           479
    Notice to Correspondents                               479

       *       *       *       *       *


OLIVER CROMWELL AS A FEOFFEE OF PARSON'S CHARITY, ELY


There is in Ely, where Cromwell for some years resided, an extensive
charity known as Parson's Charity, of which he was a feoffee or
governor. The following paper, which was submitted to Mr. Carlyle for
the second or third edition of his work, contains all the references
to the great Protector which are to be found in the papers now in the
possession of the trustees. The appointment of Oliver Cromwell as a
feoffee does not appear in any of the documents now remaining with
the governors of the charity. The records of the proceedings if the
feoffees of his time consist only of the collector's yearly accounts
of monies received and expended, and do not show the appointments of
the feoffees. These accounts were laid before the feoffees from time
to time, and signed by them in testimony of their allowance.

Cromwell's name might therefore be expected to be found at the foot of
some of them; but it unfortunately happens that, from the year 1622 to
the year 1641, there is an hiatus in the accounts. At the end of Book
No. 1., between forty and fifty leaves have been cut away, and at the
commencement of Book no. 2. about twelve leaves more. Whether some
collector of curiosities has purloined these leaves for the sale of
any autographs of Cromwell contained in them, or whether their removal
may be accounted for by the questions which arose at the latter end
of the above period as to the application of the funds of the charity,
cannot now be ascertained.

There are however, still in the possession of the governors of the
charity, several documents which clearly show that from the year
1635 to the year 1641 Cromwell was a feoffee or governor, and took an
active part in the management of the affairs of the charity. There
is an original bond, dated the 30th of May, 1638, from one Robert
Newborne to "Daniell Wigmore, Archdeacon of Ely, Oliver Cromwell,
Esq., and the rest of the Corporation of Ely." The feoffees had then
been incorporated by royal charter, under the title of "The Governors
of the Lands and Possessions of the Poor of the City or Town of Ely."

There are some detached collectors' accounts extending over a portion
of the interval between 1622 and 1641, and indorsed, "The Accoumpts
of Mr. John Hand and Mr. William Cranford, Collectors of the Revenewes
belonging to the Towne of Ely."

The following entries are extracted from these accounts:--

  "The Disbursements of Mr. John Hand from the
  of August 1636 unto the      of
  1641."

  "Anno 1636."

After several other items,--

                                                 L  s.  d.
  "Given to diverse Poore People at ye     }
  Worke-house, in the presence of Mr.      }
  Archdeacon of Ely, Mr. Oliver Cromwell,  }    16  14   0
  Mr. John Goodericke, and others, Feb.    }
  10th 1636, as appeareth,                 }    ___________

  Summa Expens. Ann. 1636                       36   3   6"
                                                ___________


    "The Disbursements of Mr. Cranford."
  "Item, to Jones, by Mr. Cromwell's consent}    1   0   0"

Mr. Cranford's disbursements show no dates. His receipts immediately
followed Mr. Hand's in point of dates.

About the year 1639 a petition was filed in the Court of Chancery by
one Thomas Fowler, on behalf of himself and others, inhabitants of
Ely, against the feoffees of Parson's Charity, and a commission for
charitable uses was issued. The commissioners sat at Ely, on the 25th
of January, 1641, and at Cambridge on the 3rd of March in the same
year, when several of the feoffees with other persons were examined.

At the conclusion of the joint deposition of John Hand and William
Cranford, two of the feoffees, is the following statement:--

    "And as to the Profitts of the said Lands in theire tyme
    receaved, they never disposed of any parte thereof but by the
    direction and appointment of Mr. Daniell Wigmore, Archdeacon
    of Ely, Mr. William March, and Mr. Oliver Cromwell."

    "These last two names were inserted att Camb. 8 Mar. 1641, by
    Mr. Hy. C."

The last name in the above note is illegible, and the last two names
in the deposition are of a different ink and handwriting from the
preceding part, but of the same ink and writing as the note.

An original summons to the feoffees, signed by the commissioners, is
preserved. It requires them to appear before the commissioners at
the Dolphin Inn, in Ely, on the 25th of the then instant January, to
produce before the commissioners a true account "of the monies, fines,
rents, and profits by you and every of you and your predecessors
feoffees receaved out of the lands given by one Parsons for the
benefitt of the inhabitants of Ely for 16 years past," &c. The summons
is dated at Cambridge, the 13th of January, 1641, and is signed by the
three commissioners,

  "Tho. Symon.
  Tho. Duckett.
  Dudley Page."

The summons is addressed

  "To Matthew, Lord Bishop of Ely,
    Willm. Fuller, Deane of Ely, and to
    Daniell Wigmore, Archdeacon of Ely.
    William March, Esq.
    Anthony Page, Esq.
    Henry Gooderick, Gent.
    Oliver Cromwell, Esq.
    Willm. Anger.
    Willm. Cranford.
    John Hand, and
    Willm. Austen."

Whether Cromwell attended the sitting of the commissioners does not
appear.

The letter from Cromwell to Mr. John Hand, published in Cromwell's
_Memoirs of Cromwell_, has not been in the possession of the feoffees
for some years.

There is, however, an item in Mr. Hand's disbursements, which probably
refers to the person mentioned in that letter. It is as follows:--

                                             L  s. d.
  "Ffor phisicke and surgery for old Benson, 2  7  4"

Cromwell's letter appears to be at a later date than this item.

John Hand was a feoffee for many years, and during his time executed,
as was usual, the office of collector or treasurer. It may be gathered
from the documents preserved that Cromwell never executed that office.
The office was usually taken by the feoffees in turn then, as at the
present time; but Cromwell most probably was called to a higher sphere
of action before his turn arrived.

It is worthy of note, that Cromwell's fellow-trustees, the Bishop
of Ely (who was the celebrated Matthew Wren), Fuller the Dean,
and Wigmore the Archdeacon, were all severely handled during the
Rebellion.

ARUN.

       *       *       *       *       *


DR. SAM. PARR AND DR. JOHN TAYLOR, OF SHREWSBURY AND SHREWSBURY
SCHOOL.


Looking at the Index to the _Memoirs of Gilbert Wakefield_, edit. of
1804, I saw, under the letter T., the following entries:--

  "Taylor, Rev. Dr. John, Tutor of Warrington Academy, i. 226.
  ---- his latinity, why faulty, ii. 449."

But I instantly suspected an error: for it was my belief that those
two notices were designed for two distinct scholars. Accordingly, I
revised both passages, and found that I was right in my conjecture.
The facts are these:--In the former of the references, "The Rev. John
Taylor, D.D.," is pointed out. The other individual, of the same
name, was John Taylor, LL.D., a native of Shrewsbury, and a pupil of
Shrewsbury School: HIS _latinity_ it is which Dr. Samuel Parr [_ut
supr._] characterises as FAULTY: and for the defects of which he
endeavours, successfully or otherwise, to account. So that whosoever
framed the _Index_ has here committed an oversight.

In the quotation which I proceed to make, Parr is assigning causes of
what, as I think, he truly deemed blemishes in G. Wakefield's Latin
style; and this is the language of the not unfriendly censor:--

    "--None, I fear, of his [W.'s] Latin productions are wholly
    free from faults, which he would have been taught to avoid
    in our best public seminaries, and of which I have seen many
    glaring instances in the works of Archbishop Potter, Dr. John
    Taylor, Mr. Toup, and several eminent scholars now living, who
    were brought up in private schools."

But could Parr mean to rank Shrewsbury School among the "private
schools?" I am not old enough to recollect what it was in the times
of Taylor, J., the civilian, and the editor of Demosthenes. Its
celebrity, however, in our own day, and through a long term of
preceding years, is confessed. Dr. Parr's judgement in this case might
be somewhat influenced by his prepossessions as an _Harrovian_.

N.

April, 1850.

       *       *       *       *       *


PROVINCIAL WORDS.


In _Twelfth Night_, Act ii. Scene 3., occur the words "Sneck up," in
C. Knight's edition, or "Snick up," Mr. Collier's edition. These words
appear most unaccountably to have puzzled the commentators. Sir Toby
Belch uses them in reply to Malvolio, as,--

_Enter_ MALVOLIO.

    "_Mal._ My masters, are you mad? or what are you? Have you no
    wit, manners, nor honesty, but to gabble like tinkers at this
    time of night? Do you make an alehouse of my lady's house,
    that you squeak out your cozier's catches without any
    mitigation or remorse of voice? Is there no respect of place,
    person, nor time, in you?

    "_Sir To._ We did keep time, Sir, in our catches. Sneck up!"

"Sneck up," according to Mr. C. Knight, is explained thus:--

    "A passage in Taylor, the Water Poet, would show that this
    means 'hang yourself.' A verse from his 'Praise of Hempseed'
    is given in illustration."

"Snick up," according to Mr. Collier, is said to be "a term of
contempt," of which the precise meaning seems to have been lost.
Various illustrations are given, as see his Note; but all are wide of
the meaning.

Turn to Halliwell's _Dictionary of Archaic and Provincial Words_, 2d
edition, and there is this explanation:--

    "SNECK, that part of the iron fastening of a door which is
    raised by moving the latch. To _sneck_ a door, is to latch
    it."

See also Burn's Poems: _The Vision, Duan First_, 7th verse, which is
as follows:--

  "When dick! the string the snick did draw,--
  And jee! the door gaed to the wa';
  An' by my ingle-lowe I saw,
            Now bliezin' bright,
  A tight, outlandish Hizzie, braw,
            Come full in sight."

These quotations will clearly show that "sneck" or "snick" applies to
a door; and that to _sneck_ a door is to shut it. I think, therefore,
that Sir Toby meant to say in the following reply:--

    "We did keep time, Sir, in our catches. Sneck up!"

That is, close up, shut up, or, as is said now, "bung
up,"--emphatically, "We kept true time;" and the probability is, that
in saying this, Sir Toby would accompany the words with the action of
pushing an imaginary door; or _sneck up_.

In the country parts of Lancashire, and indeed throughout the North
of England, and it appears Scotland also, the term "sneck the door"
is used indiscriminately with "shut the door" or "toin't dur." And
there can be little doubt but that this provincialism was known to
Shakspeare, as his works are full of such; many of which have either
been passed over by his commentators, or have been wrongly noted, as
the one now under consideration.

Shakspeare was essentially a man of the people; his learning was
from within, not from colleges or schools, but from the universe and
himself. He wrote the language of the people; that is, the common
every-day language of his time: and hence mere classical scholars have
more than once mistaken him, and most egregiously misinterpreted him,
as I propose to show in some future Notes.

R.R.

       *       *       *       *       *


FOLK LORE.


_Death-bed Superstition_. (No. 20. p. 315.).--The practice of opening
doors and boxes when a person dies, is founded on the idea that the
ministers of purgatorial pains took the soul as it escaped from the
body, and flattening it against some closed door (which alone would
serve the purpose), crammed it into the hinges and hinge openings;
thus the soul in torment was likely to be miserably pinched and
squeezed by the movement on casual occasion of such door or lid: an
open or swinging door frustrated this, and the fiends had to try some
other locality. The friends of the departed were at least assured
that they were not made the unconscious instruments of torturing the
departed in their daily occupations. The superstition prevails in the
North as well as in the West of England; and a similar one exists in
the South of Spain, where I have seen it practised.

Among the Jews at Gibraltar, at which place I have for many years been
a resident, there is also a strange custom when a death occurs in the
house; and this consists in pouring away all the water contained in
any vessel, the superstition being that the angel of death may have
washed his sword therein.

TREBOR.

       *       *       *       *       *

_May Marriages_.--It so happened that yesterday I had both a Colonial
Bishop and a Home Archdeacon taking part in the services of my church,
and visiting at my house; and, by a singular coincidence, both had
been solicited by friends to perform the marriage ceremony not later
than to-morrow, because in neither case would the bride-elect submit
to be married in the month of May. I find that it is a common notion
amongst ladies, that May marriages are unlucky.

Can any one inform me whence this prejudice arose?

ALFRED GATTY.

Ecclesfield, April 29. 1850.

    [This superstition is as old as Ovid's time, who tells us in
    his _Fasti_,

      "Nec viduae taedis eadem, nec virginis apta
        Tempora. Quae nupsit non diuturna fuit.
      Hac quoque de causa (si te proverbia tangunt),
        Mense malas Maio nubere vulgus ait."

    The last line, as our readers may remember, (see _ante_, No.
    7. p. 97.), was fixed on the gates of Holyrood on the morning
    (16th of May) after the marriage of Mary Queen of Scots and
    Bothwell.]

       *       *       *       *       *

_Throwing Old Shoes at a Wedding_.--At a wedding lately, the
bridesmaids, after accompanying the bride to the hall-door, threw into
the carriage, on the departure of the newly-married couple, a number
of old shoes which they had concealed somewhere. On inquiry, I find
this custom is not uncommon; I should be glad to be favoured with any
particulars respecting its origin and meaning, and the antiquity of
it.

ARUN.

    [We have some NOTES on the subject of throwing Old Shoes after
    a person as a means of securing them good fortune, which we
    hope to insert in an early Number.]

       *       *       *       *       *

_Sir Thomas Boleyn's Spectre_.--Sir Thomas Boleyn, the father of the
unfortunate Queen of Henry VIII., resided at Blickling, distant about
fourteen miles from Norwich, and now the residence of the dowager Lady
Suffield. The spectre of this gentleman is believed by the vulgar to
be doomed, annually, on a certain night in the year, to drive, for a
period of 1000 years, a coach drawn by four headless horses, over a
circuit of twelve bridges in that vicinity. These are Aylsham, Burgh,
Oxnead, Buxton, Coltishall, the two Meyton bridges, Wroxham, and four
others whose names I do not recollect. Sir Thomas carries his head
under his arm, and flames issue from his mouth. Few rustics are hardy
enough to be found loitering on or near those bridges on that night;
and my informant averred, that he was himself on one occasion hailed
by this fiendish apparition, and asked to open a gate, but "he warn't
sich a fool as to turn his head; and well a' didn't, for Sir Thomas
passed him full gallop like:" and he heard a voice which told him that
he (Sir Thomas) had no power to hurt such as turned a deaf ear to his
requests, but that had he stopped he would have carried him off.

This tradition I have repeatedly heard in this neighbourhood from aged
persons when I was a child, but I never found but one person who had
ever actually _seen_ the phantom. Perhaps some of your correspondents
can give some clue to this extraordinary sentence. The coach and four
horses is attached to another tradition I have heard in the west
of Norfolk; where the ancestor of a family is reported to drive his
spectral team through the old walled-up gateway of his now demolished
mansion, on the anniversary of his death: and it is said that the
bricks next morning have ever been found loosened and fallen, though
as constantly repaired. The particulars of this I could easily procure
by reference to a friend.

E.S.T.

P.S. Another vision of Headless Horse is prevalent at Caistor Castle,
the seat of the Fastolfs.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Shuck the Dog-fiend_.--This phantom I have heard many persons in East
Norfolk, and even Cambridgeshire, describe as having seen as a black
shaggy dog, with fiery eyes, and of immense size, and who visits
churchyards at midnight. One witness nearly fainted away at seeing it,
and on bringing his neighbours to see the place where he saw it, he
found a large spot as if gunpowder had been exploded there. A lane
in the parish of Overstrand is called, after him, Shuck's Lane. The
name appears to be a corruption of "shag," as _shucky_ is the Norfolk
dialect for "shaggy." Is not this a vestige of the German "Dog-fiend?"

E.S.T.

       *       *       *       *       *




QUERIES.


NUMISMATIC QUERIES.

Can any numismatical contributor give me any information as to the
recurrence elsewhere, &c., of the following types of coins in my
possession:--

1. A coin of the size of Roman 1 B., of the province of Macedonia
Prima.--_Obv._ A female head, with symbols behind, and a rich
floriated edge: _Rev._ A club within an oaken garland: Legend in the
field, [Greek: MAKEDONON PROTES].

The type is illustrated by Dr. Horne, in his _Introduction to the
Study of the Bible_, in explanation of Acts, xvi. 11, 12. The specimen
in my possession is in _lead_, finely struck, and therefore not a
_cast_, and in all respects equal in point of sharpness and execution
to the silver of the same size and type in the British Museum; and was
dug up by a labourer at Chesterton, near Cambridge. How is the metal
of which my specimen is composed to be accounted for?

2. A 3 B. coin apparently by the portrait of Tiberius.--Legend
defaced: _Rev._ The type known by collectors as the altar of Lyons:
_Ex._ (ROM)AE ET AV(G.)

3. A 3 B. of Herennia Estruscilla.--_Rev_. The usual seated figure of
Pudicitia; and the Legend, PVDICITIA AVG.

According to Col. Smyth, Akermann, and other authorities, no third
brass of this empress exists; but the specimen before me has been
decided as undoubtedly genuine by many competent judges.

4. A 3 B. coin of the Emperor Macrinus, struck in some of the
provinces.--_Obv._ A bearded portrait of the emperor: Leg., AVT.
K.M.O.C.C. MAKPINOC: _Rev._ An archaic S.C. in a laurel garland, above
L and beneath C. I am anxious to know to what locality I may ascribe
this coin, as I have not been able to find it described.

E.S.T.

       *       *       *       *       *

QUERIES PROPOSED, NO. 2.

When reflecting on my various pen-and-ink skirmishes, I have sometimes
half-resolved to _avoid controversy_. The resolution would have been
unwise; for silence, on many occasions, would be a dereliction of
those duties which we owe to ourselves and the public.

The halcyon days, so much desired, may be far distant! I have
to comment, elsewhere, on certain parts of the _Report_ of the
commissioners on the British Museum--which I hope to do firmly, yet
respectfully; and on the evidence of Mr. Panizzi--in which task I must
not disappoint his just expectations. I have also to propose a query
on the _blunder of Malone_--to which I give precedence, as it relates
to Shakspeare.

The query is--have I "mistaken the whole affair"? A few short
paragraphs may enable others to decide.

1. The question at issue arose, I presume to say, out of the
_statement of Mr. Jebb_. I never quoted the Irish edition. If _C._
can prove that Malone superintended it, he may fairly tax me with a
violation of my new canon of criticism--not otherwise. What says Mr.
James Boswell on that point? I must borrow his precise words: "The
only edition for which Mr. Malone can be considered as responsible
[is] his own in 1790." [_Plays and poems of W.S._ 1821, i. xxxiii.]

2. I am said to have "repeated what _C._ had already stated."--I
consulted the _Shakspere_ of Malone, and verified my recollections,
when the query of "Mr. JEBB" appeared--but forbore to notice its
misconceptions. Besides, one _C._, after an interval of two months,
merely _asserted_ that it was not a blunder of Malone; the other _C._
furnished, off-hand, his proofs and references.

3. To argue fairly, we must use the same words in the same sense.
Now _C._ (No. 24. p. 386.) asserts the _Malone had never seen_ the
introductory fragment; and asks, who _forged_ it? He uses the word
_fabrication_ in the sense of forgery.--The facts are produced (No.
25. p. 404.). He is informed that the _audacious fabrication_, which
took place before 1770, was first published by Malone himself,
in 1790--yet he expects me to apply the same terms to the blunder
committed by another editor in 1794.

4. As an answer to my assertion that the Irish editor _attempted to
unite_ the two fragments, _C._ proceeds to prove that he _did not
unite them_. The procedure is rather defective in point of logical
exactness. It proves only what was not denied. Malone refers to the
_will of John Shakspere, found by Joseph Moseley_, with sufficient
clearness; and it is charitable to assume that the Irish editor
intended to observe the instructions of his precursor. He failed, it
seems--but why? It would be useless to go in search of the rationale
of a blunder.

Have I "_mistaken the whole affair_"?--I entreat those readers of
the "NOTES AND QUERIES" who may take up the affirmative side of the
question to point out my errors, whether as to facts or inferences.

BOLTON CORNET.

       *       *       *       *       *

AUTHORS WHO HAVE PRIVATELY PRINTED THEIR OWN WORKS.

Can any of your readers refer me to any source whence I can obtain
an account of "JOHN PAINTER, B.A. of St. John's College, Oxford?" He
appears to have been a very singular character, and fond of printing
(privately) his own lucubrations; to most of which he subscribes
himself "The King's Fool." Three of these privately printed tracts are
now before me:--1. _The Poor Man's Honest Praises and Thanksgiving_,
1746. 2. _An Oxford Dream, in Two Parts_, 1751. 3. _A Scheme designed
for the Benefit of the Foundling Hospital_, 1751.

Who was ROBERT DEVERELL, who privately printed, in 4to., _Andalusia;
or Notes tending to show that the Yellow Fever was well known to
the Ancients_? The book seems a mass of absurdity; containing
illustrations of Milton's _Comus_, and several other subjects equally
incongruous.

EDWARD F. RIMBAULT.

       *       *       *       *       *

MINOR QUERIES.

_Seager a Painter.--Marlow's Autograph._--In a MS., which has
lately been placed in my hands, containing a copy of Henry Howard's
translation of the last instructions given by the Emperor Charles V.
to his son Philip, transcribed by Paul Thompson about the end of the
sixteenth century, are prefixed some poems in a different handwriting.
The first of these is an eclogue, entitled _Amor Constans_, in which
the dialogue is carried on by "Dickye" and "Bonnybootes," and begins
thus:--"For shame, man, wilt thou never leave this sorrowe?" At the
end is the signature, "Infortunatus, Ch.M." Following this eclogue
are sixteen sonnets, signed also "Ch.M.;" in two of which the author
alludes to a portrait painter named _Seager_. One of these sonnets
commences thus:--

  "Whilest thou in breathinge cullers, crimson white,
    Drewst these bright eyes, whose language sayth to me.
    Loe! the right waye to heaven; Love stoode by the(e),
  _Seager!_ fayne to be drawne in cullers brighte," &c.

I should be glad to receive any information respecting this painter:
as also any hints as to the name of the poet Ch. M. May I add, also,
another Query? Is any authentic writing or signature of _Christopher
Marlow_ known to exist?

M.

       *       *       *       *       *

_MS. Diary of the Convention Parliament of 1660_.--The editors of the
_Parliamentary History_ give some passages from a MS. Diary of the
Convention Parliament of the Restoration, and state that the Diary
was communicated to them by the Rev. Charles Lyttleton, Dean of Exeter
(vol. iv. p. 73.). I am anxious to know where this Diary now is, and
if it may be seen by--

CH.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Etymology of Totnes_.--Can any of your readers suggest a probable
etymology for Totnes, the "prime town of Great Britain," as it is
called by Westcote[1], who supposes it to have been built by Brutus,
1108 years before the Christian era. Mr. Polwhele, who supposed the
numerous _Hams_ in Devon to have owed their names to the worship
of Jupiter _Hammon_, would, I imagine, have derived Totnes from the
Egyptian god Thoth or Taut; or, perhaps, directly from King Thothmes.
Westcote observes that some would have the name from,--

    "The French word _tout-a-l'aise_, which is in English, all at
    ease; as if Brutus at his arrival in such a pleasant soil ...
    should here assure himself and his fellow-travellers of
    ease, rest, and content; and the _l_, in this long time, is
    changed into _n_, and so from _tout-a-lesse_ we now call it
    _tout-a-nesse_, and briefly Totnessse. This would _I willingly
    applaud, could I think or believe that Brutus spake so good
    French_, or that the French tongue was then spoken at all.
    Therefore, I shall with the more ease join in opinion with
    those who would have it named _Dodonesse_, which signifieth
    [in what language?] the rocky-town, or town on stones, which
    is also agreeable with the opinion of Leland."

Totnes is denominated Totenais and Totheneis in _Domesday Book_; and
in other old records variously spelt, Toteneis, Totteneys, Toteneys,
Totton', Totten, Totenesse, Tottenesse, Tottonasse, Totonie, &c.
Never, Donodesse.

J.M.B.

Totnes, April 23. 1850.

    [1] _A View of Devonshire in MDCXXX._, by Thomas Westcote,
    Esq., Exeter, 1845.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Dr. Maginn's Miscellanies_.--Towards the end of 1840, Dr. Maginn
issued the prospectus of a work to be published weekly in numbers,
and to be entitled "_Magazine Miscellanies_, by Dr. Maginn," which was
intended to comprise a selection from his contributions to Blackwood,
Fraser, &c. Will any one of your multitudinous readers kindly inform
me whether this work was ever published, or any portion of it?

J.M.B.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Dr. Maginn's "Shakspeare Papers."_--The Doctor published several very
able critical dissertations under this, or some similar title, about
the year 1837, in one of the monthly magazines, for references to
which I shall feel obliged.

J.M.B.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Dr. Maginn's Homeric Ballads._--Between 1839 and 1842, the "Homeric
Ballads," from thirteen to sixteen, appeared in _Fraser's Magazine_.
Will any correspondent favour me with specific references to the
numbers or months in which they were published? I may add, that I
shall esteem it as a very great favour to receive authentic reference
to any articles contributed to Blackwood, Fraser, &c., &c., by
Dr. Maginn. The difficulty of determining authorship from internal
evidence alone is well-known, and is aptly illustrated by the fact,
that an article on Miss Austen's novels, by Archbishop Whately, was
included in the collection of Sir Walter Scott's prose works.

J.M.B.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Poor Robin's Almanack_.--Who was the author or originator of _Poor
Robin's Almanack_? Are any particulars known of its successive
editors? In what year did it cease to be published? The only one I
possess is for the year 1743,--"Written by Poor Robin, _Knight of the
Burnt Island_, a well-wisher to Mathematicks," who informs his readers
that this was his eighty-first year of writing. What is meant by
_Knight of the Burnt Island_?

I must not omit to add, that at Dean Prior, the former vicar, Robert
Herrick, has the reputation of being the author of _Poor Robin_.

J.M.B.

Totnes, April 18. 1850.

       *       *       *       *       *

_The Camp in Bulstrode Park_.--Is there any published account of
this camp having been opened? It is well worth the examination of
a competent antiquary.... It is not even alluded to in Mr. Jesse's
_Favourite Haunts_, nor does that gentleman appear to have visited the
interesting village of "Hedgerley" (anciently _Hugely_), or Jordans,
the Quakers' Meeting-house, and burial-place of Penn, between
Beaconsfield and Chalfont. Chalfont was anciently written Chalfhunt,
and is by the natives still called Charffunt; and Hunt is a very
common surname in this parish: there was, however, Tobias Chalfont,
Rector of Giston, who died 1631. "Chal" appears to be a common prefix.
In Chalfont (St. Peter's) is an inscription to _Sir_ Robert Hamson,
Vycar, alluded to in Boutell's _Brasses_. In a cupboard under the
gallery staircase is a copper helmet, which, prior to the church
having been beautified in 1822, was suspended on an iron bracket with
a _bit of rag_, as it then looked, to the best of my memory. I have
heard that it belonged to the family of Gould of Oak End, extinct.

A.C.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Hobit_, a measure of corn in Wales; what is the derivation?

A.C.

       *       *       *       *       *




REPLIES.


DR. PERCY AND THE POEMS OF THE EARL OF SURREY.

I have the means of showing what Dr. Percy did with the poems of the
Earl of Surrey, because I have a copy of the work now before me.

It can hardly be said that he "prepared an edition" of those poems,
as supposed by your correspondent "G." on the authority of Watts's
_Bibliotheca Britannica_, but he made an exact reprint of the _Songes
and Sonnettes written by the Right Honorable Lorde Henry Haward,
late Earle of Surrey, and other_, which was printed _Apud Richardum
Tottell. Cum privilegio ad imprimendum solum_. 1557. The Bishop of
Dromere made no attempt at editing the work much beyond what was
necessary to secure an exact reimpression. He prefixed no Life of
Surrey (a point "G." wishes to ascertain); and, in fact, the book was
never completed. It contains considerably more than the reprint of the
poems of Lord Surrey, and was intended to consist of two volumes with
separate pagination; the first volume extending to p. 272., and the
second to p. 342.

As the work is a rarity, owing to an unfortunate accident, some of
your readers may like to see a brief notice of it. Watts (as quoted
by "G." for I have not his portly volumes at hand,) states that the
"whole impression" was "consumed in the fire which took place in Mr.
Nicholls's premises in 1808." This was a mistake, as my extant copy
establishes; and _Restituta_ (iii. 451.) informs us that _four_ were
saved. Of the history of my own impression I know nothing beyond the
fact, that I paid a very high price for it some twenty years since,
at an auction; but the late Mr. Grenville had another copy, which I
had an opportunity of seeing, and which had belonged to T. Park, and
had been sent to him by Dr. Percy for the advantage of his notes and
remarks. This, I presume, is now in the British Museum; whither it
came with the rest of Mr. Grenville's books, four or five years ago.

The "Songs and Sonnets" of Surrey occupy only the first forty pages of
vol. i.; then follow "Songs and sonnets" by Sir Thomas Wyat to p. 111.
inclusive; and they are succeeded by poems "of uncertain authors,"
which occupy the rest of the the first volume. The second volume
begins with "The Seconde Boke of Virgiles AEnaeis," filling thirty
pages; while "the Fourth Boke" ends at p. 57., with the imprint of R.
Tottell, and the date of 1557. "Ecclesiastes and Certain Psalms by
by Henry Earl of Surrey," which are "from ancient MSS. never before
imprinted," close at p. 81. "Certayne Psalmes chosen out of the
Psalter of David," consisting of the seven penitential psalms, with
the imprint of Thomas Raynald and John Harrington," fill thirty pages;
and to them is added "Sir Thomas Wyat's Defence," from the Strawberry
Hill edition; which, with a few appended notes, carries the work on to
p. 141.

A new title-page, at which we now arrive, shows us the intention of
Dr. Percy, and the object at which he had all along aimed: it runs
thus:--"Poems in Bland Verse (not Dramatique) prior to Milton's
_Paradise Lost._ Subsequent to Lord Surrey's in this Volume, and to
N.G.'s in the preceding." In truth, Dr. Percy was making a collection
in the two volumes of all the English undramatic blank verse he could
discover, prior to the publication of Milton's great poem. He was
guilty of some important omissions, because bibliographical knowledge
was not then as far advanced as at present, but he performed good
service to letters as far as he was able to go; and the blank verse
productions he subjoins are by George Tubervile, George Gascoigne,
Barnabie Riche, George Peele, James Aske, William Vallans, Nicholas
Breton, George Chapman, and Christopher Marlow. These occupy from p.
342. of vol. ii.

This list might now be considerably increased; but my present business
is only to answer the Query of "G.," as to the nature and contents
of the work. It has been said, I know not on what authority, that
Steevens assisted Percy in preparing and printing it. I apprehend that
the aid given by Steevens consisted solely in recommending the Bishop
to procure certain rare productions which would contribute to the
purpose.

J. PAYNE COLLIER.

May 7, 1850.

    [To this we may add, that about 1767, when Bishop Percy
    printed these twenty-five sheets of poems of Lord Surrey and
    the Duke of Buckingham, it appears by a letter of the Bishop
    to Horace Walpole, that he presented a copy of them to
    Walpole, with a request for information about Lord Surrey. The
    Bishop never wrote the Life of Surrey; and in 1808 the whole
    impression was burnt, with the exception of a copy or two that
    the Bishop had given to his friends. In the letter to Walpole
    the Bishop says, "A few more leaves will complete that book,
    which with the second and Dr. Surrey's Songs and Sonnets, &c.
    will be sufficient for the book."]

       *       *       *       *       *

SYMBOLS OF THE FOUR EVANGELISTS.

Horne, in his _Introduction_, vol. iv. p. 254., says that Irenaeus was
the first to discover the analogy between the four animals mentioned
by Ezekiel (i. 5. 10.) and the four Evangelists, which gave rise to
the well-known paintings of these latter. He quotes from _Iren. adv.
Hoer._ lib. iii. cap. 11.:--

    "The first living creature, which is like a lion, signifies
    Christ's efficacy, principality, and regality, viz. John; the
    second, like a calf, denotes His sacerdotal order, viz. Luke;
    the third, having as it were, a man's face, describes His
    coming in the flesh as man, viz. Matthew; and the fourth, like
    a flying eagle, manifests the grace of the Spirit flying into
    the Church, viz. Mark."
There is also an interesting passage in _Dionys Carthus. in Apocal.
Enarr._ iv. 7., from which the following is an extract:--

    "Although the above exposition of Gregorius, in which by the
    man in meant Matthew, by the calf Luke, &c., be the common
    one, yet other holy men have held a different opinion, for as
    Bede relates on this point, Augustine understood by the lion
    Matthew, because in the beginning of his Gospel he describes
    the _royal_ descent of Christ; by the calf he also understood
    Luke, because he wrote of the _priestly_ descent of Our Lord;
    by the man Mark, because he omits the question of Christ's
    birth, and confines himself more especially to describing
    His acts as a _man_; by the eagle, _all_ understand John, on
    account of the sublimity to which his Gospel soars. Others
    again understand by the lion Matthew; by the calf Mark,
    on account of the simplicity of his style; and by the man
    Luke, because he has more fully treated of Christ's _human_
    generation."

Would "JARLZBERG" kindly favour me with a reference to his interesting
anecdote of the lion's whelps?

J. EASTWOOD.

Ecclesfield, May 9. 1850.

       *       *       *       *       *

Your correspondent "JARLZBERG" (No. 24. p. 385.) inquires for the
origin of the Evangelistic symbols. The four living creatures, in
Ezekiel, i. 10., and Revelations, iv. 7., were interpreted from
the earliest times to represent the four Gospels. Why the angel is
attributed to St. Matthew, the lion to St. Mark, and so on, is another
question: but their order in Ezekiel corresponds with the order of
the Gospels as we have them. Durandus would probably furnish some
information. The fabulous legend of the lion savours of a later
origin. Some valuable remarks on the subject, and a list of references
to early writers, will be found in Dr. Wordsworth's _Lectures on the
Canon of Scripture_ (Lect. VI. p. 151.), and his _Lectures on the
Apocalypse_ (Lect. IV. pp. 116, 117.)

C.R.M.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Symbols of the Evangelists_ (No. 24. p. 385.).--The symbols of the
four Evangelists are treated of by J. Williams, _Thoughts on the Study
of the Gospels_, p. 5--22. Lond. 1842.

M.

Oxford.

       *       *       *       *       *

With regard to the symbols of the four Evangelists, "JARLZBERG" may
consult a Sermon by Boys on the portion of Scripture appointed for the
Epistle for Trinity-Sunday. (_Works_, p. 355. Lond. 1622.)

R.G.

    [To these Replies we will only add a reference to Mrs.
    Jameson's interesting and beautiful volume on _Sacred and
    Legendary Art_, vol. i. p. 98., _et seq._, and the following
    Latin quatrain:--

      "Quatuor haec Dominum signant animalia Christum,
      Est _Homo_ nascendo, _Vitulus_que sacer moriendo,
      Et _Leo_ surgendo, coelos _Aquila_ que petendo;
      Nec minus hos scribas animalia et ipsa figurant."]

       *       *       *       *       *

COMPLEXION.

_Complexion_ is usually (and I think universally) employed to express
the _tint of the skin_; and the hair and eyes are spoken of separately
when the occasion demands a specific reference to them. "NEMO"
(No. 22. p. 352.), moreover, seems to confound the terms "white"
and "fair," between the meanings of which there is considerable
difference. A white skin is not fair, nor a fair skin white. There
is no close approach of one to the other; and indeed we never see a
white complexion, except the chalked faces in a Christmas of Easter
Pantomime, or in front of Richardson's booth at Greenwich or Charlton
Fair. A contemplation of these would tell us what the "human face
divine" would become, were we any of us truly _white-skinned_.

The skin diverges in tint from the white, in one direction towards the
yellow, and in another towards the red or pink; whilst sometimes we
witness a seeming tinge of blue,--characteristic of asphyxia, cholera,
or some other disease. We often see a mixture of red and yellow (the
yellow predominating) in persons subject to bilious complaints; and
not unfrequently a mixture of all three, forming what the painters
call a "neutral tint," and which is more commonly called "an olive
complexion."

The negro skin is black; that is, it does not separate the sun's light
into the elementary colours. When, by the admixture of the coloured
races with the negro, we find coloured skins, they _always_ tend to
the yellow, as in the various mulatto shades of the West Indies, and
especially in the Southern States of America; and the same is true of
the "half-castes" of British India, though with a distinct darkness or
blackness, which the descendant of the negro does not generally show.

Though I have, in accordance with the usual language of philosophers,
spoken of _blue_ as an element in the colour of the skin, I have some
doubt whether it be a "true blue" or not. It is quite as likely
to arise from a partial participation in the quality of the negro
skin--that of absorbing a large portion of the light without any
analysis whatever. This may be called _darkness_.

However, to return to the Query: the term _pale_ is applied to the
yellow-tinted skin; _fair_, to the red or pink; _brown_, to the
mixture of red and yellow, with either blue or such darkness as
above described; _sallow_, to yellow and darkness; and the only close
approach to _whiteness_ that we ever see, is in the sick room of the
long-suffering fair complexion. In death, this changes to a "blackish
grey," a mixture of white and darkness.

The _pale_ complexion indicates a thick, hard, dry skin; the _fair_,
a thin and soft one; and all the shades of dark skin render a large
amount of ablution essential to health, comfort, or agreeableness
to others. If any of your readers should feel curious about the
characters of the wearers of these several skins, they must inquire of
Lavater and his disciples.

D.V.S.

Home, April 1. 1850.

       *       *       *       *       *


BALLAD OF DICK AND THE DEVIL.

Looking over some of your back numbers, I find (No. 11. p. 172.) an
inquiry concerning a ballad with this title. I have never met with it
in print, but remember some lines picked up in nursery days from an
old nurse who was a native of "the dales." These I think have probably
formed a part of this composition. The woman's name was curiously
enough Martha Kendal; and, in all probability, her forebears had
migrated from that place into Yorkshire:--

  "Robin a devil he sware a vow.
    He swore by the _sticks_[2] in hell--
  By the _yelding_ that crackles to mak the _low_[3],
    That warms his _namsack_[4] weel.

  "He _leaped_ on his beast, and he rode with heaste,
    To _mak_ his black oath good;
  'Twas the Lord's Day, and the folk did pray
    And the priest in _can_cel stood.

  "The door was wide, and in does he ride,
    In his clanking _gear_ so gay;
  A long keen brand he held in his hand,
    Our Dickon for to slay.

  "But Dickon goodhap he was not there,
    And Robin he rode in vain,
  And the men got up that were kneeling in prayer,
    To take him by might and main.

  "Rob swung his sword, his steed he spurred,
    He plunged right through the thr_a_ng.
  But the stout smith Jock, with his old mother's _crutch_[5],
    He gave him a _woundy_ bang.

  "So hard he smote the iron pot,
    It came down plume and all;
  Then with bare head away Robin sped,
    And himself was _fit_ to fall.

  "Robin a devil he _way'd_[6] him home,
    And if for his foes he seek,
  I think that again he will not come
    To _late_[7] them in Kendal kirk."[8]

Y.A.C.

    [2] The unlettered bard has probably confused "styx" with the
    kindling, "yelding," of hell-fire.

    [3] Flame.

    [4] I have often wondered what namsac (so pronounced) could
    be, but since I have seen the story as told by "H.J.M." it is
    evidently "namesake."

    [5] Probably crook in the original, to rhyme with Jock.

    [6] "I way'd me" is yet used in parts of Yorkshire for "I went."

    [7] "To late" is "to seek;" from _lateo_, as if by a confusion
    of hiding and seeking.]

    [8] "Kirk" is not a very good rhyme to "seek;" perhaps it should
    be "search" and "church".]

       *       *       *       *       *




REPLIES TO MINOR QUERIES.

_Cavell_.--In the time of Charles I., a large tract of land lying
south-eastward of Doncaster, called Hatfield Chace, was undertaken to
be drained and made fit for tillage and pasture by one Sir Cornelius
Vermuyden, a celebrated Flemish engineer of that day, and his
partners, or "participants," in the scheme, all or most of them
Dutchmen. The lands drained were said to be "_cavelled and allotted_"
to so and so, and the pieces of land were called "_cavells_." They
were "scottled," or made subject to a tax or assessment for drainage
purposes. Two eminent topographical writers of the present day are
inclined to be of opinion that this word _cavell_ is connected with
the Saxon _gafol_, gavel-tributum--money paid--which we have in
_gavel-kind_ and _gavelage_. One of them, however, suggests that the
word _may_ be only a term used in Holland as applicable to land, and
then introduced by the Dutch at the time of the drainage in question.
I shall be obliged if any of your readers can inform me if the word
"cavell" is so used in Holland, or elsewhere, either as denoting
any particular quantity of land, or land laid under any tax, or
_tributum_, or otherwise.

J.

    [Our correspondent will find, on referring to Kilian's
    _Dictionarium Teutonico-Latino-Gallicum_, that the word
    _Kavel_ is used for sors, "sors in divisione bonorum:" and
    among other definitions of the verb _Kavelen_, "sorte dividere
    terram," which corresponds exactly with his _cavelled and
    allotted_.]

       *       *       *       *       *

_Gootet_ (No. 25. p. 397.).--Is not this word a corruption of
_good-tide_, i.e. holiday or festival? In Halliwell's _Archaeological
Dictionary_ I find,--

    "Good-day, a holiday; Staff.

    "Gooddit, shrovetide; North. Shrove Tuesday is called Goodies
    Tuesday.

    "Good-time, a festival; Jonson."

C.W.G.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Salt ad Montem_ (No. 24. p. 384.) _as meaning Money_.--_Salt_ is
an old metaphor for money, cash, pay; derived, says Arbuthnot, from
_salt's_ being part of the pay of the Roman soldiers; hence _salarium,
salary_, and the levying contributions at _Salt_ Hill. Your Querist
will find several explanations of the Eton Montem in the _Gentleman's
Magazine_; and a special account of the ceremony, its origin and
circumstances, in Lyson's _Mag. Brit._ i. 557.

C.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Pamphlets respecting Ireland_ (No. 24. p. 384.)--I would refer
"I." to No. 6161. in the Catalogue of Stowe Library, sold by Leigh
Sotheby and Co., in January 1849. That lot consisted of two vols. of
twenty-six tracts, 4to. Amongst them is "Gookin, the Author and Case
of Transplanting the Irish in Connaught Vindicated, from Col. R.
Lawrence, 1655." Messrs. Leigh Sotheby will probably be able to inform
the Querist into whose hands these two vols. passed. The lot sold for
the large sum of 4l. 18s.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Pimlico_ (No. 24. p. 383.).--The derivation of this word is explained
from the following passage in a rare (if not unique) tract now before
me, entitled _Newes from Hogsdon_, 1598:--

    "Have at thee, then, my merrie boyes, and hey for old _Ben
    Pimlico's_ nut-browne."

Pimlico kept a place of entertainment in or near Hoxton, and was
celebrated for his nut-brown ale. The place seems afterwards to have
been called by his name, and is constantly mentioned by our early
dramatists. In 1609 a tract was printed, entitled _Pimlyco, or Runne
Red Cap, 'tis a Mad World at Hogsdon_. Isaac Reed (Dodsley's _Old
Plays_, ed. Collier, vii. 51.) says,--

    "A place near Chelsea is still called Pimlico, and was
    resorted to within these few years, on the same account as the
    former at Hogsdon."

Pimlico is still, I believe, celebrated for its fine ale.

EDWARD F. RIMBAULT.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Pimlico_ (No. 24. p. 383.).--I see, by a passage in Lord Orrery's
Letters, that there was a place called Pemlicoe in Dublin:--

    "Brown is fluctuant; he once lay at a woman's house in
    Pemlicoe, Dublin." (_Earl of Orrery to Duke of Ormond_, Feb.
    5. 1663, in _Orrery's State Letters_.)


This may be of use to "R.H.," who inquires about the origin of
_Pimlico_. _Ranelaugh_, in the same parts, is doubtless also of Irish
origin.

C.H.

    [Pimlico in Dublin still exists, as will be seen by reference
    to Thom's _Irish Almanac_, where we find "Pimlico, from Coombe
    to Tripoli."]

       *       *       *       *       *

_Bive and Chute Lambs_ (No. 6. p. 93.).--I do not know whether my
answer to your correspondent's inquiry about _bive_ and chute lambs
will be satisfactory, inasmuch as the price he gives of "_bive_" lambs
"apeece" is larger than the price of the "chute." Twin lambs are still
called _bive_ lambs on the borders of Sussex and Kent; and chute lambs
are fat lambs.

_Chuet_ is an old word signifying a fat greasy pudding. It is rightly
applied to Falstaff:--

  "Peace, _chewet_, peace."

_1st Part K. Hen. IV._

WM. DURRANT COOPER.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Latin Names of Towns_.--"M." (No. 25. p. 402.) wishes for some guide
with reference to the Latin names of towns. A great deal of assistance
may be obtained from an octavo volume, published anonymously, and
bearing the title "Dictionnaire Interprete-manuel des Noms Latins
de la Geographie ancienne et moderne; pour servir a l'Intelligence
des Auteurs Latins, principalement des Auteurs Classiques; avec les
Designations principales des Lieux. Ouvrage utile a ceux qui lisent
les Poetes, les Historiens, les Martyrologes, les Chartes, les vieux
Actes," &c. &c. A Paris, 1777.

R.G.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Le Petit Albert_ (No. 24. p. 385.).--I suspect this Petit Albert,
in 32mo.--a size in harmony with the cognomen--is only a catchpenny
publication, to which the title of _Le Petit Albert_ has been given
by way of resembling its name to that of Albertus Magnus, who wrote a
work or works of a character which gave rise, in the middle ages, to
the accusation that he practised magical arts; and hence, probably,
any abridgement or compendium of them, or any little work on such
arts, would be styled by the French compiler _Le Petit Albert_. In
the _Biographie Universelle_, it is affirmed that the rhapsodies
known under the name of _Secrets du Petit Albert_ are not by Albertus
Magnus; a statement which favours the belief that the work mentioned
by your correspondent "JARLZBERG" is one of that vulgar class (like
our old Moore's Almanack, &c.) got up for sale among the superstitious
and the ignorant, and palmed on the world under the mask of a
celebrated name. According to Bayle, Albertus Magnus has, by
some, been termed _Le Petit Albert_, owing, it is said, to the
diminutiveness of his stature, which was on so small a scale, that
when he, on one occasion, paid his respects to the pope, the pontiff
supposed he was still kneeling at his feet after he had risen up and
was standing erect.

J.M.

Oxford, April 19.

    [_Of Le Petit Albert_, of which it appears by Graesse's
    _Bibliotheca Magica_ there were editions printed at Cologne
    in 1722, Lyons 1775, and even at Paris in 1837, we are told
    in Colin de Plancy's _Dictionnaire Infernal_, s. v. Albert le
    Grand, "On a quelquefois defendu ce livre, et alors il s'est
    vendu enormement cher."]

       *       *       *       *       *

_Walter Lynne_ (No. 23. p. 367.).--"G.P." may look for Walter Lynne
into Johnson's _Typographia_, i. 556., of which copies may be had very
reasonably at Mr. Miller's (see end of No. 15.), 43. Chandos Street.

Your intimation of brevity is attended to; though, in truth, little
more could come from

NOVUS.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Emancipation of the Jews_ (No. 25. p. 491.).--"H.M.A." inquires--1.
If the story mentioned in the Thurloe State Papers, that the Jews
sought to obtain St. Paul's Cathedral for a Synagogue, has been
confirmed by other writers? In Egan's _Status of the Jews in England_,
I find the following passage:--

    "Monteith informs us, that during the Commonwealth, overtures
    were made on behalf of the Hebrews to the Parliament and
    Council of War, through the medium of two popular adherents
    of the parliamentarians; the Jews offered to pay for the
    privileges then sought by them, the sum of 500,000l.; several
    debates took place on the subject, but the _ultimatum_ of the
    Puritans being 800,000l., the negotiation was broken off."

The authorities cited on this point by the learned writer are,
Monteith's _History of Great Britain_, p. 473.; and Thurloe's _State
Papers_, vol. ii. p. 652.

On reference to Monteith, I find the following passage:--

    "What is very remarkable in this is, that the Jews, who
    crucified the Son of God, by whom Kings reign, took then
    occasion of the conjuncture which seemed favourable to them.
    They presented a petition to the Council of War, who crucified
    Him again in the person of the King, His Vicegerent in the
    kingdoms over which God had set him. By their petition, they
    requested that the act of their banishment might be repealed
    and _that they might have St. Paul's Church for their
    synagogue_, for which, _and the library of Oxford_, wherewith
    they desired to begin their traffic again, they offered five
    hundred thousand pounds, but the Council of War would have
    eight."--Monteiths's _Hist. of the Troubles of Great Britain_,
    p. 473.

I conclude that the author of the _Status of the Jews_, by omitting to
notice the alleged desire of the Jews to obtain St. Paul's Cathedral,
considered that the acrimonious statements of Monteith were not borne
out by accredited or unprejudiced authorities; for it is but justice
to state, it has been admitted by some of our most eminent critics,
that Mr. Egan's book on the Jews displays as dispassionate and
impartial a review of their condition in this country as it evinces a
profundity of historical and legal research.

"H.M.A.'s" second question I am unable to answer, not being
sufficiently versed in the religious dogmas of the Jews.

B.A.

Christ Church, Oxford.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Emancipation of the Jews_ (No. 25. p. 401.).--"MR. AUSTEN," who
inquires (p. 401.) about the Jews during the Commonwealth will do
well to refer to a chapter on the Jews in Godwin's _History of
the Commonwealth_, and to Sir Henry Ellis's notes on a remarkable
letter describing a Jewish synagogue in London immediately after the
Restoration, in the second series of his _Letters_; and in these two
places he will, I think, find references to all known passages on the
subject of Cromwell's proceedings as regards the Jews.

C.H.

       *       *       *       *       *

_As lazy as Ludlum's Dog_ (No. 24. p. 382.).--This proverb is repeated
somewhat differently in _The Doctor, &c._, "As _lazy_ as _Ludlum's_
dog, as _leaned_ his head against a wall to bark." I venture to
suggest that this is simply one of the large class of alliterative
proverbs so common in every language, and often without meaning. In
Devonshire they say as "Busy as Batty," but no one knows who "Batty"
was. As I have mentioned _The Doctor, &c._, I may was well jot down
two more odd sayings from the same old curiosity-shop:--"As proud as
old COLE's dog which took the wall of a dung-CART, and got CRUSHED by
the wheel." And, "As queer as Dick's hat-band, that went nine times
round his hat and was fastened by a rush at last."

J.M.B.

       *       *       *       *       *

_St. Winifreda_ (No. 24. p. 384.).--Your Querist will find some
information in Warton's _Hist. Eng. Poetry_, vol. i. p. 14., note,
1824.

J.M.B.

Totnes, April 18. 1850.

       *       *       *       *       *

"_Vert Vert_" (No. 23. p. 366.)--It may be of some assistance to your
Querist "ROBERT SNOW," in his endeavour to trace illustrations from
Gresset's "Vert Vert," to know that the mark of RAUX, who is said to
have painted these subjects, was composed of ten small ciphers; seven
of which were placed in a circle: the other three formed a tail,
       o o
      o   o
thus, o  o      something like the Roman capital Q. This artist,
        o o o o
between the years 1750 and 1800, was employed in the decoration of
the Sevres porcelain: his usual subjects were bouquets or groups
of flowers; and his mark will be found underneath the double L,
interlaced, inclosing some capital letter or letters denoting the year
such ware was manufactured.

W.C. Jun.

       *       *       *       *       *

"_Esquire_" _and_ "_Gentleman_."--The amusing article in No. 27., on
the title of "Esquire," recalled to my memory the resolution passed by
the corporation of Stratford-on-Avon, when they presented the freedom
of that town to Garrick. It runs something like this:--

    "Through love and regard to the memory of the immortal
    _Mr._ William Shakspeare, and being fully sensible of the
    extraordinary merits of his most judicious representative,
    David Garrick, _Esquire_."

Had David a better right to the title than the great poet?
Shakespeare, in the latter part of his life, was no doubt _Master
Shakspeare_, a title so common as even to be bestowed upon the
geometer of Alexandria. In Bayford's collection is preserved a
Catalogue advertising "_Master_ Euclid's Elements of Plain Geometry."

J.O. HALLIWELL.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Pope Felix and Pope Gregory_.--"E.M.B." (No. 26. p. 415.) inquires
who was "Pope Felix," whom AElfric called the "fifth father" of S.
Gregory the Great? This is a much disputed question, and a great
deal depends upon the meaning to be attached to the unsatisfactory
expression "atavus," used by Pope Gregory himself, in _Evangel. Hom._
xxxviii. Sec. 15., and found also in the dialogues commonly attributed to
him. (Lib. iv. cap. xvi.) Your correspondent may consult Beda, _Hist.
Eccl. Gen. Anglor._, lib. ii. cap. 1., with the note by Mr. Stevenson,
who supposes that Pope Felix _III._ was alluded to by his "venerable"
author: This is the opinion of Bollandus (ad 25 Feb.), as well as of
Cardinal Baronius; (_Annall._ ad an. 581; _et Martyrol. Rom._ die Feb.
25. Conf. De Aste, in _Martyrolog. Disceptat._, p. 96.; Beneventi,
1716); but Joannes Diaconus (_S. Greg. Vit._ lib. i. cap. i.) employs
these decisive terms, "_quartus_ Felix, sedis Apostolicae Pontifex." It
is of course possible to translate "atavus meus" merely "my ancestor;"
and this will leave the relationship sufficiently undefined.

R.G.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Love's last Shift_ (No. 24. p. 383).--"The Duchess of Bolton
(natural daughter of the Duke of Monmouth) used to divert George I.
by affecting to make blunders. Once when she had been at the play
of _Love's last Shift_, she called it '_La derniere chemise_ de
l'amour.'"--_Walpoliana_, xxx.

C.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Quem Deus vult perdere_ (No. 22, p. 351., and No. 26, p.
421.).--"C.J.R." having pointed out a presumed imitation of this
thought, it may not be impertinent to observe, that Dryden also has
adopted the sentiment in the following lines:--

  "For those whom God to ruin has designed,
  He fits for fate, and first destroys their mind."

_Hind and Panther_, part 3.

G.S. FABER.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Dayrolles_ (No. 23. p. 373).--The following information is appended
to a description of the _Dayrolles Correspondence_, in 21 folio vols.
in the Catalogue of Mr. Upcott's Collection, sold by Messrs. Evans a
few years ago:--

_Note copied from the Catalogue of Manuscripts, &c., belonging to the
late Mr. Upcott._

"James Dayrolles was resident at the Hague from 1717 to his death, 2nd
January, 1739.

"Solomon Dayrolles, his nephew, commenced his diplomatic career under
James, first Earl of Waldegrave, when that nobleman was ambassador
at Vienna. He was godson of Philip, the distinguished Earl of
Chesterfield, and was sworn a Gentleman of the Privy Chamber to George
II., 27th Feb. 1740, in the room of Sir Philip Parker, long deceased,
and on the accession of George III. was again appointed, 5th February,
1761.

"In 1745, being at that time secretary to Lord Chesterfield, in
Holland, Mr. Dayrolles was nominated to be secretary to his lordship
at Lord Lieutenant of Ireland.

"In May, 1747, he was promoted to be President in the United
Provinces; and in November, 1751, Resident at Brussels, where he
continued till August, 1757. He died in March, 1786."

J.T.C.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Solomon Dayrolles_.--

    "24th Dec. 1786. Married Baron de Reidezel, aid-de-camp to the
    Duke of Wirtemberg, to Miss Dayrolles, 2d dau. of _the late
    Solomon Dayrolles_ of Hanover Square."--_Gent. Mag._ v. _56_,
    p. 1146.

Probably Mr. Dayrolles' death may be recorded in the register of St.
George's.

B.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Emerods_ (No. 18. p. 282.) pro _haemorrhoids_. "Golden emerods" would
be an absurdity if _emerod_ meant "emerald." "The Philistines made
golden emerods," i.e. golden images of haemorrhoids (diseased veins),
in commemoration of being delivered from plagues, of which such states
of disease were concomitant signs.

TREBOR.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Military Execution_ (No. 16. p. 246.).--Your correspondent "MELANION"
is informed that the anecdote refers to Murat, and the author of the
sentiment is Lord Byron. See _Byron's Poems_, Murray's edit. 1 vol.
8vo. p. 561., note 4.

C.

       *       *       *       *       *

"_M. or N._" (No. 26. p. 415.)--I do not think that "M. or N." are
used as the initials of any particular words; they are the middle
letters of the alphabet, and, at the time the Prayer Book was
compiled, it seems to have been the fashion to employ them in the way
in which we now use the first two. There are only two offices, the
Catechism and the Solemnisation of Matrimony, in which more than one
letter is used. In the former, the answer to the first question has
always stood "N. or M." In the office of Matrimony, however, in Edward
the Sixth's Prayer Books, both the man and woman are designated by
the letter N--"I, N., take thee, N., to my wedded wife;" whilst in
our present book M. is applied to the man and N. to the woman. The
adoption of one letter, and the subsequent substitution of another, in
this service, evidently for the sake of a more clear distinction only,
sufficiently shows that no particular name or word was intended by
either. Possibly some future "J.C." may inquire of what words the
letters "A.B.," which our legislators are so fond of using in their
Acts of Parliament, are the initials.

ARUN.

       *       *       *       *       *

"_M. or N._" (No. 26, p. 415.).--"M." and "N.," and particularly "N.,"
are still in frequent use in France for _quidam_ or _quaedam_; so also
is X. We read every day of Monsieur N. or Madame X., where they wish
to suppress the name.

C.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Sapcote Motto_ (No. 23. p. 366.).--This motto is known to be French,
and as far as it can be decyphered is--

  "sco toot X vinic [or umic]
  X pones,"

the first and last letters _s_ being possibly flourishes. This
certainly seems unpromising enough. The name being Sapcote, _quasi_
Sub-cote, and the arms "three dove-cotes," I venture to conjecture
"Sous cote unissons," as not very far from the letters given. If it be
objected that the word "cote" is not in use in this sense, it may be
remarked that French, "After the scole of Stratford atte bowe," might
borrow such a meaning to suit the sound, from "cote," in the sense of
a side or declivity. And if the objection is fatal to the conjecture,
I would then propose "Sous toit unissons." If we reject the supposed
flourishes at the beginning and ending of the inscription, and take it
to be--

  CO TOOT VNIC
      CONC,

the c being a well-known ancient form of s, there is a difference of
only one letter between the inscription as decyphered and the proposed
motto.

If either of these is adopted, the sentiment of family union and
family gathering, "As doves to their windows," is well adapted for a
family device.

T.C.

Durham, May 2. 1850.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Finkle or Finkel_ (No. 24. p. 384.).--Is not "Finkle" very probably
derived from _Finc_, a finch, in the A.-S.? _Fingle_ Bridge, which
spans the river Teign, amidst some most romantic scenery, has the
following etymology assigned to it by a local antiquary, W.T.P. Short,
Esq. (vide _Essay on Druidical Remains in Devon_, p. 26.): "_Fyn_,
a terminus or boundary; and _Gelli_, hazel, the hazeltree limits or
boundary." But, Query, is not the second syllable rather _Gill_, akin
to the numerous tribe of "gills" or "ghylls," in the North Countrie?

J.M.B.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Meaning of Finkle._--Referring to No. 24. p. 384. of your most
welcome and useful publication, will you allow me to say, touching
the inquiry as to the derivation and meaning of the word "Finkle" or
"Finkel" as applied to a street, that the Danish word "Vincle" applied
to an angle or corner, is perhaps a more satisfactory derivation than
"fynkylsede, _feniculum_," the meaning suggested by your correspondent
"L." in No. 26. p. 419. It is in towns where there are traces of
Danish occupation that a "Finkle Street" is found; at least many of
the northern towns which have a street so designated were inhabited by
the Danish people, and some of those streets are winding or angular.
Finchale, a place, as you know, of fame in monastic annals, is a
green secluded spot, half insulated by a bend of the river Wear; and
Godric's Garth, the adjacent locality of the hermitage of its famous
saint, is of an angular form. But then the place is mentioned, by the
name of Finchale, as the scene of occurrences that long preceded the
coming of the Danes; and the second syllable may be derived from the
Saxon "alh" or "healh," as the place was distinguished for a building
there in Saxon times.

W.S.G.

Newcastle, May 4. 1850.

       *       *       *       *       *

Your correspondent "W.M." ("_Finkel._" p. 384.) may not have
recollected that there is a beautiful ruin on the river Wear near
Durham, of which the name is pronounced (though not spelt) _Finkel_
Abbey.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Christian Captives_ (No. 27. p. 441.).--As a very small contribution
towards an answer to "R.W.B.'s" inquiry, I may inform you that Lady
Russell mentions in her _Letters_ (p. 338., ed. 1792) that Sir William
Coventry left by his will 3000l. to redeem slaves.

C.H.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Christian Captives_ (No. 27. p. 441.).--"R.W.B." may be referred to
the case of "Attorney-General _v._ the Ironmongers' Company," which
was a suit for the administration of a fund bequeathed for the
redemption of the captives. See 2 _Mylne & Keen_, 576.; 2 _Beavan_,
313., 10 _Beavan_, 194.; and 1 _Craig & Philips_, 208.: all of which I
mention to be Reports in Chancery, in case he be not a lawyer.

A.J.H.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Ecclesiastical Year_ (No. 24. p. 381.).--"NATHAN" is informed, that,
according to the legal supputation, until A.D. 1752, the year of Our
Lord in that part of Great Britain called England, began on the 25th
day of March, as he will find stated in the 24 Geo. II. c. 23., by
which Act it was enacted, that the 1st day of January next following
the last day of December, 1751, should be the first day of the year
1752; and that the 1st day of January in every year in time to come
should be the first day of the year.

Philippe de Thaun, in his _Livre des Creatures_, which was written in
the first half of the twelfth century, p. 48. of the edition published
for the Historical Society of Science, has some remarks which may
interest your correspondent, that are thus literally translated by Mr.
Wright:--

  "In March, the year ought always to begin,
  According to that explanation which we find in the book,
  That in the twelve kalends of April, as your understand,
  Our Creator formed the first,
  Where the sun always will begin his course,
  But at all times we make the year begin in January,
  Because the Romans did so first;
  We will not un-make what the elders did."

ARUN.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Hanap._--Among the specimens of ancient and mediaeval art now
exhibiting in John Street, Adelphi, I was struck with the number of
gilt cups, called in the catalogue _hanaps_. The word was new to
me; but I have since met with it (as frequently happens after one's
interest has been excited with respect to a word) in Walter Scott's
_Quentin Durward_, in vol. i. chap. 3.; or rather, vol. xxxi. p. 60.
of the edition in 48 vols., Cadell, 1831; in which place the context
of the scene appears to connect the idea of _hanap_ with a cup
containing treasure.

Now I cannot find _hanap_ in any dictionary to which I have access;
but I find _hanaper_ in every one. Johnson, and others, give the word
_Hanaper_ as synonymous with _treasury_ or _exchequer_. They also
contract _Hanaper_ into _Hamper_. For example, in Dyche's _English
Dictionary_, 17th ed. Lond. 1794, we have,--

    "_Hamper_, or _Hanaper_, a wicker basket made with a cover to
    fasten it up with; also, an office in Chancery; the clerk or
    warden of the _Hanaper_ receives all monies due to the king
    for seals of charters, &c.... and takes into his custody all
    sealed charters, patents, &c.,... which he now puts into bags,
    but anciently, it is supposed, into _Hampers_, which gave the
    denomination to the office."

And perhaps it may be remarked here, since we commonly say of a man
in difficulties that he is "exchequered" or in "chancery," that so we
probably intend to express the same, when we say a man is _hanapered_,
or _hampered_.

Thus, there is no difficulty about the meaning of _Hanaper_; and
its connection with _treasure_ is plain and clear enough: and, with
respect to _cups_, though chiefly used for drinking, the presentation
of them with sums of money in them has ever been, and indeed is,
so very customary, that it is needless to occupy space here with
instances. But I cannot distinctly connect the _hanap_ of the
exhibition with _hanaper_: and I perhaps ought to look in another
direction for its true signification and etymology.

ROBERT SNOW.

    [Our correspondents who have written upon the subject of Hanap
    are referred to Halliwell's _Archaic Dictionary_, where they
    will find "HANAP, a cup. _Test. Vet._ p. 99.;" to Ducange,
    s.v. "HANAPUS, HANAPPUS, HANAPHUS, vas, patera, crater, (Vas
    ansatum et pede instructum, quo a poculo distinguitur), ex
    Saxonico _Hnaep_, _Hnaeppa_, Germ. _Napf_, calix patera;"
    and to Guenebault, _Dict. Iconographique des Monuments_, who
    refers again for particulars of this species of drinking cup
    to the works of Soumerard and Willemin.]

       *       *       *       *       *

_Life of W. Godwin._--"N.'s" inquiry (No. 26. p. 415.) for an account
of the life of W. Godwin, and more particularly of his last hours,
leads me to express hope in your columns that the memoirs of Godwin,
which were announced for publication shortly after his death, but
which family disputes, as I have understood, prevented from appearing,
may not much longer be denied to the public. I am not aware of any
better account of Godwin's life, to which "N." can now be referred,
than the sketch in the _Penny Cyclopaedia_.

CH.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Charles II. and Lord R.'s Daughter.--Earl of Ranelagh._--Since I
inquired in your columns (No. 25. p. 399.) who was the lady mentioned
in a passage of Henry Sidney's _Diary_, edited by Mr. Blencowe, as
Lord R.'s daughter, and a new mistress of Charles II., who in March
1680 brought Monmouth to the King for reconciliation, I have, by
Mr. Blencowe's kindness, seen the original _Diary_, which is in
the possession of the Earl of Chichester. The name of the nobleman
is there abbreviated: the letters appear to be _Rane._, and it is
probably Lord Ranelagh who is intended. I do not remember any other
notice of this amour of Charles II., and should be glad to be referred
to any other information on the subject. Charles II.'s mistresses are
political characters; and in this notice of Lord R.'s daughter, we
find her meddling in state affairs.

I do not know whether this lady, if indeed a daughter of a Lord
Ranelagh, would be the daughter or sister of the Lord Ranelagh living
in 1680, who was the first Earl of Ranelagh and third Viscount, and
who is described by Burnet as a very able and very dissolute man, and
a great favourite of Charles II. (_Hist. of his own Time_, i. 462.,
ii. 99., ed. 1823); and who, having held the office of Vice-Treasurer
in Ireland during three reigns, was turned out of it in disgrace
in 1703. He died in 1711, leaving no son, but three daughters, one
of whom was unmarried; he was the last, as well as first, Earl of
Ranelagh. The elder title of Viscount went to a cousin, and still
exists.

CH.

       *       *       *       *       *




MISCELLANIES.


_Dr. Sclater's Works._--Books written by W. Sclater, D.D., omitted in
Wood's _Ath. Oxon._ edit. Bliss. vol. iii. col. 228.:--

"A Threefold Preseruatiue against three dangerous diseases of these
latter times:--

"1. Non-proficiency in Grace.

"2. Fals-hearted Hypocrisie.

"3. Back-sliding in Religion.

"Prescribed in a Sermon at S. Paul's Crosse in London, September 17,
1609. London. 1610." 4to. Ded. to "Master Iohn Colles, Esquire," from
which it seems that Sclater had been presented to his living by the
father of this gentleman. The Ser. is on Heb. vi. 4-6.

"A Sermon preached at the last generall Assise holden for the County
of Somerset at Taunton. London, 1616." 8vo. On Ps. lxxxii. 6, 7. Ded.
to "John Colles, Esq., High Sheriffe of Sommerset."

"Three Sermons preached by William Sclater, Doctor of Diuinity, and
Minister of the Word of God at Pitmister [sic] in Sommersetshire. Now
published by his Sonne of King's Colledge in Cambridge. London, 1629."
4to. On 1 Pet. ii. 11., 2 Kings, ix. 31., and Heb. ix. 27, 28. The
last is a funeral Sermon for John Colles, Esq., preached in 1607.

JOHN J. DREDGE.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Runes._--Worsaeae (_Primeval Antiquities of Denmark_, 1849) mentions
that inscriptions are found in Denmark, Norway, and Sweden, written in
different languages in _Runic character_. He also mentions the fact of
a Pagan Runic inscription occurring at Jellinge, Denmark, on the tomb
of old King Gorm, A.D. c. 900, found in a huge barrow; and, at the
same place, a Christian Runic inscription on the tomb of his son
Harold. Has this inquiry been extended to British Runes, and might
it not throw much light upon many monuments of dates prior to the
Conquest? Crossed slabs with Runes have been found at Hartlepool,
Durham; have the inscriptions been read? (Boutell's _Christian
Monuments_, p. 3.; Cutt's _Manual of Sepulchral Slabs_, pp. 52. 60.
plate III.)

       *       *       *       *       *




MISCELLANEOUS.


NOTES ON BOOKS, CATALOGUES, SALES, ETC.


The _Nibelungenlied_, which has been aptly designated the German
Iliad, has hitherto been a sealed book to the mere English reader. Mr.
Lettsom has however just published a most successful translation of it
under the title of _The Fall of the Nibelungers_. Few will rise from
a perusal of the English version of this great national epic--which
in its present form is a work of the thirteenth century--without being
struck with the innate power and character of the original poem; and
without feeling grateful to Mr. Lettsom for furnishing them with so
pleasing and spirited a version of it.

Captain Curling, Clerk of the Cheque of what was formerly designated
the Band of Gentleman Pensioners, has, under the influence of a
laudable _esprit de corps_, combined the disjointed materials which
Pegge had collected upon the subject with the fruits of his own
researches; and, under the title of _Some Account of the Ancient
Corp of Gentlemen-at-Arms_, has produced a volume of great interest
doubtless to his "brothers in arms," and containing some curious
illustrations of court ceremonial.[9]

Mr. Timbs, the editor of _The Year-Book of Facts_, &c., announces for
early publication a work on which he has been engaged for some time,
entitled _Curiosities of London_. It will, we believe, be altogether
of a different character from Mr. Cunningham's _Handbook_, and treat
rather of present London and its amusements than those of historical
and literary associations which give a charm to Mr. Cunningham's
volume.

We are glad to find that the most mysterious and mystified portion
of the Greek Geometry is likely to receive at last a complete
elucidation--we mean the "Porisms." There are so many questions
arising out of this subject, respecting the development of the Grecian
intellect, that a full discussion of them is no easy task; especially
of those arising out of the conflicting testimonies furnished by
history, and by the internal evidences contained in the existing works
of the "fathers of Geometry." We certainly anticipate, from the known
character of the minds now engaged in this work, that some conclusive
evidence as to the state of geometry anterior to the time of Euclid
will be elicited by Messrs. Potts and Davies. The analysis of the
writings of all the authors who have treated on the Porism, will form
a subject of interest not only for its assigning to every author his
fair share of credit for his contributions towards perfecting the
poristic method; but for that _critical discrimination of principles_,
which constitutes one of the marked features of Mr. Davies's writings
in the archaeology of geometry. We shall be glad if his slight
notice of the intended work shall bring some accession of aid to the
undertaking in the form of subscriptions: as upon adequate support,
it appears, must depend whether the work shall go to press, or the
project be abandoned.

We have received the following Catalogues:--Thomas Thorpe's (13.
Henrietta Street) General Catalogue of very Choice, Curious, Rare,
and most Interesting Books recently purchased, including some hundred
articles of the utmost rarity. Williams and Norgate's (14. Henrietta
Street) No. 24. of German Book Circular, a Quarterly List of the
principal New Publications on the Continent; C.J. Stewart's (11. King
William Street, West Strand) Catalogue of Dogmatical, Polemical, and
Ascetical Theology.

    [9] We find at page 200, an Order of the Council, dated Dec. 5.
    1737, respecting the disposition of the band at the funeral of Queen
    Caroline, signed by "TEMPLE STANYAN," the subject of a Query in
    No. 24. p. 382., and of several Replies in our last, No. 28. p. 460.

       *       *       *       *       *

    WANTED.--MANUSCRIPT OF OLD ENGLISH POETRY.--Borrowed, within
    the last few months, from the Town Residence of a Gentleman,
    a large 4to. MS., in modern binding, of Early English Poetry,
    by Richard Rolle, of Hampole; containing, among other matters,
    Religious Pieces couched in the form of Legal Instruments, and
    a Metrical Chronicle of the Kings of England, in the style
    of Lydgate's. As the owner does not recollect to whom it was
    lent, and is very anxious to refer to it, he will be obliged
    by its immediate return, either to himself directly, or, if
    more convenient, to the Editor of "NOTES AND QUERIES."

       *       *       *       *       *


BOOKS AND ODD VOLUMES


WANTED TO PURCHASE.

(_In continuation of Lists in former Nos._)

THE DOCTRINE OF CONSCIENCE FRAMED ACCORDING TO THE FORM IN THE COMMON
PRAYER BOOK. by Y.N., London. 1636, 8vo., written by John Prideaux,
Lord Bishop of Worcester.

_Odd Volume_.

ARMY LIST for August 1814.

       *       *       *       *       *

NOTICE TO CORRESPONDENTS.

_Our pages again exhibit a large proportion of_ REPLIES. _Our next
Number, which will complete our First Volume, will do the same, as
it is obviously for the convenience of our readers that the_ REPLIES
_should, as far as possible, appear in the same Volume with the_
QUERIES _to which they relate_.

       *       *       *       *       *

13. Great Marlborough Street

MR. COLBURN

HAS JUST PUBLISHED THE FOLLOWING

VALUABLE & INTERESTING WORKS.

       *       *       *       *       *

I.

BURKE'S PEERAGE and BARONETAGE for 1850. New Edition, revised
and corrected throughout, from the personal communications of the
Nobility, &c. 1 vol. royal 8vo., beautifully printed in double
columns (comprising as much matter as 20 ordinary volumes), with 1500
Engravings of Arms, &c., bound, 1l. 18s.

II.

BURKE'S HISTORY of the LANDED GENTRY for 1850, corrected to the
Present Time: a Genealogical Dictionary of the whole of the Untitled
Aristocracy of England, Scotland, and Ireland, and comprising
particulars of 100,000 persons connected with them. 2 vols. royal
8vo., including the SUPPLEMENT (equal to 30 ordinary volumes), bound,
2l. 2s.

III.

EVELYN'S DIARY and CORRESPONDENCE. New and cheaper Edition, revised,
with numerous additional Notes, 4 vols. post 8vo., with Illustrations
(Vols. I. and II., comprising the Diary, are now ready). Price of each
volume, 10s. 6d.

IV.

PEPYS' DIARY and CORRESPONDENCE, illustrative of the Reigns of Charles
II. and JAMES II. Edited by LORD BRAYBROOKE. New and revised Edition,
with the omitted Passages restored from the original MS., many
additional Notes, &c. 5 vols. post 8vo., with Portraits, &c., 2l. 12s.
6d.

V.

LIVES of the PRINCESSES of ENGLAND. By Mrs. EVERETT GREEN, Editor of
the "Letters of Royal and Illustrious Ladies." 2 vols. post 8vo., with
Illustrations, bound, 1l. 1s.

VI.

NOTES from NINEVEH, and TRAVELS in MESOPOTAMIA, ASSYRIA, and SYRIA. By
the Rev. J.P. FLETCHER, Minister of St. Saviour's Church, Haverstock
Hill, 2 vols. 21s.

    "A work of great merit; not less acceptable as a book of
    travel than valuable as an auxiliary to the archaeology of the
    Holy Scriptures."--_Standard_.

VII.

MADAME PULSZKY'S MEMOIRS; with interesting Details of the LATE EVENTS
in HUNGARY. Dedicated to the Marchioness of Lansdowne. 2 vols, 21s.
bound.

    "Worthy of a place by the side of the Memoirs of Madame de
    Stael and Madame Campan."--_Globe_.

ALSO, JUST PUBLISHED,

A SECOND EDITION of Mr. WARBURTON's REGINALD HASTINGS: an Historical
Romance.

Revised, with a new Preface. 3 vols.

    "As an historical romancist, Mr. Warburton takes a first
    wrangler's rank."--_Literary Gazette_.

       *       *       *       *       *

DR. WORDSWORTH ON CHURCH QUESTIONS OF THE DAY.

Now ready, in 8vo., price 8s., in cloth,

OCCASIONAL SERMONS, preached at Westminster Abbey, in March and April
1850. By CHRISTOPHER WORDSWORTH, D.D., Canon of Westminster.

These Sermons may be had separately, price 1s. each, as follows:--

Just published,

No. VII. The CHURCH of ENGLAND in 1711 and 1850.

No. VIII. The CHURCH of ENGLAND and the CHURCH of ROME in 1850.
CONCLUSION.

Just reprinted,

Nos. IV., V., and VI., an INQUIRY--Whether the BAPTISMAL OFFICES of
the CHURCH of ENGLAND may be interpreted in a CALVINISTIC SENSE?--No.
III. The DOCTRINE of BAPTISM with reference to the Opinion of
PREVENIENT GRACE.--No. II. On PLEAS alleged for SEPARATION from the
CHURCH.--No. 1. COUNSELS and CONSOLATIONS in TIMES of HERESY and
SCHISM.

RIVINGTONS, St. Paul's Church Yard, and Waterloo Place.

       *       *       *       *       *

Preparing for Publication by Subscription, price 10s.

A TRANSLATION OF

DR. SIMSON'S RESTORATION of EUCLID'S PORISMS. With Notes by ROBERT
POTTS, M.A., Trinity College, Cambridge; with Historical Geometrical,
and Analytical Dissertations and Illustrations, by T.S. DAVIES, F.R.S.
Lond. and Ed., F.S.A., Royal Military Academy, Woolwich.

The printing will be commenced as soon as the number of subscribers is
sufficient to indemnify the authors for the inevitable outlay upon the
work; but should that number not be, at least approximately, obtained,
their intention must be abandoned. Gentlemen desirous of supporting
this undertaking will oblige the authors by an early intimation to
that effect.

       *       *       *       *       *

In 8vo., with 14 Plates, Price 4s. 6d.

ANASTATIC PRINTING and PAPYROGRAPHY: their various Applications to
the Reprinting of Letterpress, the Reprinting of Engravings, the
Multiplying of Ornamental Patterns, the successive Alterations of the
same Design; Papyrography with Ink--Writing Circulars, Music, Oriental
Characters, &c., Pen-Etching, Tracing Facsimiles of Engravings;
Papyrography with Chalk--Printing in Colours, Printing Rubbings of
Brasses, Drawing with Heel-ball, &c. &c. With illustrative Examples,
by PHILIP H. DELAMOTTE.

London: published by DAVID BOGUE, Fleet Street.

       *       *       *       *       *

EDUCATION, SCIENCE, AND GENERAL LITERATURE.

Now ready, and will be sent by post (free) to any one writing for
them,

DESCRIPTIVE CATALOGUES of BOOKS for SCHOOLS and COLLEGES, and of
CHEMICAL, MEDICAL, and LITERARY WORKS, published by TAYLOR, WALTON,
and MABERLY, 28. Upper Gower Street, and 27. Ivy Lane, Paternoster
Row.

The object of these two Catalogues is, to convey a more satisfactory
notion of the contents of the books in them, than can be drawn from
reading the titles. Instead of laudatory extracts from reviews,
general notices are given of the chief subjects and most prominent
peculiarities of the books. The Catalogues are designed to put
the reader, as far as possible, in the same position as if he had
inspected for himself, at least cursorily, the works described; and,
with this view, care has been taken, in drawing up the notices, merely
to state facts, with but little comment, and no exaggeration whatever.

       *       *       *       *       *

Printed by THOMAS CLARK SHAW, of No. 8. New Street Square, at No. 5.
New Street Square, in the Parish of St. Bride, in the City of London;
and published by GEORGE BELL, of No. 186. Fleet Street, in the Parish
of St. Dunstan in the West, in the City of London, Publisher, at No.
186. Fleet Street aforesaid.--Saturday, May 18. 1850.








End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Notes & Queries No. 29, Saturday, May
18, 1850, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NOTES & QUERIES NO. 29, ***

***** This file should be named 15197.txt or 15197.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/1/5/1/9/15197/

Produced by The Internet Library of Early Journals, Jon Ingram,
William Flis, and the PG Online Distributed Proofreading Team.


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
