Project Gutenberg's The Mirrors of Downing Street, by Harold Begbie

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Mirrors of Downing Street
       Some Political Reflections by a Gentleman with a Duster

Author: Harold Begbie

Release Date: March 9, 2005 [EBook #15306]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MIRRORS OF DOWNING STREET ***




Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Martin Pettit and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team.






[Illustration: RT. HON. DAVID LLOYD GEORGE]



THE MIRRORS OF
DOWNING STREET

SOME POLITICAL REFLECTIONS

BY
A GENTLEMAN WITH A DUSTER (Harold Begbie)


"_Right and wrong are in the nature of things. They are not words and
phrases. They are in the nature of things, and if you transgress the
laws laid down, imposed by the nature of things, depend upon it you will
pay the penalty_."

JOHN MORLEY.

_ILLUSTRATED_

G. P. PUTNAM'S SONS
NEW YORK AND LONDON
The Knickerbocker Press
1921




COPYRIGHT, 1921

BY

G.P. PUTNAM'S SONS


_Printed in the United States of America_



PUBLISHERS' NOTE

America and England have worked and fought together and have brought to
a successful conclusion the great war in defence of civilization against
a military imperialism which was threatening to dominate the world. They
have now responsibilities together in connection with the measures
needed to assure the continued peace of the world and to secure,
particularly for the smaller states and for communities not in a
position to become independent nations, the protection of their
liberties, to which they have as assured a right as that asserted by a
state of first importance which can support its claims with great
armies.

In this work of helping to adjust the present urgent problems of the
world, England is demanding cooperation from America. America could not
if she would, and would not if she could, escape her responsibilities,
as the strongest nation in the world, a nation standing for the rights
of men, for leadership in the family of nations. With these joint
responsibilities resting upon England and America, the personalities of
the men who have during the past few years had in their hands the
direction of the affairs of the United Kingdom and of the great British
Commonwealth must possess an assured interest for every intelligent
American.

The clever author of _The Mirrors of Downing Street_ has brought
together a series of critical and biographical studies, presented as
"reflections" from the mirror in the Imperial council chamber, of
thirteen typical Britons who have done noteworthy work during the years
of the war and who are now grappling with the problems of the peace. The
name of the author is not given, but he is evidently one who has had
intimate personal association with the statesmen and administrators
whose characters he presents. These analyses are not always sympathetic,
and we are not prepared to say that they will be accepted as final. They
are, however, based upon full knowledge of the conditions and a close
personal study of the men. Intelligent Americans will be interested in
the opinions held by a clear-headed, capable English writer of the
characters of leaders like Mr. Asquith, Lloyd George, Mr. Balfour, Lord
Robert Cecil, Winston Churchill, and others, and they will find in these
pages first-hand information and clever and incisive studies of
noteworthy men whose influence has counted, and is still to count, in
shaping the history of Britain and of the world.

G.H.P.

NEW YORK, December, 1920.




INTRODUCTION


Let me say that I hope I have not betrayed any confidences in these
sketches.

Public men must expect criticism, and no criticism is so good for them,
and therefore for the State, as criticism of character; but their
position is difficult, and they may justly complain when those to whom
they have spoken in the candour of private conversation make use of such
confidences for a public purpose.

If here and there I have in any degree approached this offence, let me
urge two excuses. First, inspired by a pure purpose I might very easily
have said far more than I have said: and, second, my purpose is neither
to grind my own axe (as witness my anonymity) nor to inflict personal
pain (as witness my effort to be just in all cases), but truly to raise
the tone of our public life.

It is the conviction that the tone of our public life is low, and that
this low tone is reacting disastrously in many directions, which has set
me about these studies in political personality.

There is too much dust on the mirrors of Downing Street for our public
men to see themselves as others see them. Some of that dust is from the
war; some of it is the old-fashioned political dust intended for the
eyes of the public; but I think that the worst of all hindrances to true
vision is breathed on the mirrors by those self-regarding public men in
whom principle is crumbling and moral earnestness is beginning to
moulder. One would wipe away those smears.

My duster is honest cotton; the hand that holds it is at least clean;
and the energy of the rubbing is inspired solely by the hope that such
labour may be of some benefit to my country.

I think our statesmen may be better servants of the great nation they
have the honour to serve if they see themselves as others see
them--others who are not political adversaries, and who are more
interested in the moral and intellectual condition of the State than in
the fortunes of its parties.

No man can ever be worthy of England; but we must be anxious when the
heart and centre of public service are not an earnest desire to be as
worthy of her as possible.




CONTENTS

CHAPTER                            PAGE

PUBLISHER'S NOTE                      v

INTRODUCTION                        vii

I.--MR. LLOYD GEORGE                  1

II.--LORD CARNOCK                    19

III.--LORD FISHER                    29

IV.--MR. ASQUITH                     39

V.--LORD NORTHCLIFFE                 49

VI.--MR. ARTHUR BALFOUR              59

VII.--LORD KITCHENER                 71

VIII.--LORD ROBERT CECIL             85

IX.--MR. WINSTON CHURCHILL           97

X.--LORD HALDANE                    109

XI.--LORD RHONDDA                   123

XII.--LORD INVERFORTH               135

XIII.--LORD LEVERHULME              151

XIV.--CONCLUSION                    163




ILLUSTRATIONS

RT. HON. DAVID LLOYD GEORGE   _Frontispiece_

LORD CARNOCK                         20

BARON FISHER                         30

RT. HON. HERBERT HENRY ASQUITH       40

LORD NORTHCLIFFE                     50

RT. HON. ARTHUR JAMES BALFOUR        60

LORD KITCHENER                       72

LORD ROBERT CECIL                    86

RT. HON. WINSTON CHURCHILL           98

RT. HON. RICHARD BURDON HALDANE     110

LORD RHONDDA                        124

LORD INVERFORTH                     136

LORD LEVERHULME                     152




MR. LLOYD GEORGE




THE RT. HON. DAVID LLOYD GEORGE

     Born, Manchester, 1863; son of the late Wm. George, Master of the
     Hope Street Unitarian Schools, Liverpool. Educated in a Welsh
     Church School and under tutors. By profession a solicitor.
     President of the Board of Trade, 1905-8; Chancellor of the
     Exchequer, 1908-15; Minister of Munitions, 1915-16; Secretary for
     War, 1916; Prime Minister, 1916-20.




CHAPTER I

MR. LLOYD GEORGE

     _"And wars, like mists that rise against the sun,
     Made him but greater seem, not greater grow."_

     DRYDEN.


If you think about it, no one since Napoleon has appeared on the earth
who attracts so universal an interest as Mr. Lloyd George. This is a
rather startling thought.

It is significant, I think, how completely a politician should
overshadow all the great soldiers and sailors charged with their
nation's very life in the severest and infinitely the most critical
military struggle of man's history.

A democratic age, lacking in colour, and antipathetic to romance,
somewhat obscures for us the pictorial achievement of this remarkable
figure. He lacks only a crown, a robe, and a gilded chair easily to
outshine in visible picturesqueness the great Emperor. His achievement,
when we consider what hung upon it, is greater than Napoleon's, the
narrative of his origin more romantic, his character more complex. And
yet who does not feel the greatness of Napoleon?--and who does not
suspect the shallowness of Mr. Lloyd George?

History, it is certain, will unmask his pretensions to grandeur with a
rough, perhaps with an angry hand; but all the more because of this
unmasking posterity will continue to crowd about the exposed hero
asking, and perhaps for centuries continuing to ask, questions
concerning his place in the history of the world. "How came it, man of
straw, that in Armageddon there was none greater than you?"

The coldest-blooded amongst us, Mr. Massingham of _The Nation_ for
example, must confess that it was a moment rich in the emotion which
bestows immortality on incident when this son of a village schoolmaster,
who grew up in a shoemaker's shop, and whose boyish games were played in
the street of a Welsh hamlet remote from all the refinements of
civilization and all the clangours of industrialism, announced to a
breathless Europe without any pomposity of phrase and with but a brief
and contemptuous gesture of dismissal the passing away from the world's
stage of the Hapsburgs and Hohenzollerns--those ancient, long glorious,
and most puissant houses whose history for an aeon was the history of
Europe.

Such topsy-turvydom, such historical anarchy, tilts the figure of Mr.
Lloyd George into a salience so conspicuous that for a moment one is
tempted to confuse prominence with eminence, and to mistake the slagheap
of upheaval for the peaks of Olympus.

But how is it that this politician has attained even to such
super-prominence?

Another incident of which the public knows nothing, helps one, I think,
to answer this question. Early in the struggle to get munitions for our
soldiers a meeting of all the principal manufacturers of armaments was
held in Whitehall with the object of persuading them to pool their trade
secrets. For a long time this meeting was nothing more than a succession
of blunt speeches on the part of provincial manufacturers, showing with
an unanswerable commercial logic that the suggestion of revealing these
secrets on which their fortunes depended was beyond the bounds of
reason. All the interjected arguments of the military and official
gentlemen representing the Government were easily proved by these
hard-headed manufacturers, responsible to their workpeople and
shareholders for the prosperity of their competing undertakings, to be
impracticable if not preposterous.

At a moment when the proposal of the Government seemed lost, Mr. Lloyd
George leant forward in his chair, very pale, very quiet, and very
earnest. "Gentlemen," he said in a voice which produced an extraordinary
hush, "have you forgotten that your sons, at this very moment, are being
killed--killed in hundreds and thousands? They are being killed by
German guns for want of British guns. Your sons, your brothers--boys at
the dawn of manhood!--they are being wiped out of life in thousands!
Gentlemen, give me guns. Don't think of your trade secrets. Think of
your children. Help them! Give me those guns."

This was no stage acting. His voice broke, his eyes filled with tears,
and his hand, holding a piece of notepaper before him, shook like a
leaf. There was not a man who heard him whose heart was not touched, and
whose humanity was not quickened. The trade secrets were pooled. The
supply of munitions was hastened.

This is the secret of his power. No man of our period, when he is
profoundly moved, and when he permits his genuine emotion to carry him
away, can utter _an appeal to conscience_ with anything like so
compelling a simplicity. His failure lies in a growing tendency to
discard an instinctive emotionalism for a calculated astuteness which
too often attempts to hide its cunning under the garb of honest
sentiment. His intuitions are unrivalled: his reasoning powers
inconsiderable.

When Mr. Lloyd George first came to London he shared not only a room in
Gray's Inn, but the one bed that garret contained with a
fellow-countryman. They were both inconveniently poor, but Mr. Lloyd
George the poorer in this, that as a member of Parliament his expenses
were greater. The fellow-lodger, who afterwards became private secretary
to one of Mr. Lloyd George's rivals, has told me that no public speech
of Mr. Lloyd George ever equalled in pathos and power the speeches which
the young member of Parliament would often make in those hungry days,
seated on the edge of the bed, or pacing to and fro in the room,
speeches lit by one passion and directed to one great object, lit by the
passion of justice, directed to the liberation of all peoples oppressed
by every form of tyranny.

This spirit of the intuitional reformer, who feels cruelty and wrong
like a pain in his own blood, is still present in Mr. Lloyd George, but
it is no longer the central passion of his life. It is, rather, an
aside: as it were a memory that revives only in leisure hours. On
several occasions he has spoken to me of the sorrows and sufferings of
humanity with an unmistakable sympathy. I remember in particular one
occasion on which he told me the story of his boyhood: it was a moving
narrative, for never once did he refer to his own personal deprivations,
never once express regret for his own loss of powerful encouragements in
the important years of boyhood. The story was the story of his widowed
mother and of her heroic struggle, keeping house for her shoemaking
brother-in-law on the little money earned by the old bachelor's village
cobbling, to save sixpence a week--sixpence to be gratefully returned to
him on Saturday night. "That is the life of the poor!" he exclaimed
earnestly. Then he added with bitterness, "And when I try to give them
five shillings a week in their old age I am called the 'Cad of the
Cabinet'!"

Nothing in his life is finer than the struggle he waged with the Liberal
Cabinet during his days as Chancellor of the Exchequer. The private
opposition he encountered in Downing Street, the hatred and contempt of
some of his Liberal colleagues, was exceeded on the other side of
politics only in the violent mind of Sir Edward Carson. Even the gentle
John Morley was troubled by his hot insistences. "I had better go," he
said to Mr. Lloyd George; "I am getting old: I have nothing now for you
but criticism." To which the other replied, "Lord Morley, I would sooner
have your criticism than the praise of any man living"--a perfectly
sincere remark, sincere, I mean, with the emotionalism of the moment.
His schemes were disordered and crude; nevertheless the spirit that
informed them was like a new birth in the politics of the whole world. A
friend of mine told me that he had seen pictures of Mr. Lloyd George on
the walls of peasants' houses in the remotest villages of Russia.

But those days have departed and taken with them the fire of Mr. Lloyd
George's passion. The laboured peroration about the hills of his
ancestors, repeated to the point of the ridiculous, is all now left of
that fervid period. He has ceased to be a prophet. Surrounded by
second-rate people, and choosing for his intimate friends mainly the new
rich, and now thoroughly liking the game of politics for its amusing
adventure, he has retained little of his original genius except its
quickness.

His intuitions are amazing. He astonished great soldiers in the war by
his premonstrations. Lord Milner, a cool critic, would sit by the sofa
of the dying Dr. Jameson telling how Mr. Lloyd George was right again
and again when all the soldiers were wrong. Lord Rhondda, who disliked
him greatly and rather despised him, told me how often Mr. Lloyd George
put heart into a Cabinet that was really trembling on the edge of
despair. It seems true that he never once doubted ultimate victory,
and, what is much more remarkable, never once failed to read the
German's mind.

I think that the doom that has fallen upon him comes in some measure
from the amusement he takes in his mental quickness, and the reliance he
is sometimes apt to place upon it. A quick mind may easily be a
disorderly mind. Moreover quickness is not one of the great qualities.
It is indeed seldom a partner with virtue. Morality appears on the whole
to get along better without it. According to Landor, it is the talent
most open to suspicion:

     Quickness is among the least of the mind's properties, and belongs
     to her in almost her lowest state: nay, it doth not abandon her
     when she is driven from her home, when she is wandering and insane.
     The mad often retain it; the liar has it; the cheat has it: we find
     it on the racecourse and at the card-table: education does not give
     it, and reflection takes away from it.

When we consider what Mr. Lloyd George might have done with the fortunes
of humanity we are able to see how great is his distance from the
heights of moral grandeur.

He entered the war with genuine passion. He swept thousands of
hesitating minds into those dreadful furnaces by the force of that
passion. From the first no man in the world sounded so ringing a trumpet
note of moral indignation and moral aspiration. Examine his earlier
speeches and in all of them you will find that his passion to destroy
Prussian militarism was his passion to recreate civilization on the
foundations of morality and religion. He was Peace with a sword. Germany
had not so much attempted to drag mankind back to barbarism as opened a
gate through which mankind might march to the promised land. Lord Morley
was almost breaking his heart with despair, and to this day regards
Great Britain's entrance into the war as a mistake. Sir Edward Grey was
agonizing to avert war; but Mr. Lloyd George was among the first to see
this war as the opportunity of a nobler civilization. Destroy German
militarism, shatter the Prussian tradition, sweep away dynastic
autocracies, and what a world would result for labouring humanity!

This was 1914. But soon after the great struggle had begun the note
changed. Hatred of Germany and fear for our Allies' steadfastness
occupied the foremost place in his mind. Victory was the objective and
his definition of victory was borrowed from the prize-ring. A better
world had to wait. He became more and more reckless. There was a time
when his indignation against Lord Kitchener was almost uncontrollable.
For Mr. Asquith he never entertained this violent feeling, but gradually
lost patience with him, and only decided that he must go when
procrastination appeared to jeopardize "a knock-out blow."

Anyone who questioned the cost of the war was a timid soul. What did it
matter what the war cost so long as victory was won? Anyone who
questioned the utter recklessness which characterized the Ministry of
Munitions was a mere fault-finder. I spoke to him once of the unrest in
factories, where boys could earn L15 and L16 a week by merely watching a
machine they knew nothing about, while the skilled foremen, who alone
could put those machines right, and who actually invented new tools to
make the new machines of the inventors, were earning only the fixed wage
of fifty shillings a week. I thought this arrangement made for unrest
and must prove dangerous after the war. So eager, so hot was his mind on
the end, that he missed the whole point of my remark. "What does it
matter," he exclaimed impatiently, "what we pay those boys as long as we
win the war?"

And the end of it was the humiliation of the General Election in 1918.
Where was the new world, then? He was conscious only of Lord
Northcliffe's menace. Germany must pay and the Kaiser must be tried!
There was no trumpet note in those days, and there has been no trumpet
note since. Imagine how Gladstone would have appealed to the conscience
of his countrymen! Was there ever a greater opportunity in
statesmanship? After a victory so tremendous, was there any demand on
the generosity of men's souls which would not gladly have been granted?
The long struggle between capital and labour, which tears every state in
two, might have been ended: the heroism and self-sacrifice of the war
might have been carried forward to the labours of reconstruction: the
wounds of Europe might have been healed by the charities of God almost
to the transfiguration of humanity.

Germany must pay for the war!--and he knew that by no possible means
could Germany be made to pay that vast account without the gravest
danger of unemployment here and Bolshevism in Central Europe! The Kaiser
must be tried!--and he knew that the Kaiser never would be tried!

Millennium dipped below the horizon, and the child's riding-whip which
Lord Northcliffe cracks when he is overtaken by a fit of Napoleonic
indigestion assumed for the Prime Minister the proportions of the
Damoclesian sword. He numbered himself among the Tououpinambos, those
people who "have no name for God and believe that they will get into
Paradise by practising revenge and eating up their enemies."

I can see nothing sinister in what some people regard as his plots
against those who disagree with him. He tries, first of all, to win them
to his way of thinking: if he fails, and if they still persist in
attacking him, he proceeds to destroy them. It is all part of life's
battle! But one would rather that the Prime Minister of Great Britain
was less mixed up in journalism, less afraid of journalism, and less
occupied, however indirectly, in effecting, or striving to effect,
editorial changes. His conduct in the last months of the war and during
the election of 1918 was not only unworthy of his position but marked
him definitely as a small man. He won the election, but he lost the
world.

It is a great thing to have won the war, but to have won it only at the
cost of more wars to come, and with the domestic problems of
statesmanship multiplied and intensified to a degree of the gravest
danger, this is an achievement which cannot move the lasting admiration
of the human race.

The truth is that Mr. Lloyd George has gradually lost in the world of
political makeshift his original enthusiasm for righteousness. He is not
a bad man to the exclusion of goodness; but he is not a good man to the
exclusion of badness. A woman who knows him well once described him to
me in these words: "He is clever, and he is stupid; truthful and
untruthful; pure and impure; good and wicked; wonderful and commonplace:
in a word, he is everything." I am quite sure that he is perfectly
sincere when he speaks of high aims and pure ambition; but I am equally
sure that it is a relief to him to speak with amusement of trickery,
cleverness, and the tolerances or the cynicisms of worldliness.

Something of the inward man may be seen in the outward. Mr. Lloyd
George--I hope I may be pardoned by the importance and interest of the
subject for pointing it out--is curiously formed. His head is unusually
large, and his broad shoulders and deep chest admirably match his quite
noble head; but below the waist he appears to dwindle away, his legs
seeming to bend under the weight of his body, so that he waddles rather
than walks, moving with a rolling gait which is rather like a seaman's.
He is, indeed, a giant mounted on a dwarf's legs.

So in like manner one may see in him a soul of eagle force striving to
rise above the earth on sparrow's wings.

That he is attractive to men of a high order may be seen from the
devotion of Mr. Philip Kerr; that he is able to find pleasure in a far
lower order of men may be seen from his closer friendships. It is
impossible to imagine Mr. Gladstone enjoying the society of Mr. Lloyd
George's most constant companion although that gentleman is a far better
creature than the cause of his fortunes; and one doubts if Lord
Beaconsfield would have trusted even the least frank of his private
negotiations to some of the men who enjoy the Prime Minister's political
confidence. Nor can Mr. Lloyd George retort that he makes use of all
kinds of energy to get his work done, for one knows very well that he is
far more at his ease with these third-rate people than with people of a
higher and more intellectual order. For culture he has not the very
least of predilections; and the passion of morality becomes more and
more one of the pious memories of his immaturity.

Dr. Clifford would be gladly, even beautifully, welcomed; but after an
hour an interruption by Sir William Sutherland would be a delightful
relief.

M. Clemenceau exclaimed of him, lifting up amazed hands, "I have never
met so ignorant a man as Lloyd George!" A greater wit said of him, "I
believe Mr. Lloyd George _can_ read, but I am perfectly certain he never
does."

I detect in him an increasing lethargy both of mind and body. His
passion for the platform, which was once more to him than anything else,
has almost gone. He enjoys well enough a fight when he is in it, but to
get him into a fight is not now so easy as his hangers-on would wish.
The great man is tired, and, after all, evolution is not to be hurried.
He loves his arm-chair, and he loves talking. Nothing pleases him for a
longer spell than desultory conversation with someone who is content to
listen, or with someone who brings news of electoral chances. Of course
he is a tired man, but his fatigue is not only physical. He mounted up
in youth with wings like an eagle, in manhood he was able to run without
weariness, but the first years of age find him unable to walk without
faintness--the supreme test of character. If he had been able to keep
the wings of his youth I think he might have been almost the greatest
man of British history. But luxury has invaded, and cynicism; and now a
cigar in the depths of an easy-chair, with Miss Megan Lloyd George on
the arm, and a clever politician on the opposite side of the hearth,
this is pleasanter than any poetic vapourings about the millennium.

If only he could rise from that destroying chair, if only he could fling
off his vulgar friendships, if only he could trust himself to his
vision, if only he could believe once again passionately in truth, and
justice, and goodness, and the soul of the British people!

One wonders if the angels in heaven will ever forgive his silence at a
time when the famished children of Austria, many of them born with no
bones, were dying like flies at the shrivelled breasts of their starving
mothers. One wonders if the historian sixty years hence will be able to
forgive him his rebuff to the first genuine democratic movement in
Germany during the war. His responsibility to God and to man is enormous
beyond reckoning. Only the future can decide his place here and
hereafter. It is a moral universe, and, sooner or later, the judgments
of God manifest themselves to the eyes of men.

One seems to see in him an illustrious example both of the value and
perils of emotionalism. What power in the world is greater, controlled
by moral principle? What power so dangerous, when moral earnestness
ceases to inspire the feelings?

Before the war he did much to quicken the social conscience throughout
the world; at the outbreak of war he was the very voice of moral
indignation; and during the war he was the spirit of victory; for all
this, great is our debt to him. But he took upon his shoulders a
responsibility which was nothing less than the future of civilization,
and here he trusted not to vision and conscience but to compromise,
makeshift, patches, and the future of civilization is still dark indeed.

This I hope may be said on his behalf when he stands at the bar of
history, that the cause of his failure to serve the world as he might
have done, as Gladstone surely would have done, was due rather to a
vulgarity of mind for which he was not wholly responsible than to any
deliberate choice of a cynical partnership with the powers of darkness.




LORD CARNOCK




LORD CARNOCK, 1ST BARON (ARTHUR NICOLSON, 11TH BART.)

     Born, 1849. Educ.: Rugby and Oxford; in Foreign Office, 1870-74;
     Secretary to Earl Granville, 1872-74; Embassy at Berlin, 1874-76;
     at Pekin, 1876-78; Charge, Athens, 1884-85; Teheran, 1885-88;
     Consul-General, Budapest, 1888-93; Embassy, Constantinople, 1894;
     Minister, Morocco, 1895-1904; Ambassador, Madrid, 1904-5;
     Ambassador, Russia, 1905-10; Under Secretary for Foreign Affairs,
     1910-16. Author of the _History of the German Constitution_, 1873.

[Illustration: LORD CARNOCK]




CHAPTER II

LORD CARNOCK

     _"Usually the greatest boasters are the smallest workers. The deep
     rivers pay a larger tribute to the sea than shallow brooks, and yet
     empty themselves with less noise."_--SECKER.


One evening in London I mentioned to a man well versed in foreign
affairs that I was that night meeting Lord Carnock at dinner. "Ah!" he
exclaimed, "the man who made the war."

I mentioned this remark to Lord Carnock. He smiled and made answer,
"What charming nonsense!" I asked him what he thought was in my friend's
mind. "Oh, I see what he meant," was the answer; "but it is a wild mind
that would say any one man made the war." Later, after some remarks
which I do not feel myself at liberty to repeat, he said: "Fifty years
hence I think a historian will find it far more difficult than we do now
to decide who made the war."

If Lord Carnock were to write his memoirs, not only would that volume
help the historian to follow the immediate causes of the war to one
intelligible origin, but it would also afford the people of England an
opportunity of seeing the conspicuous difference between a statesman of
the old school and a politician of these latter days.

When I think of this most amiable and cultivated person, and compare his
way of looking at the evolution of human life with Mr. Lloyd George's
way of reading the political heavens, a sentence in Bagehot's essay on
Charles Dickens comes into my mind: "There is nothing less like the
great lawyer, acquainted with broad principles and applying them with
distinct deduction, than the attorney's clerk who catches at small
points like a dog biting at flies."

No one could be less like the popular politician of our very noisy days
than this slight and gentle person whose refinement of mind reveals
itself in a face almost ascetic, whose intelligence is of a wide,
comprehensive, and reflecting order, and whose manner is certainly the
last thing in the world that would recommend itself to the mind of an
advertising agent. But there is no living politician who watched so
intelligently the long beginnings of the war or knew so certainly in the
days of tension that war had come, as this modest and gracious gentleman
whose devotion to principle and whose quiet faith in the power of simple
honour had outwitted the chaotic policy and the makeshift diplomacy of
the German long before the autumn of 1914.

This may be said without revealing any State secret or breaking any
private confidence:

As Sir Arthur Nicolson, our Ambassador at St. Petersburg, Lord Carnock
won for England, as no other man had done before him, the love of
Russia. The rulers of Russia trusted him. He was their friend in a
darkness which had begun to alarm them, a darkness which made them
conscious of their country's weakness, and which brought to their ears
again and again the rumbles of approaching storm. Lord Carnock,
sincerely loving these people, received their confidence as one friend
receives the confidence of another. His advice was honourable advice. He
counselled these friends to set their house in order and to stand firm
in the conviction of their strength. Their finances were a chaos, their
army was disorganized; let them begin in those quarters; let them bring
order into their finances and let them reorganize their army.

While he was at St. Petersburg, after a wide experience in other
countries, he twice saw Russia humiliated by Germany. Twice he witnessed
the agony of his Russian friends in having to bow before the threats of
Prussia. Remember that the rulers of Russia in those days were the most
charming and cultivated people in the world, whereas the Prussian as a
diplomatist was the same Prussian whom, even as an ally of ours in 1815,
Croker found "very insolent, and hardly less offensive to the English
than to the French."[1] The Russians felt those humiliations as a
gentleman would feel the bullying of an upstart.

Lord Carnock was at the Foreign Office in July, 1914. He alone knew that
Russia would fight. For the rest of mankind, certainly for the German
Kaiser, it was to be another bloodless humiliation of the Russian Bear.
Admiral von Tirpitz wanted war: Bethmann-Hollweg did not. The great
majority of the German people, in whom a genuine fear of Russia had
increased under the astute propaganda of the War Party, hoped that the
sword had only to be flashed in Russia's face for that vast barbarian to
cower once again. Few statesmen in Europe thought otherwise. Sir Edward
Grey, I have good reason to think, did not consider that Russia would
fight. He erred with that great number of educated Germans who thought
the sword had only to be rattled a little more loudly in the scabbard
for Russia to weaken, and for Germany to gain, without cost, the supreme
object of her policy--_an increasing ascendancy in the Balkans_. But
this time Russia was ready, and this time Lord Carnock knew Russia would
fight. I am not sure that Lord Carnock was not the only statesman in
Europe who possessed this knowledge--the knowledge on which everything
hung.

It is easy for thoughtless people, either in their hatred or love of
Bolshevism, to forget that the old Russia saved France from destruction
and made a greater sacrifice of her noblest life than any other nation
in the great struggle. The first Russian armies, composed of the very
flower of her manhood, fought with a matchless heroism, and, so
fighting, delivered France from an instant defeat.

Lord Carnock may justly be said to have prepared Russia for this
ordeal--for a true friend helps as well as gives good advice. But it
would be a total misjudgment of his character which saw in this great
work a clever stroke of diplomatic skill.

Lord Carnock was inspired by a moral principle. He saw that Russia was
tempting the worst passions of Germany by her weakness. He felt this
weakness to be unworthy of a country whose intellectual achievements
were so great as Russia's. He had no enmity at all against the Germans.
He saw their difficulties, but regretted the spirit in which they were
attempting to deal with those difficulties--a spirit hateful to a nature
so gentle and a mind so honourable.

He had studied for many years the Balkan problem. He knew that as
Austria weakened, Germany would more and more feel the menace of Russia.
He saw, over and over again, the diplomacy of the Germans thrusting
Austria forward to a paramount position in the Balkans, and with his own
eyes he saw the Germans in Bulgaria and Turkey fastening their hold upon
those important countries. If Russia weakened, Germany would be master
of the world. A strong Russia might alarm Germany and precipitate a
conflict, but it was the world's chief fortress against Prussian
domination.

For the sake of Russia he worked for Russia, loving her people and yet
seeing the dangers of the Russian character; hoping that a
self-respecting Russia might save mankind from the horrors of war and,
if war came, the worse horrors of a German world-conquest. This work of
his, which helped so materially to save the world, was done with clean
hands. It was never the work of a war-monger. No foreigner ever
exercised so great an influence in Russia, and this influence had its
power in his moral nature. I had this from M. Sazonoff himself.

Such a man as Lord Carnock could not make any headway in English
political life. It is worth our while to reflect that the intelligence
of such men is lost to us in our home government. They have no taste for
the platform, the very spirit of the political game is repellent to
them, and they recoil from the self-assertion which appears to be
necessary to political advancement in the House of Commons. No doubt the
intelligence of men like Mr. J.H. Thomas or Mr. William Brace, certainly
of Mr. Clynes, is sufficient for the crudest of our home needs,
sufficient for the daily bread of our political life; but who can doubt
that English politics would be lifted into a higher and altogether purer
region if men like Lord Carnock were at the head of things, to provide
for the spirit of man as well as for his stomach?

More and more, I think, gentlemen will stand aloof from politics--I
mean, gentlemen who have received in their blood and in their training
those notions of graciousness, sweetness, and nobleness which flow from
centuries of piety and learning. Only here and there will such a man
accept the odious conditions of our public life, inspired by a sense of
duty, and prepared to endure the intolerable ugliness and dishonesty of
politics for the sake of a cause which moves him with all the force of a
great affection. But on the whole it is probable that the political
fortunes of this great and beautiful country are committed for many
years to hands which are not merely over-rough for so precious a charge,
but not near clean enough for the sacredness of the English cause.

Only by indirect action, only by a much more faithful energy on the part
of Aristocracy and the Church, and a far nobler realization of its
responsibilities by the Press, can the ancient spirit of England make
itself felt in the sordid lists of Westminster. Till then he who crows
loudest will rule the roost.

FOOTNOTE:

[1] Croker writes from Paris of a visit to St. Cloud, where he found
Bluecher and his staff in possession: "The great hall was a common
guard-house, in which the Prussians were drinking, spitting, smoking,
and sleeping in all directions." Denon complained greatly of the
Prussians and said he was "malheureux to have to do with a bete feroce,
un animal indecrottable, le Prince Bluecher."




LORD FISHER




BARON FISHER, ADMIRAL OF THE FLEET (JOHN ARBUTHNOT FISHER)

     Born, 1841; entered Navy, 1854; took part in 1860 in the Capture of
     Canton and the Peiho Forts; Crimean War, 1855; China War, 1859-60;
     Egyptian War and Bombardment of Alexandria, 1882; Lord of the
     Admiralty, 1892-97; Commander-in-Chief, North American Station,
     1897-99; Mediterranean Station, 1899-02; Commander-in-Chief,
     1903-1904; 1st Sea Lord, 1904-10; 1914-15; died, 1920.

[Illustration: BARON FISHER]




CHAPTER III

LORD FISHER

     _"Look for a tough wedge for a tough log."_

     PUBLIUS SYRUS.


No man I have met ever gave me so authentic a feeling of originality as
this dare-devil of genius, this pirate of public life, who more than any
other Englishman saved British democracy from a Prussian domination.

It is possible to regard him as a very simple soul mastered by one
tremendous purpose and by that purpose exalted to a most valid
greatness. If this purpose be kept steadily in mind, one may indeed see
in Lord Fisher something quite childlike. At any rate it is only when
the overmastering purpose is forgotten that he can be seen with the eyes
of his enemies, that is to say as a monster, a scoundrel, and an
imbecile.

He was asked on one occasion if he had been a little unscrupulous in
getting his way at the Admiralty. He replied that if his own brother had
got in front of him when he was trying to do something for England he
would have knocked that brother down and walked over his body.

Here is a man, let us be quite certain, of a most unusual force, a man
conscious in himself of powers greater than the kindest could discern in
his contemporaries, a man possessed by a daemon of inspiration.
Fortunately for England this daemon drove him in one single direction: he
sought the safety, honour, and glory of Great Britain. If his
contemporaries had been travelling whole-heartedly in the same direction
I have no doubt that he might have figured in the annals of the
Admiralty as something of a saint. But unhappily many of his associates
were not so furiously driven in this direction, and finding his urgings
inconvenient and vexatious they resisted him to the point of
exasperation: then came the struggle, and, the strong man winning, the
weaker went off to abuse him, and not only to abuse him, but to vilify
him and to plot against him, and lay many snares for his feet. He will
never now be numbered among the saints, but, happily for us, he was not
destined to be found among the martyrs.

He has said that in the darkest hours of his struggle he had no one to
support him save King Edward. Society was against him; half the
Admiralty was crying for his blood; the politicians wavered from one
side to the other; only the King stood fast and bade him go on with a
good heart. When he emerged from this tremendous struggle his hands may
not have been as clean as the angels could have wished; but the British
Navy was no longer scattered over the pleasant waters of the earth, was
no longer thinking chiefly of its paint and brass, was no longer a
pretty sight from Mediterranean or Pacific shores--it was almost the
dirtiest thing to be seen in the North Sea, and quite the deadliest
thing in the whole world as regards gunnery.

This was Lord Fisher's superb service. He foresaw and he prepared. Not
merely the form of the Fleet was revolutionized under his hand, but its
spirit. The British Navy was baptized into a new birth with the pea-soup
of the North Sea.

When this great work was accomplished he ordered a ship to be built
which should put the Kiel Canal out of business for many years. That
done, and while the Germans were spending the marks which otherwise
would have built warships in widening and deepening this channel to the
North Sea, Lord Fisher wrote it down that war with Germany would come in
1914, and that Captain Jellicoe would be England's Nelson.

From that moment he lost something of the hard and almost brutal
expression which had given so formidable a character to his face. He
gave rein to his natural humour. He let himself go; quoted more freely
from the Bible, asserted more positively that the English people are the
lost tribes of Israel, and waited for Armageddon with a humorous eye on
the perturbed face of Admiral Tirpitz.

In July, 1914, he was out of office. A telegram came to him from Mr.
Winston Churchill, First Lord of the Admiralty, requesting to see him
urgently. Lord Fisher refused to see him, believing that Mr. Churchill
had jockeyed Mr. Reginald McKenna out of the Admiralty--Mr. McKenna who
had most bravely, nay heroically, stood by the naval estimates in face
of strong Cabinet opposition. On this ground he refused to meet Mr.
Churchill. But a telegram from Mr. McKenna followed, urging him to grant
this interview, and the meeting took place, a private meeting away from
London. Mr. Churchill informed Lord Fisher of the facts of the European
situation, and asked him for advice. The facts were sufficient to
convince Lord Fisher that the tug-o'-war between Germany and England had
begun. He told Mr. Churchill that he must do three things, and do them
all by telegram before he left that room: he must mobilize the Fleet, he
must buy the Dreadnoughts building for Turkey, and he must appoint
Admiral Jellicoe Commander-in-Chief of the Grand Fleet. To do either of
the first two was a serious breach of Cabinet discipline; to do the last
was to offend a string of Admirals senior to Admiral Jellicoe. Mr.
Churchill hesitated. Lord Fisher insisted. "What does it matter," he
said, "whom you offend?--the fate of England depends on you. Does it
matter if they shoot you, or hang you, or send you to the Tower, so long
as England is saved?" And Mr. Churchill did as he was bidden--the
greatest act in his life, and perhaps one of the most courageous acts in
the history of statesmanship. Lord Fisher said afterwards, "You may not
like Winston, but he has got the heart of a lion."

Thus was England saved, and Germany doomed. Before war was declared the
British Fleet held the seas, and in command of that Fleet was the
quickest working brain in the Navy.

On one occasion, during the dark days of the war, I was lunching at the
Admiralty with Lord Fisher, who had then been recalled to office. He
appeared rather dismal, and to divert him I said, "I've got some good
news for you--we are perfectly safe and Germany is beaten." He looked up
from his plate and regarded me with lugubrious eyes. I then told him
that Lord Kitchener had been down at Knole with the Sackvilles and had
spent a whole day in taking blotting-paper impressions of the beautiful
mouldings of the doors for his house at Broome. "Does that make you feel
safe?" he demanded; and then, pointing to a maidservant at the
sideboard, he added, "See that parlourmaid?--well, she's leaving;
yesterday I spent two hours at Mrs. Hunt's registry office interviewing
parlourmaids. Now, do you feel safe?"

His return to the Admiralty brought him no happiness--save when he sent
Admiral Sturdee to sea to avenge the death of Admiral Cradock. He was
perhaps too insistent on victory, a crushing and overwhelming victory,
for a Fleet on which hung the whole safety of the Allies, and a Fleet
which had experienced the deadly power of the submarine. He was
certainly not too old for work. To the last, looking as if he was bowed
down to the point of exhaustion by his labours, he outworked all his
subordinates. As for energy, he would have hanged I know not how many
admirals if he had been in power during the last stages of the war.

His experience of Downing Street filled him up to the brim with contempt
for politicians. It was not so much their want of brains that troubled
him, but their total lack of character. Only here and there did he come
across a man who had the properties of leadership in even a minor
degree: for the most part they had no eyes for the horizon or for the
hills whence cometh man's salvation; they were all ears, and those ears
were leaned to the ground to catch the rumbles of political emergencies.

To find men at the head of so great a nation with no courage in the
heart, with no exaltation of captaincy in the soul, without even the
decency to make sacrifices for principle, made him bitterly
contemptuous. At first he could scarcely bridle his rage, but as years
went on he used to say that the politicians had deepened his faith in
Providence. God was surely looking after England or she would have
perished years agone. In his old age he ceaselessly quoted the lines of
William Watson:

  "Time, and the Ocean, and some fostering star
  In high cabal have made us what we are";

and damned the politician with all the vigour of the Old Testament
vernacular.

I have often listened to a minister's confidential gossip about Lord
Fisher; nothing in these interesting confidences struck me so much as
the self-satisfaction of the little minister in treating the man of
destiny as an amusing lunatic.




MR. ASQUITH




THE RT. HON. HERBERT HENRY ASQUITH

     Born at Morley, Yorkshire, 1852. Educ.: City of London School;
     Balliol College, Oxford; gained 1st class, Lit. Hum. 1874;
     Barrister Lincoln's Inn, 1876; Q. C. 1890; Home Sec'y, 1892-95;
     Ecclesiastical Commissioner, 1892-95; Chancellor of the Exchequer,
     1905-8; Sec'y for War, 1914; 1st Lord of the Treasury and Prime
     Minister, 1908-16; LL.D. Edinburgh, Glasgow, Cambridge, Leeds, St.
     Andrews, and Bristol.

[Illustration: RT. HON. HERBERT HENRY ASQUITH]




CHAPTER IV

MR. ASQUITH

     _"Not to mention loss of time, the tone of their feelings is
     lowered: they become less in earnest about those of their opinions
     respecting which they must remain silent in the society they
     frequent: they come to look upon their most elevated objects as
     unpractical, or at least too remote from realization to be more
     than a vision or a theory: and if, more fortunate than most, they
     retain their higher principles unimpaired, yet with respect to the
     persons and affairs of their own day, they insensibly adopt the
     modes of feeling and judgment in which they can hope for sympathy
     from the company they keep."_--JOHN STUART MILL.


Nothing in Mr. Asquith's career is more striking than his fall from
power: it was as if a pin had dropped.

Great men do not at any time fall in so ignominious a fashion, much less
when the fate of a great empire is in the balance.

The truth is that Mr. Asquith possesses all the appearance of greatness
but few of its elements. He has dignity of presence, an almost
unrivalled mastery of language, a trenchant dialectic, a just and
honourable mind; but he is entirely without creative power and has
outgrown that energy of moral earnestness which characterized the early
years of his political life.

He has never had an idea of his own. The "diffused sagacity" of his mind
is derived from the wisdom of other men. He is a cistern and not a
fountain.

His scholarship has made no difference to scholarship. His moral
earnestness has made no difference to morality. He acquired scholarship
by rote, politics by association, and morality by tradition. To none of
these things did he bring the fire of original passion. The force in his
youth was ambition, and the goal of his energy was success. No man ever
laboured harder to judge between the thoughts of conflicting schools;
few men so earnest for success ever laboured less to think for
themselves. He would have made a noble judge; he might have been a
powerful statesman; he could never have been a great man as Mazzini,
Bismarck, and Gladstone were great men.

There are reasons for suspecting his moral qualities. When he allowed
Lord Haldane to resign from the Cabinet at the shout of a few ignorant
journalists he sacrificed the oldest of his friends to political
exigencies. This was bad enough; but what made it worse was the
appearance of heroic courage he assumed in paddling to Lord Haldane's
rescue long after the tide of abuse had fallen. During the time he
should have spoken to the whole nation, during the time he should have
been standing sword in hand at the side of his friend, he was in
negotiation with Sir Edward Carson.

It is a mistake to say that he brought England into the war. England
carried Mr. Asquith into the war. The way in which politicians speak of
Mr. Asquith as having "preserved the unity of the nation" in August,
1914, is index enough of the degraded condition of politics. A House of
Commons that had hesitated an hour after the invasion of Belgium would
have been swept out of existence by the wrath and indignation of the
people. Mr. Asquith was the voice of England in that great moment of her
destiny, a great and sonorous voice, but by no means her heart. He kept
faction together at a moment when it was least possible for it to break
apart; but he did not lead the nation into war. It was largely because
he seemed to lack assurance that Lord Haldane was sacrificed. The Tories
felt that Mr. Asquith would not make war whole-heartedly: they looked
about for a scapegoat; Lord Haldane was chosen for this purpose by the
stupidest of the Tory leaders; and the bewildered Prime Minister, with
no mind of his own, and turning first to this counsellor and then to
that, sacrificed the most intellectual of modern War Ministers, called
Sir Edward Carson, to his side, and left the British war machine to Lord
Kitchener.

We must make allowance for the time. No minister in our lifetime was
confronted by such a gigantic menace. Moreover, the Cabinet was not
united. Mr. Asquith came out of that tremendous ordeal creditably, but
not, I think, as a great national hero. As for his conduct of the war,
it was dutiful, painstaking, dignified, wise; but it lacked the
impression of a creative original mind. He did not so much direct policy
and inspire a nation as keep a Cabinet together. One seemed to see in
him the decorative chairman of a board of directors rather than the
living spirit of the undertaking.

When the historian comes to inquire into the trivial consequences of Mr.
Asquith's fall from power he will be forced, I think, to lift that veil
which Mr. Asquith has so jealously drawn across the privacy of his
domestic life. For although he ever lacked the essentials of greatness,
Mr. Asquith once possessed nearly all those qualities which make for
powerful leadership. Indeed it was said in the early months of the war
by the most able of his political opponents that it passed the wit of
man to suggest any other statesman at that juncture for the office of
Prime Minister.

His judicial temperament helped him to compose differences and to find a
workable compromise. His personal character won the respect of men who
are easily influenced by manner. There was something about him superior
to a younger generation of politicians--a dignity, a reticence, a proud
and solid self-respect. With the one exception of Mr. Alfred Spender, a
man of honour and the noblest principles, he had no acquaintance with
journalism. He never gave anybody the impression of being an
office-seeker, and there was no one in Parliament who took less pains to
secure popularity. Above all things, he never plotted behind closed
doors; never descended to treason against a rival.

Search as men may among the records of his public life they will fail to
discover any adequate cause of his fall from power. He was diligent in
office; he took always the highest advice in every military dispute;
settled the chief difficulty at the War Office without offence to Lord
Kitchener; he gave full rein to the fiery energy of Mr. Lloyd George; he
was in earnest, but he was never excited; he was beset on every side,
but he never failed to maintain the best traditions of English public
life; he was trusted and respected by all save a clique. Even in the
humiliation of the Paisley campaign he was so noble a figure that the
indulgence with which he appeared to regard the rather violent aid of a
witty daughter was accepted by the world as touchingly paternal--the old
man did not so much lean upon the arm of his child as smile upon her
high-spirited antics.

One must trespass upon the jealously guarded private life to discover
the true cause of his bewildering collapse. Mr. Asquith surrendered some
years ago the rigid Puritanism of early years to a domestic circle which
was fatal to the sources of his original power. Anyone who compares the
photographs of Mr. Asquith before and after the dawn of the twentieth
century may see what I mean. In the earlier photographs his face is
keen, alert, powerful, austere; you will read in it the rigidity of his
Nonconformist upbringing, the seriousness of his Puritan inheritance,
all the moral earnestness of a nobly ambitious character. In the later
photographs one is struck by an increasing expression of festivity, not
by any means that beautiful radiance of the human spirit which in
another man was said to make his face at the age of seventy-two "a
thanksgiving for his former life and a love-letter to all mankind," but
rather the expression of a mental chuckle, as though he had suddenly
seen something to laugh at in the very character of the universe. The
face has plumped and reddened, the light-coloured eye has acquired a
twinkle, the firm mouth has relaxed into a sportive smile. You can
imagine him now capping a "_mot_" or laughing deeply at a daring jest;
but you cannot imagine him with profound and reverend anxiety striving
like a giant to make right, reason, and the will of God prevail.

Like Mr. Lloyd George, his supplanter, he has lost the earnestness which
brought him to the seats of power. A domestic circle, brilliant with the
modern spirit and much occupied in sharpening the wits with epigram and
audacity, has proved too much for his original stoicism. He has found
recreation in the modern spirit. After the day's work there has been
nothing so diverting for him as the society of young people; chatter
rather than conversation has been as it were prescribed for him, and
when he should have been thinking or sleeping he has been playing cards.

It is possible to argue that this complete change from the worries of
the day's work has been right and proper, and that his health has been
the better for it; but physical well-being can be secured by other
means, and no physical well-being is worth the loss of moral power.
There are some natures to whom easy-going means a descent. There are
some men, and those the strongest sons of nature, for whom the kindest
commandment is, "Uphill all the way."

Mr. Asquith, both by inheritance and temperament, was designed for a
strenuous life, a strenuous moral life. He was never intended for
anything in the nature of a _flaneur_. If he had followed his star, if
he had rigorously pursued the path marked out for him by tradition and
his own earliest propensities, he might have been an unpleasant person
for a young ladies' tea-party and an unsympathetic person to a gathering
of decadent artists; he might indeed have become as heavy as Cromwell
and as inhuman as Milton; but he would never have fallen from Olympus
with the lightness of thistledown.




LORD NORTHCLIFFE




LORD NORTHCLIFFE, FIRST VISCOUNT (ALFRED CHARLES WILLIAM HARMSWORTH)

     Born, 1865, in Dublin. Educ.: in Trade Schools; trained as a
     book-seller, and worked in the establishment of George Newnes;
     LL.D., Rochester Univ., U.S.A.; Proprietor of the London _Times,
     Daily Mail_, and a number of other journals; Cr. Bart. in 1904;
     Viscount, 1917; Chairman of the British War Mission to the United
     States, 1917; Director of the Aerial Transport Committee, 1917;
     Director of Propaganda in Enemy Countries, 1918.

[Illustration: LORD NORTHCLIFFE]




CHAPTER V

LORD NORTHCLIFFE

     _" ... We cannot say that they have a great nature, or strong, or
     weak, or light; it is a swift and imperious imagination which
     reigns with sovereign power over all their beings, which subjugates
     their genius, and which prescribes for them in turn those fine
     actions and those faults, those heights and those littlenesses,
     those flights of enthusiasm and those fits of disgust, which we are
     wrong in charging either with hypocrisy or
     madness."_--VAUVENARGUES.


A great surgeon tells me he has no doubt that Carlyle suffered all his
life from a duodenal ulcer. "One may speculate," he says, "on the
difference there would have been in his writings if he had undergone the
operation which to-day is quite common."

This remark occurs to me when I think about Lord Northcliffe.

There is something wrong with his health. For a season he is almost
boyish in high spirits, not only a charming and a most considerate host,
but a spirit animated by the kindliest, broadest, and cheerfullest
sympathies. Then comes a period of darkness. He seems to imagine that he
may go blind, declares that he cannot eat this and that, shuts himself
up from his friends, and feels the whole burden of the world pressing on
his soul.

It is impossible to judge him as one would judge a perfectly healthy
man.

The most conspicuous thing in his character is its transilience. One is
aware in him of an anacoluthic quality, as if his mind suddenly stopped
leaping in one direction to begin jumping in a quite contrary direction.
It cannot be said that his mind _works_ in any direction. It is not a
trained mind. It does not know how to think and cannot support the
burden of trying to think. It springs at ideas and goes off with them in
haste too great for reflection. He drops these ideas when he sees an
excuse for another leap. Sequence to Lord Northcliffe is a synonym for
monotony. He has no _esprit de suite_. But he has leaps of real genius.
An admirable title for his biography would be, "The Fits and Starts of a
Discontinuous Soul." There is something of St. Vitus in his psychology.
You might call him the Spring-Heeled Jack of Journalism.

A story told of one of his journalists illustrates the difficulty of
dealing with so uncertain a person. Lord Northcliffe invited this
journalist, let us call him Mr. H., to luncheon. They approached the
lift of Carmelite House, and Lord Northcliffe drew back to let his guest
enter before him--he has excellent manners and, when he is a host, is
scrupulously polite to the least of people in his employment. Mr. H.
approached the lift, and raising his hat and making a profound bow to
the boy in charge of it, passed in before Lord Northcliffe. Nothing was
said during the descent. On leaving the lift Mr. H. again raised his
hat and bowed low to the boy. When they were out of earshot Lord
Northcliffe remonstrated with him on his behaviour. "You shouldn't
joke," he said, "with these boys, it makes discipline difficult."
"Joke!" exclaimed Mr. H., "good heavens, I wasn't joking; how do I know
that to-morrow he will not be the editor of the _Daily Mail_?"

This story has a real importance. It emphasizes a remarkable
characteristic of Lord Northcliffe's variability. It emphasizes the
romantic quality of his mind. Nothing would please him more than to
discover in one of his office boys an editor for _The Times_. His own
life has given him almost a novelette's passion for romance. He lives in
that atmosphere. Few men I have known are so free from snobbishness or
so indifferent to the petty conventions of society. The dull life of the
world is hateful to him. He would make not only the journalism of the
suburbs sensational, he would make the history of mankind a fairy-story.

It is difficult to understand his power in the world. He is not the
great organizer that people suppose; all the organization of his
business has been done by Lord Rothermere, a very able man of business;
nor is he the inspirational genius one is so often asked to believe. Mr.
Kennedy Jones is largely responsible for the journalistic fortunes of
Lord Northcliffe.

I am disposed to think that it is the romantic quality of his mind which
is the source of his power. All the men about him are unimaginative
realists. He is the artist in command of the commercial mind, the poet
flogging dull words into a kind of wild music. Mr. Kennedy Jones could
have started any of his papers, but he could never have imparted to them
that living spirit of the unexpected which has kept them so effectually
from dulness. Carmelite House could give the news of the world without
Lord Northcliffe's help, but without his passion for the twists and
turns of the fairy-story it could never have presented that news so that
it catches the attention of all classes.

I have never been conscious of greatness in Lord Northcliffe, but I have
never failed to feel in his mind something unusual and remarkable. He is
not an impressive person, but he is certainly an interesting person. One
feels that he has preserved by some magic of temperament, not to be
analyzed by the most skilful of psychologists, the spirit of boyhood.
You may notice this spirit quite visibly in his face. The years leave
few marks on his handsome countenance. He loves to frown and depress his
lips before the camera, for, like a child, he loves to play at being
somebody else, and somebody else with him is Napoleon--I am sure that he
chose the title of Northcliffe so that he might sign his notes with the
initial N--but when he is walking in a garden, dressed in white
flannels, and looking as if he had just come from a Turkish bath, he has
all the appearance of a youth. It is a tragedy that a smile so agreeable
should give way at times to a frown as black as midnight; that the
freshness of his complexion should yield to an almost jaundiced yellow;
and that the fun and frolic of the spirit should flee away so suddenly
and for such long periods before the witch of melancholy.

Of his part in the history of the world no historian will be able to
speak with unqualified approval. His political purpose from beginning to
end, I am entirely convinced, has been to serve what he conceives to be
the highest interests of his country. I regard him in the matter of
intention as one of the most honourable and courageous men of the day.
But he is reckless in the means he employs to achieve his ends. I should
say he has no moral scruples in a fight, none at all; I doubt very much
if he ever asks himself if anything is right or wrong. I should say that
he has only one question to ask of fate before he strips for a fight--is
this thing going to be Success or Failure?

In many matters of great importance he has been right, so right that we
are apt to forget the number of times he has been wrong. Whether he may
not be charged in some measure at least with the guilt of the war,
whether he is not responsible for the great bitterness of international
feelings which characterized Europe during the last twenty years, is a
question that must be left to the historian. But it is already apparent
that for want of balance and a moral continuity in his direction of
policy Lord Northcliffe has done nothing to elevate the public mind and
much to degrade it. He has jumped from sensation to sensation. The
opportunity for a fight has pleased him more than the object of the
fight has inspired him. He has never seen in the great body of English
public opinion a spirit to be patiently and orderly educated towards
noble ideals, but rather a herd to be stampeded of a sudden in the
direction which he himself has as suddenly conceived to be the direction
of success.

The true measure of his shortcomings may be best taken by seeing how a
man exercising such enormous power, power repeated day by day, and
almost at every hour of the day, might have prepared the way for
disarmament and peace, might have modified the character of modern
civilization, might have made ostentation look like a crime, might have
brought capital and labour into a sensible partnership, and might have
given to the moral ideals of the noblest sons of men if not an
intellectual impulse at least a convincing advertisement.

The moral and intellectual condition of the world, a position from which
only a great spiritual palingenesis can deliver civilization, is a
charge on the sheet which Lord Northcliffe will have to answer at the
seat of judgment. He has received the price of that condition in the
multitudinous pence of the people; consciously or unconsciously he has
traded on their ignorance, ministered to their vulgarities, and inflamed
the lowest and most corrupting of their passions: if they had had
another guide his purse would be empty.

All the same, it is the greatest mistake for his enemies to declare
that he is nothing better than a cynical egoist trading on the enormous
ignorance of the English middle-classes. He is a boy, full of adventure,
full of romance, and full of whims, seeing life as the finest fairy-tale
in the world, and enjoying every incident that comes his way, whether it
be the bitterest and most cruel of fights or the opportunity for doing
someone a romantic kindness.

You may see the boyishness of his nature in the devotion with which he
threw himself first into bicycling, then into motoring, and then into
flying. He loves machinery. He loves every game which involves physical
risk and makes severe demands on courage. His love of England is not his
love of her merchants and workmen, but his love of her masculine youth.

He has been generosity itself to his brothers, with all of whom he does
not, unfortunately, get on as well as one could wish. The most beautiful
thing in his life is the love he cherishes for his mother, and nothing
delights him so much as taking away her breath by acts of astonishing
devotion. A man so generous and so boyish may make grave mistakes, but
he cannot be a deliberately bad man.




MR. ARTHUR BALFOUR




THE RT. HON. ARTHUR JAMES BALFOUR

     Born in Scotland 1848; s. of Jas. M. Balfour and Lady Blanche
     Cecil; nephew of the late Marquis of Salisbury and therefore 1st
     cousin to the present Marquis, Lord Robert Cecil, and Lord Hugh
     Cecil. Educ.: Eton and Trinity Coll., Cambridge; LL.D. Edinburgh,
     St. Andrews, Cambridge, Dublin, Glasgow, Manchester, Liverpool,
     Birmingham, Bristol, Sheffield, Columbia (New York); D.C.L. Oxford.
     M.P. for Hertford, 1874-85; Private Sec'y to his uncle, the late
     Marquis of Salisbury, 1878-80; served on Mission to Berlin with
     Salisbury and Beaconsfield, 1878; Privy Councillor, 1885; President
     of Local Government Board, 1885-86; Sec'y for Scotland, 1886-87;
     Lord Rector, St. Andrews, 1886; Sec'y for Ireland, 1887-91; Lord
     Rector, Glasgow, 1890; Chancellor of Edinburgh since 1891; First
     Lord of Treasury, 1891-92; President British Association, 1904;
     Prime Minister, 1902-1905; Leader of the Commons, 1895-1906; 1st
     Lord of the Admiralty 1915-16; Head of British Mission to America,
     1917; Author of a series of philosophical and economic works.

[Illustration: RT. HON. ARTHUR JAMES BALFOUR]




CHAPTER VI

MR. ARTHUR BALFOUR

     _"A sceptre once put into the hand, the grip is instinctive; and he
     who is firmly seated in authority soon learns to think security and
     not progress, the highest lesson of statecraft."_--J.R. LOWELL.


In one of the _Tales_ Crabbe introduces to us a young lady, Arabella by
name, who read Berkeley, Bacon, Hobbes, and Locke and was such a prodigy
of learning that she became the wonder of the fair town in which, as he
tells us, she shone like a polished brilliant. From that town she
reaped, and to that town she gave, renown:

  And strangers coming, all were taught t'admire
  The learned Lady, and the lofty Spire.

One feels that in Mr. Balfour there is something of both the learned
Lady and the lofty Spire. He is at once spinsterish and architectural. I
mean that he is a very beautiful object to look at, and at the same time
a frustrated and perverse nature. Moreover his learning partakes of a
drawing-room character, while his loftiness dwindles away to a point
which affords no foothold for the sons of man. One may look up to him
now and again, but a constant regard would be rewarded by nothing more
serviceable to the admirer than a stiff neck. He points upward indeed,
but to follow his direction is to discover only the void of etheric
vacancy. Like his learning, which may astonish the simple, but which
hardly illuminates the student, his virtues leave one cold. Someone who
knows him well said to me once, "He is no Sir Galahad. Week-ending and
London society have deteriorated his fibre."

He began life well, but he has slackness in his blood and no vital
enthusiasm in his heart. His career has been a descent. He has taken
things--ethically and industrially--easily, too easily.

It is a pity that Nature forgot to bestow upon him those domestic
motions of the heart which humanize the mind and beautify character, for
in many ways he was fitted to play a great part in affairs of State and
with real emotion in his nature would have made an ideal leader of the
nation during the struggle with Germany. He is a conspicuous example of
the value of sensibility, for lacking this one quality he has entirely
failed to reach the greatness to which his many gifts entitled him.

Few men can be so charming: no man can be more impressive. His handsome
appearance, his genial manner, his distinguished voice, his eagerness
and playfulness in conversation, all contribute to an impression of
personality hardly equalled at the present time. He might easily pass
for the perfect ideal of the gentleman. In a certain set of society he
remains to this day a veritable prince of men. And his tastes are pure,
and his life is wholesome.

A lady of my acquaintance was once praising to its mother a robust and
handsome infant who could boast a near relationship with Mr. Arthur
Balfour. "Yes," said the mother, with criticism in her eyes and voice,
"I think he is a nice child, but we rather fear he lacks the Balfourian
manner." Even in childhood!

This Balfourian manner, as I understand it, has its roots in an attitude
of mind--an attitude of convinced superiority which insists in the first
place on complete detachment from the enthusiasms of the human race, and
in the second place on keeping the vulgar world at arm's length.

It is an attitude of mind which a critic or a cynic might be justified
in assuming, for it is the attitude of one who desires rather to observe
the world than to shoulder any of its burdens; but it is a posture of
exceeding danger to anyone who lacks tenderness or sympathy, whatever
his purpose or office may be, for it tends to breed the most dangerous
of all intellectual vices, that spirit of self-satisfaction which
Dostoievsky declares to be the infallible mark of an inferior mind.

To Mr. Arthur Balfour this studied attitude of aloofness has been fatal,
both to his character and to his career. He has said nothing, written
nothing, done nothing, which lives in the heart of his countrymen. To
look back upon his record is to see a desert, and a desert with no altar
and with no monument, without even one tomb at which a friend might
weep. One does not say of him, "He nearly succeeded there," or "What a
tragedy that he turned from this to take up that"; one does not feel for
him at any point in his career as one feels for Mr. George Wyndham or
even for Lord Randolph Churchill; from its outset until now that career
stretches before our eyes in a flat and uneventful plain of successful
but inglorious and ineffective self-seeking.

There is one signal characteristic of the Balfourian manner which is
worthy of remark. It is an assumption in general company of a most
urbane, nay, even a most cordial spirit. I have heard many people
declare at a public reception that he is the most gracious of men, and
seen many more retire from shaking his hand with a flush of pride on
their faces as though Royalty had stooped to inquire after the measles
of their youngest child. Such is ever the effect upon vulgar minds of
geniality in superiors: they love to be stooped to from the heights.

But this heartiness of manner is of the moment only, and for everybody;
it manifests itself more personally in the circle of his intimates and
is irresistible in week-end parties; but it disappears when Mr. Balfour
retires into the shell of his private life and there deals with
individuals, particularly with dependents. It has no more to do with his
spirit than his tail-coat and his white tie. Its remarkable impression
comes from its unexpectedness; its effect is the shock of surprise. In
public he is ready to shake the whole world by the hand, almost to pat
it on the shoulder; but in private he is careful to see that the world
does not enter even the remotest of his lodge gates.

"The truth about Arthur Balfour," said George Wyndham, "is this: he
knows there's been one ice-age, and he thinks there's going to be
another."

Little as the general public may suspect it, the charming, gracious, and
cultured Mr. Balfour is the most egotistical of men, and a man who would
make almost any sacrifice to remain in office. It costs him nothing to
serve under Mr. Lloyd George; it would have cost him almost his life to
be out of office during a period so exciting as that of the Great War.
He loves office more than anything this world can offer; neither in
philosophy nor music, literature nor science, has he ever been able to
find rest for his soul. It is profoundly instructive that a man with a
real talent for the noblest of those pursuits which make solitude
desirable and retirement an opportunity should be so restless and
dissatisfied, even in old age, outside the doors of public life.

The most serious effect upon his character of this central selfishness
may be seen in his treatment of George Wyndham. Mr. Balfour has had only
one friend in his parliamentary life, Alfred Lyttelton, but George
Wyndham came nearer to his affections than any other man in the Unionist
Party, and was at one time Mr. Balfour's devoted admirer. Nevertheless,
in the hour of his tragedy, in the hour which broke his heart and
destroyed his career, Mr. Balfour, who should have championed him
against the wolves of the Party, and might, I verily believe, have saved
both him and Ireland, turned away his face and rendered homage to
political opportunism. Wyndham's grave and the present condition of
Ireland stand as sorrowful reminders of that unworthy act.

Wyndham was by no means a first-rate politician, but he was a sincere
man, something too of a genius, and I think there was genuine
inspiration in his method of solving the Irish question.

This incident reveals in Mr. Balfour a capacity for meanness which
rather darkens his good qualities. It prevents one from believing that
his conduct has always been guided by noble and disinterested motives.
The historian might have said that although he mistook astuteness and
adroitness in parliamentary debate for statesmanship, and although he
accomplished nothing for the good of his country, he yet lent a certain
dignity and nobleness to public life at a time when it was besieged by
new forces in democracy having no reverence for tradition and little
respect for good manners; but when the full truth of the Wyndham
incident is related it will be difficult for the historian to avoid a
somewhat harsh judgment on Mr. Balfour's character.

Nor does the Wyndham incident stand alone. His treatment of Mr. Ritchie
and Lord George Hamilton was very bad. Then there was the case of Joseph
Chamberlain, who had good reason never to forgive him. Some day Mr.
Asquith (or will it be Mrs. Asquith) may tell the story of dealings with
Mr. Balfour which were not of a handsome character. The more these
things are revealed the worse I think it will be for Mr. Balfour's
character.

But such is the personal effect of the man that even those whom he has
treated badly never bring any public charge against him. With the
exception of Mr. Asquith, and Joseph Chamberlain, all forgave him, and
even sought to find excuses for his inexplicable lapse. But I am
inclined to think that this indicates weakness on the part of the victim
rather than grace on the part of the victimizer.

There are other ways in which his lack of sensibility manifests itself
in an unpleasant fashion. He is so self-absorbed that he appears to be
wholly unaware of those who minister to his comfort. Of his servants he
never knows the least detail, not even their names, and even a devoted
secretary who has served him faithfully for many years may find himself
treated almost as a stranger in a moment of need. I fear it must be said
that in financial matters Mr. Balfour is as close-fisted as any miser,
although I believe that this meanness has its rise, not so much in
avariciousness as in a total incapacity to realize the importance of
money to other people.

It has been said that the whole history of philosophical thought is an
attempt to separate the object and the subject. Mr. Balfour appears to
have made this separation complete. For him there is no object. His mind
has embraced his subjective self, and has not merely refused the
fruitless effort of attempting to stand outside its functions in order
to perceive its own perceptions, but, abandoning the unperceived
perceptions and the inactive activities of ultimate reality, it has
canonized its own functions and deified its own subjective universe. So
complete, indeed, is this separation that he can scarcely be called
selfish, since for him there exists no objective field for the operation
of unselfishness.

I lament this self-absorption of Mr. Balfour as much as I lament in his
cousin Lord Robert Cecil the lack of the fighting qualities of
leadership. To no man of the Unionist Party after the death of Lord
Beaconsfield and Lord Salisbury have more hopeful opportunities
presented themselves for creative statesmanship. He might have settled
the Irish Question. He might have avoided the Boer War, in the conduct
of which he behaved with real nobleness at the beginning. He might have
saved Germany from her own war-mongers. In any case he might have led
the Unionist Party towards construction and so have prevented the
slap-dash methods at reform set going by Mr. Lloyd George after a long
and irritating period of Tory pottering. For few men in modern times
have exercised so great a fascination over that curious and easily
satisfied body, the House of Commons, and no man in the public life of
our times has enjoyed a more powerful prestige in the constituencies.
Indeed, he stood for many years as the most dignified and honourable
figure in the public life of Great Britain, and his influence in
politics during the first part of that period was without serious
rivalry.

It must not be forgotten, too, that in the days of "bloody Balfour" he
was not merely chivalrous, but even Quixotic, in taking upon himself the
mistakes and misdoings of his subordinates in Ireland. He certainly had
the makings of a chivalrous figure, and perhaps even a great man. One
thinks that he began his descent unconsciously, and that carelessness
rather than any inherent badness led gradually to an egoism which has
proved fatal to his powers and to his character.

To the self-absorbed, vision is impossible. Mr. Balfour, unable to
penetrate the future, has lived from day to day, enjoying the game of
politics for the fun of confounding critics and managing colleagues,
enjoying too the privilege and dignity of power, but never once feeling
the call of the future, or experiencing one genuine desire to leave the
world better than he found it. And now he ends his political career
clinging to a decorative office under the leadership of Mr. Lloyd
George.

At the end of his Gifford Lectures, after an argument which induced one
of his listeners to say that he had _a stammer in his thoughts_, Mr.
Balfour announced his faith in God. One may recall Pascal's exclamation,
"How far it is from believing in God to loving Him!"

I have always thought it significant of his true nature that Mr.
Balfour should be one of the worst offenders in that unlovely Front
Bench habit of putting his feet up on the Clerk's table. The last time I
was in the House of Commons Mr. J.H. Thomas was lying back on the
Opposition Front Bench with his legs in the air and his muddy boots
crossed on the table. The boorishness of this attitude struck my
companion very sharply. But I pointed out to him that the difference
between Mr. Thomas, the Labour member, and Mr. Balfour, the great
gentleman, was merely a size in boots.




LORD KITCHENER




LORD KITCHENER OF KHARTOUM

     Born, 1846; entered Army, 1866; Colonel, 1899; Burmah Campaign,
     1891; Viscount, 1914; Baron, 1914; Earl, 1914; Sec'y for War, 1914;
     died, 1917.

[Illustration: LORD KITCHENER]




CHAPTER VII

LORD KITCHENER

     _"I never knew a man so fixed upon doing what he considered his
     duty."_--CROKER PAPERS.


Soon after he had taken his chair at the War Office, Lord Kitchener
received a call from Mr. Lloyd George. The politician had come to urge
the appointment of denominational chaplains for all the various sects
represented in the British Army.

Lord Kitchener was opposed to the idea, which seemed to him irregular,
unnecessary, and expensive, involving a waste of transport, rations, and
clerks' labour. But Mr. Lloyd George stuck to his sectarian guns, and
was so insistent, especially in respect of Presbyterians, that at last
the Secretary of State for War yielded in this one case. He took up his
pen rather grudgingly and growled out, "Very well: you shall have a
Presbyterian." Then one of his awkward smiles broke up the firmness of
his bucolic face. "Let's see," he asked; "Presbyterian?--how do you
spell it?"

This was one of his earliest adventures with politicians, and he ended
it with a sly cut at unorthodoxy. A little later came another political
experience which afforded him real insight into this new world of Party
faction, one of those experiences not to be lightly dismissed with a
jest.

He discovered at the War Office that preparations had been made for just
such an emergency as had now occurred. The thoughtfulness and
thoroughness of this work struck him with surprise, and he inquired the
name of its author. He was told that Lord Haldane had made these
preparations. "Haldane!" he exclaimed; "but isn't he the man who is
being attacked by the newspapers?"

A chivalrous feeling which does not seem to have visited the bosoms of
any of Lord Haldane's colleagues visited the bosom of this honest
soldier. Someone about him who had enjoyed personal relations with
various editors was dispatched to one of the most offending editors
conducting the campaign against Lord Haldane with the object of stopping
this infamous vendetta.

"I know what you say is true," replied this editor, "and I regret the
attack as much as Lord Kitchener does; but I have received my orders and
they come from so important a quarter that I dare not disobey them." He
gave Lord Kitchener's emissary the name of a much respected leader of
the Unionist Party.

Thus early in his career at the War Office Lord Kitchener learnt that
the spirit of the public school does not operate in Westminster and that
politics are a dirty business.

At no time in his life was Lord Kitchener "a racehorse amongst cows,"
as the Greeks put it, being, even in his greatest period, of a slow,
heavy, and laborious turn of mind; but when he entered Mr. Asquith's
Cabinet he was at least an honest man amongst lawyers. He was a great
man; wherever he sat, to borrow a useful phrase, was the head of the
table; but this greatness of his, not being the full greatness of a
complete man, and having neither the support of a keen intellect nor the
foundations of a strong moral character, wilted in the atmosphere of
politics, and in the end left him with little but the frayed cloak of
his former reputation.

There is no doubt that his administration of the War Office was not a
success. In all important matters of strategy he shifted his ground from
obstinacy to sulkiness, yielding where he should not have yielded at
all, and yielding grudgingly where to yield without the whole heart was
fatal to success: in the end he was among the drifters, "something
between a hindrance and a help," and the efforts to get rid of him were
perhaps justified, although Mr. Asquith's policy of curtailing his
autocracy on the occasions when he was abroad had the greater wisdom.

I shall not trouble to correct the popular idea of Lord Kitchener's
character beyond saying that he was the last man in the world to be
called a machine, and that he solemnly distrusted the mechanism of all
organizations. He was first and last an out-and-out individualist, a
believer in men, a hater of all systems. As Sir Ian Hamilton has said,
wherever he saw organization his first instinct was to smash it. I think
his autocracy at the War Office might have been of greater service to
the country if all the trained thinkers of the Army, that small body of
brilliant men, had not been in France. Even in his prime Lord Kitchener
was the most helpless of men without lieutenants he could trust to do
his bidding or to improve upon it in the doing.

It will better serve the main purpose of this book to suggest in what
particulars the real greatness of this once glorious and finally
pathetic figure came to suffer shipwreck at the hands of the
politicians.

Lord Kitchener's greatness was the indefinable greatness of personality.
He was not a clever man. He had no gifts of any kind. In the society of
scholars he was mum and among the lovers of the beautiful he cut an
awkward figure. At certain moments he had curious flashes of
inspiration, but they came at long intervals and were seldom to be had
in the day of drudgery, when his mind was not excited. On the whole his
intelligence was of a dull order, plodding heavily through experience,
mapping the surface of life rather than penetrating any of its
mysteries, making slowly quite sure of one or two things rather than
grasping the whole problem at a stroke.

But there was one movement in his character which developed greatness
and by its power brought him to wonderful success and great honour;
this was a deep, an unquestioning, a religious sense of duty.

He started life with a stubborn ambition. As he went along he felt the
lightness of duty, and married his ambition to this Spartan virtue. He
remained in most respects as selfish a man as ever lived, as selfish as
a greedy schoolboy; nevertheless by the power of his single virtue, to
which he was faithful up to his last moments on this earth, he was able
to sacrifice his absorbing self-interest to the national welfare even in
a political atmosphere which sickened him at every turn.

You may see what I mean by considering that while he longed for nothing
so much in later life as the possession of Broome Park, and that while
his selfishness stopped hardly at anything to enrich that house with
pictures, china, and furniture, and that while he would shamelessly hint
for things in the houses of the people who were entertaining him, even
in the houses of his own subordinates, until the weaker or the more
timorous gave him the object of his covetousness, nevertheless for the
sake of his country he clung to the uncongenial chair in Whitehall, not
merely working like a cart-horse for what he considered to be his
nation's good, but suffering without public complaint of any kind, and
scarcely a private grumble, all the numerous humiliations that came his
way either from his own colleagues in the Cabinet or from a powerful
section of the newspapers outside.

I remember hearing from the late Mr. John Bonner, a most admirable
artist in many fields, an amusing account of an interview with Lord
Kitchener which illustrates the Field-Marshal's passion for his Kentish
home, and also sheds a telling light on the aesthetic side of his
character.

Mr. Bonner had been recommended to Lord Kitchener, who wanted amorini
scattered about the leafy gardens at Broome. Drawings were made and
approved: a few months afterwards the amorini were set up in the
gardens.

Soon came a summons to the presence of the great man. Mr. Bonner found
him a terrible object in a terrible rage. In his late years, be it
remembered, Lord Kitchener was not good to look upon. He appeared a
coarse, a top-heavy person; and in anger, his cross-eyes could be
painfully disconcerting.

Lord Kitchener forgot that Mr. Bonner was not only an artist of a
singularly beautiful spirit, but a gentleman. He blazed at him. What did
he mean by sticking up those ridiculous little figures in Broome?--what
did he mean by it?--with an unpleasant reference to the account.

The poor artist, terribly affrighted, said that he thought Lord
Kitchener had seen his drawings and approved of them. "Yes, the
drawings!--but you can't see the figures when they're up! What's the
good of something you can't see?"

The great man, it appeared at last, wanted amorini the size of giants; a
rather Rosherville taste.

"He had knowledge," said Lady Sackville, from whose beautiful house he
borrowed many ideas for Broome, and would have liked to have carried off
many of its possessions, particularly a William the Fourth drum which he
found in his bedroom as a waste-paper receptacle; "he had knowledge but
no taste."

Her daughter said to me on one occasion, "Every chair he sits in becomes
a throne," referring to the atmosphere of power and dignity which
surrounded him.

It is instructive, I think, to remark how a single virtue passionately
held--held, I mean, with a religious sense of its seriousness--can carry
even a second-class mind to genuine greatness, a greatness that can be
felt if not defined. In every sense of the word greatness, as we apply
it to a saint, a poet, or a statesman, Lord Kitchener was a second-class
and even a third-class person; but so driving was his sense of duty that
it carried him to the very forefront of national life, and but for the
political atmosphere in which he had to work for the last few years of
his distinguished service to the State he might have easily become one
of the great and shining heroes of British history. He had no taste; but
the impression he made on those who had was the impression of a great
character.

How was it that his greatness, that is to say his greatness of
personality, made so pitiable an end? What was lacking that this
indubitable greatness should have been so easily brayed in the mortar of
politics?

The answer I think is this: a single virtue can bestow greatness, and
the greatness may never fail when it has time and space in which to
express itself; but many virtues of intellect and character are
necessary when time is of the essence of the contract, and more
especially in a situation of shared responsibility.

Lord Kitchener knew many of his own failings. He was by no means a vain
man. Indeed he suffered considerable pain from the knowledge that he was
not the tremendous person of the popular imagination. This knowledge
robbed him of self-assurance. He tried to live up to the legendary
Kitchener, and so long as he could find men as brave as himself, but of
swifter and more adaptable intelligence, to do his bidding, he
succeeded: many of the public, indeed, believed in the legendary
Kitchener up to the day of his tragic death--death, that unmistakable
reality, meeting him on a journey, the object of which was to impress
Russia with the legendary Kitchener. But more and more, particularly in
consultation with the quick wits of politicians, he found it impossible
to impersonate his reputation.

I have been told by more than one Cabinet Minister that it was
impressive to see how the lightning intellects of Mr. Lloyd George and
Mr. Winston Churchill again and again reduced the gigantic soldier to a
stupefied and sulking silence.

A proposal would be made by a minister, and Mr. Asquith would turn to
Lord Kitchener for his opinion. Lord Kitchener would say, "It's
impossible," and close his lips firmly. At this Mr. Lloyd George would
attack him, pointing out the reasonableness of this proposal in swift
and persuasive phrases. Lord Kitchener, shifting on his chair, would
repeat, "It's impossible." Then in question after question Mr. Churchill
would ask why it was impossible. "It's impossible," Lord Kitchener would
mumble at the end of these questions. Finally, when nearly everybody had
attempted to extract from him the reason for his refusal to countenance
this proposal, he would make an impatient side movement of his head,
unfold his arms, bend over the papers on the table before him, and grunt
out, sometimes with a boyish smile of relief, "Oh, all right, have it
your own way."

He lacked almost every grace of the spirit. There was nothing amiable in
his character. Very few men liked him a great deal, and none I should
say loved him. I do not think he was brutal by nature, although his
nature was not refined; but he cultivated a brutal manner. He had the
happiness of three or four friendships with cultivated and good women,
but the beautiful creature whom he loved hungrily and doggedly, and to
whom he proposed several times, could never bring herself to marry him.
I think there was no holy of holies in his character, no sanctuaries for
the finer intimacies of human life. As Sainte-Beuve said of Rousseau,
"he has at times a little goitre in his voice." One sees the fulness of
his limitations by comparing him with such great figures of Indian
history as the Lawrences and Nicholson: in that comparison he shrinks
at once to the dimensions of a colour-sergeant.

But in attempting to study a man of this nature, for our own learning,
we should rather observe how notable a victory he achieved in making so
much of so little than vociferate that he was not this thing or that.

He began life with no gifts from the gods; it was not in his horoscope
to be either a saint or a hero; no one was less likely to create
enthusiasm or to become a legend; and yet by resolutely following the
road of duty, by earnestly and stubbornly striving to serve his
country's interests, and by never for one moment considering in that
service the safety of his own life or the making of his own fortune,
this rough and ordinary man bred in himself a greatness which, magnified
by the legend itself created, helped his country in one of the darkest
hours, perhaps the very darkest, of its long history.

One could wish that behind this formidable greatness of personality
there had been greatness of mind, greatness of character, greatness of
heart, so that he might have been capable of directing the whole war and
holding the politicians in leash to the conclusion of a righteous peace.
But these things he lacked, and the end was what it was.

"Character," says Epicharmus, "is destiny to man." Lord Kitchener, let
us assert, was faithful to his destiny. And he was something more than
faithful, for he sanctified this loyalty to his own character by a
devotion to his country which was pure and incorruptible. Certainly he
can never be styled "the son of Cronos and Double-dealing."




LORD ROBERT CECIL




LORD ROBERT CECIL

(EDGAR ALGERNON CECIL)

     Born, 1864. Educ.: at Eton and Oxford. Private Secretary to his
     father, the late Marquis of Salisbury, 1886-88; called to the Bar,
     1887; M.P. for East Marylebone, 1906-10; for Hitchin Division of
     Herts, 1912; Under Secretary for Foreign Affairs, 1915-16;
     Assistant Secretary for Foreign Affairs, 1918; Manager of Blockade,
     1916-18. Author of _Principles of Commercial Law_ and _Our National
     Church_.

[Illustration: LORD ROBERT CECIL]




CHAPTER VIII

LORD ROBERT CECIL

     _"Nothing great was ever achieved without enthusiasm."_--EMERSON.


If a novelist take for his hero an educated gentleman who expresses
contempt for the licence and indecencies of modern life, it is ten to
one that the critics, who confess themselves on other occasions as sick
of prurient tales, will pronounce this hero to be a prig. In like
manner, let a politician evince concern for the moral character of the
nation and it is ten to one his colleagues in the House of Commons and
his critics in the Press, and everywhere the very men most in despair of
politics, will declare him to be a fanatic.

This has been the unfortunate fate of Lord Robert Cecil. He is regarded
by his countrymen as unpractical. Men speak well of him, and confess
willingly that he is vastly superior in character and intellect to the
ruck of politicians, but nevertheless wind up their panegyrics with the
regretful judgment that, alas, he is a fanatic.

It is a thousand pities, I think, that he is not a fanatic. It is for
the very reason he is not fanatical that his progress in politics has
been in the suburbs of the second rank. He has every quality for the
first rank, and for the foremost place in that rank, save the one urging
passion of enthusiasm. It is a sense of humour, an engaging sense of
diffidence, a continual deviation towards a mild and gentle cynicism, it
is this spirit--the very antithesis of a fanatical temper--which keeps
him from leadership.

The nation has reason on its side for suspecting Lord Robert Cecil. In
the mind of the British people nothing is more settled than the
conviction that the conquering qualities of a great captain are courage
and confidence. He has given no sign of these qualities. Nature, it
would seem, has fashioned him neither pachydermatous nor pugilistic. He
appears upon the platform as a gentleman makes his entrance into a
drawing-room, not as a toreador leaps into the bull ring. He expresses
his opinions as a gentleman expresses his views at a dinner-table, not
as an ale-house politician airs his dogmatisms in the tap-room. The very
qualities which give such a grace and power to his personality, being
spiritual qualities, prevent him from capturing the loud and grateful
loyalty of a political party.

Now, while a man like Mr. Lloyd George can only affirm his own essence
by the exercise of what we may call brute force, and by making use of
vulgar methods from which a person of Lord Robert Cecil's quality would
naturally shrink, it is nevertheless not at all necessary for a man of
noble character and greater power to employ the same means in order to
earn the confidence of his countrymen.

What is necessary in this case is not brute force but fanaticism, and by
fanaticism I mean that spirit which in Cromwell induced Hume to call him
"this fanatical hypocrite," and which Burke adequately defined in saying
that when men are fanatically fond of an object _they will prefer it to
their own peace_.

Lord Robert Cecil need not adopt the tricks of a mountebank to achieve
leadership of the British nation, but he must contract so entire a faith
in the sacred character of his mission that all the inhibiting
diffidencies of his modest nature will henceforth seem to him like the
whisperings of temptation. He must cease to watch the shifts of public
opinion. He must cease merely to recommend the probable advantage of
rather more idealism in the politics of Europe. He must act. He must
learn to know that a man cannot give a great idea to the world without
giving himself along with it. The cause must consume the person.
Individual peace must be sacrificed for world's peace.

From the very beginning of the War Lord Robert Cecil perceived that the
need of the nation was not for a great political leader, but for a great
moral leader. He told me so with an unforgettable emphasis, well aware
that under the public show of our national life the heart of the British
people was famishing for such guidance. He numbered himself among those
anxiously scanning the horizon for such a leader. He should have been
instead answering the inarticulate cry of the people for that leader.

No good man of my acquaintance is more powerfully convinced of the
goodness of British nature. He watches the British people with an
abiding affection. He believes that they possess, even those of them who
appear most degraded and sordid, the foundational virtues of Christian
character--a love of justice, an instinct for kindness, and faith in
truth. He knows that they are more capable than any other people in
Europe of generous self-sacrifice, and that any absence of grace in
their manner which must distress the superficial observer comes rather
of a passion for honesty than a lack of beauty. And this knowledge of
his goes with the conviction that no man will ever appeal to the British
nation in vain who bases his appeal on justice, fair play, and charity.
What a nation to lead! What an inspiration for a true leader!

He is convinced that no moral appeal has ever been made to the British
people in vain. And yet he has never made that appeal. With grief and
sorrow he watches the stampeding of the nation he so deeply admires into
murderous and indiscriminate hatred of our enemies in the late war. He
saw the majority of the British people's war-like mood degraded and
vulgarized by the propaganda of hate. But he made no move to save the
national honour. The better part, and as I firmly believe the greater
part, of the nation was waiting for moral leadership: particularly were
the young men of the nation who marched to death with the purest flame
of patriotism in their hearts hungering for such leadership; but Lord
Robert Cecil, the one man in Parliament who might have sounded that
note, was silent. The voice that should have made Britain's glory
articulate, the voice that might have brought America into the War in
1914 and rendered Germany from the outset a house divided against
itself, was never heard. Lord Robert Cecil looked on, and Mr. Lloyd
George sprang into the prize-ring with his battle-cry of the knock-out
blow.

I wonder if even the sublimest humility can excuse so fatal a silence.
Great powers have surely great responsibilities.

I remember speaking to Lord Robert on one occasion of the shooting of
Miss Cavell--a brutal act which distressed him very deeply. I said I
thought we weakened our case against Germany by speaking of that
atrocious act as a "murder," since by the rules of war, as she herself
confessed, Miss Cavell incurred the penalty of death. He replied: "What
strikes me as most serious in that act is not so much that the Germans
should think it no crime to shoot a woman, but that they should be
wholly incapable of realizing how such an atrocious deed would shock the
conscience of the world. They were surprised--think of it!--by the
world's indignation!"

In this remark you may see how far deeper his reflections take him than
what passes for reflection among the propagandists of hate. Abuse of
Germany never occupied his mind, which was sorrowfully engaged in
striving to comprehend the spiritual conditions of the German people: he
realized, that is to say, that we were not fighting an enemy who could
be shouted down or made ashamed by abusive epithets, but that we were
opposing a spirit whose anger and temper were entirely different from
our own, and therefore a spirit which must be understood if we were to
conquer it. It was not merely the armies of Germany which must be
defeated, it was the soul of Germany which had to be converted. He saw
this clearly: he never ceased to work to that end; but he failed to take
the nation into his confidence and the public never understood what he
was after. A fanatic would have left the nation in no doubt of his
purpose.

Every now and then he has half let the nation see what was in his mind.
For example, he has taken those illuminating, those surely inspired,
words of Edith Cavell as the text for more than one address--_Patriotism
is not enough_. But beautiful and convincing as these addresses have
been, their spirit has always had the wistful and _piano_ tones of
philosophy, never the consuming fervour of fanaticism. He knows, as few
other men know, that without a League of Nations the future of
civilization is in peril, even the future of the white races; but he has
never made the world feel genuine alarm for this danger or genuine
enthusiasm for the sole means that can avert it. He has not preached
the League of Nations as a way of salvation; he has only recommended it
as a legal tribunal.

It is apparently difficult for a politician, however statesmanlike his
qualities, to realize that politics cannot be even divorced from
morality, much less to comprehend that morality is the very sinew of
politics, being in truth nothing more than the conscience of a nation
striving to express itself in State action. Because of this politics
become degraded and sink to the lowest levels of a mere factional
manoeuvring for place. They engage the attention of the attorney, and
earn nothing but the contempt of the wise. They become like the
perversions of art in the hands of those who assert that art has nothing
to do with morals; they interest only a handful of experts.

But a man like Lord Robert Cecil does surely apprehend that the essence
of politics is morality and, therefore, his unwillingness to use moral
weapons in the political arena is hard to understand. He debates where
he should appeal; he criticizes where he should denounce; and he accepts
a compromise where he should lead a revolt. He is also altogether too
civil for the rogues with whom he has to do.

I remember being in the House of Commons on an afternoon when Mr. Lloyd
George was expected to make an important speech. Lord Robert Cecil sat
in a corner seat on the back benches; his brother, Lord Hugh, occupied
the corner seat on the front bench below the gangway. During the Prime
Minister's speech, which was a succession of small scoring points
against the Labour Party delivered with that spirit of cocksureness
which has grown with him in the last few years, I noticed Lord Robert
make a pencilled note on a slip of paper and pass it across the gangway
with a nod of his head toward Lord Hugh. I watched the journey of this
little paper and watched to see its effect. Lord Hugh unfolded the slip
of paper, read it, smiled very boyishly all over his face, and, folding
it up again, slowly turned his head and looked back towards his brother.
The smile they exchanged was a Cecilian biography. One saw in the light
of that instant and whole-hearted smile the danger of a keen sense of
ironical humour. Both these men have the making of creative fanatics; in
both of them there is an intense moral earnestness and in both great
intellectual power; but nature has mixed up with these gifts, which were
intended for mankind, a drollery of spirit, only amusing in the
confidence of private life which they have allowed to weaken their
sincerities. Humanity may be thankful that St. Paul was without a sense
of humour.

During the war, as Minister of Blockade, Lord Robert Cecil rendered
services of the greatest magnitude to his countrymen: he kept Sweden out
of the war when the Russian Foreign Office could hardly breathe for
anxiety on this point, and at a time when many British newspapers were
doing their best to facilitate the great desire of Germany to march an
army through Sweden and Finland to the thus easily reached Russian
capital. His work, too, at the Peace Conference in Paris entitles him to
the gratitude of the nation: he kept the idea of the League of Nations
alive in an atmosphere that was charged with war. He prevented these
conferences from making "a Peace to end Peace." But on the whole I feel
that he is rather the shadow of great statesmanship leaning diffidently
over the shoulder of political brute force than the living spirit of
great statesmanship leading the moral conscience of the world away from
barbarism towards nobler reason and less partial truth.




MR. WINSTON CHURCHILL




MR. WINSTON CHURCHILL

     The Rt. Hon. Winston Churchill (Leonard Spencer) son of Lord
     Randolph Churchill. Born, 1874. Educ: Harrow and Sandhurst. Entered
     army in 1895; served with Spanish Forces in Cuba, 1895; in
     operations in India, 1897-98; on the Nile and at the Battle of
     Khartoum, 1899; was given the Khartoum Medal in that year;
     Correspondent of the _Morning Post_ in South Africa, 1899-1900;
     taken prisoner and escaped, 1900; in long series of actions
     including Spion Kop, Pieters, and capture of Pretoria; M.P. Oldham,
     1900-06; M.P. for Manchester, 1906-08; commissioned Colonel, 1916;
     retired, 1916; Under Colonial Secretary, 1906-08; President Board
     of Trade, 1908-10; Home Secretary, 1910-11; First Lord of the
     Admiralty, 1911-15; Minister of Munitions, 1917; Rector of Aberdeen
     Univ., 1914; Chairman of the Duchy of Lancaster, 1915; Author of a
     series of books (campaign records), and also of the _Life of Lord
     Randolph Churchill_.

[Illustration: RT. HON. WINSTON CHURCHILL]




CHAPTER IX

MR. WINSTON CHURCHILL

     _"He was not free from that careless life-contemning desperation,
     which sometimes belongs to forcible natures.... He was too heedless
     of his good name and too blind to the truth that though right and
     wrong may be near neighbours, yet the line that separates them is
     of an awful sacredness."_--JOHN MORLEY (of Danton).


Mr. Winston Churchill was one of its most interesting figures in the
Parliament which included Joseph Chamberlain, Charles Dilke, and George
Wyndham. With the fading exception of Mr. Lloyd George, he is easily the
most interesting figure in the present House of Commons.

There still clings to his career that element of great promise and
unlimited uncertainty which from his first entrance into politics has
interested both the public and the House of Commons. He has disappointed
his admirers on several occasions, but not yet has he exhausted their
patience or destroyed their hopes.

His intellectual gifts are considerable, his personal courage is of a
quality that makes itself felt even in the bosom of hate, and he
possesses in a unique degree the fighting qualities of the born
politician. No man is more difficult to shout down, and no man responds
more gratefully to opposition of the fiercer kind. If on several
occasions he has disappointed his friends, also on several occasions he
has confounded his enemies.

From his youth up Mr. Churchill has loved with all his heart, with all
his mind, with all his soul, and with all his strength, three
things--war, politics, and himself. He loved war for its dangers, he
loves politics for the same reason, and himself he has always loved for
the knowledge that his mind is dangerous--dangerous to his enemies,
dangerous to his friends, dangerous to himself. I can think of no man I
have ever met who would so quickly and so bitterly eat his heart out in
Paradise.

He was once asked if politics were more to him than any other pursuit of
mankind.

"Politics," he replied, "are almost as exciting as war, and quite as
dangerous."

"Even with the new rifle?"

"Well, in war," he answered, "you can only be killed once, but in
politics many times."

Unhappily for himself, and perhaps for the nation, since he has many of
the qualities of real greatness, Mr. Churchill lacks the unifying spirit
of _character_ which alone can master the discrepant or even
antagonistic elements in a single mind, giving them not merely force,
which is something, but direction, which is much more. He is a man of
truly brilliant gifts, but you cannot depend upon him. His love for
danger runs away with his discretion; his passion for adventure makes
him forget the importance of the goal. Politics may be as exciting and
as dangerous as war, but in politics there is no V.C.

I am not enamoured of the logic of consistency. It seems a rather
ludicrous proceeding for an impecunious young man to join a very
strictly political club with the idea in his mind that he will always be
in favour of that particular party's programmes. Most of us, I think,
will agree that a man who never changes his opinion is a stupid person,
and that one who boasts in grave and hoary age of his lifelong political
consistency is merely confessing that he has learnt nothing in the
school of experience. One sees the danger of this state of mind when he
thinks of the theologians who burned men of science at the stake rather
than be false to their Christian dogmas.

Nevertheless, illogical and ridiculous as consistency may appear,
amounting in truth to nothing more than either inability to see the
other side of an argument or a deliberate refusal to acknowledge an
intellectual mistake, who can doubt that this quality of the mind
creates confidence? On the other hand, who can doubt that one who
appears at this moment fighting on the left hand, and at the next moment
fighting just as convincingly on the right, creates distrust in both
armies?

A newspaper which says at one time, "France must be rolled in mud and
blood, her colonies must be taken from her and given to Germany, she has
no sense of honour"; and at another time describes every German as a
Hun and hails France as the glory of civilization, does not encourage
the judicious reader to look for guidance in its editorial
pronouncements. But the newspaper which felt itself obliged to offer
France a respectful admonition on one occasion and even to oppose French
policy with firmness and to express sympathy with the Germans might
afterwards acclaim the great virtues of France and oppose itself to the
German nation without any loss of our respect. In the one case the
inconsistency arises from hysterical and immoral passion, in the other
from a moral principle.

There is only one region in which consistency has the great sanction of
an indubitable virtue: it is the region of moral character. A good man,
a man who makes us feel that righteousness is the breath of his
nostrils, may change his intellectual opinions many times without losing
our confidence, deeply as we may deplore his change. Goodness has an
effect on men's minds which can hardly be exaggerated. Conduct is the
one sphere in which consistency has an absolute merit. A man whose whole
life is governed by moral principle has a constituency in the judgment
of all honest people and may be said to represent mankind rather than a
party. Even a cynical opportunist like Lord Beaconsfield had to confess,
"So much more than the world imagines is done by personal influence."

Mr. Churchill has not convinced the world of this possession. He carries
great guns, but his navigation is uncertain, and the flag he flies is
not a symbol which stirs the blood. His effect on men is one of
interest and curiosity, not of admiration and loyalty. His power is the
power of gifts, not character. Men watch him, but do not follow him. He
beguiles the reason, but never warms the emotions. You may see in him
the wonderful and lightning movements of the brain, but never the
beating of a steadfast heart. He has almost every gift of statesmanship,
and yet, lacking the central force of the mind which gives strength and
power to character, these gifts are for ever at the sport of
circumstance. His inconsistencies assume the appearance of shifts and
dodges.

There is one particular way in which I think his inconsistencies have
been dangerous to his career. They have brought him too often into
inferior company.

Lord Northcliffe, with all his faults, is a man to whom statesmen may
speak their minds without loss of influence, but there are other
newspaper proprietors, financiers of commercialized journalism, with
whom a man of Mr. Churchill's power and position should hold no personal
relations. His is a mind which stands in need of constant communion with
men of culture and refinement. He knows the world by this time well
enough, what he does not know are the heights. His character suffers, I
think, from association with second-rate people. He is too heedless of
his good name.

Is it too late for him to acquire strength of character? His faults are
chiefly the effects of a forcible and impetuous temperament: they may be
expected to diminish as age increases and experience moulds. But
character does not emerge out of the ashes of temperament. It is not to
be thought that Mr. Churchill is growing a character which will
presently emerge and create devotion in his countrymen. Character for
him must lie in those very qualities which are now chiefly responsible
for his defects--his ardour, his affectibility, his vehemence, his
impetuous rashness, his unquestioned courage. One thing only can convert
those qualities into terms of character, it is a new direction.

There is perhaps only one other man in the present House of Commons who
could do more than Mr. Churchill for his country and the world. All Mr.
Churchill needs is the direction in his life of a great idea. He is a
Saul on the way to Damascus. Let him swing clean away from that road of
destruction and he might well become Paul on his way to immortality.
This is to say, that to be saved from himself Mr. Churchill must be
carried away by enthusiasm for some great ideal, an ideal so much
greater than his own place in politics that he is willing to face death
for its triumph, even the many deaths of political life.

At present he is but playing with politics. Even in his most earnest
moments he is only "in politics" as a man is "in business." But politics
for Mr. Churchill, if they are to make him, if they are to fulfil his
promise, must be a religion. They must have nothing to do with Mr.
Churchill. They must have everything to do with the salvation of
mankind.

It is time, high time, he hitched his waggon to a star.

Ever since I first met him, when he was still in the twenties, Mr.
Churchill has seemed to me one of the most pathetic and misunderstood
figures in public life. People have got it into their heads that he is a
noisy, shameless, truculent, and pushing person, a sort of intellectual
Horatio Bottomley of the upper classes. Nothing could be further from
the truth.

Mr. Churchill is one of the most sensitive of prominent politicians, and
it is only by the exercise of his remarkable courage that he has
mastered this element of nervousness. Ambition has driven him onward,
and courage has carried him through, but more often than the public
thinks he has suffered sharply in his progress. The impediment of
speech, which in his very nervous moments would almost make one think
his mouth was roofless, would have prevented many men from even
attempting to enter public life; it has always been a handicap to Mr.
Churchill, but he has never allowed it to stop his way, and I think it
is significant both of his courage and the nervousness of his
temperament that while at the beginning of a speech this thickness of
utterance is most noticeable, the speaker's pale face showing two
patches of fiery pink in his cheeks, the utterance becomes almost clear,
the face shows no sign of self-consciousness, directly he has
established sympathy with his audience. It is interesting to notice an
accent of brutality in his speaking, so different from the suave and
charming tones of Mr. Balfour; this accent of brutality, however, is
not the note of a brutal character, but of a highly strung temperament
fighting its own sensibilities for mastery of its own mind. Mr.
Churchill is more often fighting himself than his enemies.

His health has been against him: his heart and his lungs have not given
him the support he needs for his adventurous and stormy career. At
times, when every man's hand has seemed to be against him, he has had to
fight desperately with both body and mind to keep his place in the
firing line. Some of his friends have seen him in a state of real
weakness, particularly of physical weakness, and for myself I have never
once found him in a truculent or self-satisfied frame of mind. I believe
he is at heart a modest man, and I am quite certain he is a delicate and
a suffering man. But for the devotion of his wife I think he could not
have held his place so long.

Fate, too, has opposed him. His enemies are never tired of shouting the
two names of Antwerp and Gallipoli. They are convenient terms of abuse:
I suppose they would have destroyed most politicians; certainly they are
more deadly than such a phrase as "spiritual home," for although the
world may be ignorant of the fact, every honest, educated man must
acknowledge a debt of gratitude to the thinkers of ancient Germany,
while to be associated with operations which involve the suffering, the
death, and the defeat of British troops is in every way more fatal to
reputation.

But, in truth, both these strokes of military strategy were sound in
conception. I doubt indeed if the military historian of the future, with
all the documents before him, will not chiefly condemn the Allies for
their initial failure to make Antwerp a sea-fed menace to the back of
the German Armies; while even in our own day no one doubts that if Lord
Kitchener, in one of his obstinate moods, had not refused to send more
divisions to Gallipoli we should have taken Constantinople. The fault of
those operations lay not in attempting them but in not adequately
supporting them.

Mr. Churchill has had bad luck in these matters, but even here it is the
lack of character which has served him most ill. He never impressed Lord
Kitchener as a man of power, although that sullen temperament grew in
the end to feel an amused affection for him. He did excellent work at
the Admiralty, work of the highest kind both before and at the outbreak
of war, but his colleagues in the Cabinet never realized the importance
of this work, judging it merely as "one of Winston's new crazes,"
Ministers speak of him in their confidences with a certain amount of
affection, but never with real respect. Many of them, of course, fear
him, for he is a merciless critic, and has an element of something very
like cruelty in his nature; but even those who do not fear him, or on
the whole rather like him, will never tell you that he is a man to whom
they turn in their difficulties, or a man to whom the whole Cabinet
looks for inspiration.

General William Booth of the Salvation Army once told Mr. Churchill
that he stood in need of "conversion," That old man was a notable judge
of character.




LORD HALDANE




LORD HALDANE

     The Rt. Hon. Richard Burdon Haldane was born in 1856. Graduate of
     Edinburgh University; Professor of Philosophy, St. Andrew's
     University; Barrister, 1879; Q.C., 1890; created 1st Viscount,
     1911; M.P. from Haddingtonshire, 1885-1911; Sec'y for War, 1905-12;
     Rector of Edinburgh Univ.; Chancellor, Univ. of Bristol; Author of
     various philosophical works.

[Illustration: RT. HON. RICHARD BURDON HALDANE]




CHAPTER X

LORD HALDANE

     _"He is Attic in the sense that he has no bombast, and does not
     strive after affect, and that he can speak interestingly on many
     subjects 'without raising his voice.'"_--GILBERT MURRAY (on
     Xenophon).


If for nothing else, the nation owes Lord Haldane a debt of gratitude
for the example he has given it in behaviour. No man so basely deserted
by his colleagues and so scandalously traduced by his opponents ever
faced the world with a greater calm or a more untroubled smile.

Lessing said of grief in sculpture that it may writhe but it must not
scream. Lord Haldane has not even writhed. When a member of the House of
Lords asked him what he proposed doing with the two sacks crammed full
of abusive letters addressed to him there by correspondents who thus
obeyed a vulgar editor's suggestion, Lord Haldane replied with very good
humour, "I have an oyster-knife in my kitchen and an excellent
scullery-maid in my establishment: I shall see only my personal
letters."

In the darkest hour of his martyrdom, when the oldest and staunchest of
his political friends maintained an absolute silence, he gave no sign of
suffering and uttered no single word either of surprise or bitterness.
He seemed to some of us in those days almost wanting in sensibility,
almost inhuman in his serenity. Newspaper articles which made most of us
either wince or explode with anger did nothing more to the subject of
their vilification than to set him off laughing--a comfortable,
soft-sounding, and enjoying laughter which brought a light into his face
and gently shook his considerable shoulders. He loved to produce at
those moments the encomiums pronounced on his work at the War Office by
those very newspapers only a few years before at the hour of his
triumphant retirement.

This tranquillity of spirit owed nothing to an unimpressionable mind or
a thick skin. One came to see that it was actually that miracle of
psychology, a philosophic temperament in action. I believe he could have
the toothache without a grimace. He has not only studied philosophy, he
has become a philosopher, and not merely a philosopher in theory but a
philosopher in soul--a practising philosopher. He might stagger for a
moment under the shock of a tremendous sorrow to one whom he loved, but
not all the shovings of all the halfpenny editors of our commercialized
journalism, not even the most contemptible desertion of his friends,
could move his equilibrium by a hair's breadth.

After the noble tributes paid to him by Lord Haig and Lord French I need
not trouble the reader by dealing with the accusations brought against
the greatest of our War Ministers by the gutter-press or by the baser
kind of politicians. It is now acknowledged in all circles outside of
Bedlam that Lord Haldane prepared a perfect instrument of war which,
shot like an arrow from its bow, saved the world from a German victory,
and among the intellectual soldiers it is generally held that if France
and Russia had been as well prepared to fulfil their engagements as we
were to fulfil ours the war would have ended in an almost immediate
victory for the Allies.[2]

It will be more instructive to ask how a man who never made an enemy in
his life, and for whom many of our greatest men have a deep affection,
came of a sudden to be the target of such general and overwhelming
abuse. I think I can do something to clear up this mystery.

When he saw that the great conflict was inevitable, Lord Haldane
suggested to Mr. Asquith, then acting as War Secretary, that he should
go down to the War Office, where he was still well known and very
popular with the intellectual generals, and mobilize his own machine for
war. The harassed and overburdened Mr. Asquith gratefully accepted this
suggestion.

Accordingly Lord Haldane went down to the War Office, and knowing that
speed was the one thing to save us from a German avalanche, began to
mobilize the Expeditionary Force. Some of the generals were alarmed. War
was not yet declared. The cost of mobilization ran into millions.
Suppose war did not come after all, how were those millions to be met?
Lord Haldane brushed aside every consideration of this kind.
Mobilization was to be pushed on, cost what it might. He had not studied
his Moltke to no profit.

On leaving the War Office that same day, after having mobilized the
British Army, he went across to the Foreign Office and was there stopped
by a certain soldier who asked him how many divisions he was sending to
France. Lord Haldane very naturally rebuked this person for asking such
a question, telling him that war was not yet declared and that therefore
perhaps no divisions at all would go to France.

Never was a just reproof more fatal to him who administered it.

I believe this soldier went straight off to an important Civil Servant
with the sensational news that Lord Haldane was holding back the
Expeditionary Force, and afterwards carried the same false news to one
of the most violent anti-German publicists in London, a frenzied person
who enjoys nevertheless a certain power in Unionist circles. In a few
hours it was all over London that the Liberals were going to desert
France, that Lord Haldane, a friend of the German Kaiser, had got back
to the War Office, and that he was preventing mobilization.

I am quite willing to believe that the snubbed soldier honestly thought
he was spreading a true story: I am sure that the frenzied publicist
believed this story with all the lunatic fervour of his utterly
untrained and utterly intemperate mind; but what I cannot bring myself
to believe for a moment is that the Unionist statesman to whom this
story was taken, and who there and then gave orders for a campaign
against Lord Haldane, was inspired by any motive less immoral, less
cynical, and less disgraceful to a man of honour than a desire for
office.

He saw the opportunity of discrediting the Liberal Government through
Lord Haldane and took it. The Cabinet was to fall under suspicion
because one of its members could be accused of pro-Germanism. Lord
Haldane, against whom his friend Lord Morley now brings the sorrowful
charge that he was responsible for the war; Lord Haldane, against whom
all the German writers have brought charges of stealing their War Office
secrets and of defeating their diplomacy, was to be called a
pro-German--a man actually doing Germany's work in the British War
Office. And this for a Party purpose.

Mr. Arthur Balfour, by nature the most selfish of men and also an
intemperate lover of office, would never have stooped to such dishonour;
but among the leaders of the Unionist Party there was to be found a man
who saw in a lie the opportunity for a Party advantage and took it.

In these matters a statesman need not show himself. A word to one or two
newspaper proprietors is sufficient. Nor need he hunt up any arguments.
The newspaper reporter will not leave a dust-bin unsearched. One word,
nay, the merest hint is sufficient. So stupid, so supine, is the public,
that Fleet Street will undertake to destroy a man's reputation in a week
or two.

It was in this fashion that Lord Haldane fell.

     "You have killed me," says Socrates, "because you thought to escape
     from giving an account of your lives. But you will be disappointed.
     There are others to convict you, accusers whom I held back when you
     knew it not, they will be harsher inasmuch as they are younger, and
     you will wince the more."

One day the full truth of this scandalous story will be told, and the
historian will then pronounce a judgment which will leave an indelible
stain on the reputation of some who with a guilty conscience now sun
themselves in the prosperity of public approval. Their children will not
read that judgment without bitter shame.

I condemn in this matter not only the man who gave the order for calumny
and slander to set to work but, first, the friends of Lord Haldane who
kept silence, and, second, the democracy of these islands which allowed
itself to be deceived and exploited by the lowest kind of newspapers.

Why was Sir Edward Grey silent? He was living in Lord Haldane's house
at the time, and, agonizing over the abhorrent prospect of European
slaughter and striving to the point of a nervous collapse to avert this
calamity, was devotedly served and strengthened by his host. Why was he
silent?

Why was Mr. Asquith silent? He knew that Lord Haldane had delivered the
War Office from chaos and had given to this country for the first time
in its history a coherent and brilliantly efficient weapon for this very
purpose of a war with Germany. He spoke when it was too late. Why did he
not speak when the hounds were in full cry?

And why were Mr. Lloyd George and Mr. Winston Churchill silent? Could
they not have told the nation that they had grudged Lord Haldane his
Army estimates, and that they had even suggested another and less
expensive scheme of national defence--a scheme that was actually
examined by the War Office experts and condemned?

Let Mr. Lloyd George look back. If he had had his way with the War
Office could Germany have been stopped from reaching Paris and seizing
the Channel ports? Moreover, if he had had his way, could he himself
have hoped to escape hanging on a lamp-post? Is it not true to say that
in saving France from an overwhelming and almost immediate destruction
the British Expeditionary Force also saved his neck, the neck of Mr.
Winston Churchill, and the necks of all the Cabinet? But if this is so,
and his own conscience shall be the judge, how is it that he said no
word to the nation which might have saved Lord Haldane from martyrdom?

The nation, I think, does not know what it loses in allowing its
judgment to be stampeded by unconscionable journalism. Lord Haldane is
no political dilettante. Few men in modern times have brought to
politics a mind so trained in right thinking, or a spirit so full of
that impressive quality, as Morley calls it, the presentiment of the
eve: "a feeling of the difficulties and interests that will engage and
distract mankind on the morrow." Long ago he foresaw the need in our
industrial life of the scientific spirit, and in our democracy of a
deeper and more profitable education. "Look at Scotland, the best
educated nation; and at Ireland, the worst!" For these things he
prepared. Long ago, too, he thought out a better and a complete system
of Cabinet government. Long ago he had seen that the enmity between
Capital and Labour must be brought to an end and an entirely new
relation brought into existence, identifying the prosperity of the one
with the other. For this, too, he had a scheme. These things were the
chief concern of his life, and only for these things did he remain in
politics.

The nation would have been in a healthier condition if Lord Haldane's
reasoned policy had been acted upon and Mr. Lloyd George's talent for
oratory had been employed to explain that reasoned policy to the less
educated sections of the public, instead of used to arouse an angry
opposition to the unreasoned and disconnected reforms of his own
conception.

But what a topsy-turvy world! Mr. Lloyd George is "the man who won the
war," he who did nothing to prepare for it, and suggested some things
that might have made it difficult to be won; while Lord Haldane, who did
prepare for it, and whose work did save the whole world, is cast out of
office. And when the war is won, and Lord Haldane's position has been
publicly and nobly vindicated by Lord Haig, Mr. Lloyd George as Prime
Minister of England has a portfolio for Mr. Austen Chamberlain and
another for Dr. Macnamara, but none for this man to whom more than to
any other politician he owes his place and perhaps his life.

Lord Haldane is not what Prodicus used to call "a Boundary Stone, half
philosopher and half practical statesman." His philosophy is his
statesmanship, and his statesmanship is his philosophy. He has brought
to the study of human life a profound mind and a trained vision. His
search after truth has destroyed in him all pettiness of personal
ambition. He desires, because he regards it as the highest kind of life,
to further the work of creative evolution, to be always on the side of
spiritual forces, and never to be deceived by transitory materialism.
Democracy has need of these qualities, and a great empire without such
qualities in its statesmen can hardly endure the test of time.

His faults are a too generous confidence in the good sense of democracy
and a lack of impassioned energy. He is too much a thinker, too little a
warrior. Unhappily he is not an effective speaker, and his writing is
not always as clear as his ideas. He is at his best in conversation with
men whom he likes.

His activity is enormous, but it is the activity of the scholar. He
works far into the night, takes little or no exercise, and avoids "that
dance of mimes"--the life of society. By hard reading he keeps himself
abreast of knowledge in almost every one of its multitudinous
departments and will go a long journey to hear a scientific lecture or
to take part in a philosophical discussion. He is the friend of
philosophers, theologians, men of science, men of letters, and many a
humble working man. He was never privately deserted in the long months
of his martyrdom. His charming London house, so refined and so dignified
in its simplicity, was the frequent meeting-place of many even in those
bad days when the door outside was daubed with paint, the windows
broken, and a police-man stood on guard. A few of us wished he took his
ill-treatment with a fiercer spirit; but looking back now I think that
even the youngest of us perceives that he was unconsciously teaching us
by his behaviour one of the noblest lessons to be learned in the school
of life.

Let his fate teach democracy that when it has found a leader whom it can
trust, it must be prepared to fight for him as well as to follow him. No
statesman is safe from the calumny of newspapers, and no statesman
violently and persistently attacked in a crisis can depend upon the
loyalty of his colleagues. It is not in our politics as it is in our
games.

FOOTNOTE:

[2] It is well known that Lord Haig regards Lord Haldane as the greatest
Secretary of State for War that England ever had; he has expressed his
gratitude again and again for the manner in which Lord Haldane organized
the military forces of Great Britain for a war on the Continent. Lord
French has said: "He got nothing but calumny and abuse; but the reward
to such a man does not come in the ordinary way. I had proved the value
of his great work and that is all the reward he ever wanted."




LORD RHONDDA




LORD RHONDDA OF LLANWERN (DAVID ALFRED THOMAS MACKWORTH)

     First Baron, 1916. Born, in Aberdare, Wales, 1856; died, 1919.
     Educated with tutors, and later at Caius College, Cambridge;
     Scholar also, of Jesus; President South Wales Liberal Federation,
     1893-97; M.P. for Merthyr, 1888-1910; for Cardiff, 1910; Food
     Controller, 1917-1919.

[Illustration: LORD RHONDDA]




CHAPTER XI

LORD RHONDDA

     _"Whereof what better witness can ye expect I should produce than
     one of your own now sitting in Parliament."_--MILTON.


In the _Merry Passages and Jests_ of old Sir Nicholas Lestrange record
is made of the following witty definition: "Edm. Gurney used to say that
a mathematitian is like one that goes to markett to buy an axe to break
an egg."

This perhaps had been the fate of Lord Rhondda, for he was by nature of
a true mathematical turn, had not the circumstances of his economic life
forced him to apply this natural tendency to the practical affairs of
commerce. But nature herself had given him with this aptitude for
mathematics another quality which must eventually, one would suppose,
have saved him from the unfruitful fate of a theorist--he was a man of
rare imagination. And so this mathematician, who was also a poet,
brought a unique mind to the affairs of commerce and there scored a
success which attracted attention in both hemispheres.

I do not know a better example to illustrate the main thesis of this
book than the case of Lord Rhondda. No doubt the case of a greater man,
Lord Leverhulme, would lend itself to a far stronger illustration of
that thesis, but, unfortunately for my argument and for the nation, Lord
Leverhulme has never had an opportunity of vindicating in office those
qualities which the House of Commons neglected or overlooked during the
years in which, like Lord Rhondda, he sat humbly on its back benches.

For the best part of his manhood Lord Rhondda was a political failure.
The House of Commons, which prides itself on its judgment of men,
treated him as a person of no importance. He represented one of the
largest industrial constituencies in the country, was always returned by
an overwhelming majority, and was known to be in his own district an
administrator of far-reaching talent; but because he could not speak
effectually, and because the House of Commons--that most self-satisfied
assembly of mediocrities--did not take to him, he was never offered by
his political leaders during all the long years of his patient service
even an under-secretaryship.

This was the man who saved the nation from one of its greatest perils
during perhaps the most critical period of the war.

As one examines Lord Rhondda's administration of the Ministry of Food
one discovers an interesting and surely an important fact in the
psychology of our public life.

His triumph, which was one of the greatest in the war, lay almost
entirely in the region of personality. For his gravest difficulties were
not so much in the office of the Ministry as in the great and grumbling
world outside, where toiling men and women stood outside provision shops
for hours in the rain and cold only to be told in the vast majority of
cases when their turn came that supplies were exhausted for that day.

By the power of his imagination Lord Rhondda saw that the first step
towards saving a very perilous situation was to convince this vast world
of seething discontent that absolute justice should characterize the
administration of his office. To this end, satisfied that those about
him were men of devoted zeal and real talent, he set himself to the
creation of a public opinion favourable to the discharge of his duties.
And by a stroke of inspiration he saw that to achieve this tranquillity
of the public mind he must give his own personality to the world. His
character must become a public possession. A man, and not an office,
must stand for Food Control. The instinct of the Briton for justice and
fair play must receive assurance from a moral personality.

Therefore no member of the Government was more accessible, or more ready
to be interviewed and photographed, than the Food Controller. It was not
vanity, but foreseeing statesmanship, which opened his door to the
humblest newspaper reporter who visited the Ministry. His personality--a
moral, just, fearless, and confident personality--had to be conveyed to
the mind of the public, and every interview he gave to the Press had
this important objective for its reason. He saw the morals of an
economic situation, and he solved those economics very largely by making
a moral impression on the public mind.

The work of his office was carried to victory by Sir William Beveridge,
Captain Tallents, Professor Gonner, and other very able men in charge of
rationing; but this work must have failed had it not been for public
confidence in Lord Rhondda's integrity; and, moreover, Lord Rhondda's
character played no small part in firing that work with a zeal and
passion which were excelled by no other department of public service.
Men not only worked hard for him, they worked for him affectionately.

His choice of Mr. J.H. Clynes was inspired by the same idea. He had
heard this labour member speak, and had been impressed by the moral
qualities of his oratory; he knew that in choosing him to represent the
Food Ministry in the House of Commons he might be sure of the confidence
of Labour, both there and in the circles of trade unionism. He was not
deceived. Mr. Clynes was the most loyal and impressive of lieutenants,
who, on one occasion in particular, saved a difficult situation.

Lord Rhondda realized the moral qualities of statesmanship. He appealed
to the highest instincts of his countrymen. This was his greatest
achievement.

He was in many ways a lovable man. The quality which chiefly drew
people to him was his extreme boyishness. The remarkable beauty of his
face always seemed to me an expression of this delightful
boyishness--his smile deepening this effect in a most charming manner.
He loved life with a boy's fervour, regarding it always as an
opportunity for winning success. The difficulties of work, like the
difficulties of a mathematical problem called out the athletic qualities
of an otherwise shy and almost effeminate nature. He loved to pit his
brains against other men, rejoiced to discover obstacles in his path,
never despaired when things went against him, and infinitely preferred
the battle for success to the success itself. In this, too, he was a
boy; he had to win a fight fairly and honourably to enjoy the victory. I
believe him to have been one of the most honest and straightforward men
that ever made a fortune in business.

There was no man less embittered by failure and disappointment. He seems
to have had reason to believe that Mr. Lloyd George frustrated his early
efforts as a politician, indeed he told me more than once that Mr. Lloyd
George had deliberately set himself to that end; and yet it was at Mr.
Lloyd George's earnest beseeching that he accepted the office of Food
Controller, and once a member of his Cabinet, he seldom spoke of this
old opponent without the warmest admiration. "You can't trust him a
yard," he said to me on one occasion laughing very good-naturedly; "but
there is not a man in the Government who can hold a candle to him for
courage and inspiration. I know very well that I could never have done
what he has done. More than any man in the country he has pulled us
through the critical days of the war. He is wonderful--nothing short of
wonderful--and sometimes I feel almost fond of him, for he has many
likeable sides to his character; all the same, I know very well he is
not to be trusted. I took office on certain conditions, not one of which
has he observed. He is one of those men with whom you cannot deal
confidently."

This was the bitterest thing I ever heard him say of his former enemy.
As regards the old days in the House of Commons, he told me that there
was room for only one leader in Wales, and that, while Mr. Lloyd George
could speak, he couldn't, and so Mr. Lloyd George, who was consumed by
personal ambition, had won the battle. In saying this he smiled like a
boy, and only grew serious when he added of those wasted years, "The
bother is I had a lot of useful things I wanted to do for the country."

He was convinced that he could have paid off the whole of the National
Debt during those years.

A good judge of statesmen said of Lord Rhondda that he would have made
the greatest Chancellor of the Exchequer these islands had ever
possessed. I do not think there can be any doubt of this, for his genius
lay in figures and he had extraordinary swiftness in seeing his way
through expensive chaos to economical order. His mind was constructive,
if not positively creative. He was never happier--except when
birds'-nesting or romping with young people--than when he was in an
arm-chair working out with pencil and paper some problem of
administration which involved enormous figures. He would sit up to the
small hours of the morning over his work, and would come down to
breakfast radiant with happiness, bursting with energy, exclaiming, "I
had a glorious time last night!" Certainly he would have brought to the
Treasury an original mind, and a mind, moreover, profoundly acquainted
with the activities of trade and commerce--those important factors in
national finance which appear to cut so small a figure in the minds of
bankers and officials.

Although a rather dull speaker, few men of my acquaintance were more
lucid and convincing in conversation, particularly when he addressed a
sympathetic mind. This was notably the case when he was unfolding his
ideas on the conflicting theories of Individualism and Socialism. If his
conversations on this head could be printed in a book they would make
difficult work even for the most ingenious apologists of Socialism. He
was persuaded that no theory of Socialism could be put into successful
practice without involving the loss of personal freedom, and that
without Individualism there would be no initiative, no audacity, and no
creative energy in the development of an industry. Whenever he was in
conflict with Socialists he would say to them, "Why don't you buy me out
and run the mines yourselves? You have plenty of money in your unions,
and I am quite willing to sell."

There were several strange and interesting movements in his otherwise
quite simple and boyish nature. For example, he had no religious faith
worth speaking about, certainly no dogmatic faith of any kind; but he
always said his prayers. Then he held the theory that old age was a form
of disease, and so avoided, as much as possible, the society of old
people, fearing contagion; the young people with whom he loved to
surround himself, and on whom he delighted to play many practical jokes,
he called his "young germs."

He was entirely free from all forms of snobbishness, and would make fun
of titles and honours and ridicule aristocratic pretensions; yet he went
somewhat painfully out of his way to get a title from his Party when he
retired from the House of Commons, and was justly indignant at the way
this bargain was broken by the Liberal leaders of that day. I think he
wanted a title at that time chiefly to prove to his constituents that he
had faithfully done his duty by them.

He seldom read a book of any account after he came down from Cambridge,
but hardly a day of his life passed that he did not learn by heart a
number of fine sayings which appealed to him in a book of quotations.
These quotations he would fire off at his family till they cried for
mercy, or another set.

He was far happier among his Herefords at Llanwern than in London or in
Cardiff, but he was for ever postponing the day of his retirement from
public life. He kept all his boy's love for birds and animals, and had
real feeling for beautiful things in nature; but the game of life drew
him always towards the city.

At one time he smoked a prodigious number of cigars and drank a bottle
of port every night, but about twenty years before his death he gave up
both habits on the challenge of a friend and never reverted to them
again. Mr. William Brace, the miners' leader, said to me one day,
"Rhondda has the income of a duke and the tastes of a peasant, whereas I
have the income of a peasant and the tastes of a duke." I told Lord
Rhondda this, and he smiled quietly over the remark, saying, "He's a
very pleasant fellow, Brace: fond of pictures, and a good judge of them,
too. Yes, I suppose my tastes are rather simple when you come to look at
them, but I don't find them cheap." He was on excellent terms with
Labour politicians, knew many of the old miners with real intimacy, and
could handle large bodies of men with consummate tact.

I do not think for a moment that he was a very great man, but I can
think of few Cabinet ministers during the last thirty years who were
anything like so well-fitted to render the nation real and lasting
service. Lord Rhondda had genius, and though a boyish egoist in his
private life he was earnestly and most eagerly anxious to sacrifice all
he possessed for the good of the State. That he came so late and for so
brief a period to power I regard, if not as a national misfortune, at
any rate as a striking condemnation of our methods of government.




LORD INVERFORTH




LORD INVERFORTH 1ST BARON OF SOUTHGATE (ANDREW WEIR)

     Born, 1865. Head of firm of Andrew Weir and Co. shipowners of
     Glasgow, Surveyor General of Supplies, 1917-19; Minister of
     Munitions, 1919.

[Illustration: LORD INVERFORTH]




CHAPTER XII

LORD INVERFORTH

     _"Gratitude is a fruit of great cultivation; you do not find it
     among gross people."_--DR. JOHNSON.


We are keeping up Voltaire's idea of our English character. Instead of
only admirals, however, we are now hanging all sorts and descriptions of
our public servants, but whether to encourage the others or to pay off a
grudge, who shall determine?

Lord Inverforth takes his hanging very well. One might go so far as to
say that he is not merely unaware of the noose round his neck but so
perverse as to think he is still alive. His sense of humour is as good
to him as a philosophic temperament.

I like his sense of humour. It manifests itself very quietly and with a
flash of unexpectedness. One day at luncheon he was speaking of Lord
Leverhulme, whose acquaintance he had made only a week or two before.
Someone at the table said, "What I like about Leverhulme is his
simplicity. In spite of all his tremendous undertakings he preserves the
heart of a boy." With a twinkle in his eyes, and in a soft inquiring
voice, "Have you ever tried to buy glycerine from him?" asked Lord
Inverforth.

This story has a sequel. I mentioned it to Lord Leverhulme. "One day
two Englishmen," he replied at once, "were passing the Ministry of
Munitions. They saw Lord Inverforth going in. One who did not recognize
him said, 'Anyone can tell that man; he's a Scotsman.' To which the
other, who did recognize him, replied, 'Yes, but you couldn't tell
_that_ Scotsman anything else.' You might repeat that story to Lord
Inverforth the next time you meet him."

I did, and the Minister of Munitions accepted the compliment with a good
grace.

It is a fortunate thing for this country that a man of so remarkable a
genius for organization as Lord Inverforth should be found willing to
serve the national interests in spite of an almost daily campaign of
abuse directed against his administration. I sometimes wish he would
bring an action for libel against one of these critics. It would be an
amusing case. He might claim damages of, let us say, L7,000,000 or even
L10,000,000, for he is a man of gigantic interests, claiming these
damages on the score that his alleged libellers have injured his
reputation as a man of business in all quarters of the world. They would
have him the craziest muddler and the most easily swindled imbecile
outside Fleet Street--where alone wisdom is to be found. How one would
enjoy a verbatim report of the cross-examination of these critics _in
their own newspapers_.

I will endeavour to show that Lord Inverforth is not quite so consummate
an ass as his critics would have the public to believe, but rather one
of the very greatest men, in his own particular line, who ever came to
the rescue of a chaotic Government.

Let me not be supposed to insist that a great man of business is a great
man. I regard Lord Inverforth as an exceedingly great man of business,
one of the very greatest in the world, and this fact I hope to make
clear in a few lines, but I do not regard him as a national hero in the
wider sense of that term. He has too many lacks for that, and some of
them essential to true and catholic greatness.

He could never fire the imagination of a people, nor does he convey a
warm and generous feeling to the heart. His enthusiasms are all of a
subdued nature. The driving force in his character which has made him so
powerful a man of business, owes little to the higher virtues. He has
found the plain of life too full of absorbing interest and too crowded
with abounding opportunities for getting on to raise his eyes to the
mountains. This is not to say that he is a man of no ideals, but to say
that his ideals are of too practical and prosaic a kind ever to stir the
pulses with excitement.

Nevertheless I regard him as a born statesman, and could wish that the
conditions of political life made it more easy for a man of his gifts to
serve the country than men with the gifts of, let us say, Dr. Macnamara
or Sir Hamar Greenwood.

The world knows so little of him that perhaps I may begin my political
reflections in this case with a brief summary of his career, such
details of a business man's biography as may contribute to an
understanding of his character.

Andrew Weir, as he was in those days, went to school at Kirkcaldy, where
he was chiefly notable for seeking information on more subjects than
came under the jurisdiction of his pedagogue's ferule. A benign Rosa
Dartle might have been his godmother. He was for ever consulting
encyclopaedias and books of reference. However badly he knew his Greek
verbs or his Latin syntax he had a very shrewd and curious knowledge of
the world when he left school at fifteen to enter the local branch of
the Commercial Bank of Scotland.

At school he had wanted to own ships. This ambition still lodged in his
brain. His thoughts were all at sea. There was no romance in the world
so pleasing to his soul as the romance of the merchant marine. He had a
real passion for harbours. He loved the idea of far voyages. The smells
of cargoes and warehouses composed a sea-bouquet for him which he
esteemed sweeter than all the scents of hedges and wood. If there was a
big man for him in the world it was the sailor.

I don't think he had so profound a feeling for bankers. Not quite so
downright as Lord Leverhulme in stating his opinion of bankers, Lord
Inverforth nevertheless regards them on the whole as lacking in courage
and imagination. He said to himself on his banker's stool, "I will learn
all I can, but I won't stay here; I'll be a shipowner."

In his twentieth year he bought a sailing ship. This was at Glasgow in
the year 1885. He called himself Andrew Weir and Co. He had the feeling
that sailing ships, engaged in coastwise trade, might be bigger. He
announced his intention of building a large coasting ship. People
informed him, with an almost evangelical anxiety as to his commercial
salvation, that he was a lunatic. But the big ship was a success. He
built more and bigger. Then, in 1896 he said to himself, "Why shouldn't
steam be used in the coasting trade?" and he went into steam. Again
there were inquiries after his mental health, but the steamer flourished
like the big sailing ship. At the beginning of what the curate called
"this so-called twentieth century" the firm of Andrew Weir and Co. flew
its flag in all the ports under heaven, and controlled the largest fleet
of sailing ships in the world.

There is this fact to be noticed in particular. Mr. Andrew Weir's
inquisitive mind had not merely mastered the grammar of shipowning but
had crammed the cells of his brain with the whole encyclopaedia of
commercial geography. He knew each season what the least of the islands
of the world was producing, and the crops, manufactures, and financial
condition of every country across the sea. He knew, also, the way in
which the various nations conducted the business of transport. From his
office in Glasgow he could see the whole vast labours of industrious and
mercantile man, that Brobdingnagian ant of this revolving globe, merely
by closing his eyes. The map of the world's commerce was cinematographed
upon his brain.

One thing more remains to be said. Mr. Andrew Weir inherited the moral
traditions of Scotch industry. He grew rich, but not ostentatious. His
increasing fortune went back and back into trade. He never dreamed
either of cutting a figure in plutocratic society or making himself a
public character. A quiet, rather shy, and not often articulate person,
he lived a frugal life, loving his business because it occupied all his
time and satisfied nearly every curiosity of his inquiring mind.

War came, and Mr. Weir was busier than ever with his ships. Not until
1917 did it occur to the Government that the work of buying supplies for
its gigantic armies was something only to be mastered by a man of
business. The nation may be grateful to Mr. Lloyd George for having
discovered in Glasgow perhaps the one man in the British Isles who knew
everything there was to know about commercial geography.

Mr. Andrew Weir entered the War Office in March, 1917, as Surveyor
General of Supply. The position was not merely difficult in its nature,
but difficult in its circumstances. Soldiers are jealous animals, and
not easily does the War Office take to the black-coated man of business.
Mr. Weir was tact itself. For some weeks the soldiers were hardly aware
of his presence, then they learned that the quiet Scotsman in the black
coat was saying the most laudatory things about their organization;
then they found themselves marvellously improving this organization
merely by acting on the most modestly given suggestions from the smooth
civilian; and finally the very greatest of them discovered that somehow
or another Supply had now got a wonderful "move on," and that among
other things this wonderful "move on" had brought the civilian on top of
them--still smooth and modest, still in the background, but absolute
master of the whole machinery.

Lord Inverforth's work soon involved not merely the care of the British
Armies but the care of the Allied nations. What did he do? Besieged by
the unconscionable rascals of the world, fawning or blustering to get
contracts at extraordinary prices, Lord Inverforth struck a master blow
at this international cupidity by obtaining control of the principal raw
materials and instituting the system of costing. Manufacturers got their
contracts on a fixed basis of profits. Lord Inverforth knew the exact
cost of every stage in the manufacture of each article he bought, and he
saw that the manufacturer received from the taxpayer only a small
percentage of profit on that cost.

The greatest thing he did at that time, and the bravest, for he did it
without authorization and at a cost of L250,000,000, was to buy up the
Australasian wool-clip from 1917 to 1920. In this way Germany was doomed
to defeat. England, so to speak, had the clothing of humanity in her
right hand.

But Lord Inverforth also controlled flax, hemp, leather, and jute, so
that the enemy's case was as hopeless as our own was secure.

These gigantic operations involved an expenditure of over L500,000,000.
They brought an actual profit to the British Government of over
L20,000,000, saved the taxpayer Heaven only knows how many millions, and
were conducted at an administrative cost of three shillings for every
L100.

Nothing like it had ever been done before in the world.

Early in 1919 Lord Inverforth was asked to clear up war's rubbish-heap.
He became Minister of Munitions. Within twenty-four hours his body of
expert buyers had become the Disposal Board--a body of expert sellers.

The property of the British taxpayer was scattered over four continents,
and in all manner of places in those four continents. It was composed of
350,000 different kinds of things.

At once Lord Inverforth was again besieged by the rascals. There was an
army of them, composed of many "rings," seeking to buy up these "waste
products of war" at a knock-down price. At the same time came the
blustering contractor, cheated by peace of his contract, with a claim
for millions on one ground or another.

Lord Inverforth made it clear, first, that the stores were to be sold at
a commercial value, and, second, that he would protect the taxpayer
against extortionate claims on the part of contractors. As regards this
second difficulty, pressure was brought against him from the very
highest political quarters to admit certain claims and to avoid legal
action. His reply was, "I will resign before I initial those claims."

He fought them all, and he beat them all. He saved the taxpayer millions
of pounds.

As for the disposal of stores, he has already brought to the Exchequer
over L500,000,000, and before these pages are printed that sum may be
increased to something like L800,000,000.

The least imaginative reader will perceive from this brief statement
that a veritable Napoleon of Commerce has presided over the business
side of the war. Where there was every opportunity for colossal waste,
there has been the most scientific economy; where there was every
likelihood of wholesale corruption, there has been an unsleeping
vigilance of honesty; and where, at the end, there might have been a
tired carelessness resulting in ruinous loss, there has been up to the
very last moment an unremitting enthusiasm for the taxpayers' interest
which has resulted in a credit contribution to the national balance
sheet of L800,000,000.

I have left to the last this not unworthy feature of Lord Inverforth's
labours. Those labours have been given to the nation. He, at the head of
things, and the chiefs of the Disposal Board under him, have refused to
accept any financial reward. One and all they deserted their businesses
and slaved from morning to night in the national interests, and one and
all they gave their services to the State.

What has been Lord Inverforth's reward from the public? From first to
last he has been attacked by a considerable section of the Press, and
has been accused in Parliament of incredible waste and incorrigible
stupidity. Let it be supposed (I do not grant it for a moment) that he
made mistakes, even very great mistakes, still, on the total result of
his gigantic labours, does not the public owe him a debt of gratitude?
Has he not been an honest man at the head of a department where
dishonesty had its chief opportunity? Did he not strike a death blow at
Germany when he secured, with a suddenness which ruined his rivals in
the field, the wool-clip of the world? Is there one man in these islands
who thought for a moment that the overplus of stores would fetch a sum
of L800,000,000?

I will say a word about Slough, which is still the favourite cry of Lord
Inverforth's critics, who have held their peace about the "dumps" since
the publication of the White Paper describing the sale of stores.

Slough was the work of the War Office. It was begun badly. Mistakes of a
serious kind were made. It might have been a financial disaster. But
Lord Inverforth is a chivalrous man. He has never disclosed the fact
that he inherited Slough. In the face of violent criticism he has
maintained a dignified silence, letting the world think that he was the
parent of the idea, and bending all his energies to make it a success.
He has had his reward. Slough has been sold and the transaction shows a
profit for the taxpayer.

During the last years of his administration I saw a good deal of Lord
Inverforth. He was anxious to get back to his own work. He asked again
and again to be relieved of his duties--the machinery he had set up
being in excellent running order. But the Prime Minister begged him to
stay, and he has stayed, against his will and against his own interests,
and all the time he has been subjected to a stream of malignant
criticism.

Let the reader ask himself whether the case of Lord Inverforth is likely
to encourage the best brains in the country to come to the political
service of the nation. Is there not a danger that we may fall into the
American position, and have our great men in commerce and our
second-rate men in politics?

I regard Lord Inverforth as one of the few very great men in commerce
who have the qualities of genuine statesmanship. I am not at liberty to
give my chief grounds for this belief, but before long the world may
know from Lord Inverforth's commercial activities on the Continent that
more than any other man in these islands he has seen the way and taken
the step to reconstruct the shattered civilization of Europe.

On many occasions I have discussed with him the future of mankind. I
have found him the least anxious and always the most self-possessed
observer of events. Quiet, patient, practical, and imaginative, inspired
too by humane motives, he cherishes the unshakable faith that Great
Britain is destined to lead civilization into the future as far as human
eye can see. He places his faith in British character. Rivalry on the
part of powerful nations, even when it is directed against our key
industries, does not disturb him in the least. While others are crying,
"How shall we save ourselves?" he is pushing the fortunes of the British
race in every quarter of the world. And where British trade goes, on the
whole there goes too the highest civilizing power in the world--British
character. It is significant of his faith that he has ever worked to get
the British mercantile marine manned by men of the British race, and to
this end has led the way in improving the conditions of the British
seaman's life.

"All the fallacies and wild theories of revolutionary minds," he once
said to me, "break ultimately on the rock of industrial fact. The more
freely nations trade together the more clearly will it be seen that
humanity must work out its salvation within the limits of economic law.
And the way to a smooth working out of that salvation is by recognizing
the claims of the moral law. We are men before we are merchants. There
is no reason why mistrust should exist between management and labour.
The economic law by no means excludes, but rather demands, humaneness. I
believe that a system of profit sharing can be devised which will bring
management and labour into a sensible partnership. Selfishness on the
part of capital is as bad as selfishness on the part of labour. Both
must be unselfish, both must think of the general community, and both
must work hard. The two chief enemies of mankind are moral slackness and
physical slackness."

There is no man living who would make a better Chancellor of the
Exchequer than this merchant prince who, however, has had enough of
politics and is going back very gladly to his desk in the City. He is
not in the least soured by the public ingratitude, and rightly judges it
to be rather the voice of unscrupulous and stunt-seeking journalism than
the considered judgment of the nation. But he has a very poor opinion of
the way in which the Government of the country conducts its business.




LORD LEVERHULME




LORD LEVERHULME, 1ST BARON (WILLIAM HESKETH LEVER)

     Born 1851, Lancashire. Educ.: Bolton Church Institute; Chairman of
     Lever Bros., Port Sunlight; High Sheriff, Lancaster, 1917.

[Illustration: LORD LEVERHULME]




CHAPTER XIII

LORD LEVERHULME

     _"Dullness is so much stronger than genius because there is so much
     more of it, and it is better organized and more naturally cohesive_
     inter se. _So the Arctic volcano can do nothing against Arctic
     ice."_--SAMUEL BUTLER.


The reader may properly wonder to find the figure of Lord Leverhulme
brought before the mirrors of Downing Street.

But let me explain why I introduce this industrial Triton into the
society of our political minnows.

Lord Leverhulme rejected politics only when politics rejected him. He is
of that distinguished company to whom the House of Commons has turned
both a deaf ear and a cold shoulder. He failed where Mr. Walter Long
succeeded, and fell where Dr. Macnamara rose.

I once asked a Cabinet Minister how it was that a man of such
conspicuous quality had failed to win office. "I really cannot tell
you," he replied with complacency, "but I remember very well that the
House of Commons never took to him. It is curious how many men who do
well outside the House of Commons fail to make good inside."

Curious indeed! But more curious still, we may surely say, that the
House of Commons should continue, in the light of this knowledge, to
enjoy so good an opinion of itself.

I suppose that nobody will now dispute that Lord Leverhulme is easily
the foremost industrialist, not merely in the British Isles, but in the
world. I can think of no one who approaches him in the creative faculty.
Not even America, the country of big men and big businesses, has
produced a man of this truly colossal stature. Mr. Rockefeller is a name
for a committee. Mr. Carnegie was pushed to fortune by his more resolute
henchmen. But Lord Leverhulme, as is very well known in America, has
been the sole architect of his tremendous fortunes, and in all his
numerous undertakings exercises the power of an unquestioned autocrat.

Mr. Lloyd George once remarked to me that the trouble with Lord
Leverhulme is that he cannot work with other men. But this is only true
in part. Lord Leverhulme can work very well with men who are not fools.
When I told him of Mr. Lloyd George's remark, "Well, I don't know," he
replied, "I have been working with other men all my life!" Yes, but
this, too, expresses only part of the truth. He has been working with
these other men as an accepted master.

It is not so in politics. There a man of power cannot pick and choose
his colleagues. He must work with fools as well as men of ability. And
never can he work as a master. Always at the Cabinet table he will find
a cabal of deadheads opposed to the exercise of his authority, and in
the department over which he is set to rule a bunch of traditional
Barnacles, without one spark of imagination between them, who will fight
his new ideas at every turn.

The essence of politics and government is mediocrity. The good sense of
the House of Commons is a conspiracy to resist genius and to enthrone
the average man. A department of the State is well governed only when
its chief Civil Servant, by the grace of God, chances to be a man of
statesmanlike capacity.

Like Lord Rhondda, Lord Leverhulme was approached by the Government
during the numerous crises of the war to render service to the State.
His experience in this respect confirmed his judgment that our system of
government is a chaos which would hardly be tolerated in a business
establishment of the second class. I will give an incident.

It was a matter of grave urgency to the Government that margarine should
be manufactured in this country. A Cabinet Minister begged Lord
Leverhulme, on the score of patriotism, to set up such a factory. Lord
Leverhulme expressed his willingness to take up the project, but said
that he must go to the public for a certain sum of money to carry it
out. The Cabinet Minister made no demur to this very natural proposal,
but suggested that it might be well if Lord Leverhulme would call at the
Treasury and inform them of his purpose.

Accordingly the great industrialist, able as was no other man in this
particular to serve his country's need, called humbly at the Treasury
for permission to ask the public for capital. He was received by an
official who refused point-blank to listen to such a proposition. Lord
Leverhulme mentioned again the name of the Cabinet Minister who had
requested him to embark on this venture. This was nothing to the
official. He had nothing to do with other departments. His business was
to see that the public's money came to the Treasury; he was certainly
not going to countenance the raising of money for an industrial purpose.

You could no more have got into this gentleman's head than you could
have got into the head of a rabbit the idea that money invested in an
essential industrial undertaking pays the State far better than money
advanced to it at the cost of five per cent.

Not to weary the reader with an incident, however telling, the end of
this affair was that after going backwards and forwards between a
Cabinet Minister and a Treasury official, Lord Leverhulme was at last
permitted to ask the public for a small sum of money which he himself
considered inadequate for the Government's purpose.

I have never heard him speak bitterly of his political experiences, but
I have never heard him express anything but an amused contempt for the
antiquated machinery which passes amongst politicians for a system of
government.

     The English [he says] have pushed their fortunes, never by the aid
     of Government, but on the contrary almost always in the teeth of
     Government opposition. There is no man so lacking in imagination as
     a Government official, and no man, unless it is a banker, so
     wanting in courage as a Cabinet Minister. The wealth of England is
     the creation of her industrial population. The brains, the faith,
     the energy of the capitalist, and the brains, the loyalty, the
     strength of labour, these have made us the first nation of the
     world. There has been only one real obstacle in our path. Not
     foreign competition, for that is an incentive, but the cowardice
     and stupidity of Governments. We possess an empire unrivalled in
     its opportunities for trade and commerce, an empire which, you
     would surely think, could not fail to inspire a statesman with
     great ideas. But what happens? We have a Government which thinks it
     has exhausted statesmanship by crippling industry at home in order
     to pay off our war debt as quickly as possible. Instead of setting
     itself to create more wealth, with the wealth of the world lying at
     its feet, it sets itself to dry up the sources of wealth at the
     centre of the empire. But it is no use talking. One thing a
     Government in this country cannot stand is imagination; and another
     is courage. The British Empire is in the hands of a lot of
     clerks--and timid clerks at that. We must do our best to get along
     without statesmanship at the head.

The reader may not remember that some years before Mr. Lloyd George
plunged into a disordered series of social reforms, Lord Leverhulme,
sitting in the House of Commons, introduced Bills of a reasonable and
connected character to ensure workmen against unemployment and to set up
a system of old age pensions. He did not enter Parliament for his own
glorification. He had nothing to gain, but much to lose, by devoting
himself to the business of Westminster. But he believed that he could
benefit the State as a legislator, and he entered Parliament with the
definite intention of introducing order into what was self-evidently a
condition of dangerous chaos. He had a remedy for slums, a remedy for
unemployment, a remedy for the poverty of the workman in old age, and a
remedy for the educational deadlock. Further, he cherished the hope that
he might do something towards developing the wealth and power of the
British Empire, without impairing the spirit of individualism which, in
his faith, is the driving power of British fortune.

How many men who entered the House of Commons with no ideas at all have
been taken to the friendly bosom of that assembly? Moreover, can the
reader name with confidence one Cabinet Minister in the past twenty
years who can fairly be compared in creative genius with this remarkable
man to whom the House of Commons refused the least of its rewards?

I saw Lord Leverhulme on several occasions at the end of the war. He
spoke to me with great freedom of his ideas in the hope that I might
carry them with effect to the Prime Minister. He proved to me that it
was the nonsense of a schoolboy to talk of making Germany pay for the
war, and suggested that the Prime Minister's main appeal to the nation
at the General Election of 1918 should be a moral appeal for unity in
the industrial world. He had one master word for that great moment in
our history. It was the word "Production."

I found this word unpopular in Downing Street. Mr. Lloyd George was more
mindful of Lord Northcliffe than of one "who cannot work with other
men." And so the word went forth to the British peoples: Germany must
pay for the war and the Kaiser must be tried. At the eleventh hour
before the election there was no equivocation. Germany _should_ pay for
the war. The Kaiser _should_ be tried. Instead of a great moral appeal,
which might have prevented all the disastrous conflicts in industry, and
might have preserved the spirit of loyalty which had united the people
during the war, the Prime Minister put himself at the head of a
disreputable mob calling for revenge.

"One disadvantage of the democratic system," says Mr. Birrell, "is that
a Prime Minister no longer feels himself responsible for good
government. He awaits a 'mandate' from a mob who are watching a football
match."

We have only to compare this order of mind with a mind like Lord
Leverhulme's to perceive how it is that politics in our country tend
more and more in the American direction. The big men are outside.
Politics are little more than a platform for a pugilistic kind of
rhetoric. He who can talk glibly and with occasional touches of such
sentimentalism as one finds in a Penny Reciter is assured of the ear of
the House of Commons, and may fairly count on one day becoming a
Minister of State. But the field for the constructive, imaginative, and
creative minds is the field of commerce.

The danger of the State from this condition of things is, unhappily, not
only the loss of creative statesmanship at the head of the
nation--serious as that is. The danger is greater. Small men are more
likely to fall into dishonest ways than big men. There lies, I think,
our greatest danger. It seems to me, observing our public life with some
degree of intimacy, that there is a growing tendency for the gentleman
to fall out of the political ranks and for his place to be filled by the
professional politician, who in many cases appears to be almost entirely
without moral principle. What can become of such a movement save
eventual corruption? At present our politics are stupid but fairly
honest. There are still representatives of the old school in the House
of Commons. But the conquering advance is from the ranks of
professionalism.

I would not have the reader to suppose that I consider Lord Leverhulme a
heaven-sent genius of statesmanship. The British constitution is twelve
men in a box, and the very spirit of that arrangement is distrust of the
expert. Moreover, there is wisdom in the Eastern legend which says that
in making genius the fairies left out one essential gift--the knowledge
of when to stop.

Whether Lord Leverhulme would have made a better statesman than, let us
say, Sir Henry Campbell Bannerman or Mr. Bonar Law it is surely certain,
I think, that a true statesman would have made every conceivable use of
his unusual mind. This, as I look at things, is the ideal method of
government. I do not believe in the business man as statesman. I believe
in the trained, cultured, and incorruptible gentleman as statesman, and
the business man as his adviser.

But until our politics are of a higher order we can hardly expect the
best minds in the nation to feel any attraction to a political career.
More and more the professional politician, the narrow man, the man of
the loud voice and the one idea, the man who has few instincts of
honesty in his mind and no movement of high and disinterested patriotism
in his soul, will press himself upon the attention of democracy and by
intimidating his leaders and brow-beating his opponents force his way
onward to office.

The consideration of this grave peril to the moral character of our
public life brings me to my brief conclusion.




CONCLUSION




CHAPTER XIV

CONCLUSION

     _"While the advances made by objective science and its industrial
     applications are palpable and undeniable all around us, it is a
     matter of doubt and dispute if our social and moral advance towards
     happiness and virtue has been great or any."_--MARK PATTISON.


After all, a nation gets the politics that it deserves. The fault is not
in our stars, but in ourselves, that we are underlings. If the tone of
public life is a low one it is because the tone of society is not a high
one. The remedy, then, is not "Sack the lot," but rather, "Repent, lest
a worse thing befall thee."

It seems to me that a beginning in moral and social reformation might be
made if aristocracy could be encouraged to affirm its ancient rights by
the performance of its inherent duties.

We are a nation without standards, kept in health rather by memories
which are fading than by examples which are compelling. We still march
to the dying music of great traditions but there is no captain of
civilization at the head of our ranks. We have indeed almost ceased to
be an army marching with confidence towards the enemy, and have become a
mob breaking impatiently loose from the discipline and ideals of our
past.

Aristocracy, it must be boldly said, has played traitor to England. It
has ceased to lead, and not because it has been thrust from its rightful
place by the rude hand of democracy, but because it has deliberately
preferred the company of the vulgar. No one has pulled it down, it has
itself descended. It has lost its respect for learning, it has grown
careless of manners, it has abandoned faith in its duty, it is conscious
of no solemn obligations, it takes no interest in art, it is indifferent
to science, it is sick of effort, it has surrendered gladly and
gratefully to the materialism of plutocracy.

If it could have lost itself in plutocracy the harm would not have been
so great; but it still remains for the multitude a true aristocracy, and
looking up to that aristocracy for its standards--an aristocracy whose
private life is now public property--the multitude has become
materialistic, throwing Puritanism to the dogs, and pushing as heartily
forward to the trough as any full-fed glutton in the middle or the upper
ranks of life.

The standards set by the privileged classes at this time are the same
standards as ruled in France before the Revolution. There is no example
of modesty, earnestness, restraint, thrift, duty, or culture. Everything
is sensual and ostentatious, and shamefacedly sensual and ostentatious.

It is time for the best people in aristocracy to set their faces against
this wanton and destructive spirit. It is time a halt was called to
luxury and profligacy; time that the door was shut in the face of
invading vulgarity. Creation has not agonized in bloody sweat through
countless ages of suffering and achievement that those who possess the
highest opportunities for doing good should pervert those opportunities
into a mere platform for the display of a harmful badness. Evolution was
not aiming at Belgravia when it set out on its long journey from the
flaming mist of the nebula. We cannot suppose that Nature is content
with the egoism of the social butterfly. The very blood of dead humanity
cries out for a higher creature.

Aristocracy, one sees, is too apt to regard itself as the spoilt child
of material fortune, instead of humbly and with a sense of deepest
responsibility accepting the heavy duties of moral leadership imposed
upon it by the labours of evolution.

It is to be hoped that the children of the present generation of
aristocracy may grow up with no taste for the betting ring, the card
room, and the night club, or, at any rate, that a certain number of them
may find their highest happiness in knowledge and wisdom rather than in
amateur theatricals and fancy-dress balls. The human mind, after all,
cannot find rest in triviality, and after so long a period of the most
sordid and vulgar self-indulgence it is reasonable to hope that our
aristocracy may experience a reaction.

If men would ask themselves, before they rush out to seek her, What is
Pleasure? and consult the past history of humanity as well as their own
senses and inclinations they could hardly fail, except in the case of
the most degenerate, to discover that the highest happiness is not of
the nursery or the kitchen, but rather of the living spirit.

Observation of nature, love of beautiful things, delight in noble
literature, gratitude for the highest forms of wit and humour, sympathy
with all sorts and conditions of men, reverence for the majesty of the
universe, kindness to all, love of children, and devotion to the home,
these operations of the human spirit bring peace to the heart of man and
continue their ministrations to his happiness with an increasing power
of joy as his personality enlarges itself to receive the highest
revelations of Life.

       *       *       *       *       *

Something far greater than she is now doing might be done by the Church
to restore the sanctions which once ruled human conduct and gave a
living force to public opinion. Religion in these days is obviously too
complaisant. To watch the Church in the world is to be reminded of a
poor relation from the provinces sitting silent and overawed in the
gilded drawing-room of a parvenu. There is no sound of confidence in her
voice. She whines for the world's notice instead of denouncing its very
obvious sins. She is too much in this world, and too little in the
other. She is too careful not to offend Dives, and too self-conscious to
be seen openly in the company of Lazarus. It is impossible not to think
that a coarse world has shaken her faith in Christian virtue. She clings
to her traditions and her doctrines, but she has lost the vigorous faith
in spiritual life which gave beauty to those traditions and has ceased
to set that example of entire self-sacrifice which rendered her
doctrines less difficult of interpretation by the instructed. She has
ceased to preach, even with the dying embers of conviction, that a man
may gain the whole world and yet lose his soul alive.

       *       *       *       *       *

A responsibility hardly to be exceeded by that of aristocracy rests upon
the leaders of Labour. Every voice raised to encourage the economic
delusions of Socialism is a voice on the side of vulgarity and
irreligion. Most of the leaders of Labour know perfectly well that
economic Socialism is impossible, but by not saying so with honest
courage they commit a grave sin, a sin not only against society but
against God. For democracy in England, once the most sensible and
kind-hearted democracy in Europe, is placing its faith more and more in
the power of wages to buy happiness, turning away with more and more
impatience from the divine truth that the Kingdom of Heaven is within
us.

It is a grievous thing to corrupt the mind of the simple. Democracy in
England has been the chief representative of veritable Englishness up to
these days. It was never Latinized or Frenchified. The cottage garden
refused to follow the bad example of the "carpet-bedder." The poor have
always been racy of the soil. They have laughed at the absurdities of
fashion and seen through the pretensions of wealth. They have believed
in heartiness and cheerfulness. All their proverbs spring out of a keen
sense of virtue. All their games are of a manly character. To
materialize this glorious people, to commercialize and mammonize it, to
make it think of economics instead of life, to make it bitter,
discontented, and tyrannous, this is to strike at the very heart of
England.

But though the leaders of Labour are guilty of this corruption, there is
no doubt that the ugliness of spirit in democracy is the reflection of
the ugly life led by the privileged classes. There is no reproach for
this democracy when it looks upward. It sees nothing but the reckless
and useless display of wealth, nothing in the full sunshine of
prosperity but a Bacchanalian horde of irresponsible sensualists,
nothing there but a ramp of unashamed hedonism, and a hedonism of the
lowest order.

Democracy, nursing what it deems to be its economic wrongs, and not
unnaturally regarding the wealthy classes with bitter anger, has yet to
learn that capital was largely the creation of the Puritan character,
and that the prosperity of these British Islands was laid in no small
measure by the thrift and temperance of those who lived simply because
they thought deeply. Capital, without which Labour could have done
little, is not a contrivance of the noisy rich, but the deliberate
creation of virtuous men. Capital, now regarded as an enemy, was once
the visible best friend of Labour.

Where is there now among the possessing classes an example even of
simplicity in dress, modesty in behaviour, temperance in conduct, and
thrift in living? As for any higher example--an example of wisdom, duty,
self-sacrifice, and moral earnestness--it is nowhere visible in our
national life to those who look upward.

Until we recover this ancient spirit our politics must continue their
descent to the abyss, and democracy will listen to the corrupting
delusions of the economic Socialist.

We need the Puritan element in our characters, the Hellenic element in
our minds, and the Christian element in our souls. We must set a higher
value on moral qualities, on intellectual qualities, and on Christian
qualities. We must learn to see, not gloomily and heavily, but with joy
and thanksgiving, that our world is set in the midst of an infinite
universe, that it has a purpose in the scheme of things, that we are all
members one of another, and that there is no grandeur of character,
mind, or soul which can ever be worthy of creation's purpose.

Less flippancy in the world would lead to more seriousness, more
seriousness would lead to greater intelligence, and greater intelligence
would lead to nobler living.

"The cure for us," said George Sand, "is far more simple than we will
believe. All the better natures amongst us see it and feel it. It is a
good direction given by ourselves to our hearts and consciences."

Let each man ask himself, Is my direction worthy of man's past and
hopeful for his future?




       *       *       *       *       *

"_An instantaneous success_"

+Mirrors of Washington+

+Anonymous+

_Octavo. Portraits_

+HARDING+      It does to our great and near-great
+WILSON+       what the "gentleman with a duster"
+HUGHES+       did to eminent Englishmen in "The
+HARVEY+       Mirrors of Downing Street." It tells
+HOUSE+        painfully plain truths about the personalities
+HOOVER+       of those in whose hands our
+ROOT+         destinies lie or have lain. It is searching
+LODGE+        in its analyses, and contains fourteen
+BORAH+        discerning, piercing, sometimes
+KNOX+         satirical, always brilliant, character
+PENROSE+      studies. "And," says the _N.Y. Eve.
+LANSING+      Post_, "it contains indiscretions delicious
+BARUCH+       enough to satisfy the most
+JOHNSON+      exacting." 14 portraits and 14
                    amusing caricatures by Cesare.

_Chicago Daily News_: "We recommend it because it gives a startling and
clear picture of Washington's fourteen great political figures--an
unusual picture, quite different from anything we have had thus far in
American critical writing. A chuckling expose of the good and bad in
American politics ... succinct word pictures, penetrating anecdotes ...
not vicious ... gently, with a charmingly unobtrusive sapiency, the
mysterious pen has traced the ludicrous outlines of the nation's
anointed.... The book should be read by all hands and all parties. It is
not partisan ... the sort of education which may be acquired once in a
lifetime."

+G.P. Putnam's Sons+

+New York London+

       *       *       *       *       *

_By the Author of_ "The Mirrors of Downing Street"

+THE GLASS OF FASHION+

SOME SOCIAL REFLECTIONS

The Author prefers to remain anonymous

He signs himself

A GENTLEMAN WITH A DUSTER

_With Portraits_

"The Gentleman with a Duster" who so mercilessly and brilliantly
clarified the mirrors of Downing Street, now turns his attention to
English Society--and what a drubbing it gets. Perhaps the sorriest
victims to fall under his cleanser are Col. Repington and Margot
Asquith. His name for the latter will surely stick--"The Grandmother of
the Flapper." But society at large is not spared, and there can be no
question as to the sincerity of the author. The _Spectator_, realizing
this, says, "The book is not a piece of mere Grubb Street morality
prepared by someone who thinks that this is the dish the public desires
at the moment."

_The Glass of Fashion_ is at times savagely ferocious, but it
scintillates brilliancy throughout.

+NEW YORK G.P. PUTNAM'S SONS LONDON+

       *       *       *       *       *

+Mrs. Gladstone+

+By Her Daughter Mary Gladstone Drew+

"Presents us with a most beautiful picture of William and Catherine
Gladstone's life."

"_A Gentleman with a Duster_."


"The record this book gives us is from the pen of a loving daughter and
one qualified for this labor of love from intimate personal knowledge."
_New Haven Journal-Courier_.


"The essence of mid-Victorianism at its very best."--_Newark Evening
News_.


"An exquisite portrait of a fine old lady, true helpmate and grande dame
of the Victorian era."
_N.Y. Evening Globe_.

"Remarkable word pictures both of Mrs. Gladstone and her
husband."--_Oregonian_.


+G.P. Putnam's Sons New York London+





End of Project Gutenberg's The Mirrors of Downing Street, by Harold Begbie

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MIRRORS OF DOWNING STREET ***

***** This file should be named 15306.txt or 15306.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/1/5/3/0/15306/

Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Martin Pettit and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team.


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
