The Project Gutenberg EBook of Punch, Or The London Charivari, Vol. 103,
October 8, 1892, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Punch, Or The London Charivari, Vol. 103, October 8, 1892

Author: Various

Editor:   Francis Burnand


Release Date: March 23, 2005 [EBook #15441]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PUNCH ***




Produced by Malcolm Farmer, William Flis, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team.





PUNCH,

OR THE LONDON CHARIVARI.

VOL. 103.



October 10, 1892.




AT A HYPNOTIC SEANCE.

    SCENE--_A Public Hall in a provincial town. The Hypnotist--a
    tall, graceful, and handsome young man, in well-fitting
    evening clothes--has already succeeded in putting most of
    his subjects to sleep, and is going round and inspecting them
    critically, as they droop limply on a semicircle of chairs,
    in a variety of unpicturesque attitudes. The only Lady on
    the platform is evidently as yet in full possession of her
    senses._

_First Female Spectator_ (_to Second_). MARIA MANGLES do take a time
sending off, don't she?

_Second F.S._ (_also a friend of Miss MANGLES_). Yes, that she do--it
gives her such a silly look, sitting there, the on'y one with her
senses about her!

_First F.S._ It's all affectation--she could shut her eyes fast enough
if she _liked_!

_Second F.S._ The 'Ipnotiser's coming round to her now--she'll _have_
to go off now. (_With a not unpleasurable anticipation_.) I expect
he'll make her do all manner o' ridic'lous things!

_First F.S._ Well, it will be a lesson, to her against making' herself
so conspicuous another time. I shan't pity her.

_The Hyp._ (_after a brief colloquy with Miss MANGLES_). I see I am
not likely to succeed with this Lady; so, with many thanks to her on
behalf of myself and the audience for coming forward, I will detain
her no longer.

[Illustration: "I do. Lovely creature!"]

    [_Applause, amidst which Miss M. descends to her seat in the
    body of the hall, with a smile of conscious triumph._

_First F.S._ (_disappointed_). I don't see what she's done to clap
their hands about, myself!

_Second F.S._ Nor I neither--taking up his time all for
nothing--depend upon it she wouldn't have gone up if he hadn't been so
nice-looking!

_First F.S._ I wouldn't like to think _that_ of her myself; but,
anyhow, she didn't get much by it, did she? He soon sent _her_
packing!

_Male Spectator_ (_to a Woman in front of him_). Evening, Mrs.
MIDGELLY--I see they've got your good man up on the platform.

_Mrs. M._ He _will_ go, Mr. BUDKIN! He's gone up every night the
'Ipnotiser's been here, and says he feels it's going to do him good.
So this evening I said I'd come in too, and judge for myself. What
good he expects to get, laying there like a damp dishclout, _I_ don't
know!

    [_Meanwhile the Hypnotist has borrowed a silver-handled
    umbrella from the audience, and thrust it before the faces of
    one or two loutish-looking youths, who immediately begin to
    squint horribly and follow the silver-top with their noses,
    till they knock their heads together._

_Mr. Budkin_ (_to Mrs. MIDGELLY_). He's going to give your husband a
turn of it now.

    [_The umbrella-handle is applied to Mr. M., a feeble-looking
    little man with a sandy top-knot; he grovels after the
    silver-top when it is depressed, and makes futile attempts to
    clamber up the umbrella after it when it is held aloft._

_Mrs. M._ (_severely_). I haven't patience to look at him. A _Kitten_
'ud have had more sense!

_The Hyp._ (_calling up one of the heavy youths_). Can you whistle,
Sir? Yes? Then whistle something. (_The Youth whistles a popular air
in a lugubrious tone._) Now you _can't_ whistle--try. (_The Youth
tries--and produces nothing but a close imitation of an air-cushion
that is being unscrewed._) Now, if I were not to wake him up, this
young gentleman's friends would never enjoy the benefit of his whistle
again!

_Voice from a Back Row_. _Don't_ wake him, Guv'nor, we can _bear_ it!

_Hyp._ (_after restoring the lost talent, and calling up another
Youth, somewhat smartly attired_). Now, Sir, what do you drink?

_The Youth_ (_with a sleepy candour_). Beer when I can get 'old of it.

_A Friend of his in Audience_. JIM's 'aving a lark with him--he said
as 'ow he meant to kid him like--_he_ ain't 'ipnotised, bless yer!

_Hyp._ But you like water, too, don't you? (_JIM admits this--in
moderation._) Try this. (_He gives him a tumbler of water._) Is that
good water?

_Jim_ (_smacking his lips_). That's good water enough, Sir.

_Hyp._ It's bad water--taste it again.

    [_JIM tastes, and ejects it with every symptom of extreme
    disapproval._

_Jim's Friend_. Try him with a drop o' Scotch in it--_'e'll_ get it
down!

_Hyp._ (_to JIM_). There is _no_ water in that glass--it's full of
sovereigns, don't you see? (_JIM agrees that this is so, and testifies
to his conviction by promptly emptying the contents of the glass into
his trousers' pocket_) What have you got in your pocket?

_Jim_ (_chuckling with satisfaction_). Quids--golden sovereigns!

_Hyp._ Wake up! _Now_ what do you find in your pocket--any sovereigns?

_Jim_ (_surprised_). Sovereigns? No, Sir! (_After putting his hand
in his pocket, bringing it out dripping, and dolefully regarding the
stream of water issuing from his leg_.) More like water, Sir.

    [_He makes dismal efforts to dry himself, amidst roars of
    laughter._

_His Friend_. Old JIM didn't come best out o' that!

_Hyp._ (_to JIM_). You don't feel comfortable? (_Emphatic assent from_
JIM.) Yes, you do, you feel no discomfort whatever.

    [_JIM resumes his seat with a satisfied expression._

_An Open-minded Spect._ Mind yer, if this yere 'Ipnotism can prevent
water from being wet, there must be _something_ in it!

_Hyp._ I will now give you an illustration of the manner in which,
by hypnotic influence, a subject can_ be affected with an entirely
imaginary pain. Take this gentleman. (_Indicating the unfortunate
Mr. MIDGELLY, who is slumbering peacefully._) Now, what pain shall we
give him?

_A Voice_. Stomach-ache!

    [_This suggestion, however, is so coyly advanced that it
    fortunately escapes notice._

_Hyp._ Tooth-ache? Very good--we will give him tooth-ache.

    [_The Audience receive this with enthusiasm, which increases
    to rapturous delight when Mr. MIDGELLY's cheek begins to
    twitch violently, and he nurses his jaw in acute agony; the
    tooth-ache is then transferred to another victim, who writhes
    in an even more entertaining manner, until the unhappy couple
    are finally relieved from torment._

_A Spect._ Well, it's better nor any play, this is--but he ought to
ha' passed the toothache round the lot of 'em, just for the fun o' the
thing!

_Mrs. Midgelly_. I should ha' thought there was toothache enough
without coming here to get more of it, but so long as MIDGELLY's
enjoyin' himself, _I_ shan't interfere!

    [_The Hypnot. has impressed his subjects with the idea that
    there is an Angel at the other end of the hall, and they are
    variously affected by the celestial apparition, some gazing
    with a rapt grin, while others invoke her stiffly, or hail her
    like a cab. Mr. MIDGELLY alone exhibits no interest._

_Mr. Budkin_ (_to Mrs. M._). Your 'usband don't seem to be putting
himself out, Angel or no Angel.

_Mrs. M._ (_complacently_). He knows too well what's due to _me_, Mr.
BUDKIN. _I'm_ Angel enough for him!

_Hyp._ I shall now persuade this Gentleman that there is a beautiful
young lady in green at the door of this hall. (_To Mr. M._) Do you see
her, Sir?

_Mr. M._ (_rising with alacrity_). I do. Lovely creature!

    [_He suddenly snatches up a decanter of water, and invites
    his invisible charmer, in passionate pantomime, to come up and
    share it with him--to the infinite delight of the Audience,
    and disgust of his Wife._

AFTER THE PERFORMANCE.

_Mr. Midgelly_ (_as he rejoins his Wife_). I felt the influence more
strongly to-night than what I have yet; and the Professor says, if I
only keep on coming up every night while he's here, I shall soon be
completely susceptible to--Why, whatever's the matter, my dear?

_Mrs. M._ Matter! You're quite susceptible enough as it is; and, now
I know how you can go on, you don't catch me letting _you_ get
'ipnotised again. You and your young lady in green indeed!

_Mr. M._ (_utterly mystified_). Me and my--I don't know what you're
alluding to. It's the first _I've_ heard of it!

_Mrs. M._ (_grimly_). Well, it won't be the last by a long way. Oh,
the insight I've had into your character this evening, MIDGELLY!

    [_Mr. M. is taken home, to realise that Hypnotism is not
    altogether without its dangers._

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: THUNDERS FROM SNOWDON.

    "Nothing could have served my purpose better, than to have
    drawn this illuminating flash out of the thunders," &c.,
    &c.--_Vide Duke of Argyll's Letter to The Times, and his
    Letter to Somebody who had drawn his Grace's attention to Mr.
    Gladstone's Snowdon Speech._

       *       *       *       *       *

MEM. FROM WHITBREADFORDSHIRE.--Sir BLUNDELL MAPLE is reported to
have said, "I'll give you a good tip. Back _Duke_--and my horses for
the Cambridgeshire." New Carpet Knight not successful as a sporting
tipster, seeing that Colonel DUKE, though he fought well, was beaten.
Perhaps Sir BLUNDELL meant _the Duke_, who races every night at Drury
Lane. That's a very good tip, as safe as houses--Drury Lane houses, of
course.

       *       *       *       *       *

A CITY PARADOX.

  Our City Aldermanic lights
    Who talk (and live) a trifle high,
  In stern defence of civic rights
    Profess themselves prepared to die.
  And yet the Aldermanic crowd--
    It's amply true, say what you will--
  With open eyes have just allowed
    The Mayoralty to come to KNILL!

       *       *       *       *       *

"HABITUAL DRUNKARDS COMMITTEE."--An awful-looking heading to a
paragraph! What a picture the imagination may conjure up of a
Committee of Habitual Drunkards! There would be the Honble. TOM TOPER,
Lord SOTT, SAM SOKER, Marquis of MOPPS and BROOMS, Captain FUDDLE,
DICK SWIZZLER, R.N., FRANK FARGONE (of the _Daily Booze_), with TITE
ASA DRUMM in the Chair, or if not, under the table with the others.

       *       *       *       *       *

CONVERSATIONAL HINTS FOR YOUNG SHOOTERS.

(_BY MR. PUNCH'S OWN GROUSE IN THE GUN-ROOM._)

Many manuals have been published for the edification of beginners in
the art of shooting. If that art can indeed be acquired by reading,
there is no reason why any youth, whose education has been properly
attended to, should not be perfectly proficient in it without having
fired a single shot. But, _Mr. Punch_ has noticed in all these volumes
a grave defect. In none of them is any instruction given which shall
enable a man to obtain a conversational as well as a merely shooting
success. Every pursuit has its proper conversational complement. The
Farmer must know how to speak of crops and the weather in picturesque
and inflammatory language; the Barrister must note, for use at the
dinner-table, the subtle jests of his colleagues, the perplexity
of stumbling witnesses, and the soul-stirring jokes of Judges;
the Clergyman must babble of Sunday-schools and Choir-practices.
Similarly, a Shooter must be able to speak of his sport and its varied
incidents. To be merely a good shot is nothing. Many dull men can
be that. The great thing, surely, is to be both a good shot and a
cheerful light-hearted companion, with a fund of anecdotes and a rich
store of allusions appropriate to every phase of shooting. _Mr. Punch_
ventures to hope that the hints he has here put together, may be of
value to all who propose to go out and "kill something" with a gun.

THE GUN.

No subject offers a greater variety of conversation than this. But,
of course, the occasion counts for a good deal. It would be foolish to
discharge it (metaphorically speaking) at the head of the first comer.
You must watch for your opportunity. For instance, guns ought not
to be talked about directly after breakfast, before a shot has been
fired. Better wait till after the shooting-lunch, when a fresh start
is being made, say for the High Covert half a mile away. You can then
begin after this fashion to your host:--"That's a nice gun of yours,
CHALMERS. I saw you doing rare work with it at the corner of the new
plantation this morning." CHALMERS is sure to be pleased. You not only
call attention to his skill, but you praise his gun, and a man's gun
is, as a rule, as sacred to him as his pipe, his political prejudices,
his taste in wine, or his wife's jewels. Therefore, CHALMERS is
pleased. He smiles in a deprecating way, and says, "Yes, it's not a
bad gun, one of a pair I bought last year."

"Would you mind letting me feel it?"

"Certainly not, my dear fellow here you are."

You then interchange guns, having, of course, assured one another that
they are not loaded. Having received CHALMERS's gun, you first appear
to weigh it critically. Then, with an air of great resolution, you
bring it to your shoulder two or three times in rapid succession, and
fire imaginary shots at a cloud, or a tuft of grass. You now hand
it back to CHALMERS, observing, "By Jove, old chap, it's beautifully
balanced! It comes up splendidly. Suits me better than my own."
CHALMERS, who will have been going through a similar pantomime with
your gun, will make some decently complimentary remark about it, and
each of you will think the other a devilish knowing and agreeable
fellow.

From this point you can diverge into a discussion of the latest
improvements, as, e.g., "Are ejectors really valuable?" This is sure
to bring out the man who has tried ejectors, and has given them up,
because last year, at one of the hottest corners he ever knew, when
the sky was simply black with pheasants, the ejectors of both his guns
got stuck. He will talk of this incident as another man might talk of
the loss of a friend or a fortune. Here you may say,--"By gad, what
frightful luck! What did you do?" He will then narrate his comminatory
interview with his gun-maker; others will burst in, and defend
ejectors, or praise their own gun-makers, and the ball, once set
rolling, will not be stopped until you take your places for the
first beat of the afternoon, just as MARKHAM is telling you that his
old Governor never shoots with anything but an old muzzle-loader by
MANTON, and makes deuced good practice with it too.

"Choke" is not a very good topic; it doesn't last long. After you have
asked your neighbour if his gun is choked, and told him that your left
barrel has a modified choke, the subject is pretty well exhausted.

"Cast-off." Not to be recommended. There is very little to be made of
it.

Something may be done with the price of guns. There's sure to be
someone who has done all his best and straightest shooting with a gun
that cost him only L15. Everybody else will say, "It's perfect rot
giving such high prices for guns. You only pay for the name. Mere
robbery." But there isn't one of them who would consent not to be
robbed.

It sometimes creates a pretty effect to call your gun "My old
fire-iron," or "my bundook," or "this old gas-pipe of mine."

"Bore." Never pun on this word. It is never done in really good
sporting society. But you can make a few remarks, here and there,
about the comparative merits of twelve-bore and sixteen-bore. Choose
a good opening for telling your story of the man who shot with a
fourteen-bore gun, ran short of cartridges on a big day, and was, of
course, unable to borrow from anyone else. Hence you can deduce the
superiority of twelve-bores, as being the more common size.

All these subjects, like all others connected with shooting, can be
resumed and continued after dinner, and in the smoking-room. Talk of
the staleness of smoke! It's nothing to the staleness of the stories
to which four self-respecting smoking-room walls have to listen in the
course of an evening.

(_To be continued._)

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: A PIS-ALLER.

"ARE THERE ANY NIGGERS ON THE BEACH THIS MORNING, MAMMIE?"

"NO, DEAR; IT'S SUNDAY MORNING."

"OH, THEN I MAY AS WELL GO TO CHURCH WITH YOU!"]

       *       *       *       *       *

BY-AND-BY LAWS FOR TRAFALGAR SQUARE.

(_WHEN MEETINGS ARE HELD IN "TIMES OF POLITICAL OR SOCIAL CRISES_.")

1. Cabs, omnibuses, carriages, and pedestrians will be expected to
keep clear of the space occupied by the Demonstrators.

2. To prevent destruction of glass and removal of property from shop
windows, tradesmen will be expected to put up their shutters several
hours before the holding of the meeting.

3. No particular notice will be paid to the transference of property
from one leader of labour to another. If done by stealth, it will be
accepted as a proof of secret Socialism.

4. No objection will be raised to combats amongst the Demonstrators,
with the restriction that no Government property is injured.

5. As the maintaining of the road is a matter of contract,
Demonstrators wishing to emphasise their opinions, must bring their
own stones.

6. As a good deal of property is expected to change hands during the
various proceedings, an application with a description of lost goods,
and photograph of supposed thief, can be addressed to the Chief
Inspector of Police, Scotland Yard.

7. These regulations (which are tentative) will be in force until
after the next General Election, when a fresh series will be
published, to be followed by others as occasion may require.

       *       *       *       *       *

A POOR ROAD TO LEARNING.

    SCENE--_Interior of a School Board Office. Official discovered
    hard at work, doing single-handed in London what is done by
    nearly a thousand officials combined in "Bonnie Scotland."
    Enter Female Applicant, with infant._

_Applicant_. Please, Sir, here's my boy. Can you take him?

_Official_. Certainly. Has he had any education?

_App._ Well, as he's rising five, not much.

_Off._ But does he know anything? For instance, has he learned any
English history?

_App._ Not that I know of.

_Off._ Has he dipped into geography?

_App._ Well, I don't think he has.

_Off._ Can he cipher at all?

_App._ Not very well.

_Off._ Does he know what two and two make?

_App._ Well, he has never said he does.

_Off._ Can he write?

_App._ Well, no, he doesn't write.

_Off._ But I suppose he can read? Come, he at least can read?

_App._ Well, no, Sir, I am afraid he's not much of a scholar. I don't
think he can read.

_Off._ Then he is absolutely ignorant--miserably ignorant.

_App._ Very likely, Sir,--you know best.

_Off._ Well, now, my good woman, I will tell you what we will do with
him. We will teach him to read, write, and cipher, and give him an
excellent education.

_App._ And you will take care of him, Sir?

_Off._ Of course we will take care of him; and as for his education,
we will--

_App._ Oh, Sir, so long as you looks after him, never you mind about
his education!

    [_Exit infantless._

       *       *       *       *       *

TO MAUD.

_A PENITENT ROUNDEL._

  I called you MAUDE. I only meant to tease,
    But somehow, ere I ended, came to laud
  Your charms in my poor verses. So in these
          I called you MAUDE.

  "My name is _MAUD_."
      And I am overawed,
    Forgive the indiscretion if you please.
  The spirit Truth, they tell me, is abroad,
    And since she sojourns still across the seas,
  I swear I knew the final _e_ a fraud--
    So that you suffered from no lack of _e_'s
          I called you MAUDE!

       *       *       *       *       *

KNILL NISI BOIMUM.

[Illustration: Lord Mayor Elect Knill and the Livery Goose.]

The good common sense of the Common Councilman and Liverymen of the
City,--Liverymen not to be led astray by any false lights,--coupled
with their truly English love of fairplay, prevailed, and the City
Fathers on Goose Day were prevented from following in the goose-steps
of that Uncommon Councilman who, bearing the honoured names of BEAUFOY
(a fine old Norman-Baron title!) and of MOORE (shade of Sir THOMAS!),
made so extraordinary a display of bigotry and ignorance as, it is to
be hoped, is rare, and becoming rarer every day, among our worthy JOHN
GILPINS of credit and renown East of the Griffin.

But in spite of this nonsensical hot-gospelling rant, Alderman and
Sheriff STUART KNILL was elected Lord Mayor, while BEAUFOY MOORE
was, so to speak, no MOORE, and, in fact, very much against his will
and wish, was reduced to NIL. WILLY-KNILLY he had to cave in. _Mr.
Punch_ congratulates the Lord Mayor Elect, but still more does he
congratulate the City Fathers on rising above paltry sectarianism, so
utterly unworthy of time, place, and persons, and for standing up,
in true English fashion, for freedom of worship coupled with absolute
Liberty of Conscience.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE PRIDE OF THE EMPIRE.

[Illustration: "A Warde with you."]

[Illustration: Stock Exchange Swell (Empire Period).]

At this moment there is really a very excellent extertainment at
the Empire Theatre of Varieties, something, or rather many things
of which the Management may, and should be proud. A capital troupe
of Bicyclists, a Spanish Dancer and singer--whose gestures to the
multitude are more intelligible than her language--a graceful,
serpentine dancer, and "a very peculiar American Comedian"--all these
are a part of the programme. But the best item in this liberal bill of
fare is _Round the Town_, a characteristic Ballet, in five _tableaux_.
The composers of this pleasing piece are Madame KATTI LANNER, and Mr.
GEORGE EDWARDES. As the lady is well known for her admirable dances,
it may be safely presumed that the gentleman is solely responsible for
the plot, or rather "the argument." It runs as follows:--"_Dr. Burch_,
newly arrived in London with his pupils, wishes to show them the
sights. What better to begin with than Covent Garden Market in the
early morning?" Quite so, the more especially as the lads must be very
backward boys. There are six of them, and the youngest seems about
thirty, and the oldest about double that age. The Doctor must have
rescued them from Epsom Race Course, and apparently is attempting to
give them an education fitting them to follow what seems to be his own
calling--the profession of an undertaker. These elderly pupils follow
their kind preceptor (for, although he is called _Burch_, there is
not the slightest suggestion of the rod about him, and, moreover, his
charges are really too elderly to receive chastisement) to the Royal
Exchange, the Thames Embankment, and, lastly, to the Empire. During
their travels, they meet _Mr. Rapless_, known as "the Oofless Swell,"
(a part amusingly played by Mr. W. WARDE), and _John Brough_, a
carpenter with a taste for ballet costumes and drink, the carpenter's
wife, and the carpenter's child. _Dr. Burch_, who is evidently
easy-going, but good-hearted, after flirting with a lady who has her
boots cleaned before the Royal Exchange, suddenly developes into a
philanthropist, not to say a divine. On the carpenter's wife and
child appearing on the Thames Embankment in the characters of would-be
suicides, the worthy pedagogue convinces them (to quote the programme)
"That they have no right to take away the lives which the Almighty has
placed in their hands." Mother and child are quickly convinced, and
the neat but drunken father (Signorina MALVINA CAVALAZZI) appearing
on the scene, the good man informs him that his wife and child are
dead, "driven to an untimely grave by his (the intemperate but natty
artisan's) desertion and cruelty." The effect of this inaccurate
statement is startling. To quote once more from the argument,
"incontinently the now penitent ruffian falls fainting to the ground."
But he is brought back to himself, his better self, by his child
whispering "Father!" The situation is full of pathos, even when
witnessed from the Stalls. Recovering his senses, the converted
carpenter promptly borrows money from the good old Doctor, and when
that estimable gentleman is about to enter the Empire Theatre of
Varieties (accompanied by his school), a little later he has the
"satisfaction of seeing his _protege Mortimer_ (the ex-ruffian),
returning contentedly from his work." This is the simple but pathetic
story that Mr. GEO. EDWARDES touchingly tells with the assistance of
a full _corps de ballet_, five _tableaux_, and last, but certainly not
least, the hints of Madame KATTI LANNER.

[Illustration: Jolly Tar A.B. "Hip, Hip, Hooray!"]

[Illustration: Dramatic Situation on the Embankment, as seen from
Empire Stalls.]

There are many remarkable persons in _Round the Town_. Notably
an effeminate but substantial stock-broker, who looks like a
stock-jobber's maiden-aunt in disguise. Another important personage is
a representative of the Navy, whose figure suggests as an appropriate
greeting, "Hip, hip, hip, hooray!" Both these characters are
well-played, and although subordinate parts, make their mark, or
rather, we should say, score heavily. Altogether; the ballet is
excellent both in dances and plot. The first is a testimony of the
good head of Madame KATTI LANNER, and the last of the equally good
heart of Mr. GEORGE EDWARDES. There is no doubt that _Round the Town_
will draw all London to see (in its realistic scenes) all London
drawn!

       *       *       *       *       *

WRITTEN A HUNDRED YEARS HENCE.

(_FROM A COLLECTION OF COMMUNICATIONS SUPPLIED BY OUR PROPHETIC
COMPILER._)

DEAR MR. PUNCH,--Forgive me for addressing you, but the urgency of
the occasion warrants the intrusion. A hundred years since, the old
Fighting _Foudroyant_ was sold by the Admiralty to be broken up. The
moment the Public of the Period learned the cruel fact through the
customary sources of information, they flew to the rescue. Headed by
the then LORD MAYOR, they raised a fund to bring back the discarded
vessel, and yet in those distant days there were they who denied
that the _Foudroyant_ had ever done anything in particular. And now
we propose doing the same thing. On the Thames there is an ancient
steamboat called _Citizen Z_, that once belonged to the Company that
started penny river lifts. It is certainly rather out of date, but is
full of historical memories. It is said that the Cabinet travelled
to Greenwich on its venerable boards, where they feasted on the
half-forgotten Whitebait, and the entirely, superseded Champagne. It
has carried, at one time or another, all the nobility to Rosherville,
there to spend (as the old saying went) "a happy day," and yet it is
proposed to break it up! Out upon the thought! Have we no veneration
for our relics of the past? Cannot we appreciate a boat that should
have had an honoured place in the Museum at Woolwich? Do not let this
act of Vandalism be done. Save the steamer for the sake of its past.

Yours truly, A REAR-ADMIRAL.

_H.M.S. Electric-Balloon, Skye._

DEAR MR. PUNCH,--I appeal to you, and I know I shall not appeal in
vain. The picturesque Cabman's Shelter in the middle of Piccadilly is
threatened! I hope you will exert your influence to preserve it. It
absolutely teems with historical associations. Lord RANDOLPH CHURCHILL
is supposed to have used it for writing his famous letter on the
Poor-Laws, and to this day is shown the initials of CHARLES STUART
PARNELL which were carved by that celebrated statesman on one of its
benches about the middle of the last century--probably in 1854. And
why is it to be removed? Simply because it is said to impede the
traffic! Could anything be more absurd? Do, pray, save it from the
hand of the ruthless "improver." Yours truly,

ONE WHO RESPECTS THE PAST.

_Tumbledowns, West Kensington_ (_late Reading_).

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: OVERHEARD IN THE HIGHLANDS.

_First Chieftain_. "I SAY, OLD CHAP, WHAT A DOOSE OF A BORE THESE
GAMES ARE!"

_Second Chieftain_. "AH, BUT, MY DEAR BOY, IT IS THIS SORT OF THING
THAT HAS MADE US SCOTCHMEN _WHAT WE ARE_!!"]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: A NUISANCE.

_Miss Priscilla_. "YES; IT'S A BEAUTIFUL VIEW. BUT TOURISTS ARE IN THE
HABIT OF BATHING ON THE OPPOSITE SHORE, AND THAT'S RATHER A DRAWBACK."

_Fair Visitor_. "DEAR ME! BUT AT SUCH A DISTANCE AS THAT--SURELY--"

_Miss Priscilla_. "AH, BUT WITH A _TELESCOPE_, YOU KNOW!"]

       *       *       *       *       *

AT LAST!

(_JEREMIAD BY A MIDDLE-AGED MARTYR TO THE GREAT SEASIDE
SUPERSTITION._)

    ["To middle-aged people, at all events, nothing can be more
    trying and deleterious than holidays."--_Daily News_.]

  Oh, thanks to thee, thanks to thee, sage unconventional!
    Heaven be blest, the truth's out, then, at last!
  Holiday woes--'twould take volumes to mention all!--
    Now, in the lump, meet a shrewd counterblast.
  _Trying?_ Of course they are! _Most deleterious?_
    Scribe, let me clasp thee, in thought, to this breast!
  Holiday-hunting is Man's most mysterious,
            Maddening guest!

  _Quixote_, I swear, was a model of sanity,
    When with the Holiday-seeker compared.
  Fidgety folly, and fussy inanity.
    These be the figments by which we are snared.
  Soon as you're drawn from your own cosy drawing-room,
    Far over flood, field, or foam--for your sins--
  Then, when your breast makes for vulturine gnawing room,
            Bother begins!

  Bother, that bugbear of bufferish Middle-Age!
    Swift "scurry-funging" may do for the young,
  The "hey-diddle-diddle, the Cat-and-the-fiddle" age.
    "Over the moon" I myself once had sprung,
  Thirty years syne, in sheer fervour athletical--
    Now, like the dog, I would laugh, and look on.
  Once, with sheer "drive," I'd a sense sympathetical--
            Now I have none!

  Holiday? Term, Sir, is simply a synonym
    For--waste of tissue! What doctor will dare
  Tell his poor patients so? _I_'ll put _my_ tin on him!
    Rest? Recreation? Pick-up? Change of air?
  All question-begging fudge-phrases of sophistry!
    Let city-toilers who're fagged or "run down,"
  Autumnal _quiet_ (in home or in office), try;
            _Not_ "out of town."

  Out of town? Where is the term that's claptrappier?
    _Means_ out of temper, or out of your mind.
  Boot-black or old crossing-sweeper's far happier,
    Tied to his task in the town--as you'll find.
  Picking up coppers far better than picking up
    Shells by the sea, or sham friends on the snore.
  Bah! What have buffers to do with such kicking-up
            Heels? It's a bore!

  Who'll start a League to be called Anti-Holiday?
    Bet half the middle-aged men-folk will join!
  Then we _might_ get an occasional jolly day,
    Free from the pests who perplex and purloin.
  "Health-Resort" quackery, portmanteau-packery,
    Cheat-brigade charges and chills I might miss.
  Dear-bought jimcrackery, female knicknackery!--
            Oh! 'twere pure bliss!

       *       *       *       *       *

BRAVO, BOBBY!

    ["The Brighton Police have received orders to move on all
    organ-grinders."]

  Bless you, Brighton Bobby, bless you,
    Boldly bringing balmy bliss!
  Barrel--organ barred--I guess you
    Banish blatant bands with this.

  Brazen blasts, by boobies blowing,
    Bad as barrel's buzz can be.
  Bid them budge! I'd vote for throwing
    Beggars like these in the sea.

  Battered bands from Bremen, Berlin;
    Bearded bandits, born between
  Bari and Bergamo, hurl in!
    Bathed--that's what they've never been!

  Britons all, oh, be not laggards,
    But, like Brighton, move them on!
  Bad, bacteria-hearing black-guards,
    Beastly, blatant brutes, begone!

       *       *       *       *       *

ANOTHER ABOUT THE NEW LORD MAYOR ELECT.--"It's _a Knill wind_ that
blows nobody any good." _Signed_, BOGIE MOORE.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: THE OLD SPIRIT.

["_Gentlemen of the Life Guards,--Forward--March!"--_Sir WALTER SCOTT.
"_Old Mortality_."]

L'ESPRIT DE CORPS (_loq._). "SHAME! SHAME!--IS IT THUS YOU USE YOUR
SWORDS? WHATEVER MAY HAVE HAPPENED, ARE WE NOT STILL 'GENTLEMEN OF THE
LIFE GUARDS'?"

    "It is stated that Lord METHUEN, after censuring the
    conduct of the regiment, requested the men who had cut the
    saddle-panels to step forward and own the act, which would in
    that case be dealt with simply as a case of insubordination.
    He gave them a few minutes to consider, but as none of them
    made any admission, he intimated that he should have to report
    the matter to the Commander-in-Chief as a mutiny."--_Daily
    Paper_, 30th Sept., 1892.]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: AN ABSENT AUDIENCE.

_Socialist_. "Ah!--it's all very well yer looking at _Me_, with yer
Smiles AND yer Jeers...."]

       *       *       *       *       *

DE CORONA.

    ["The shape of the hat is another token in which individuality
    asserts itself, and the angle at which it is worn. There are
    men who vary this angle with their different moods."--_Article
    on "Men's Dress," Daily News, Sept. 10._]

  You ask why I gaze with devotion
    At ALGERNON's features, my love?
  Nay, you are astray in your notion,
    My glance is directed above;
  His hair may be yellow or ruddy,
    No longer I'm anxious for that,
  But now I incessantly study
          The tilt of his hat.

  At times it will carelessly dangle
    With an air of aesthetic repose,
  At others will point to an angle
    Inclined to the tip of his nose;
  When it rests on the side of his head, he
    Will smile at whatever befalls,
  When pushed o'er his brow, we make ready
          For numerous squalls!

  When he starts for his train to the City
    It is put on exactly upright,
  And who would not view it with pity
    Return, mud-bespattered, at night?
  When early, so polished and glowing,
    Jammed on at haphazard when late;
  It forms a barometer, showing
          His mood up to date.

  And you, who are young and unmarried,
    Give heed to my counsel, I pray;
  Do not, I entreat you, be carried
    By wealth or affection away;
  The heroine, novelists mention,
    "Eyes fondly his features." Instead,
  Observe, for _your_ part, with attention,
          The hat on his head!

       *       *       *       *       *

A NEW COLLECTION OF _HIMS_, ANCIENT AND MODERN.--The Church Congress
at Folkestone.

       *       *       *       *       *

LADY GAY'S SELECTIONS.

_Mount Street, Grosvenor Square._

DEAR MR. PUNCH,

We were not overcrowded last week at Newmarket, and really the more
one takes racing from a business point of view, the more attractive it
becomes!--at least, I have found it so myself ever since it has been
my duty to acquire information for the benefit of my readers.

There was only one thing that annoyed me during the week, and that
was the inconsiderate behaviour of _Windgall_ in winning the October
Handicap, although it was a most extraordinary confirmation of my
remarks anent his performance in the Leicester Handicap, in my last
letter; but it _is_ annoying that, when you select a horse to win a
race, he runs _second_, and directly after wins a race for which he is
_not_ selected, beating the horse chosen by a length!--it puzzles me
completely, as it is impossible in this case to put it down to want
of good breeding! We were sorry not to have the _Buccaneer-Orvieto_
match decided, as it would have been the event of the meeting; but,
as the old proverb runs, "a wise owner is merciful to his beast," so
_Orvieto_ had an afternoon's rest at the price of L100!--rather more
than some people might be inclined to pay for a game of forfeits!

The time is not yet ripe--(has anyone _ever_ seen time get ripe, I
wonder?)--for disclosing what I know about the Cesarewitch--(I never
know whether I've spelt that correctly or not!--and the more you look
at it the "wronger" it seems!)--but I may mention that I've heard
great accounts of _Kingkneel_, who was bought the other day for Sir
GREENASH BURNLEY (the latest favourite of fortune, and beloved of
the ring)--and had he not earned a penalty--(this expression ought
to be changed, as it implies, to my mind, which is an _excellent_
average sample; a misdemeanor)--by winning a paltry thousand pounds
race somewhere; I really believe the Cesare--no!--not again!--was
at his mercy--but now, as the turf-writer puts it--"I shall look
elsewhere!"--as if _that_ would make any difference!--but of this
race, more anon, and meantime, those who are fond of the "good things"
of this life must not miss my selection for the big race of next week
at Kempton--on the Jubilee Course, which said course, I am told, is by
no means a Jubilee for the jockeys, owing to the danger in "racing for
the bend."

There are several horses entered who seem to have great chances,
making the race as difficult as a problem in _Euclid_--but my
selection will most certainly be "there, or thereabouts," which is a
comforting, if somewhat vague reflection.

Yours truly, LADY GAY.

DUKE OF YORK STAKES SELECTION.

  The muse is dull!--the day is dead!
    And vain is all endeavour
  To light afresh the poet's spark--
    I _can't_ find a rhyme for the winner,
          _Iddesleigh_,

P.S.--Really it's most thoughtless of owners to harass one with such
names!

       *       *       *       *       *

"IN THIS STYLE, TWO-AND-SIX."

(IN THE POUND).

SIR,--I have been much struck with the suggestion to do without hats,
and have made trial of the system. It has also made trial of _me_,
in the way of colds in the head, bronchial catarrh, &c., but I still
persevere. _It's so much cheaper!_ I have sold my stock of old
hats for half-a-crown, and calculate that I shall save _quite three
shillings per annum_ by not buying new ones. Surely anybody can see
that this is well worth doing! I am now seriously contemplating the
possibility of _doing without boots_!

Yours truly, SAVE THE SAXPENCES.

SIR,--Talk about hair growing if you leave off hats! My hair
was falling off in handfuls a little time ago. Did I abjure hats
altogether? Not being a born idiot, I did not. But I saw that what was
needed was proper ventilation aloft. So I had a specially-constructed
top-hat made, with holes all round it. In fact there were more holes
than hat, and the hatter scornfully referred to it as a "sieve." The
invention answered splendidly. There was a thorough draught constantly
rushing across the top of my head, with the speed and violence of a
first-class tornado. My locks, before so scanty, at once began to grow
in such profusion that it now seems impossible to stop them, except
by liberal applications of "Crinificatrix," the Patent Hair Restorer.
_That_ checks the growth effectually. My general name among chance
acquaintances is "Old Doormat." You can judge how thick my hair must
be and I ascribe it entirely to the beneficent action of the draught,
as before,

Yours, WELL-COVERED.

DEAR SIR,--Why would it be a mistake to say that a Negro was "as
black as my hat?" _Because I never wear one._ The only inconvenience
resulting is in wet weather--but, even then, I am prepared for all
emergencies. I keep in my pocket a little square of black waterproof,
to cover my head when it rains. In an Assize town, the other day, I
was followed by an angry crowd, who imagined that I was one of the
Judges, and that I had gone mad, and was walking about the streets
with the black cap on! But all true reformers are treated in this way,
even in England, the land of Liberty.

Yours, HATZOFF.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: THE JERRY-BUILDING JABBERWOCK.]

  "Beware the Jabberwock, my son!
    The jaws that bite, the claws that catch!"--
  Ah, CARROLL! it is not in fun
    Your song's light lilt we snatch.

  Our Jabberwock's a _real_ brute,
    With mighty maw, and ruthless hand,
  Who ravage makes beyond compute
    In Civic Blunderland.

  Look at the ogre's hideous mouth!
    His tiger-teeth, his dragon-tail!
  O'er Town, East, West, and North and South,
    He leaves his slimy trail.

  And where he comes all Beauty dies,
    And where he halts all Greenery fades.
  Pleasantness flies where'er he plies
    His gruesomest of trades.

  He blights the field, he blasts the wood,
    With breath as fierce as prairie flame;
  And where sweet works of Nature stood,
    He leaves us--slums of shame.

  The locust and the canker-worm
    Are not more ruinous than he.
  "I'll take this Eden--for a term!"
    He cries, and howls with glee.

  "Beauty? Mere bosh! Charm? Utter rot!
    What boots your 'Earthly Paradise,'
  Until 'tis made 'A Building Plot'?
    Then it indeed looks nice!

  "O Jerry Street! O Jerry Park!
    O Jerry Gardens, Jerry Square!--
  You won't discover--what a lark!--
    One 'touch of Nature' there!

  "'This handsome Villa Residence'
    Means mud-built walls and clay-clogged walks;
  And drains offensive to the sense,
    And swamps whence fever stalks.

  "Beauty's best friends I drive away,
    Artists who sketch, ramblers who rove,
  Lovers who spoon, children who play,--
    All, all who Nature love.

  "Nor do I give them wholesome homes
    For verdant meads--no, there's the fun!
  Stuccodom, frail and sickly, comes
    After 'Lot Twenty-One!'

  "I make a clearing, dig a trench,
    Run up a shell of rotten bricks.
  And thus the rule of sham and stench
    Upon the 'site' I fix.

  "The ugly and unhealthy still
    Associate with the name of Jerry;
  And thus I work my wicked will,
    And flourish, and make merry!"

  'Twas so the Jerry-Jabberwock
    Sang in a suburb, void of shame,
  Blunderland's civic will to mock,
    And put its sense to shame.

  This ogre of our towns to slay,
    Where is the urban "Beamish Boy"?
  CARROLL, when comes that "frabjous day,"
    _We_'ll "chortle in our joy."

  Young County Council, are _you_ one?
    'Tis said you're but a Bumble-batch!
  Beware the Jobjob Bird, and shun
    The Bigot-Bandersnatch!

  We'll pardon much that seems absurd,
    Excuse some blunders that bewilder,
  If you'll but "draw your vorpal sword"
    And slay--the Jerry-Builder!

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: METAMORPHOSIS.

("_We know what we are, but we know not what we may be._")

_Conductor_. "TAKE YER TO THE CIRCUS, AND THERE YOU'LL CHANGE INTO A
HELEPHANT."

_Master Kenneth_. "OH, MOTHER, WHAT A JOLLY CIRCUS! MAY WE GO AND SEE
THE OLD GENTLEMAN CHANGE INTO AN ELEPHANT?"]

       *       *       *       *       *

THE MODERN MERCURY.

[Illustration]

  Behold that urchin, occupied
  In counting with an honest pride
    The marbles he has won!
  O tardy messenger of fate,
  Without distinction, small and great,
  Their telegrams, perforce, await
    Until your game is done.

  Perchance a philosophic strain
  Makes you regard as wholly vain
    Our human bliss and woes;
  What matters, whether State affairs,
  Or news of good, or weighty carts,
  Or tidings relative to shares
    Within your bag repose?

  Well, not by me will you be blamed;
  I like to see you not ashamed
   To dawdle for awhile;
  You furnish, by example sage,
  A moral for our busy age;
  And so, though others fume and rage,
    I watch you with a smile.

  He moves at length, and now we'll see
  Which way ... This telegram for me?
    Oh, worst of human crimes
  Is such delay!--it's monstrous quite!
  I'll forward a complaint to-night!
  Here, pen and paper--let me write
    A letter to the _Times_!

       *       *       *       *       *

MRS. RAM was heard to remark that she "didn't know a finer body of
men than the Yokel Loamanry." Probably the old lady meant the Local
Yeomanry.

       *       *       *       *       *

LETTERS TO ABSTRACTIONS.

NO. XVI.--TO YOUTHFULNESS.

You are much misunderstood. For it is supposed that those who in this
world bear your stamp upon them are to be recognised without trouble
by the mere calculation of their years of life. No notion can be
further from the truth. Mere absence of wrinkles, the presence or
colour of the hair on the head, the elasticity of limbs, these do not
of themselves, I protest, testify to youthfulness. I knew a lad of
twenty, who, in the judgment of the world, was young. In mine he was
one of the hoariest as he was one of the least scrupulous of men. No
veteran that I ever met could have put him up to any trick, or added
any experience to his store. He seemed to have a marvellous and
intuitive experience of the ways of life, and of the tricks of men.
No shady society came amiss to him. He gambled, in his way, as coolly,
and with as careful a precision, as _Barry Lyndon_; he met the keen
frequenters of the betting-ring on equal terms, and contrived, amid
that vortex to keep his head above water. He had a faultless taste
in wine--he knew a good cigar by an instinct. It is hardly necessary
to add that, with all these accomplishments, he held and expressed
the meanest opinion of human nature in general. Not even Sir ROBERT
WALPOLE could have more cynically estimated the price at which men
might be bought. As for women, this precocious paragon despised them,
and women, as is their wont, repaid him by admiration, and, here
and there, by genuine affection. I shudder to think how he might
have developed in the course of years. It happened, however, that a
shipwreck--a form of disaster against which cynicism and precocity
afford no protection--removed him from the world before he had come of
age. Now, to call this infant young, would have been a mockery. To all
outward appearance, indeed, he was a boy, but his mind was that of a
selfish and used-up _roue_ of sixty, without illusions, and without
hope.

[Illustration]

Let me pass to a more pleasant subject, and one with which you,
my dear boy, are more closely connected. I refer to my old friend.
General VANGARD, the kindest and best-natured man that ever drew
half-pay. Seventy years have passed over his head, and turned his hair
to silver, but his heart remains pure gold without alloy. In vain do
his whiskers and moustache attempt to give a touch of fierceness to
his face. The kindly eyes smile it away in a moment. He stands six
feet and an inch, his back his broad, his step springy; he carries
his head erect on his massive shoulders with a leonine air of
good-humoured defiance. To hear him greet you, to feel his hand-shake,
is to get a lesson in geniality. I never knew a man who had so
whole-hearted a contempt for insincerity and affectation. It was
only the other day that I saw little TOM TITTERTON, of the Diplomatic
Service, introduced to him. TOM is a devil of a fellow in Society.
He warbles little songs of his own composition at afternoon teas,
he insinuates himself into the elderly affections of stony-hearted
dowagers, he can lead a _cotillon_ to perfection, and is universally
acknowledged as an authority on gloves and handkerchiefs. It was at a
shooting-party that he and the General met. The little fellow advanced
simpering, and raised a limp and dangling hand to about the height
of his eyes. The General had extended his in his usual bluff and
unceremonious manner. Naturally enough the hands failed to meet. A
puzzled look came over the General's face. In a moment, however,
he had grasped the situation, and TITTERTON's hand, and shaken the
latter with a ferocious heartiness. "OW!" screamed TOM. It was a short
exclamation, but a world of agony was concentrated into it. "The
old bear has spoilt my shooting for the day," said TITTERTON to me
afterwards, as he missed his tenth partridge. That very evening, I
remember, there was a great discussion in the smoking-room on the
subject of wrestling. One of the party, a burly youth of twenty-six,
boasted somewhat loudly of the tricks that a Cornishman had lately
taught him. For a long time the General sat silently puffing his
cigar, but at length the would-be wrestler said something that roused
him. "Would you mind showing me how that's done?" he said; "I seem to
remember something about it, but it was done differently in my time.
No doubt your notion's an improvement." Nothing loth the burly one
stood up. I don't quite know what happened. The General seemed to
stoop with outstretched hands and then raise himself with a spring as
he met his opponent. A large body hurtled through the air, and in a
moment the younger man was lying flat on the carpet amidst the shouts
of the company. "It's the old 'flying mare' my boy," said the General
to me, "a very useful dodge. I learnt it fifty years ago."

In the company of young men the General is at his very best. He knows
all their little weaknesses, and chaffs them with delightful point and
humour, though he would not, for all the world, give them pain. It
is a pleasant sight to see the old fellow with a party of his young
friends, poking sly fun at them, laughing with them, taking all their
jests in good part, and thoroughly enjoying himself. He can walk most
of them off their legs still, can row with them on the broad reaches
of the Thames, and keep his form with the best of them; he can hold
his gun straight at driven birds, and revel like a boy in a rattling
run to hounds across country. All the youngsters respect him by
instinct, and love the cheery old fellow, whose heart is as soft as
his muscles are hard. They talk to him as to an elder brother, come to
him for his advice, and, which is perhaps even more strange, like it,
and follow it. Withal, the General is the most modest of men. In his
youth he was a mighty man of war. It was only the other day that I
heard (not from his own lips, you may be sure) the thrilling stories
of his hand-to-hand conflict with two gigantic Russians in the fog of
Inkermann, and of his rescue of a wounded Sergeant at the attack in
the Redan. With women, old or young, the General uses an old-fashioned
and chivalrous courtesy, as far removed from latter-day smartness as
was BAYARD from BOULANGER. The younger ones adore him. They all seem
to be his nieces, for they all call him Uncle JOHN.

A year or two ago the General fell ill, and the doctors shook their
heads. It was touching to see the concern of all his young friends.
CHARLIE CHIRPER, a gay little butterfly of a fellow, who never seemed
to treat life as anything but a huge joke, became gloomy with anxiety.
Twice every day he called to make inquiries, and, as the bulletins
got worse, CHARLIE became visibly thinner. I saw him at the Club one
evening, sitting moodily in a corner. "What's up, CHARLIE?" I said
to him. "You look as if you'd been refused by an heiress." "The Old
General's worse to-day," said CHARLIE, simply. "They're very anxious
about him. No, dash it all!" he went on, "it's too bad. I can't bear
to think of it. Such an old ripper as the General! Why must they take
him? Why can't they take a useless chap like me, who never did anyone
any good?" And the unaccustomed tears came into the lad's eyes as he
turned his head away. But the old General battled through, and, thank
Heaven, I can still write of him in the present tense.

Yours as always, my dear boy, DIOGENES ROBINSON.

       *       *       *       *       *

"ANECDOTAGE."

(_COMPANION VOLUME TO OTHER WORKS OF THE SAME KIND._)

A traveller in Italy during the middle ages knew a Chemist very well
indeed. One day a rather stylish Lady, with a shifty look about the
eyes, entered the shop and asked for some poison. "I cannot furnish
you. Madam, with what you require. I have quarrelled with the
undertaker." The Traveller subsequently ascertained that the name of
the lady was LUCREZIA BORGIA.

       *       *       *       *       *

Just before the Battle of Waterloo, FOUCHE met BONAPARTE, who was then
in command of the French Army. He said, "You will find that, before
this campaign is over, I shall have on one foot a BLUCHER, and on
the other a WELLINGTON. It is fortunate for me I cannot find pairs
of both! This is a proof (if one is needed) of the EMPEROR's fear of
fate.

       *       *       *       *       *

CHRISTOPHER COLUMBUS was (as a lad) very fond of exploration. One day
he went over to America, and, arriving at his destination, christened
it Columbia. The land of the Yankees, even now, is occasionally known
by this appellation.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Mr. Punch_ one day was invited to listen to Someone's Recollections
or Reminiscences. All went well for five minutes, when the
Autobiographist, looking up from his Autobiography, found that _Mr.
Punch_ was fast asleep. The Sage slumbered as the Representative of
the Public.

       *       *       *       *       *

NOTICE.--Rejected Communications or Contributions, whether MS.,
Printed Matter, Drawings, or Pictures of any description, will in no
case be returned, not even when accompanied by a Stamped and Addressed
Envelope, Cover, or Wrapper. To this rule there will be no exception.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Punch, Or The London Charivari, Vol.
103, October 8, 1892, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PUNCH ***

***** This file should be named 15441.txt or 15441.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/5/4/4/15441/

Produced by Malcolm Farmer, William Flis, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team.


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
