The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Letters of Lord Nelson to Lady
Hamilton, Vol. I., by Horatio Nelson

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Letters of Lord Nelson to Lady Hamilton, Vol. I.
       With A Supplement Of Interesting Letters By Distinguished Characters

Author: Horatio Nelson

Release Date: March 26, 2005 [EBook #15469]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LETTERS OF LORD NELSON ***




Produced by Steven Gibbs, Stephen Ellison and the PG Online
Distributed Proofreading Team.






            THE
           Letters
             OF
        LORD NELSON
             TO
       LADY HAMILTON;
           WITH A
         SUPPLEMENT
             OF
    _INTERESTING LETTERS_,
             BY
   Distinguished Characters.


       IN TWO VOLUMES.


          VOL. I.

         *       *       *       *       *

  London:

  Printed by Macdonald and Son, Smithfield,
  FOR THOMAS LOVEWELL & CO. STAINES HOUSE,
  BARBICAN;

  AND SOLD BY ALL THE BOOKSELLERS.

                   1814.




ADVERTISEMENT.


In presenting to the Public the Letters of LORD NELSON to LADY
HAMILTON, something may justly be expected elucidatory of them.

Their mutual attachment is so generally known, that for the Editors
to have given notes, however desirable and explanatory, might not,
perhaps, have been deemed perfectly decorous.

They now stand on their own real merits. Some parts (though not very
numerous) have been suppressed, from the most honourable _feelings to
individuals_, as they would certainly have given pain.

That portion of Letters now offered to the BRITISH NATION, written
by the first of her _Naval Commanders_, will shew his most private
sentiments of _men_ and _measures_, of _countries_ and their _rulers_.

It is the duty of the Editors to state, that every letter has
been most accurately transcribed, and faithfully compared with the
_originals in their possession_.

Should our IMMORTAL HERO have expressed an erroneous opinion of some
individuals and of things, let us ever remember, they were written
(_often under the feelings of sickness and of disappointment_) by
him who so repeatedly fought, and almost as frequently bled, for _our
country_--for his "DEAR ENGLAND;" and let us never forget, that to him
we owe more than to any man for our existence as a great and powerful
Nation.

His country has truly honoured him; and it is not presumptuous in the
Editors to affirm, that his deeds will be remembered, not _only in
name_, but in _their consequences_, by our remotest posterity.

Were we to dedicate them, unto whom should we?--To the BRITISH NAVY;
as the genuine sentiments of a _true seaman_--the _first_ even of
their own _Heroes_; for NELSON could forego all private feelings, _all
selfish motives_, for that which will ever be the first object of a
truly great and brave man--the _glory and happiness of his country_.

Our task, which has, from various causes, been attended with more
difficulties than could be imagined, is thus far accomplished; and we
have the pleasure to inform the public, that a very large collection
of LORD NELSON'S _most important public and private correspondence_,
&c. with the most distinguished characters (_at home and abroad_) is
now in preparation for the press. Many of the documents will certainly
throw a light on political transactions at present _very imperfectly
understood_; and those which we intend to present to the world, we
doubt not, will be found more than usually interesting.




CONTENTS.

       *       *       *       *       *

VOL. I.

       *       *       *       *       *

LETTERS FROM LORD NELSON TO LADY HAMILTON.

  LETTER I.  Page  3
        II.        7
       III.        9
        IV.       11
         V.       13
        VI.       15
       VII.       18
      VIII.       20
        IX.       23
         X.       28
        XI.       32
       XII.       34
      XIII.       39
       XIV.       44
        XV.       48
       XVI.       53
      XVII.       58
     XVIII.       60
       XIX.       65
        XX.       69
       XXI.       74
      XXII.       77
     XXIII.       82
      XXIV.       84
       XXV.       88
      XXVI.       89
     XXVII.       91
    XXVIII.       96
      XXIX.      101
       XXX.      104
      XXXI.      108
     XXXII.      113
    XXXIII.      124
     XXXIV.      130
      XXXV.      133
     XXXVI.      135
    XXXVII.      147
   XXXVIII.      152
     XXXIX.      155




  SUPPLEMENT.


  _Letters from Lord Nelson to Mrs. Thomson_.

  LETTER I. Page 173
        II.      175


  _Letters from Lady Hamilton to Lord Nelson_.

  LETTER I. Page 181
        II.      185


  _Letters from the Reverend Edmund Nelson, (Lord
  Nelson's Father) to Lady Hamilton_.

  LETTER I. Page 189
        II.      191


  _Letters from the Reverend Dr. Nelson, now Earl
  Nelson, to Lady Hamilton_.

  LETTER I.      195
        II.      199
       III.      202
        IV.      206
         V.      210
        VI.      213


  _Letters from the Earl of St. Vincent to Lady Hamilton._

  LETTER I. Page 217
        II.      219
       III.      222
        IV.      225
         V.      227


  _Letters from Sir Alexander John Ball to Lady
  Hamilton._

  LETTER I. Page 233
        II.      236

  _Letters from the Earl of Bristol, Bishop of Derry
  in Ireland, to Lady Hamilton_.

  LETTER I. Page 241
        II.      243
       III.      245
        IV.      248
         V.      249
        VI.      250
       VII.      252
      VIII.      253
        IX.      255
         X.      257


  _Letter from the Honourable Charles Greville, Nephew
  of Sir William Hamilton, to Lady Hamilton_.

       Page      265


  _Letters from Lady Hamilton to the Honourable
  Charles Greville_.

  LETTER I. Page 269
        II.      273




       THE
     Letters
       OF
   LORD NELSON
       TO
  LADY HAMILTON.




THE Letters OF LORD NELSON TO LADY HAMILTON.




LETTER I.


  Vanguard, off Malta,
  Oct. 24, 1798.

MY DEAR MADAM,

After a long passage, we are arrived; and it is as I suspected--the
ministers at Naples know nothing of the situation of the island. Not
a house or bastion of the town is in possession of the islanders; and
the Marquis de Niza tells me, they want arms, victuals, and support.
He does not know, that any Neapolitan officers are in the island;
perhaps, although I have their names, none are arrived; and it is very
certain, by the Marquis's account, that no supplies have been sent by
the governors of Syracuse or Messina.

However, I shall and will know every thing as soon as the Marquis is
gone, which will be to-morrow morning. He says, he is very anxious to
serve under my command; and, by his changing his ship, it appears
as if he was so: however, I understand the trim of our English ships
better.

Ball will have the management of the blockade after my departure; as,
it seems, the Court of Naples think my presence may be necessary, and
useful, in the beginning of November.

I hope it will prove so; but, I feel, my duty lays at present in the
East; for, until I know the shipping in Egypt are destroyed, I shall
never consider the French army as completely sure of never returning
to Europe.

However, all my views are to serve and save the Two Sicilies; and
to do that which their Majesties may wish me, even against my own
opinion, when I come to Naples, and that country is at war. I shall
wish to have a meeting with General Acton on this subject.

You will, I am sure, do me justice with the Queen; for, I declare to
God, my whole study is, how to best meet her approbation.

May God bless you and Sir William! and ever believe me, with the most
affectionate regard, your obliged and faithful friend,

  HORATIO NELSON.

I may possibly, but that is not certain, send in the inclosed letter.
Shew it to Sir William. This must depend on what I hear _and see_; for
I believe scarcely any thing I hear.

Once more, God bless you!




LETTER II.


  [May 12, 1799.]

MY DEAR LADY HAMILTON,

Accept my sincere thanks for your kind letter. Nobody writes so
well: therefore, pray, say not you write ill; for, if you do, I will
say--what your goodness sometimes told me--"You l--e!" I can read, and
perfectly understand, every word you write.

We drank your and Sir William's health. Troubridge, Louis, Hallowell,
and the new Portuguese Captain, dined here. I shall soon be at
Palermo; for this business must very soon be settled.

No one, believe me, is more sensible of your regard, than your obliged
and grateful

  NELSON.

I am pleased with little Mary; kiss her for me. I thank all the house
for their regard. God bless you all!

I shall send on shore, if fine, to-morrow; for the feluccas are going
to leave us, and I am sea-sick.

I have got the piece of wood for the tea-chest; it shall soon be sent.

Pray, present my humble duty and gratitude to the Queen, for all
her marks of regard; and assure her, it is not thrown away on an
ungrateful soil.




LETTER III.


  Vanguard, May 19, 1799,
  Eight o'Clock. Calm.

MY DEAR LADY HAMILTON,

Lieutenant Swiney coming on board, enables me to send some blank
passports for vessels going to Procida with corn, &c. and also one for
the courier boat.

To tell you, how dreary and uncomfortable the Vanguard appears, is
only telling you, what it is to go from the pleasantest society to a
solitary cell; or, from the dearest friends, to no friends. I am now
perfectly the _great man_--not a creature near me. From my heart, I
wish myself the little man again!

You, and good Sir William, have spoiled me for any place but with you.
I love Mrs. Cadogan. You cannot conceive what I feel, when I call you
all to my remembrance. Even to Mira, do not forget your faithful and
affectionate

  NELSON.




LETTER IV.


  May 20, 1799.

MY DEAR LADY HAMILTON,

Many thanks to you and Sir William for your kind notes. You will
believe I did not sleep much, with all my letters to read, &c. &c.

My letters from Lord St. Vincent are May 6th. He says--"We saw the
Brest squadron pass us yesterday, under an easy sail. I am making
every effort to get information to Lord Keith; who I have ordered
here, to complete their water and provisions. I conjecture, the French
squadron is bound for Malta and Alexandria, and the Spanish fleet for
the attack of Minorca."

I must leave you to judge, whether the Earl will come to us. I think
he will: but, _entre nous_, Mr. Duckworth means to leave me to my
fate. I send you (_under all circumstances_) his letter. Never mind;
if I can get my eleven sail together, they shall not hurt me.

God bless you, Sir William, and all our joint friends in your house;
Noble, Gibbs, &c. and believe me ever, for ever, your affectionate
friend,

  NELSON.




LETTER V.


  February 3, 1800.

MY DEAR LADY HAMILTON,

Having a Commander in Chief, I cannot come on shore till I have made
_my manners_ to him. Times are changed; but, if he does not come on
shore directly, I will not wait.

In the mean time, I send Allen to inquire how you are. Send me word,
for I am anxious to hear of you. It has been no fault of mine, that I
have been so long absent. I cannot command; and, now, only obey.

Mr. Tyson, and the Consul, have not been able to find out the
betrothed wife of the Priore; although they were three days in their
inquiries, and desired the Neapolitan Consul to send to Pisa. I also
desired the Russian Admiral, as he was going to Pisa, to inquire if
the Countess Pouschkin had any letters to send to Palermo; but, as I
received none, I take for granted she had none to send.

May God bless you, my dear Lady; and be assured, I ever am, and shall
be, your obliged and affectionate

  BRONTE NELSON.




LETTER VI.


  Off La Valette, Feb. 20, 1800.

MY DEAR LADY HAMILTON,

Had you seen the Peer receive me, I know not what you would have done;
but, I can guess. But never mind! I told him, that I had made a vow,
if I took the Genereux by myself, it was my intention to strike my
flag. To which he made no answer.

If I am well enough, I intend to write a letter to Prince Leopold, and
to send him the French Admiral's flag; which I hope you will approve
of, as it was taken on the coast of his father's kingdom, and by as
faithful a subject as any in his dominions.

I have had no communication with the shore; therefore, have seen
neither Ball, Troubridge, or Graham: nor with the Lion; when I have,
I shall not forget all your messages, and little Jack. I only want to
know your wishes, that I may, at least, appear grateful, by attending
to them.

My head aches dreadfully, and I have none here to give me a moment's
comfort.

I send the packet to General Acton; as I think it may go quicker, and
he will be flattered by presenting the flag and letter to the Prince.

Malta, I think, will fall very soon, if these other corvettes do not
get in.

Pray, make my best regards acceptable to Mrs. Cadogan, Miss Knight,
little Mary Re Giovanni, Gibbs, &c. &c. and ever believe me your truly
faithful and affectionate

  BRONTE NELSON.




LETTER VII.


  June 16, [1800.] Seven o'Clock.

MY DEAR LADY HAMILTON,

What a difference--but it was to be--from your house to a boat!

Fresh breeze of wind, the ship four or five leagues from the mole;
getting on board into truly a hog-stye of a cabin, leaking like a
sieve, consequently floating with water. What a change!

Not a felucca near us. I saw them come out this morning, but they
think there is too much wind and swell.

Pray, do not keep the cutter; as I have not a thing, if any thing
important should arrive, to send you.

Only think of Tyson's being left!

May God bless you, my dear Lady; and believe me, ever, your truly
affectionate and sincere friend,

  NELSON.

Lady Hamilton--Put the candlestick on _my_ writing-table.




LETTER VIII.


  January 28, 1801.

What a fool I was, my dear Lady Hamilton, to direct that your cheering
letters should be directed for Brixham! I feel, this day, truly
miserable, in not having them; and, I fear, they will not come till
to-morrow's post.

What a blockhead, to believe any person is so active as myself! I
have this day got my orders, to put myself under Lord St. Vincent's
command: but, as no order is arrived to man the ship, it must be
Friday night, or Saturday morning, before she can sail for Torbay.
Direct my letters, now, to Brixham.

My eye is very bad. I have had the physician of the fleet to examine
it.

He has directed me not to write, (and yet I am forced, this day,
to write Lord Spencer, St. Vincent, Davison about my law-suit,
Troubridge, Mr. Locker, &c. but you are the only female I write to;)
not to eat any thing but the most simple food; not to touch wine or
porter; to sit in a dark room; to have green shades for my eyes--(will
you, my dear friend, make me one or two? Nobody else shall;)--and to
bathe them in cold water every hour. I fear, it is the writing has
brought on this complaint. My eye is like blood; and the film so
extended, that I only see from the corner farthest from my nose. What
a fuss about my complaints! But, being so far from my sincere friends,
I have leisure to brood over them.

I have this moment seen Mrs. Thomson's friend. Poor fellow! he seems
very uneasy and melancholy. He begs you to be kind to her; and I have
assured him of your readiness to relieve the dear good woman: and
believe me, for ever, my dear Lady, your faithful, attached, and
affectionate,

  NELSON & BRONTE.

I will try and write the Duke a line. My brother intended to have gone
off to-morrow afternoon; but this half order may stop him.




LETTER IX.


  San Josef, February 8th, 1801.

MY DEAR LADY,

Mr. Davison demands the privilege of carrying back an answer to your
kind letter; and, I am sure, he will be very punctual in the delivery.

I am not in very good spirits; and, except that our country demands
all our services and abilities, to bring about an honourable peace,
nothing should prevent my being the bearer of my own letter. But, my
dear friend, I know you are so true and loyal an Englishwoman, that
you would hate those who would not stand forth in defence of our King,
laws, religion, and all that is dear to us.

It is your sex that make us go forth; and seem to tell us--"None but
the brave deserve the fair!" and, if we fall, we still live in the
hearts of those females. You are dear to us. It is your sex that
rewards us; it is your sex who cherish our memories; and you, my dear,
honoured friend, are, believe me, the _first_, the best, of your sex.

I have been the world around, and in every corner of it, and never yet
saw your equal, or even one which could be put in comparison with you.
You know how to reward virtue, honour, and courage; and never to ask
if it is placed in a Prince, Duke, Lord, or Peasant: and I hope, one
day, to see you, in peace, before I set out for Bronte, which I am
resolved to do.

Darby's is one of the ships sent out after the French squadron; I
shall, therefore, give the print to Hardy. I think, they might come by
the mail-coach, as a parcel, wrapped up round a stick; any print shop
will give you one: and direct it as my letters. The coach stops, for
parcels, at the White Bear, I believe, Piccadilly.

Pray, have you got any picture from Mrs. Head's? I hope, Mr. Brydon
has executed the frames to your satisfaction; the bill, he is directed
to send to me.

Only tell me, how I can be useful to you and Sir William; and believe,
nothing could give me more pleasure: being, with the greatest truth,
my dear Lady, your most obliged and affectionate friend,

  NELSON & BRONTE.

I am told, the moment St. George arrives, that I am to be tumbled out
of this ship; as the Ville de Paris is going to Plymouth, to be paid,
and the Earl will hoist his flag here: and if I am as fortunate in
getting a fresh-painted cabin, (which is probable) I shall be knocked
up. At all events, I shall be made very uncomfortable by this hurry.

It has been very good, and friendly, of Mr. Davison, to travel upwards
of two hundred miles, to make me a visit.

I rather think, the great Earl will not much like his not having
called on him; but his manner of speaking of Mr. Davison, for his
friendship to me, in the matter of the law-suit, Lord St. Vincent
states to my solicitors as offensive to him. Why should it? only that
Mr. Davison wishes that I should have justice done me, and not to be
overpowered by weight of interest and money.

Once more, God bless you and Sir William.

  N. & B.

Sir Isaac Heard has gazetted Troubridge's, Hood, &c.'s honours; but
has not gazetted mine: and he has the King's orders for mine as much
as the others.




LETTER X.


  No 2. San Josef, February 16th, 1801.

MY DEAREST FRIEND,

Your letters have made me happy, to-day; and never again will I scold,
unless you begin. Therefore, pray, never do; My confidence in you is
firm as a rock. * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *

I cannot imagine, who can have stopped my Sunday's letter! That it has
been, is clear: and the seal of the other has been clearly opened; but
this might have happened from letters sticking together.

Your's all came safe; but the numbering of them will point out,
directly, if one is missing. I do not think, that any thing very
particular was in that letter which is lost.

Believe me, my dear friend, that Lady A. is as damned a w---- as ever
lived, and Mrs. W---- is a bawd! Mrs. U---- a foolish pimp; eat up
with pride, that a P---- will condescend to put her to expence. Only
do as I do; and all will be well, and you will be every thing I wish.

I thank you for your kindness to poor dear Mrs. Thomson. I send her a
note; as desired by her dear good friend, who doats on her.

I send you a few Lines, wrote in the late gale; which, I think, you
will not disapprove.

How interesting your letters are! You cannot write too much, or be too
particular.

       *       *       *       *       *

  Though ----'s polish'd verse superior shine,
  Though sensibility grace every line;
  Though her soft Muse be far above all praise.
  And female tenderness inspire her lays:

     Deign to receive, though unadorn'd
         By the poetic art,
     The rude expressions which bespeak
         A Sailor's untaught heart!

  A heart _susceptible_, sincere, and true;
  A heart, by fate, and nature, torn in two:
  One half, to duty and his country due;
  The other, _better half_, to love and you!

     Sooner shall Britain's sons resign
         The empire of the sea;
     Than Henry shall renounce his faith,
         AND PLIGHTED VOWS, TO THEE!

     And waves on wares shall cease to roll,
         And tides forget to flow;
     Ere thy true Henry's constant love,
         Or ebb, or change, shall know.

The weather, thank God, is moderating.

I have just got a letter from the new Earl at the Admiralty, full of
compliments. But nothing shall stop my law-suit, and I hope to cast
him.

I trust, when I get to Spithead, there will be no difficulty in
getting leave of absence.

The letters on service are so numerous, from three days interruption
of the post, that I must conclude with assuring you, that I am, for
ever, your attached, and unalterably your's,

  NELSON & BRONTE.

I shall begin a letter at night.




LETTER XI.


  [March 1801.]

You say, my Dearest Friend, why don't I put my Chief forward? He has
put me in the front of the battle, and Nelson will be first. I could
say more; but will not make you uneasy, knowing the firm friendship
you have for me.

The St. George will stamp an additional ray of glory to England's
fame, if Nelson survives; and that Almighty Providence, who has
hitherto protected me in all dangers, and covered my head in the day
of battle, will still, if it be his pleasure, support and assist me.

Keep me alive, in your and Sir William's remembrance. My last thoughts
will be with you both, for you love and esteem me. I judge your hearts
by my own.

May the Great God of Heaven protect and bless you and him! is the
fervent prayer of your and Sir William's unalterable friend, till
death.




LETTER XII.


  Friday Night, Nine o'Clock.
  St. George. [March 1801.]

Having, my truly Dearest Friend, got through a great deal of business,
I am enabled to do justice to my private feelings; which are fixed,
ever, on you, and about you, whenever the public service does not
arrest my attention.

I have read all, all, your kind and affectionate letters: and have
read them frequently over; and committed them to the flames, much
against my inclination. There was one I rejoiced not to have read at
the time. It was, where you consented to dine and sing with * * * *.
Thank God, it was not so! I could not have borne it; and, now, less
than ever. But, I now know, he never can dine with you; for, you would
go out of the house sooner than suffer it: and, as to letting him hear
you sing, I only hope he will be struck deaf, and you dumb, sooner
than such a thing should happen! But, I know, it never now can.

You cannot think how my feelings are alive towards you; probably,
more than ever: and they never can be diminished. My hearty endeavours
shall not be wanting, to improve and to give US NEW ties of regard and
affection.

I have seen, and talked much with, Mrs. Thomson's friend. The fellow
seems to eat all my words, when I talk of her and his child! He says,
he never can forget your goodness and kind affection to her and his
dear, dear child. I have had, you know, the felicity of seeing it, and
a finer child never was produced by any two persons. It was, in truth,
a love-begotten child! I am determined to keep him on board; for, I
know, if they got together, they would soon have another. But, after
our two months trip, I hope, they will never be separated; and, then,
let them do as they please.

We are all bustle and activity. I shall sail, on Monday, after your
letter arrives. Troubridge will send it, as an Admiralty letter. On
Tuesday I shall be in the Downs, if we have any wind; and Troubridge
will send, under cover to Admiral Lutwidge.

It is not my intention to set my foot out of the ship, except to make
my take-leave bow to Admiral Milbank. I have been much pressed to dine
ashore: but, no; never, if I can help it, till I dine with you.

  Eleven o'Clock.

Your dear letters just come on board. They are sympathetic with my own
feelings; and, I trust, we shall soon meet, to part no more!

Monday, I shall be here for letters; Tuesday, at Deal. Recollect,
I am, for ever, your's; aye, for ever, while life remains, your's,
your's faithfully,

  NELSON & BRONTE.

I charge my only friend to keep well, and think of her Nelson's glory.

I have written to Lord Eldon, the Chancellor, as my brother desired.

Pray, as you are going to buy a ticket for the Pigot diamond--buy the
right number, or it will be money thrown away.

For ever, ever, your's, only your's.

Kindest regards to my dear Mrs. Thomson, and my God Child.




LETTER XIII.


  Deal--[Shall be on board the Medusa
  before this letter go from the Downs]--July
  31, 1801.

MY DEAREST EMMA,

Did not you get my letter from Sheerness on Thursday morning, telling
you I was just setting off for Deal; as I have no letter from you of
yesterday, only those of Wednesday, which went to Sheerness? It has
been my damned blunder, and not your's; for which I am deservedly
punished, by missing one of your dear letters. They are my comfort,
joy, and delight.

My time is, truly, fully taken up, and my hand aches before night
comes.

I got to bed, last night, at half past nine; but the hour was so
unusual, that I heard the clock strike one. To say that I thought of
you, would be nonsense; for, you are never out of my thoughts.

At this moment, I see no prospect of my getting to London; but, very
soon, the business of my command will become so simple, that a child
may direct it.

What rascals your post-chaise people must be! They have been paid
every thing. Captain Parker has one receipt for seven pounds odd, and
I am sure that every thing is paid; therefore, do not pay a farthing.
The cart-chaise I paid at Dartford.

You need not fear all the women in this world; for all others, except
yourself, are pests to me. I know but one; for, who can be like my
Emma? I am confident, you will do nothing which can hurt my feelings;
and I will die by torture, sooner than do any thing which could offend
you.

Give ten thousand kisses to my dear Horatia.

Yesterday, the subject turned on the cow-pox. A gentleman declared,
that his child was inoculated with the cow-pox; and afterwards
remained in a house where a child had the small-pox the natural way,
and did _not_ catch it. Therefore, here was a full trial with the
cow-pox. The child is only feverish for two days; and only a slight
inflammation of the arm takes place, instead of being all over
_scabs_. But, do you what you please!

I did not get your newspapers; therefore, do not know what promise you
allude to: but this I know, I have _none_ made me.

The extension of the patent of peerage is going on; but the wording of
my brother's note, they have wrote for a meaning to. The patent must
be a new creation. First, to my father, if he outlives me; then to
William, and his sons; then to Mrs. Bolton, and her sons; and Mrs.
Matcham, and her's. Farther than that, I care not; it is far enough.
But it may never get to any of them; for the old patent may extend
by issue male of my own carcase: I am not so very old; and may marry
again, a wife more suitable to my genius.

I like the Morning Chronicle.

Ever, for ever, your's, only your,

  NELSON & BRONTE.

Best regards to Mrs. Nelson, the Duke, and Lord William.

I have totally failed for poor Madame Brueys.

Bonaparte's wife is one of Martinique, and some plan is supposed to be
carried on.




LETTER XIV.


  Sheerness, August 11th, 1801.

MY DEAREST EMMA,

I came from Harwich yesterday noon; not having set my foot on shore,
although the Volunteers, &c. were drawn up to receive me, and the
people ready to draw the carriage.

Parker had very near got all the honours; but I want none, but what
my dear Emma confers. You have sense to discriminate whether they are
deserved or no.

I came on shore; for my business lays with the Admiral, who lives in
a ship hauled on shore, and the Commisioner. Slept at Coffin's: and,
having done all that I can, am off for the Downs; to-day, if possible.

As far as September 14th, I am at the Admiralty's disposal; but, if
Mr. Buonaparte do not chuse to send his miscreants before that time,
my health will not bear me through equinoctial gales.

I wish that Sir William was returned; I would try and persuade him
to come to either Deal, Dover, or Margate: for, thus cut off from the
society of my dearest friends, 'tis but a life of sorrow and sadness.
But, _patienza per forza_!

I hope you will get the house. If I buy, no person can say--this
shall, or not, be altered; and, you shall have the whole arrangement.

Remember me most kindly to Mrs. Nelson, the Duke, and Lord William.
Write to me in the Downs.

May the Heavens bless and preserve you, for ever and ever! is the
constant prayer of, my dear Emma, your most affectionate and faithful

  NELSON & BRONTE.

The Mayor and Corporation of Sandwich, when they came on board to
present me the freedom of that ancient town, requested me [to] dine
with them. I put them off for the moment, but they would not be let
off. Therefore, this business, _dreadful_ to me, stands over, and I
shall be attacked again when I get to the Downs. But I will not dine
there, without you say, approve; nor, perhaps, then, if I can get off.
Oh! how I hate to be stared at.




LETTER XV.


  Deal, August 18th, 1801.

MY DEAREST EMMA,

Your dear, good, kind, and most affectionate letters, from Saturday to
last night, are arrived, and I feel all you say; and may Heaven bless
me, very soon, with a sight of your dear angelic face. You are a
nonpareil! No, not one fit to wipe your shoes. I am, ever have been,
and always will remain, your most firm, fixed, and unalterable friend.

I wish Sir William had come home a week ago, then I should have seen
you here.

I have this morning been attending the funeral of two young Mids: a
Mr. Gore, cousin of Capt. Gore, and a Mr. Bristow. One nineteen, the
other seventeen years of age.

Last night, I was all the evening in the Hospital, seeing that all was
done for the comfort of the poor fellows.

I am going on board; for nothing should keep me living on shore,
without you were here. I shall come in the morning, to see Parker, and
go on board again directly.

I shall be glad to see Oliver: I hope he will keep his tongue quiet,
about the tea-kettle; for, I shall not give it till I leave the
Medusa.

You ask me, what Troubridge wrote me? There was not a syllable about
you in it. It was about my not coming to London; at the importance of
which, I laughed: and, then, he said, he should never venture another
opinion. On which, I said--"Then, I shall never give you one." This
day, he has wrote a kind letter, and all is over.

I have, however, wrote him, in my letter of this day, as
follows--_viz._ "_And I am, this moment, as firmly of opinion as ever,
that Lord St. Vincent, and yourself, should have allowed of my coming
to town, for my own affairs; for, every one knows, I left it without a
thought for myself_."

I know, he likes to be with you: but, shall he have that felicity, and
_he_ deprive me of it? No; that he shall not!

But this business cannot last long, and I hope we shall have peace;
and, I rather incline to that opinion. But the Devil should not get me
out of the kingdom, without being some days with you.

I hope, my dear Emma, you will be able to find a house suited for my
comfort. I am sure of being HAPPY, by your arrangements.

I have wrote a line to Troubridge, about Darby.

Parker will write you a line of thanks, if he is able. I trust in God,
he will yet do well!

You ask me, my dear friend, if I am going on more expeditions? And,
even if I was to forfeit your friendship, which is dearer to me than
all the world, I can tell you nothing.

For, I go out; [if] I see the enemy, and can get at them, it is my
duty: and you would naturally hate me, if I kept back one moment.

I long to pay them, for their tricks t'other day, the debt of a
drubbing, which, surely, I'll pay: but _when, where, or how_, it is
impossible, your own good sense must tell you, for me or mortal man to
say.

I shall act not in a rash or hasty manner; that you may rely, and on
which I give you my word of honour.

Just going off. Ever, for ever, your faithful

  NELSON & BRONTE.

Every kind thing to Mrs. Nelson.




LETTER XVI.


  Medusa, Downs, August 31st, 1801.

MY DEAR EMMA! DEAREST, BEST, FRIEND OF NELSON,

Sir William is arrived, and well; remember me kindly to him. I should
have had the pleasure of seeing him, but for _one of my lords and
masters_, TROUBRIDGE; therefore, I am sure, neither you or Sir William
will feel obliged to him.

The weather is very bad, and I am very sea-sick. I cannot answer
your letter, probably; but I am writing a line, to get on shore, if
possible: indeed, I hardly expect that your letter can get afloat.

I entreat you, my dear friend, to work hard for me, and get the
house and furniture; and I will be so happy to lend it to you and Sir
William!

Therefore, if you was to take the Duke's house, _a cake house_, open
to every body he pleases, you had better have a booth at once; you
never could rest one moment quiet. Why did not the Duke assist Sir
William, when he wanted his assistance? why not have saved you from
the distress, which Sir William must every day feel, in knowing that
his excellent wife sold her jewels to get a house for him; whilst his
own relations, great as they are in the foolish world's eye, would
have left a man of his respectability and age, to have lodged in the
streets. Did the Duke, or any of them, give him a house _then_?

Forgive me! you know if any thing sticks in my throat, it must out.
Sir William owes his life to you; which, I believe, he will never
forget.

To return to the house--The furniture must be bought with it; and the
sooner it is done, the better I shall like it.

Oh! how bad the weather is!

The devils, here, wanted to plague my soul out, yesterday, just after
dinner; but I would have seen them damned, before they should have
come in. The Countess Montmorris, Lady this, that, and t'other, came
along-side, a Mr. Lubbock with them--to desire they might come in. I
sent word, I was so busy that no persons could be admitted, as my time
was employed in the King's service. Then they sent their names, which
I cared not for: and sent Captain Gore, to say it was impossible;
and that, if they wanted to see a ship, they had better go to the
Overyssel (a sixty-four in the Downs.) They said, no; they wanted
to see me. However, I was stout, and will not be shewn about like a
_beast_! and away they went.

I believe, Captain Gore wishes me out of his ship; for the _ladies_
admire him, I am told, very much: but, however, no Captain could be
kinder to me than he is. These ladies, he told me afterwards, were his
relations.

I have just got your letters; many thanks, for them! You do not say,
in the end, Sir William is arrived.

I am glad, that you approve. You may rely, my dear friend, that I will
not run any unnecessary risk! No more boat work, I promise you; but,
ever, your attached and faithful

  NELSON & BRONTE.

To the Duke, and Lord William, say every thing which is kind; and to
Mrs. Nelson.

I am so dreadfully sea-sick, that I cannot hold up my head!




LETTER XVII.


  September 21st, [1801.]
  Quarter past Ten o'Clock.

MY DEAR EMMA,

I wish you would send the letter to Mrs. Dod's, directly; for,
otherwise, he may, inadvertently.

If done, and it comes to London, deliver some of the things. The
wardrobe is her's; and if any of her clothes are at Mr. Dod's, they
had better be separated from mine--and, indeed, what things are worth
removing--to have them directly sent to Merton. A bed, or two, I
believe, belong to my father; but, am not sure.

I send you Dr. Baird's comfortable note, this moment received.

You will [find] Parker is treated like an infant. Poor fellow! I
trust, he will get well, and take possession of his room at the farm.

Ever your affectionate,

  NELSON & BRONTE.




LETTER XVIII.


  Amazon, September 26, 1801.
  Eight o'Clock.

MY DEAREST EMMA,

Your kind letters came on board about six o'clock.

You may rely upon one thing, that I shall like Merton; therefore, do
not be uneasy on that account. I have that opinion of your taste and
judgment, that I do not believe it can fail in pleasing me. We must
only consider our means; and, for the rest, I am sure, you will soon
make it the prettiest place in the world.

I dare say, Mr. Hazelwood acted, like all lawyers, whose only
consideration was for their client: but, I am sure, you will do, for
me, all the civil things towards Mrs. Greaves.

If I can afford to buy the Duck Close, and the field adjoining, it
would be pleasant; but, I fear, it is not in my power: but, I shall
know, when my accounts are settled, at New Year's Day.

To be sure, we shall employ the trades-people of our village, in
preference to any others, in what we want for common use, and give
them every encouragement to be kind and attentive to us.

From my heart, do I wish that I was with you: and it cannot be long;
for, to-day, I am far from well; violent head ache, and very cold;
but, it may be agitation.

Whatever, my dear Emma, you do for my little charge, I must be pleased
with. Probably, she will be lodged at Merton; at least, in the spring,
when she can have the benefit of our walks. It will make the poor
mother happy, I am sure.

I do not write to her to-day, as this goes through the Admiralty; but,
tell her all I would say. You know my unchangeable thoughts about her.

I shall have the child christened, when I come up.

Have we a nice church at Merton? We will set an example of goodness to
the under-parishioners.

Would to God, I was with you at Laleham. I shall never forget our
happiness at that place.

Mr. Davison will pay Mrs. Nelson fifty pounds, October 1st. I dare
say, Mr. Shakespeare has some orders about it.

I had, yesterday, a letter from my father; he seems to think, that he
may do something which I shall not like. I suppose, he means, going to
Somerset Street.

Shall I, to an old man, enter upon the detestable subject; it may
shorten his days. But, I think, I shall tell him, that I cannot go to
Somerset Street, to see him. But, I shall not write till I hear your
opinion.

If I once begin, you know, it will _all out_, about her, and her
ill-treatment to her son. But, you shall decide.

Our accounts of dear Parker, I fear, preclude all hopes of his
recovery.

It was my intention to have gone ashore this morning, to have called
on Admiral Lutwidge: but, the wind's coming fresh from the S.W. I have
declined it; for, I doubt, if I could get off again.

At ten o'clock, with your letters, came off Dr. Baird's note, to say
every hope was gone! I have desired, that his death should be sent,
by telegraph, to the Admiralty. They will, surely, honour his memory,
although they would not promote him.

What are our feelings, my dear Emma! but, we must cheer up: and, with
best regards to Mrs. Nelson, believe me ever, for ever, your most
affectionate,

  NELSON & BRONTE.

Best regards to Sir William.

I send you the last report. Who knows!




LETTER XIX.


  Amazon, October 8, 1801.

MY DEAREST FRIEND,

I do not expect, although I am writing, that any boat can communicate
with us to-day.

What can be the use of keeping me here? for, I can know nothing such
weather; and, what a change since yesterday! It came on, in one hour,
from the water like a mill-head, to such a sea as to make me very
unwell. If I had gone to make my visit, I could not have got off
again. I rejoice that I did not go.

Until I leave the station, I have no desire to go on shore; for, Deal
was always my abhorrence.

That Parker is a swindler. Langford owed our dear Parker twenty-five
pounds, of which there was no account; but Langford desired his agents
to pay Mr. Parker. Langford requested, that he would wait two or three
months, as it would be more convenient to him. To which the other
agreed--"Aye, as long as you please." He got one pound eleven
shillings and sixpence from Samuel, by casting his account wrong. The
first thing he does, is to desire Langford's agents to pay thirty-four
pounds for Langford, nine pounds more than the debt. He is worse than
a public thief. His conduct to me was, absolutely, the worst species
of thieving; for, it was under false pretences. He sent Dr. Baird on
board, to me, to say that, in London, his pocket book was stole, in
which was twenty pounds; and begged my assistance to get him home; and
that he had not a farthing to buy mourning for his dear son. At this
time, he had forty-seven pounds in his pocket, besides what he had
sold of his son's. He has behaved so unlike a gentleman, but very like
a blackguard, to both Captain Sutton, Bedford, and Hardy, I am
now clear that he never lost one farthing, and that the whole is
a swindling trick. So, you see, my dear friend, how good-nature is
imposed upon. I am so vexed, that he should have belonged to our dear
Parker!

I have now done with the wretch, for ever. I hope he has got nothing
from you; and, if you have promised him any thing, _do not send it_.

  Ten o'Clock.

Your kind letters are arrived. I rejoice that you have got into
Merton. I hope to get the letter on shore; but, it is very uncertain.

Ministry, my dearest friend, think very differently of my services
from you! But, never mind; I shall soon have done with them afloat.

Make my kindest regards to Sir William, and all our friends; and
believe me, ever, your faithful and affectionate

  NELSON & BRONTE.

I have just got a very kind letter from Captain Read. He says, he
will come and see me, be where it will. He inquired after you and Sir
William.




LETTER XX.


  Amazon, Ten o'Clock,
  October 12, 1801.

MY DEAREST FRIEND,

This being a very fine morning, and smooth beach, at eight o'clock,
I went with Sutton and Bedford, and landed at Walmer; but found Billy
fast asleep: so, left my card; walked the same road that we came, when
the carriage could not come with us that night; and all rushed into
my mind, and brought tears into my eyes. Ah! how different to walking
with such a friend as you, Sir William, and Mrs. Nelson.

Called at the barracks, on Lord George; but, he is gone to London.

From thence to the Admiral's, found him up; and, waiting half an hour
to see Mrs. Lutwidge, who entreated me to stay dinner, came directly
on board.

I did not even call to see poor Langford; who has been worse these few
days past, and God knows when he will be well. I am afraid it will be
a long time; for several pieces of bone are lately come away, and more
to come.

But Troubridge has so completely prevented my ever mentioning any
body's service, that I am become a cypher, and he has gained a victory
over Nelson's spirit. I am kept here; for what, he may be able to
tell, I cannot: but long it cannot, shall not, be.

Sutton and Bedford are gone a tour, till dinner time: but nothing
shall make me, but almost force, go out of the ship again, till I have
done; and the Admiralty, in charity, will be pleased to release me.

I am, in truth, not over well. I have a complaint in my stomach
and bowels, but it will go off. If you was here, I should have some
rhubarb; but, as you are not, I shall go without.

Sutton has sent into Yorkshire, for a cow that, in the spring, will
give fourteen pounds of butter a week; and, he has given Allen the
finest goat I ever saw. The latter, I am afraid, will be troublesome.

Just as I was coming off, I received your packet; and thank you, from
my heart, for all your kindness.

What can Reverend Sir want to be made a Doctor for? He will be laughed
at, for his pains!

I thank you for the King's letters, I shall write a kind line to
Castelcicala, and answer the King's, very soon: and, write to Acton;
for he can make Bronte every thing to me, if he pleases. I dare say,
I did wrong, never to write him; but, as he treated Sir William
unkindly, I never could bring myself to it.

I am glad the Duke has been to see you; and taking plants from him, is
nothing. Make my kindest remembrances to him.

I would have every body like your choice; for, I am sure, you have as
fine a taste in laying out land, as you have in music. I'll be damned,
if Mrs. Billington can sing so well as you. She may have stage trick,
but you have pure nature.

I always say every thing, for you and Sir William. I wish you had
translated the King's and Acton's letters, Banti cannot.

I may be able to dispose of Charles, but not of the other, and he
would corrupt Charles.

For ever yours,

  NELSON & BRONTE.

Mrs. Lutwidge inquires always particularly after you. We all laugh,
and say she is more fond of soldiers than ever, since General Don has
shewn her how he would keep off the French!




LETTER XXI.


  Amazon, October 15th, 1801.

MY DEAREST FRIEND,

I have received all your letters of yesterday, and the one sent from
the post at Merton; and, also, one mis-sent to Poole: but I do not
write direct to Merton, till I hear that mine to Sir William, sent
yesterday, gets to you before those by London.

The Admiralty will not give me leave, till the 22d; and, then, only
ten days. What a set of beasts!

My cold is now got into my head; and I have such dreadful pain in my
teeth, that I cannot hold up my head: but none of them cares a damn
for me or my sufferings; therefore, you see, I cannot discharge my
steward.

And yet, I think, upon consideration, that I will send up all my
things, and take my chance as to their sending me down again. What
do you think? At all events, every thing except my bed. I have
table-spoons, forks, every thing; at least, I shall have, soon, two
hundred pounds worth.

What a b---- that Miss Knight is! As to the other, I care not what she
says.

My poor dear father is wrong. But more of this, when we meet: which
will be Friday, the 23d, at farthest; if possible, the 22d. But, the
Admiralty are hard upon me.

I am sorry to hear, that you have been ill: and my cold is so
dreadfully bad, that I cannot hold up my head; and am so damned stupid
that you must, my dear friend, forgive my letter.

Admiral Lutwidge is going to Portsmouth. Sir William Parker is going
to be tried, for something.

Make my kindest respects to Sir William; and believe me, ever, your's
most faithfully,

  NELSON & BRONTE.

I have wrote a line to Merton.

Excuse my letter.




LETTER XXII.


  Amazon October 16th, 1801.

MY DEAREST FRIEND,

It being a very fine morning, and the beach smooth, I went to call on
Admiral Lutwidge, and returned on board before ten o'clock.

Mrs. Lutwidge is delighted with your present. Sutton, &c. were called
forth to admire it. She joins in abusing the Admiralty. She pressed me
very much to dine with them at three o'clock; but, I told her I would
not dine with the angel Gabriel, to be dragged through a night surf!

Her answer was, that she hoped soon I should dine with an angel, for
she was sure you was one. In short, she adores you; but, who does not?
You are so good, so kind, to every body; old, young, rich, or poor, it
is the same thing!

I called on poor Langford; who has a long time to look forward to, for
getting well; he told me your goodness, in writing him a line: and I
called upon Dr. Baird; he disapproves of rhubarb, and has prescribed
magnesia and peppermint: and I called on Mr. Lawrence. So, you see, I
did much business in one hour I was on shore.

Civility to Lutwidge was proper for me; and, indeed, my duty.

The moment I got your letters, off I came, and have read them with
real pleasure. They have made me much better, I think; at least, I
feel so.

I admire the pigs and poultry. Sheep are certainly most beneficial to
eat off the grass. Do _you_ get paid for them; and take care that they
are kept on the premises all night, for that is the time they do good
to the land. They should be folded. Is your head man a good person,
and true to our interest? I intend to have a farming book. I am glad
to hear you get fish; not very good ones, I fancy.

It is, I thank God, only six days before I shall be with you, and to
be shewn all the beauties of Merton. I shall like it, leaves or no
leaves.

No person there can take amiss our not visiting. The answer from me
will always be very civil thanks, but that I wish to live retired. We
shall have our sea friends; and, I know, Sir William thinks they are
the best.

I have a letter from Mr. Trevor, begging me to recommend a youngster
for him; but, none before your Charles.

Banti, I suppose, must return; but, at present, we know not what ships
are to be kept in commission.

I have a letter from a female relation of mine. She has had three
husbands; and he, Mr. Sherstone, three wives. Her brother, a Nelson, I
have been trying, ever since I have been in England, to get promoted.
The last and present Admiralty promised. I never saw the man; he is in
a ship in the North Seas, forty-five years of age.

I have a letter from Troubridge, recommending me to wear flannel
shirts. Does he care for me? _No_; but, never mind. They shall work
hard, to get me back again.

Remember me, kindly, to Sir William, the Duke, and all friends; and
believe me, ever, your most affectionate

  NELSON & BRONTE.

Do you ever see Castelcicala? He is a good man, and faithful to his
master and mistress.




LETTER XXIII.


  Amazon, October 16th, 1801.

MY DEAREST FRIEND,

I send you a letter for Allen's wife; and one for Germany, which I
wish you would make Oliver put in the Foreign Post Office, and pay
what is necessary.

I would send you the letter to which it is an answer, but it would
be over-weight. It is all compliments; and, the man says, it is all
truth.

The wind is freshened cold, but very fine day.

Best regards to Sir William, Mrs. Cadogan, Mr. Oliver, and all
friends.

For ever, your's faithfully,

  NELSON & BRONTE.

I have a letter from Reverend Doctor--he is as big as if he was a
Bishop; and one from the Bedel of the university, to say how well he
preached. I hope you ordered something good for him, for those big
wigs love eating and drinking.




LETTER XXIV.


  Amazon, October 17th, 1801.

MY DEAREST FRIEND,

Although my complaint has no danger attending it, yet it resists the
medicines which Dr. Baird has prescribed; and, I fancy, it has pulled
me down very much.

The cold has settled in my bowels. I wish the Admiralty had my
complaint: but, they have no bowels; at least, for me.

I had a very indifferent night, but your and Sir William's kind
letters have made me feel better.

I send you a letter from Lord Pelham. I shall certainly attend; and
let them see, that I may be useful in council as I have been in the
field. We must submit; and, perhaps, these Admiralty do this by me, to
prevent another application.

You may rely, that I shall be with you by dinner, on Friday; at half
past three, or four at farthest.

I shall not dine with Pitt, as Mr. and Mrs. Long are staying there.
Not that I ever saw her in my life, nor care if I never do.

I pray that I may not be annoyed, on my arrival: it is retirement with
my friends, that I wish for.

Thank Sir William, kindly, for his letter; and the inclosure, which I
return.

Sutton is much pleased with your letter; and, with Bedford, will
certainly make you a visit. They are both truly good and kind to me.

Our weather has been cold these two days, but not bad. I have got a
fire in the cabin; and, I hope my complaint will go off.

May Heaven bless you!

I send this, through Troubridge, direct in Piccadilly.

I shall, you may rely, admire the pig-stye, ducks, fowls, &c. for
every thing you do, I look upon as perfect.

Dr. Baird has been aboard, to see me. He thinks, I shall be better;
and, that a few days on shore will set me up again.

Make my kind remembrances to Sir William, the Duke, and all friends;
and believe me, ever, your most affectionate

  NELSON & BRONTE.

Bedford has made me laugh. Mrs. Lutwidge has been babbling, that she
will go to Portsmouth with the Admiral; who says, he shall be so fully
employed that he cannot be much with her. She whispered Bedford--"I
have many friends in the army there!"

She will certainly marry a soldier, if ever she is disposable. But,
perhaps, you will agree with me, that no good soldier would take her.
I am sure, the purchase would be dear, even if it was a _gift_. Don't
call this a bull.

Sutton's man was on the farm; and the sheep, when not belonging to the
farm, always paid so much sheep, so much lambs: but, I dare say, you
manage well.

Sir William's letter has delighted me, with your activity and
prudence.




LETTER XXV.


The two letters would have been over-weight, so I send you the letter
I have answered. Pray, take care of it, it is a curiosity!

Ever your faithful

  NELSON & BRONTE.


  Amazon, 2 P.M.

Yawkins is in great distress: his cutter paid off; and he, like many
others, very little to live upon. He begs his best respects to Sir
William. He breakfasted here this morning.

Many very long faces at peace!




LETTER XXVI.


MY DEAREST FRIEND,

Hardy begs you will send the inclosed to Naples.

I wish Tyson would come home; for many are pulling at him, and I want
to pay him. I will not be in his debt forty-eight hours after his
arrival.

Hardy is just anchored, and his commodore gone on shore.

Ever your most faithful

  NELSON & BRONTE.

Mrs. Nelson had better direct her letters to me, unless I am on the
spot. You see, you paid postage, and it lays me open to their Post
Office conversation.




LETTER XXVII.


  Amazon, October 19th, 1801.

MY DEAREST FRIEND,

What a gale we have had! But Admiral Lutwidge's boat came off; and, as
your letter was wrote, it got on shore: at least, I hope so; for the
boat seemed absolutely swallowed up in the sea. None of our boats
could have kept above water a moment; therefore, I could not answer
all the truly friendly things you told me in your letters, for they
were not opened before the boat was gone.

I am sure, you did well to send Mrs. Lutwidge a gown, and she loves
you very much, but there is no accounting for taste. She admires
entirely red coats; you, true blue.

They dine with Billy Pitt, to-day; or, rather, with Mr. Long; for Pitt
does not keep house, in appearance, although he asked me to come and
see him: and that I shall do, out of respect to a great man, although
he never did any thing for me or my relations. I assure you, my dear
friend, that I had rather read and hear all your little story of a
white hen getting into a tree, an anecdote of Fatima, or hear you
call--"Cupidy! Cupidy!" than any speech I shall hear in parliament:
because I know, although you can adapt your language and manners to
a child, yet that you can also thunder forth such a torrent of
eloquence, that corruption and infamy would sink before your voice, in
however _exalted_ a situation it might be placed.

Poor Oliver! what can be the matter with him?

I must leave my cot here, till my discharge, when it shall come to the
farm, as cots are the best things in the world for our sea friends.

Why not have the pictures from Davison's, and those from Dodd's;
especially, my father's, and Davison's?

_A-propos_! Sir William has not sat, I fear, to Beechey. I want a
half-length, the size of my father's and Davison's.

I wonder your pictures are not come from Hamburg! You have not lost
the directions for unfolding them; nor the measure, that I may have
frames made for them? For, up they shall go, as soon as they arrive.
What, have your picture, and not hang it up? _No_; I will submit, in
the farm, to every order but _that_.

The weather, to-day, is tolerable; but, I do not think I could well
get on shore: but Thursday, I hope, will be a fine day.

I shall call on Mr. Pitt, make my visit at the Hospital, and get off
very early on Friday morning.

My cold is still very troublesome, I cannot get my bowels in order. In
the night I had not a little fever.

But, never mind; the Admiralty will not always be there. Every one has
their day.

God bless you, my dear friend; and believe me, ever, your's most
faithfully,

  NELSON & BRONTE.

Write on Wednesday.

Your letters of yesterday are received. Reverend Doctor would like to
be a Bishop.

I have sent poor Thomson's letter, and the distressed Mrs. ----, to
the Earl. Kindest regards to Sir William.




LETTER XXVIII.


  Amazon, October 20th, 1801.

MY DEAREST FRIEND,

How could you think, for a moment, that I would be a time-server to
any Minister on earth! And, if you had studied my letter a little
closer, you would have seen that my intention was, to shew them that I
could be as useful in the cabinet as in the field.

My idea is, to let them see that my attendance is worth soliciting.
For myself, I can have nothing; but, for my brother, something may be
done.

Living with Mr. Addington a good deal; never, in your sense of the
word, shall I do it. What, leave my dearest friends, to dine with a
minister? Damn me, if I do, beyond what you yourself shall judge to be
necessary! Perhaps, it may be _once_; and _once_ with the _Earl_ but
that you shall judge for me.

If I give up all intercourse--you know enough of Courts, that they
will do nothing: make yourself of consequence to them, and they will
do what you wish, in reason; and, out of reason, I never should ask
them.

It must be a great bore, to me, to go to the House. I shall tell Mr.
Addington, that I go on the 29th to please him, and not to please
myself; but more of this subject, when we meet.

Dr. Baird is laid up with the rheumatism; he will now believe, that
the cold may affect me. This is the coldest place in England, most
assuredly.

_Troubridge_ writes me that, as the weather is set in fine again, he
hopes I shall get _walks_ on shore. He is, I suppose, laughing at me;
but, never mind.

I agree with you, in wishing Sir William had a horse. Why don't you
send to the Duke, for a poney for him.

I am just parting with four of my ships--Captains Conn, Rowley,
Martin, and Whitter--who are proceeding to the Nore, in their way to
be paid off.

The surf is still so great on the beach, that I could not land dry, if
it was necessary, to-day; but, I hope, it will be smooth on Thursday:
if not, I must go in a boat to Dover, and come from thence to Deal.

Sutton says, he will get the Amazon under sail, and carry me down;
for, that I shall not take cold: Bedford goes with a squadron to
Margate; so that all our party will be broke up. I am sure, to many of
them, I feel truly obliged.

Make my kindest respects to Sir William; and believe me, ever, your
most faithful and affectionate

  NELSON & BRONTE.

I wish Banti was separated from Charles, for he is a knowing one. I
wish I could get him with a good Captain, who would keep him strict to
his duty.

Hardy cannot get paid a hundred pounds he advanced for Mr. Williams's
nephew.

Many thanks for Mrs. Nelson's letters.

The Reverend Doctor likes going about. Only think of his wanting to
come up with an address of thanks! Why, [the] King will not receive
him, although he is a Doctor; and less, for being my brother--for,
they certainly do not like me.




LETTER XXIX.


  Amazon, October 20th, 1801.

MY DEAREST FRIEND,

Only two days more, the Admiralty could, with any conscience, keep me
here; not that I think, they have had any conscience.

I dare say, Master Troubridge is grown fat. I know, I am grown lean,
with my complaint: which, but for their indifference about my health,
would never have happened; or, at least, I should have got well, long
ago, in a warm room, with a good fire, and sincere friends.

I believe, I leave this little squadron with sincere regret, and with
the good wishes of every creature in it.

How I should laugh, to see you, my dear friend, rowing in a boat; the
beautiful Emma rowing a one-armed Admiral in a boat! It will certainly
be caricatured.

Well done, farmer's wife! I'll bet your turkey against Mrs. Nelson's;
but, Sir William and I will decide.

Hardy says, you may be sure of him; and, that he has not lost his
appetite.

You will make us rich, with your economy.

I did not think, tell Sir William, that impudence had got such deep
root in Wales. I send you the letter, as a curiosity; and to have the
impudence to recommend a midshipman!

It is not long ago, a person from Yorkshire desired me to lend him
three hundred pounds, as he was going to set up a school!

Are these people mad; or, do they take me for quite a fool?

However, I have wisdom enough to laugh at their folly; and to be,
myself, your most obliged and faithful friend,

  NELSON & BRONTE.

Best regards to Sir William, Mrs. Cadogan, and all friends.




LETTER XXX.


  Amazon, October 21st, 1801.

MY DEAREST FRIEND,

It blows strong from the westward, and is a very dirty day, with a
good deal of surf on the beach; but Hardy and Sutton recommended my
going on shore this morning, as they believe it may blow a heavy gale
to-morrow. But, what comfort could I have had, for two whole days, at
Deal?

I hope the morning will be fine: but I have ordered a Deal boat, as
they understand the beach better than our's; and, if I cannot land
here, I shall go to Ramsgate Pier, and come to Deal in a carriage.

Has Mrs. Cadogan got my Peer's robe? for I must send for Mr. Webb, and
have it altered to a Viscount's.

Lord Hood wrote to me, to-day, and he is to be one of my introducers.
He wanted me to dine with him the 24th; but I'll be damned if I dine
from home that day, and it would be as likely we should dine out the
23d.

If you and Sir William ever wish me to dine with his brother, it must
be the time of a very small party; for it would be worse than death to
me, to dine in so large a party.

I expect, that all animals will increase where you are, for I never
expect that you will suffer any to be killed.

I am glad Sir William has got the Duke's poney; riding will do him
much good.

I am sorry to tell you, that Dr. Baird is so ill, that I am told it is
very probable he may never recover.

This place is the devil's, for dreadful colds: and I don't believe I
should get well all the winter; for both cough, and bowels, are still
very much out of order.

You are now writing your last letter for Deal; so am I, for Merton,
from Deal: at least, I hope so; for, if I can help it, I will not
return to it.

I have much to do, being the last day on board; but ever, my dearest
friend, believe me your truly affectionate

  NELSON & BRONTE.

I am literally starving with cold; but my heart is warm.

I suppose I shall dine with Lutwidge: but I am not very desirous of
it; for I shall have Sutton, Bedford, and Hardy, with me.

You must prepare Banti's mother, as it is a peace, for some other line
of life than the navy. Yesterday, he sold a pair of silver buckles; he
would soon ruin poor Charles, who is really a well-disposed boy.

I never shall get warm again, I believe. I cannot feel the pen.

Make my kindest regards to Sir William, Mrs. Cadogan, Oliver, &c.
Sutton, Hardy, and Bedford, all join in kind remembrances.

As Monday is Horace's birth-day, I suppose I must send him a one pound
note.




LETTER XXXI.


  May 22d, [1803.]
  Eight o'Clock in the Morning.

MY DEAREST EMMA,

We are now in sight of Ushant, and shall see Admiral Cornwallis in an
hour.

I am not in a little fret, on the idea that he may keep the Victory,
and turn us all into the Amphion. It will make it truly uncomfortable;
but, I cannot help myself.

I assure you, my dear Emma, that I feel a thorough conviction, that we
shall meet again, with honour, riches, and health, and remain together
till a good old age. I look at your and my God's Child's picture; but,
till I am sure of remaining here, I cannot bring myself to hang
them up. Be assured, that my attachment, and affectionate regard, is
unalterable; nothing can shake it! And, pray, say so to my dear Mrs.
T. when you see her. Tell her, that my love is unbounded, to her and
her dear sweet child; and, if she should have more, it will extend
to all of them. In short, my dear Emma, say every thing to her, which
your dear, affectionate, heart and head, can think of.

We are very comfortable. Mr. Elliot is happy, has quite recovered his
spirits; he was very low, at Portsmouth. George Elliot is very well;
say so, to Lord Minto. Murray, Sutton--in short, every body in the
ship, seems happy; and, if we should fall in with a French man-of-war,
I have no fears but they will do as we used to do.

Hardy is gone into Plymouth, to see our Dutchman safe. I think, she
will turn out a good prize.

Gaetano desires his duty to Miledi! He is a good man; and, I dare say,
will come back: for, I think, it cannot be a long war; just enough to
make me independent in pecuniary matters.

If the wind stands, on Tuesday we shall be on the coast of Portugal;
and, before next Sunday, in the Mediterranean.

To Mrs. Cadogan, say every kind thing; to good Mrs. Nelson, the
Doctor, &c. &c.

If you like, you may tell him about the entailing of the pension: but,
perhaps, he will be so much taken up with Canterbury, that it will do
for some dull evening at Hilborough.

I shall now stop, till I have been on board the Admiral. Only, tell
Mrs. T. that I will write her the first safe opportunity; I am not
sure of this.

I shall direct to Merton, after June 1st. Therefore, as you change,
make Davison take a direction to Nepean; but, I would not trouble him
with too many directions, for fear of embroil.

  May 23d.

We were close in with Brest, yesterday; and found, by a frigate, that
Admiral Cornwallis had a rendezvous at sea. Thither we went; but, to
this hour, cannot find him.

It blows strong. What wind we are losing! If I cannot find the
Admiral by six o'clock, we must all go into the Amphion, and leave
the Victory, to my great mortification. So much for the wisdom of my
superiors.

I keep my letter open to the last: for, I still hope; as, I am sure,
there is no good reason for my not going out in the Victory.

I am just embarking in the Amphion; cannot find Admiral Cornwallis.

May God in Heaven bless you! prays your most sincere

  NELSON & BRONTE.

Stephens's publication I should like to have.

I have left my silver seal; at least, I cannot find it.




LETTER XXXII.


  [July 1803.

MY DEAREST EMMA,

Although I have wrote letters from various places, merely to
say--"Here I am," and "There I am;"--yet, as I have no doubt but
that they would all be read, it was impossible for me to say more
than--"Here I am, and well:" and I see no prospect of any certain mode
of conveyance, but by sea; which, with the means the Admiralty has
given me, of small vessels, can be but seldom.

Our passages have been enormously long. From Gibraltar to Malta, we
were eleven days: arriving the fifteenth in the evening, and sailing
in the night of the sixteenth--that is, three in the morning of the
seventeenth--and it was the twenty-sixth before we got off Capri;
where I had ordered the frigate, which carried Mr. Elliot to Naples,
to join me.

I send you copies of the King and Queen's letters. I am vexed, that
she did not mention you! I can only account for it, by her's being a
political letter.

When I wrote to the Queen, I said--"I left Lady Hamilton, the
eighteenth of May; and so attached to your Majesty, that I am sure she
would lay down her life to preserve your's. Your Majesty never had a
more sincere, attached, and real friend, than your dear Emma. You
will be sorry to hear, that good Sir William did not leave her in such
comfortable circumstances as his fortune would have allowed. He has
given it amongst his relations. But she will do honour to his memory,
although every one else of his friends call loudly against him on that
account."

I trust, my dear Emma, she has wrote you. If she can forget Emma, I
hope, God will forget her! But, you think, that she never will, or
can. Now is her time to shew it.

You will only shew the King and Queen's letters to some few particular
friends.

The King is very low; lives, mostly, at Belvidere. Mr. Elliot had not
seen either him or the Queen, from the seventeenth, the day of his
arrival, to the twenty-first. On the next day, he was to be presented.

I have made up my mind, that it is part of the plan of that Corsican
Scoundrel, to conquer the kingdom of Naples. He has marched thirteen
thousand men into the kingdom, on the Adriatic side; and he will take
possession, with as much shadow of right, of Gaeta and Naples: and,
if the poor King remonstrates, or allows us to secure Sicily, he will
call it war, and declare a conquest.

I have cautioned General Acton, not to risk the Royal Family too
long; but Naples will be conquered, sooner or later, as it may suit
Buonaparte's convenience.

The Morea, and Egypt, are likewise in his eye. An army of full seventy
thousand men are assembling in Italy.

Gibbs and Noble are gone to Malta.

I am, you may believe, very anxious to get off Toulon, to join the
fleet.

Sir Richard Bickerton went from off Naples, the day I left Gibraltar.

We passed Monte Christo, Bastia, and Cape Corse, yesterday; and are
now moving, slowly, direct for Toulon.

What force they have, I know not; indeed, I am totally ignorant: some
say, nine sail of the line; some, seven; some, five. If the former,
they will come out; for we have only the same number, including
sixty-fours, and very shortly manned.

However, I hope they will come out, and let us settle the matter. You
know, I hate being kept in suspence.

  [July 8th.

I left this hole, to put down what force the French have at Toulon.
Seven sail of the line ready, five frigates, and six corvettes. One
or two more in about a week. We, to day, eight sail of the
line--to-morrow, seven; including two sixty-four gun ships.

You will readily believe, how rejoiced I shall be to get one of your
dear, excellent letters, that I may know every thing which has passed
since my absence.

I sincerely hope, that Mr. Booth has settled all your accounts. Never
mind, my dear Emma, a few hundred pounds; which is all the rigid gripe
of the law, not justice, can wrest from you.

I thank God, that you cannot want; (although that is no good reason
for its being taken from you:) whilst I have sixpence, you shall not
want for fivepence of it! But, you have bought your experience, that
there is no friendship in money concerns; and, your good sense will
make you profit of it.

I hope, the minister has done something for you. But, never mind, we
can live upon bread and cheese.

Independence is a blessing; and, although I have not yet found out
the way to get prize money--what has been taken, has run into our
mouths--however, it must turn out very hard, if I cannot get enough to
pay off my debts, and that will be no small comfort.

I have not mentioned my Bronte affairs to Acton, as yet; but, if
Naples remains much longer, I shall ask the question. But, I expect
nothing from them. I believe, even Acton wishes himself well, and
safely removed.

I think, from what I hear, that the King's spirits are so much
depressed, that he will give up the reins of Naples, at least, to his
son, and retire to Sicily. Sir William, you know, always thought,
that he would end his life so. Certainly, his situation must be
heart-breaking!

Gaetano returned in the frigate. I believe, he saw enough of Naples.
He carried his family money; and Mr. Falconet (Gibbs being absent)
will pay Mr. Greville's pension to Gaetano's family. I have now [sent]
Gaetano to the post: and he desires, to present his duty; and to tell
you, that Mr. Ragland, from Sir William's death, will not pay any more
pensions, without orders from Mr. Greville.

Vincenzo has had none paid. He is very poor; keeps a shop. His son
wanted, I find, to come in the frigate to me. I cannot afford to
maintain him; therefore, I shall give no encouragement.

Old Antonio was allowed a carline a day; that is, now, not paid.

Sabatello lives with Mr. Elliot.

Nicolo, and Mary Antonio, have left Mr. Gibbs, for some cause; Gaetano
says, he believes, for _amore_.

Francesca has two children living, and another coming. She lives the
best amongst them, like _gallant homme_.

Pasqual lives with the Duke Montelione; and Joseph, with the old
Russian.

Your house is a hotel; the upper parts are kept for the Marquis, the
owner.

Mr. Elliot has taken the house of the Baille Franconi, on the Chaia.

Doctor Nudi inquired kindly after us; and all the women at Santa Lucia
expected, when they saw Gaetano, that you was arrived.

Bread never was so dear; every thing else in plenty. The wages not
being raised, Gaetano says, the poor of England are a million times
better off.

So much for Gaetano's news. He desires his duty to Signora Madre; and
remembrances to Mary Ann, Fatima, &c.

  [July 8th.

We joined, this morning, the fleet. The men in the ships are good; but
the ships themselves are a little the worse for wear, and very short
of their complements of men. We shall never be better: therefore, let
them come; the sooner, the better.

I shall write a line to the Duke, that he may see I do not forget my
friends; and I rely, my dearest Emma, on your saying every kind thing,
for me, to the Doctor, Mrs. Nelson, Mrs. Bolton, Mr. and Mrs. Matcham,
Mrs. Cadogan; whose kindness, and goodness, I shall never forget.

You will have the goodness to send the inclosed, as directed; and be
assured, that I am, to the last moment of my life, your most attached,
faithful, and affectionate,

  NELSON & BRONTE.




LETTER XXXIII.


  Victory, off Toulon,
  August 1, 1803.

  [I do not know that you will get this letter.]

MY DEAREST EMMA,

Your letter of May 31, which came under cover to Mr. Noble, of Naples,
inclosing Davison's correspondence with Plymouth, arrived by the
Phoebe two days ago: and this is the only scrap of a pen which has
been received by any person in the fleet since we sailed from England.

You will readily conceive, my dear Emma, the sensations which the
sight and reading even your few lines [occasioned.] They cannot be
understood, but by those of such mutual and truly sincere attachment
as your's and mine. Although you said little, I understood a great
deal, and most heartily approve of your plan and society for next
winter; and, next spring, I hope to be rich enough to begin the
alterations at dear Merton. It will serve to amuse you; and, I am
sure, that I shall admire all your alterations, even to planting a
gooseberry bush.

Sutton joined me yesterday, and we are all got into the Victory; and,
a few days will put us in order.

Every body gives a very excellent character of Mr. Chevalier, the
servant recommended by Mr. Davison; and I shall certainly live as
frugal as my station will admit. I have known the pinch, and shall
endeavour never to know it again.

I want to send two thousand one hundred pounds, to pay off Mrs.
Greaves, on October 1st. But, I have not received one farthing; but,
I hope to receive some soon. But Mr. Haslewood promised to see this
matter kept right for me.

Hardy is now busy, hanging up your and Horatia's picture; and I trust
soon to see the other two safe arrived from the Exhibition. I want
no others to ornament my cabin. I can contemplate them, and find new
beauties every day, and I do not want any body else.

You will not expect much news from us. We see nothing. I have great
fear, that all Naples will fall into the hands of the French; and, if
Acton does not take care, Sicily also. However, I have given my final
advice so fully and strongly that, let what will happen, they cannot
blame me.

Captain Capel says, Mr. Elliot cannot bear Naples. I have no doubt,
but that it is very different to your time.

The Queen, I fancy, by the seal, has sent a letter to Castelcicala;
her letter to me is only thanks for my attention to the safety of the
kingdom. If Dr. Scott has time, and is able, he shall write a copy for
you.

The King is very much retired. He would not see the French General,
St. Cyr; who came to Naples, _to settle the contribution for the
payment of the French army_.

The Queen was ordered to give him and the French minister a dinner,
but the King staid at Belvidere.

I think, he will give it up soon; and retire to Sicily, if the French
will allow him.

Acton has never dared give Mr. Elliot, or one Englishman, a dinner.

The fleet are ready to come forth; but, they will not come for the
sake of fighting me.

I have this day made George Elliot, post; Lieutenant Pettit, a master
and commander; and Mr. Hindmarsh, gunner's son, of the Bellerophon,
who behaved so well this day five year, a Lieutenant.

I reckon to have lost two French seventy-fours, by my not coming out
in the Victory; but I hope they will come soon, with interest.

This goes to Gibraltar, by Sutton, in the Amphion.

I shall write the Doctor in a day or two. I see, by the French papers,
that he has kissed hands.

With kindest regards to your good mother, and all at Merton, &c. &c.
&c. ever your's, most faithfully and affectionately,

  NELSON & BRONTE.




LETTER XXXIV.


  Victory, off Toulon,
  August 10th, 1803.

MY DEAREST EMMA,

I take the opportunity of Mr. Acourt's going through Spain, with Mr.
Elliot's dispatches for England, to send this letter: for I would not,
for the world, miss any opportunity of sending you a line.

By Gibraltar, I wrote you, as lately as the 4th; but all our ways of
communicating with England, are very uncertain: and, I believe, the
Admiralty must have forgot us; for, not a vessel of any kind or sort
has joined us, since I left Spithead.

News, I absolutely am ignorant of: except, that a schooner, belonging
to me, put her nose into Toulon; and four frigates popped out, and
have taken her, and a transport loaded with water for the fleet.
However, I hope to have an opportunity, very soon, of paying them the
debt, with interest.

Mr. Acourt says, at Naples, they hope that the mediation of Russia
will save them: but, I doubt, if Russia will go to war with the French
for any kingdom; and they, poor souls! relying on a broken reed, will
lose Sicily.

As for getting any thing for Bronte, I cannot expect it; for, the
finances of Naples are worse than ever. _Patienza_, however; I will--
* * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *

I see, many Bishops are dead. Is my brother tired of Canterbury? I
wish I could make him a Bishop. If you see him, or write, say that I
have not ten minutes to send away Mr. Acourt, who cannot be detained.

I hope Lord St. Vincent has sent out Sir William Bolton. As soon as I
know who is first Lord, I will write him.




LETTER XXXV.


MY DEAR LADY HAMILTON,

Your friend's godson arrived safe yesterday afternoon; and I shall,
you know, always feel too happy in obeying your commands: for, you
never ask favours, but for your friends.

In short, in every point of view, from Ambassatrice to the duties of
domestic life, I never saw your equal!

That elegance of manners; accomplishments; and, above all, your
goodness of heart, is unparalleled: and only believe, for ever, and
beyond it, your faithful and devoted

  NELSON & BRONTE.

Victory, August 24th, 1803.




LETTER XXXVI.


[_N.B. The Mysterious Letter appears to have been inclosed in this
Packet_.]

  August 26th, 1803.
  Wrote several days past.

MY DEAREST EMMA,

By the Canopus, Admiral Campbell, I have received all your truly kind
and affectionate letters, from May 20th to July 3d; with the exception
of one, dated May 31st, sent to Naples.

This is the first communication I have had with England since we
sailed.

All your letters, _my dear letters_, are so entertaining! and which
paint so clearly what you are after, that they give me either the
greatest pleasure or pain. It is the next best thing, to being with
you.

I only desire, my dearest Emma, that you will always believe, that
Nelson's your own; Nelson's _Alpha_ and _Omega_ is _Emma_! I cannot
alter; my affection and love is beyond even this world! Nothing can
shake it, but yourself; and that, I will not allow myself to think,
for a moment, is possible.

I feel, that you are the real friend of my bosom, and dearer to me
than life; and, that I am the same to you. But, I will neither have
P.'s nor Q.'s come near you! No; not the slice of Single Gloster! But,
if I was to go on, it would argue that want of confidence which would
be injurious to your honour.

I rejoice that you have had so pleasant a trip into Norfolk; and I
hope, one day, to carry you there by a nearer _tie_ in law, but not in
love and affection, than at present.

I wish, you would never mention that person's name! It works up your
anger, for no useful purpose. Her good or bad character, of me or
thee, no one cares about.

This letter will find you at dear Merton; where we shall one day meet,
and be truly happy.

I do not think it can be a long war; and, I believe, it will be much
shorter than people expect: and I shall hope to find the new
room built; the grounds laid out, neatly but not expensively; new
Piccadilly gates; kitchen garden; &c. Only let us have a plan, and
then all will go on well. It will be a great source of amusement to
you; and Horatia shall plant a tree. I dare say, she will be very
busy. Mrs. Nelson, or Mrs. Bolton, &c. will be with you; and time
will pass away, till I have the inexpressible happiness of arriving
at Merton. Even the thought of it vibrates through my nerves; for, my
love for you is as unbounded as the ocean!

I feel all your good mother's kindness; and, I trust, that we shall
turn rich, by being economists. Spending money, to please a pack of
people, is folly, and without thanks. I desire, that you will say
every kind thing from me to her, and make her a present of something
in my name.

Dr. Scott is gone with my mission to Algiers, or I would send you a
copy of the King and Queen's letter. I send you one from the Queen.
Both King, Queen, and Acton, were very civil to Sir William Bolton. He
dined with Acton.

Bolton does very well in his brig; but, he has made not a farthing of
prize money. If I knew where to send him for some, he should go; but,
unless we have a Spanish war, I shall live here at a great expence:
although Mr. Chevalier takes every care, and I have great reason to be
satisfied.

I have just asked William, who behaves very well, whether he chooses
to remit any of his wages to his father. It does not appear, he
_does_, at present. He is paid, by the King, eighteen pounds a year,
as one of my retinue; therefore I have nothing to pay. I have told
him, whenever he chooses to send any, to tell Mr. Scott, or Captain
Hardy, and he will receive a remittance bill; so, he may now act as he
pleases.

_A-propos_ of Mr. Scott. He is very much obliged to you for your news
of Mrs. Scott's being brought to bed. No letters came in the cutter,
but to me, and he was very uneasy. He is a very excellent good man;
and, I am very fortunate in having such a one.

I admire your kindness to my dear sister Bolton. I have wrote her,
that certainly I will assist Tom Bolton at college. It is better, as I
tell her, not to promise more than I am sure I can perform. It is only
doing them a injury. I tell her, if _vacancies_, please God, should
happen, that my income will be much increased.

With respect to Mr. Bolton--every body knows, that I have no interest;
nobody cares for me: but, if he will point out what he wants, I will
try what can be done. But, I am sure, he will not be half so well
off as at present. Supposing he could get a place of a few hundreds
a year, he would be a ten times poorer man than he is at present. I
could convince you of it, in a moment; but, if I was to begin, then it
would be said, I wanted inclination to render them a service.

I should like to see Sir H---- P----'s book. I cannot conceive how
a man that is reported to have been so extravagant of government's
money, to say no worse, can make a good story.

I wrote to the old Duke, not long since. I regard him; but, I would
not let him touch you for all his money. No; that would never do!

I believe Mr. Bennett's bill to be correct; but, it was not intended
you should pay that out of the allowance for Merton; and, how could
you afford to send Mrs. Bolton a hundred pounds. It is impossible, out
of your income.

I wish Mr. Addington would give you five hundred pounds a year; then,
you would be better able to give away than at present. But your purse,
my dear Emma, will always be empty; your heart is generous beyond your
means.

Your good mother is always sure of my sincerest regard; pray, tell her
so.

Connor is getting on very well: but, I cannot ask Captain Capel
to rate him; that must depend upon the boy's fitness, and Capel's
kindness. I have placed another year's allowance of thirty pounds in
Capel's hands, and given Connor a present.

What a story, about Oliver and Mr. Matcham buying an estate in
Holstein; and, to sell out at such a loss! I never heard the like. I
sincerely hope it will answer his expectations; it is a fine country,
but miserably cold.

How can Tyson be such a fool! I sincerely hope, he will never want
money. I am not surprised at Troubridge's abuse; but, his tongue is no
scandal. You make me laugh, when you imitate the Doctor!

I am quite delighted with Miss Yonge's goodness: and I beg you will
make my best respects to her and her good father; and assure Mr.
Yonge, how much obliged I feel for all his kind attentions to you.
Those who do that, are sure of a warm place in my esteem.

I have wrote to Dumourier; therefore, I will only trouble you to say
how much I respect him. I fancy he must have suffered great distress
at Altona. However, I hope, he will now be comfortable for life. He
is a very clever man; and beats our Generals, out and out. Don't they
feel his coming? Advise him not to make _enemies_, by shewing he knows
more than some of us. Envy knows no bounds to its persecution. He has
seen the world, and will be on his guard.

I put Suckling into a frigate, with a very good man, who has a
schoolmaster; he does very well. Bulkley will be a most excellent
sea-officer; it is a pity he has not served his time. I have answered
Mr. Suckling's letter.

Gaetano is very well, and desires his duty. I think, sometimes, that
he wishes to be left at Naples; but, I am not sure.

Mr. Denis's relation has been long in the Victory; but, if the
Admiralty will not promote my lieutenants, they must all make a
retrograde motion. But, I hope, they will not do such a cruel thing.
I have had a very affectionate letter from Lord Minto. I hope George
will be confirmed; but, the Earl will not answer his application.

I shall send you some sherry, and a cask of paxoretti, by the convoy.
Perhaps, it had better go to Merton, at once; or, to Davison's cellar,
where the wine-cooper can draw it off. I have two pipes of sherry,
that is bad; but, if you like, you can send the Doctor a hogshead
of that which is coming. Davison will pay all the duties. Send it
entirely free, even to the _carriage_. You know, doing the thing well,
is twice doing it; for, sometimes, carriage is more thought of than
the prime cost.

The paxoretti I have given to Davison; and ordered one hogshead of
sherry to Canterbury, and one to dear Merton.




LETTER XXXVII.


  Victory, September 10th, 1803.

MY DEAREST EMMA,

What can I send you, buffeting the stormy gulph of Lyons; nothing, but
my warmest affection, in return for all your goodness to me and mine!

I have sent to Naples, to try and get some shawls from the King's
manufactory; and have requested Mr. Falconet to ask his wife to choose
some for you, and also some fine Venetian chains. I only wish, my dear
Emma, that I knew what you would like, and I would order them with
real pleasure; therefore, pray tell me.

We have so very little communication with the Mediterranean world,
Malta and Toulon are in separate worlds. It takes, on the [average,]
six or seven weeks to get an answer to a letter: and, in fifteen to
twenty days, by the French papers, which we get from Paris, we have
news from London; not the best side of the question, you may be sure,
but enough to give us an idea of how matters go on.

I am of opinion, that we shall have a peace much sooner than is
generally expected: and that will be, to me, the very highest pleasure
in this world; to return to Merton, and your dear beloved society.
Then, I agree with you, that "I would not give sixpence to call the
King my uncle!"

I have wrote again to Gibbs, about my Bronte affairs; and [the copy
of a letter] to Mrs. Graefer I will send you, if I can; but you must
preserve it, for I have no other. It may be necessary, situated as I
am, to keep her in good humour; for a thousand pounds may be easily
sold off the estate, and I never the wiser. However, you will see what
I have said.

I have wrote to Mr. Elliot about Sabatello. What a rascal he must be!
Gaetano is going to Naples, and I shall tell him; but, of course, he
would rather favour Sabatello, his brother-in-law, than Julia.

I send you, my dearest Emma, an hundred pounds, which you will dispose
of as follows--a _present_ for yourself; and, if you like, a trifle
to the servants: something to the poor of Merton; something for
Mrs. Cadogan, Miss Connor, Charlotte, &c. &c. I only send this as a
trifling remembrance from me, whose whole soul is at Merton.

  September 16th.

The day after I wrote the former part of this letter, Mr. Scott
received from Venice, and desired to present to you, two very handsome
Venetian chains, received from Venice. This I would not suffer; for I
allow no one to make my own Emma presents, but her Nelson. Therefore,
he will be paid for them; but, your obligation is not the less to
him. He is a very worthy, excellent, modest man, and an excellent
secretary.

Dr. Scott is, at times, wrong in the head; absolutely, too much
learning has turned him. But we all go on very well.

I had a letter from Gibbs about Bronte, and from Noble, which will
begin another letter; only, believe me, at all times, sides, and ends,
most faithfully your's, for ever,

  NELSON & BRONTE.




LETTER XXXVIII.


  September 26th, 1803.

MY DEAREST EMMA,

We have had, for these fourteen days past, nothing but gales of wind,
and a heavy sea. However, as our ships have suffered no damage, I
hope to be able to keep the sea all the winter. Nothing, but dire
necessity, shall force me to that out of the way place, Malta. If I
had depended upon that island, for supplies for the fleet, we must all
have been knocked up, long ago; for, Sir Richard Bickerton sailed from
Malta, the same day I left Portsmouth. So that we have been a pretty
long cruise; and, if I had only to look to Malta for supplies,
our ships companies would have been done for long ago. However, by
management, I have got supplies from Spain, and also from _France_;
but it appears, that we are almost shut out from Spain, for they begin
to be very uncivil to our ships. However, I suppose, by this time,
something is settled; but, I never hear from England. My last letters
are July 6th, near three months. But, as I get French newspapers
occasionally, we guess how matters are going on.

I have wrote Mr. Gibbs, again, a long history about Bronte; and, I
hope, if General Acton will do nothing for me, that he will settle
something: but, I know, whatever is settled, I shall be the loser.
Till next year, the debt will not be paid off; how--

* * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *




LETTER XXXIX.


  Victory, off Toulon,
  October 18th, 1803.

MY DEAREST EMMA,

Your truly kind and affectionate letters, from July 17th, to August
24th, all arrived safe in the Childers, the 6th of this month.

Believe me, my beloved Emma, that I am truly sensible of all your
love and affection, which is reciprocal. You have, from the variety of
incidents passing before you, much to tell me; and, besides, you have
that happy knack of making every thing you write interesting. Here I
am, one day precisely like the other; except the difference of a gale
of wind, or not.

Since September 1st, we have not had four fine days; and, if the
French do not come out soon, I fear, some of my ships will cry out.

You are very good, to send me your letters to read.

Mrs. D---- is a damned pimping bitch! What has she to do with your
love? She would have pimped for Lord B----, or Lord L----, or Captain
M'N----, * * * * of * * * *, or any one else. She is all vanity:
fancies herself beautiful; witty; in short, like you. She be damned!

As I wrote you, the consulship at Civita Vecchia will not, in itself,
pay their lodgings; and, the bad air will tip her off.

There will be no Lord Bristol's table. He tore his last will, a few
hours before his death. It is said, that it was giving every thing to
those devils of Italians about him.

I wish he may have given Mrs. Denis any thing; but, I do not think it:
and, as for you, my dear Emma, as long as I can, I don't want any of
their gifts.

As for old Q. he may put you into his will, or scratch you out, as he
pleases, I care not.

If Mr. Addington gives you the pension, it is well; but, do not let it
fret you. Have you not Merton? It is clear--the first purchase--and my
dear Horatia is provided for: and, I hope, one of these days, that you
will be my own Duchess of Bronte; and, then, a fig for them all!

I have just had a letter from Gibbs, of which I send you a copy. You
see what interest he is taking about Bronte.

I begin to think, without some assistance like his, that I never
should have touched a farthing. It will be 1805, before I touch the
estate. Neither principal or interest of the seven thousand ounces
have been paid; and, it is now eight thousand ounces debt.

You will see, Gibbs, at last, has fixed on sending his daughter home;
and I shall be glad of so good an opportunity of obliging him, as it
will naturally tie him to my interest. He was a great fool, not to
have sent the child with you, as you wished.

I am glad to find, my dear Emma, that you mean to take Horatia home.
_Aye_! she is like her mother; will have her own way, or kick up a
devil of a dust. But, you will cure her: I am afraid I should spoil
her; for, I am sure, I would shoot any one who would hurt her.

She was always fond of my watch; and, very probably, I might have
promised her one: indeed, I gave her one, which cost sixpence! But,
I go no where to get any thing pretty; therefore, do not think me
neglectful.

I send you Noble's letter; therefore, I hope you will get your cases
in good order: they have had some narrow escapes.

I am glad you liked South End.

How that Coffin could come over, and palaver, Rowley, Keith, &c. and
Coffin to abuse the Earl! Now, I can tell you, that he is the Earl's
spy.

It is Coffin, who has injured Sir Andrew Hammond so much: and his
custom is, to abuse the Earl, to get people to speak out; and, then,
the Earl takes his measures accordingly.

To me, it is nothing. Thank God! there can be no tales told of my
cheating; or, I hope, neglecting my duty. Whilst I serve, I will serve
well, and closely; when I want rest, I will go to Merton.

You know, my dear Emma, that I am never well when it blows hard.
Therefore, imagine what a cruize off Toulon is; even in summer time,
we have a hard gale every week, and two days heavy swell.

It would kill you; and myself, to see you. Much less possible, to have
Charlotte, Horatia, &c. on board ship!

And I, that have given orders to carry no women to sea in the Victory,
to be the first to break them!

And, as to Malta, I may never see it, unless we have an engagement;
and, perhaps, not then: for, if it is _complete_, I may go home, for
three months, to see you; but, if you was at Malta, I might absolutely
miss you, by leaving the Mediterranean without warning.

The other day, we had a report the French were out, and seen steering
to the westward. We were as far as Minorca, when the alarm proved
false.

Therefore, my dearest beloved Emma! although I should be the happiest
of men, to live and die with you, yet my chance of seeing you is much
more certain by your remaining at Merton, than wandering where I may
never go; and, certainly, never to stay forty-eight hours.

You cannot, I am sure, more ardently long to see me, than I do to be
with you; and, if the war goes on, it is my intention to get leave to
spend the _next winter_ in England: but I verily believe that, long
before that time, we shall have peace.

As for living in Italy, that is entirely out of the question. Nobody
cares for us, there; and, if I had Bronte--which, thank God! I shall
not--it would cost me a fortune to go there, and be tormented out of
my life. I should never settle my affairs there.

I know, my own dear Emma, if she will let her reason have fair play,
will say, I am right; but she is, like Horatia, very angry, if she
cannot have her own way. Her Nelson is called upon, in the most
honourable manner, to defend his country! Absence, to us, is equally
painful: but, if I had either stayed at home, or neglected my duty
abroad, would not my Emma have blushed for me? She could never have
heard of my praises, and how the country looks up.

I am writing, my dear Emma, to reason the point with you; and, I am
sure, you will see it in its true light. But I have said my say, on
this subject, and will finish.

I have received your letter, with Lord William's and Mr. Kemble's,
about Mr. Palmer: he is also recommended by the Duke of Clarence;
and, he says, by desire of the Prince of Wales. I have, without him,
twenty-six to be made Captains, and list every day increasing. It is
not _one_ whole French fleet that can get through it.

I shall, probably, offend many more than I can oblige. Such is always
the case: like the tickets--those who get them, feel they have a right
to them; and those [who] do not get them, feel offended for ever.

But, I cannot help it: I shall endeavour to do what is right, in every
situation; and some ball may soon close all my accounts with this
world of care and vexation!

But, never mind, my own dear-beloved Emma: if you are true to me,
I care not--and approve of all my actions. However, as you say, I
approve of them, myself; therefore, probably, I am right.

Poor Reverend Mr. Scott is, I fear, in a very bad way. His head has
been turned by too much learning, and the stroke of lightning will
never let him be right again. The Secretary Scott is a treasure; and I
am very well mounted: Hardy is every thing I could wish or desire.

Our days pass so much alike that, having described one, you have
them all. We now breakfast by candlelight; and all retire, at eight
o'clock, to bed.

Naples, I fancy, is in a very bad way, in regard to money. They have
not, or pretend not to have, enough to pay their officers; and, I
verily believe, if Acton was to give up his place, that it would
become a province of France. Only think of Buonaparte's writing to
the Queen, to desire her influence to turn out Acton! She answered,
properly: at least, so says Mr. Elliot, who _knows more of Naples_
than any of us; God help him!--and General Acton has, I believe, more
power than ever.

By Gibbs's letter, I see, he has sent over about my accounts at
Bronte. He can have no interest in being unfriendly to me. Why should
he? I want no great matters from him; and he can want nothing from me,
that it is not my duty to give his Sovereigns: therefore, why should
he be against us! For my part, my conduct will not alter, whether he
is or not.

Our friend, Sir Alexander, is a very great diplomatic character; and,
even an Admiral must not know what he is negotiating about: although
you will scarcely believe, that the Bey of Tunis sent the man at my
desire.

You shall judge--_viz_. "The Tunisian Envoy is still here,
negotiating. He is a moderate man; and, apparently, the best disposed
of any I ever did business with." Could even the oldest diplomatic
character be drier? I hate such parade of nonsense! But, I will turn
from such stuff.

You ask me, Do you do right to give Charlotte things? I shall only
say, my dear Emma, whatever you do in that way, I shall always
approve. I only wish, I had more power than I have! But, somehow, my
mind was not sharp enough for prize-money. Lord Keith would have made
twenty thousand pounds, and I have not made six thousand.

Poor Mr. Este, how I pity him! but, what shall I do with him? However,
if he comes, I shall shew him all the kindness in my power.

  October 22d.

The vessel is just going off. I have not a scrap of news! Only, be
assured of my most affectionate regard.

Remember me kindly to Charlotte. Shall always love those that are good
to Horatia. I will write her by another opportunity.

Remember me to Mrs. Cadogan.

You may be sure, I do not forget Charles, who has not been well;
Captain Capel is very good to him.

I am, ever, for ever, my dearest Emma, your most faithful and
affectionate

  NELSON & BRONTE.



                   SUPPLEMENT.

         *       *       *       *       *

             _INTERESTING LETTERS_,

                   ELUCIDATORY

                       OF

              Lord Nelson's Letters

                       TO

                 LADY HAMILTON.

         *       *       *       *       *

                     VOL. I.




       Letters

        FROM

     LORD NELSON

         TO

     MRS. THOMSON.




Letters OF LORD NELSON, &c.




I.

See LETTER X. Page 29.


I sit down, my Dear Mrs. T. by desire of poor Thomson, to write you a
line: not, to assure you of his eternal love and affection for you and
his dear child; but only to say, that he is well, and as happy as he
can be, separated from all which he holds dear in this world. He has
no thoughts separated from your love, and your interest. They are
united with his; one fate, one destiny, he assures me, awaits you
both. What can I say more? Only, to kiss his child for him: and love
him as truly, sincerely, and faithfully, as he does you; which is,
from the bottom of his soul. He desires, that you will more and more
attach yourself to dear Lady Hamilton.




II.

See LETTER XXXVI. Page 135.


My Dearest Beloved * * * *,

To say, that I think of you by day, night, and all day, and all night,
but too faintly express my feelings of love and affection towards you
* * * * * * * * * * unbounded affection. Our dear excellent, good * *
* * * * * is the only one who knows any thing of the matter; and she
has promised me, when you * * * * * * again, to take every possible
care of you, as a proof of her never-failing regard for your own dear
Nelson. Believe me, that I am incapable of wronging you, in thought,
word, or deed. No; not all the wealth of Peru could buy me for one
moment: it is all your's, and reserved wholly for you; and * * *
certainly * * * * * * * * * from the first moment of our happy,
dear, enchanting, blessed meeting. The thoughts of such happiness, my
dearest only beloved, makes the blood fly into my head. The call
of our country, is a duty which you would, deservedly, in the cool
moments of reflection, reprobate, was I to abandon: and I should feel
so disgraced, by seeing you ashamed of me! No longer saying--"This is
the man who has saved his country! This is he who is the first to go
forth to fight our battles, and the last to return!" And, then, all
these honours reflect on you. "Ah!" they will think; "what a man! what
sacrifices has he not made, to secure our homes and property; even the
society and happy union with the finest and most accomplished woman
in the world." As you love, how must you feel! My heart is with you,
cherish it. I shall, my best beloved, return--if it pleases God--a
victor; and it shall be my study to transmit an unsullied name. There
is no desire of wealth, no ambition, that could keep me from all my
soul holds dear. No; it is to save my country, my wife in the eye of
God, and * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * will tell you
that it is all right: and, then, only think of our happy meeting.

Ever, for ever, I am your's, only your's, even beyond this world,

  NELSON & BRONTE.

For ever, for ever, your own NELSON.

August 26th, [1803.]



       Letters

        FROM

    LADY HAMILTON

         TO

     LORD NELSON.




Letters OF LADY HAMILTON, &c.




I.


  Naples, June 30th, 1798.

DEAR SIR,

I take the opportunity of Captain Hope, to write a few lines to you,
and thank you for your kind letter by Captain Bowen.

The Queen was much pleased, as I translated it for her: and charges me
to thank you; and say, she prays for your honour and safety--victory,
she is sure you will have.

We have still the regicide minister here, _Garrat_: the most impudent,
insolent dog; making the most infamous demands every day; and I see
plainly, the court of Naples must declare war, if they mean to save
their country.

_Her Majesty_ sees, and feels, all you said in your letter to Sir
William, dated off the Faro di Messina, in its true light; so does
General Acton.

But, alas! their First Minister, _Gallo_, is a frivolous, ignorant,
self-conceited coxcomb, that thinks of nothing but his fine
embroidered coat, ring, and snuff-box; and half Naples thinks him half
a Frenchman: and, God knows, if one may judge of what he did in making
the peace for the Emperor, he must either be very ignorant, or not
attached to his masters or the _cause commune._

The Queen and Acton cannot bear him, and consequently [he] cannot
have much power: but, still, a First Minister, although he may be a
minister of smoke, yet he has always something; enough, at least, to
do mischief.

The Jacobins have all been lately declared innocent, after suffering
four years imprisonment; and, I know, they all deserved to be hanged
long ago: and, since Garrat has been here, and through his insolent
letters to Gallo, these pretty gentlemen, that had planned the death
of their Majesties, are to be let out on society again.

In short, I am afraid, all is lost here; and I am grieved to the heart
for our dear, charming Queen, who deserves a better fate!

I write to you, my dear Sir, in confidence, and in a hurry.

I hope you will not quit the Mediterranean, without taking _us_. We
have our leave, and every thing ready, at a day's notice, to go: but
yet, I trust in God, and you, that we shall destroy those monsters,
before we go from hence. Surely, their reign cannot last long!

If you have any opportunity, write to us; pray, do: you do not know
how your letters comfort us.

God bless you, my dear, dear Sir! and believe me, ever, your most
sincerely obliged and attached friend,

  EMMA HAMILTON.




II.


  Thursday Evening, June 12th, [1799.]

I have been with the Queen this evening. She is very miserable; and
says, that although the people of Naples are for them, in general,
YET things will not be brought to that state of quietness and
subordination, till the fleet of Lord Nelson appears _off Naples_.
She therefore begs, intreats, and conjures you, my dear Lord, if it is
possible, to arrange matters so as to be able to go to Naples.

Sir William is writing for General Acton's _answer_.

For God's sake, consider it, and do! We will go with you, if you will
come and fetch us.

Sir William is ill; I am ill: it will do us good.

God bless you! Ever, ever, your's sincerely,

  E. HAMILTON.




               Letters

               FROM THE

          REV. EDMUND NELSON

    (_Lord Nelson's Father_)

                   TO

             LADY HAMILTON.




Letters OF THE REV. EDMUND NELSON, _&c_.




I.


Madam,

I am much favoured by your polite letter, and the very friendly regard
with which Sir William Hamilton and yourself always mention my dear
son; who is, certainly, a worthy, good, brave man, parental partiality
_apart_. But, I myself am by no means satisfied with his present
situation; as to its importance, its safety, or its merited rewards.
It [is] his to sow, but others reap the yellow harvests. All things, I
trust, however, will work together for good.

Captain Parker's misfortune, I see, in every point of view, with a
friendly concern. Langford will quickly be upon his legs.

Though the amusements of a dirty sea-port are not the most refined,
good health, and domestic cheerfulness, will be a happy substitute.

I beg the whole party to accept this my remembrance; and assurance of
my regard, respect, and love: and am, Madam, your most humble servant,

  EDM. NELSON.

Burnham, August 11th, [1801.]




II.


Madam,

Your polite congratulation upon the entrance of a new year, I return
seven-fold to you, and the whole of the party now under the hospitable
roof of Merton Place. Time is a sacred deposit committed to our trust;
and, hereafter, we must account for the use we have made of it. To
me, a large portion of this treasure has already been granted, even
seventy-nine years. The complaint my dear son has felt is, I know,
very, very painful: and can be removed, only, with much care and
caution; not venturing, without a thick covering, both head and feet,
even to admire your parterres of snow-drops, which now appear in all
their splendour. The white robe which _January_ wears, bespangled with
ice, is handsome to look at; but we must not approach too near _her_.

I shall be very glad to know the Lord of Merton is recovered.

I am, Madam, your most humble servant,

  EDM. NELSON.

Bath, January 7th, 1802.




       Letters

       From The

   REV. DR. NELSON,

         NOW

     EARL NELSON,

          TO

    LADY HAMILTON.




Letters OF EARL NELSON, &c.




I.


  Hilborough, near Brandon,
  Wednesday, March 4th, 1801.

My Dear Lady,

I have sent you, by this day's coach, a hunted hare; which, I hope,
will prove tender and good. It was killed yesterday.

We are very much gratified by your kind and friendly letters: they
are very interesting to us, and they give an additional zest to our
breakfast; indeed, they are the only things give us any comfort, in
our absence. How unfortunate it was, we left town as we did! I had a
letter, yesterday morning, from my great and beloved Brother. He tells
me, he has sent my letter to the new Lord Chancellor; God grant it may
have the desired effect; but, they are all so engaged, that I fear it
much. At any rate, our good Friend has done what he can. He tells
me, he shall be at Yarmouth to-morrow or next day. A near relation
of our's, who has not seen my Lord since his return to England,
has offered to take me in his carriage: so, we set out on Sunday
afternoon; for we parsons can't go till the Sunday duty is over. We
sleep at Norwich, and hope to be at Yarmouth early on Monday.

I have written to my Brother by this post; so that, if he is likely to
have sailed before Monday, he has time to stop us. Yarmouth is sixty
miles from hence.

I have written you all these particulars; because, I know, you like to
know all about us.

Mrs. Nelson does not go with us; so you must be charitable to her, and
give her a letter or two. We shall return by the following Sunday.

I see, by the papers, the King was better on Tuesday.

Mrs. Nelson is going out for a day; when she returns, she will
write. She will thank you to keep the _two_ guineas my Lord left for
Charlotte, till you hear from her; as she has thought of laying it out
in a frock for her.

We both join in united regards to Sir William; and believe me, your
Ladyship's faithful and most obliged and affectionate friend,

  Wm. NELSON.




II.


  Hilborough, March 29th, 1801.

My Dear Lady,

As I have duty to-day, both morning and afternoon, and to preach
_twice_, I have only time to scrawl a few lines to you between the
services. I will write to my deary to-morrow.

I do not much wonder we have no news from the Baltic, considering the
state of the wind; and, unless it changes, it may be some time first.
Pray God it may be good, when it does arrive.

I was rather surprised to hear _Tom Tit_ (that bad bird) had taken his
flight to town: but, he is a prying little animal, and wishes to know
every thing; and, as he is so small and insignificant, his movements
are not always observed. But, for God's sake, take care of him; and
caution our little jewel to be as much upon her guard as she can. I am
terribly afraid, this bird will endeavour to do mischief. He must be
watched with a hawk's eye. I almost wish some hawk, or _Jove's eagle_,
would either devour him or frighten him away.

It is not very likely I should hear from Yarmouth before you, because
our Yarmouth letters generally go to London first; but if I
should, accidentally, your Ladyship shall depend on hearing from me
immediately.

I am glad my little Horace looks so well; and that you think him so
like his great, his glorious, his immortal Uncle. Why should he not be
like him? Is it so very uncommon for such near relations to have some
similitude? They who say otherwise, only say it out of envy, malice
and hatred, and all uncharitableness; out upon all such miscreants!
say I.

My love to deary, Charlotte, and the hereditary Duke of Bronte.

God bless you, my dear Lady; and believe me, your's faithfully,

  Wm. NELSON.

Tell me, in your next, whether you have seen that little bird, called
_Tom Tit_.




III.


  Hilborough, August 23d, 1801.

MY DEAR LADY HAMILTON,

I have written two long letters to my jewel, but I still seem to
have more to say. I can't find out whether a certain Viscountess is
expected at Burnham, or no.

I am pleased that you propose bringing Mrs. Nelson to Hilborough. I
hope, Sir William will be able to amuse himself with fishing a little.
The weather is too hot for me to come to London, and I can't leave my
parish at this time.

Tell my Brother, I should have great pleasure in seeing him; and will
go with him to Plymouth, or any where else, if he particularly
desires it. When you have seen Parker and Langford, you can give me a
particular account of the state of their wounds. I feel much for them.
I think it is better the _Cub_ did not speak to Mrs. N. It will save
some trouble.

I wish you could get a comfortable house near London.

You will find Mr. Nayler, of the Herald's Office, a pleasant
young man. I believe, he is my friend, and will readily give every
information in his power.

If _Jove_ gets a higher title, perhaps things may be settled more to
our minds. Now we are already in the patent, as _Barons_; it will be
no difficult matter, in that case, to have our entails advanced to the
highest honour, if my brother wishes.

This I only mention _entre nous_, without having a desire on the
subject. I am perfectly satisfied, that I am in the patent. I don't
mean to say more to my Brother.

I am told, there are two or three very old lives, Prebends of
Canterbury, in the Minister's gift--near six hundred pounds a year,
and good houses.

The Deans of Hereford, Exeter, Litchfield and Coventry, York, and
Winchester, are old men.

Write from Deal, and tell me when you are likely to return to London.

You can't come from thence nearer than London, unless my Brother lands
you on the other side of the river Thames, on the Essex or Suffolk
coasts. If that plan takes place, Mrs. Nelson had better send Sarah
home before you go.

Compliments to Sir William, and all friends. Your's very faithfully,

  Wm. NELSON.




IV.


  Sunday Morning, Sept. 6th, [1801.]

My Dear Lady,

To be sure, you did promise to write to me on Thursday last; and I was
very much disappointed at not receiving a letter yesterday, and sent
to the Post Office twice, to be certain there was no mistake: and,
now, this morning, comes your roguish, waggish letter, on a Sunday
morning, (amidst all my meditations for the good of my parishioners)
about love, courtship, marriage, throwing the stocking, going to bed,
&c. &c. &c.--quite shocking to write to a country parson, who can
have no idea of such _things_. It might do well enough for a King's
chaplain; or a church dignitary, who is supposed to have more
_learning_, and more knowledge of _things in general_.

I wish you was here, and you should not laugh at me for nothing. I
would give you as good as you brought, at any time.

I'll have no Emmas, at present. Stay till there comes one or two of
another sort, to keep the line of the Nelsons in the true name and
blood, without being obliged to go to others to assume a name
which scarcely belongs to them; and, then, as many Emmas, Elfridas,
Evelindas, and Evelinas, as you please.

But, I hope to God, the present young Horatio will go on as we all
wish, and transmit a long race to posterity.

I am delighted with Dr. Heath's letter to my Brother, and the
character he gives of him. My only fear is, that we shall spoil him
among us.

I have not yet heard from him, how he felt himself. I should have
liked to have peeped slyly into his room, and seen how he acted on
first receiving the joyful intelligence.

I don't know enough how to thank my Brother, for all his goodness to
me and mine; my heart overflows, whenever I think of it: but I can't
sit down, and write a formal letter of thanks; it would be too absurd
for _me_ to write, or _him_ to read. He well knows me; and I leave it
to your Ladyship, (my best and truest friend) to say every thing to
him, for and from me: it will come best from your lips, and adorned
with your eloquence.

I wish my Brother had done with this business. I hope, a peace will
soon put an end to his toils and dangers. * * * * * * * * * * * * * *
* * * * * * * * * * * * * *




V.


  Hilborough, September 8th, 1801.

MY DEAR LADY HAMILTON,

I hope you will have received my long letter of Sunday's date, by this
time. I wonder you should accuse me of remissness, in not writing to
_you_. I told you then, and I repeat it now, that I would always give
you "_as good as you brought_:" and, upon looking back to the last
week's letters, I find I have always answered your's, whenever I had
one; and, generally, by the _same post_.

As I wrote so much on Sunday, and you said--you thought you should
leave Deal on Tuesday or Wednesday, I said--I should write no more
till you got back to London. Nor should I now, was it not to rebut the
charge of remissness and inattention to you.

I am glad Mrs. Nelson is likely to come home soon; but, I hear nothing
about your intentions. I shall write to her to-morrow, and direct my
letter to Piccadilly; where, I hope, it will find her: and, if this
letter travels to Deal, and follows you to London, it is no matter;
it is not worth having, when you get it. Only, I could not bear the
thoughts of the appearance of neglect, without deserving it.

One or two letters I wrote to Mrs. Nelson last week, I gave public
notice, were intended, in a great degree, for the whole party.

Mrs. Bolton is here for a day, to help my solitary life. I find Lady
N. has taken a house in Somerset Street, Portman Square. She, and my
Father, are to spend the winter in London; and, I am informed, he is
to pay half. Whether it is ready-furnished, or not, I can't tell.

Mr. Edwards is this moment gone, and begs his compliments to you all.

Believe me, your's most faithfully,

  Wm. NELSON.

Compliments to Parker and Langford.




VI.


  Canterbury, February 9th, 1805.

Dear Lady Hamilton,

I send you a small parcel; which I will thank you to forward to my
Brother, if you think there is a chance of his getting it before he
leaves the Mediterranean. But, if you have reason to expect him home
very soon, you will be kind enough to return it to me again; or, keep
it till I see you.

The ceremony of electing the new Archbishop takes place on Tuesday
morning. I think it more than probable, we shall make choice of the
person his Majesty has recommended to us, in his letter, which the
Chapter received yesterday.

Mrs. Nelson begs her love to you, Charlotte, Mrs. Bolton, &c. &c.

Your's, very faithfully,

  Wm. NELSON.

I received Mrs. Bolton's parcel safe on Friday.



       Letters

       FROM THE

  EARL OF ST. VINCENT

         TO

    LADY HAMILTON.




Letters OF THE EARL OF ST. VINCENT, _&c._




I.


My Dear Madam,

The prodigies of valour performed by your new Chevalier have, I fear,
obliterated the memory of your ancient Knight. Nevertheless, I
beg your Ladyship will lay me at the feet of the Queen of the Two
Sicilies, and assure her Majesty of my profound respect for her
person, and that my life is devoted to the defence of it: and, for
yourself, accept every kind wish of your Ladyship's truly affectionate
and faithful Knight,

  ST. VINCENT.


Gibraltar, 18th October 1798.




II.


MY DEAR LADY HAMILTON,

Ten thousand most grateful thanks are due to your Ladyship, for
restoring the health of our invaluable friend Nelson, on whose life
the fate of the remaining governments in Europe, whose system has
not been deranged by these devils, depends. Pray, do not let your
fascinating Neapolitan dames approach too near him; for he is made of
flesh and blood, and cannot resist their temptations.

Lady St. Vincent will be transported with your attention to her.
I have sent the fan mounts for Lady Nelson and her, by Sir James
Saumarez; who, after seeing the French prizes safe moored in the
Tagus, conveys the Duke d'Hervie. He, poor man! although a Grandee
of Spain, having been driven out of that kingdom by the insolent
intrigues of Truguet.

I have obeyed your Ladyship's commands respecting Tom Bowen, who is
now Captain of L'Aquilon, and gone to Lisbon to take possession of
her; and his brother William, who married a daughter of Sir William
Parker, I have appointed to the Caroline, the finest frigate I have,
and he is employed on the most advantageous service for filling his
pockets. Should your Ladyship have any other protege, I desire you
will not spare me.

I am very much penetrated with the condescension their Majesties of
the Two Sicilies have graciously shewn to me, through your Ladyship,
and I rely on your doing justice to my feelings upon the occasion.

I have taken up my residence here for some months, that I may be ready
to afford succour to the detachments of the fleet I have the honour to
command, in the Levant and before Cadiz; and, when Sir William and you
arrive, I shall be able to give you some English mutton, in a plain
way.

Continue to love me; and rest assured of the most unfeigned and
affectionate regard of, my dear Lady Hamilton, your faithful and
devoted Knight,

  ST. VINCENT.

  Admiral's House, Rosia, Gibraltar,
    28th October 1798.




III.


MY DEAR LADY HAMILTON,

I have to thank you, which I do most kindly, for your obliging letters
of the 7th and 10th of November; and for the gracious letter which
your Ladyship had received from the charming, delightful Queen of the
Two Sicilies, at whose feet I am anxiously desirous to throw myself:
and, as I have relinquished my intention of returning to England,
(although in possession of leave to go) I hope the period is not far
distant. In the meanwhile, have the goodness to keep me alive in the
remembrance of her Majesty: assure her of my profound respect and
admiration for her as Queen--I dare not give utterance to what I feel
for her as one of the first and most lovely of her sex.

Our possession of the island of Minorca will relieve her Majesty, and
the government, from one embarrassment, touching their last treaty
with France; as Lord Nelson will now be able to refit his squadron,
without committing an infraction of the treaty.

Our excellent friend, General O'Hara, is very busy in erecting two
rooms for the accommodation of your Ladyship and Sir William, when
you visit this curious rock. He is among the most hospitable and
entertaining of men: and we live together as all commanders of his
Majesty's land forces and fleets ought to do; and, I hope, will do,
from the examples which have been shewn wherever I have acted with the
army--as Sir Charles Grey, the Governor of this garrison, and General
Stuart, will testify; and, if the immortal Wolfe could be conjured
from the grave, he would do so too.

I hope soon to hear, our dear Lord Nelson is quite well, under your
fostering care; and, with my warmest wishes for every blessing to be
showered down upon you and your's, I have the honour to be, with the
truest respect, esteem, and regard, your Ladyship's very affectionate,
humble servant,

  ST. VINCENT.

  Rosia House, Gibraltar,
    7th Dec. 1798.




IV.


MY DEAR LADY HAMILTON,

Permit me to introduce to your acquaintance and protection another
hero of the Nile, in Captain Darby, of the Bellerophon; who you will
find a pleasant, queer, and faithful Irishman.

I also beg leave to interest you in favour of Mrs. Lock; a daughter
of the Duchess of Leinster, by Mr. Ogilvie. Her husband is appointed
Consul at Naples; which may occasion some difficulty in bringing her
forward, unless the etiquette is altered touching Consuls.

God bless you, my dear Madam; and, be assured, I always am your
Ladyship's truly affectionate

  ST. VINCENT.

  Rosia House, Gibraltar,
    1st January 1799.




V.


MY DEAR LADY HAMILTON,

I cannot sufficiently thank you, for sending me her Sicilian Majesty's
most gracious letter; the contents of which I feel, as becomes a good
royalist, and loyal subject: and for your goodness to Mrs. Lock;
who, poor thing! merits a more respectable situation than that of
Consuless. She is, certainly, a very comely woman, and truly amiable.

The designation Sir William has in contemplation for him, will place
them in an honourable stile; and, I have no doubt, from the protection
they have at home, will lead to ministerial character.

You are very good to my old friend Darby--who is a good-humoured,
blundering Irishman; and will make you laugh, in the midst of the
pangs your Ladyship must suffer for the destiny of the delightful city
and country to which you have so long contributed a large portion of
the gaiety and charming society of Sir William's hospitable mansion:
for, although I had not the good fortune to revisit Naples after Sir
William's return, all my travelling friends did ample justice to the
liberality of the representatives of our Royal Master and Mistress.
Mr. Preston was charge, when I was at Naples with the Duke of
Gloucester; and, though a worthy gentleman, and since a pious Bishop,
he was certainly a dry comedian.

Have the goodness to commend me to the Queen; continue to nurse my
excellent friend, Nelson; and, when I have the happiness to see Sir
William and your Ladyship here, I will pour the effusions of my heart
upon you both. The Governor has added two rooms to the convent, for
your accommodation; and Mrs. Grey, late Miss Whitbread, wife to the
Captain of the Ville de Paris, will contribute all that this house
affords for the entertainment of both.

God bless you, my dear Lady Hamilton; and, be assured, no man respects
and esteems you more truly than your Ladyship's truly affectionate

  ST. VINCENT.

  Rosia House,
    27th February 1799.




         Letters

          FROM

  SIR ALEXANDER JOHN BALL

           TO

     LADY HAMILTON.




Letters OF SIR ALEXANDER JOHN BALL, _&c_.




I.


My Dear Madam,

I cannot help loving and esteeming you very much, although you have
proved such a false gipsey to me. Pray, do you recollect looking into
my hand, and telling me a pretty story of carrying home Sir William
and Lady Hamilton, &c. &c. However, I forgive you; as you did not take
money, and could only have in view giving me much pleasure.

I beg leave to introduce to your Ladyship's notice the Abbe Savoye;
who is a sensible man, and the most polished here. He has great
influence with the Maltese. Pray, request Sir William to introduce him
particularly to Le Chevalier Acton.

I shall have the pleasure of seeing you and Sir William Hamilton in
England, this summer. How very much I wished to be near you, when you
were reading the parliamentary effusions of gratitude and joy for the
services Lord Nelson has rendered his country! I would rather be Lord
Nelson, than any Duke--or, indeed, any man--in England; and you may
guess how very proud I am in having such a friend. Indeed, I feel,
that I owe more to him than any man in this world. I have written to
Sir William; God bless you both!

I remain, with sincere respect and esteem, my dear Madam, your
Ladyship's most devoted and obliged humble servant,

  ALEXANDER JOHN BALL.

  Alexander,
  9th February 1799.

Davidge Gould is sighing for Palermo; _alias_ Miss K----. I wish the
Admiral would let him recreate for a fortnight, and send Hardy to me
again.




II.


My Dear Madam,

I had the honour of writing to your Ladyship and Sir William, by the
Vanguard; since which, I have read the few lines you had the goodness
to address to me at the bottom of Lord Nelson's letter of the 9th
inst.

I cannot entertain any hopes of personally paying my respects to you
and Sir William, before your departure for England; but, be assured,
that I can never forget the very flattering attention you have both
been pleased to honour me with.

You must wait a month longer, for the warm weather; otherwise, the
transition may be too great for Sir William.

We are anxiously waiting for the Maltese deputies to return from
Palermo. The inhabitants are critically situated; but, I hope, all
will end well. Good news from you will determine it.

I find, that you fascinate all the navy as much at Palermo as you
did at Naples. If we had many such advocates, every body would be a
candidate for our profession.

God bless, and protect, you and Sir William. May prosperous gales
attend you! May you live a thousand years!

Believe me, with sincere respect and esteem, my dear Madam, your
Ladyship's most devoted and obliged servant,

  ALEXANDER JOHN BALL.

23d February 1799.




            Letters

            FROM THE

         EARL OF BRISTOL,

  _Bishop of Derry, in Ireland_,

              TO

        LADY HAMILTON.




Letters OF THE EARL OF BRISTOL, _Bishop of Derry, &c_.




I.


  Naples, Sunday Morning,
  [1795.]

I return you the inclosed, my Dearest Emma, which does equal honour
to the excellent head and heart of the writer. I shall begin, for the
first time of my life, to have a good opinion of myself, after such
honourable testimonials.

In the mean time, I send you an extraordinary piece of news, just
written me from Ratisbon--a courier from the Elector of Mentz,
desiring _the Empire_ to make a separate peace with France.

Couriers have been sent from the Diet to Sweden and Denmark, desiring
their mediation: "and it is clear," says my letter, "_Somebody_ is at
the bottom of all this; the Elector of Mentz only lends his name."

The suburbs of Warsaw taken; the capitulation of the city daily
expected.

The King of Prussia totally retired beyond Potsdam, and supposed to be
at the eve of madness.

  Oh! Emma, who'd ever be wise,
  If madness be loving of thee.

  B.




II.


  Munich, 14th July 1795.

Dearest Emma,

Here is great news from England. My letters of the 26th June assure
me, seven thousand men are embarked for St. Pol de Leon, together with
an immense number of emigres--that, the week before, a bishop, and
sixty priests, were most prosperously landed at the same place, and
received with the greatest acclamations--that six sail of the line
from Russia, were in sight, and the pilots gone to conduct them--that,
in Amsterdam, and other towns of Holland, there is the greatest
insurrections in favour of that fool the Stadtholder. All this,
however, can only tend to facilitate peace, but not at all to restore
that despicable, odious family of Bourbons--the head of which is now
at _Verona_, where we left him eating _two capons_ a day; ('tis a pity
the whole family are not _capons_!) and, what is more, dressing them
himself in a superb kitchen--the true chapel of a Bourbon Prince.

Emma! if that dear Queen of Naples does not write, herself, to
Prince D'Oria, for me, I won't look at your beautiful face these six
months--"_coute qui coute_."

To-morrow, for _Pyrmont_, near Hanover. Emma--adieu!




III.


* * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * There is no doubt
but Don Luizi is implicated: that very circumstance, argues the extent
of the mischief; for so cautious a man, and one whose sentiments are
so publicly known, would not engage without good support.

I have conversed with one of his intimates--one "who is no stranger
to his dearest secret." The evidence will be difficult; perhaps,
impracticable: unless his most confidential friends can be gained; and
that, I deem, impossible.

But the character of the Garrison at Capua is of the most alarming
complexion; and, yet, is what I can best depend on. I think, _Wade_
could tell much, if he would speak out.

Adieu!

Lovel and I were on Vesuvius. He goes, like a true parson, only to
eat the better. I foresee, he will once more fall into _Nudi's_ hands.
Procyta will be another _Duo_; for I hate large parties on such, and
especially females--unless they be Phoenixes, like yourself.

It is a great discouragement to a Caserta party, to view the whole
town buried in a mist; and the Belvidere alone, like a buoy, to point
out the shoal.

Sweet Emma--adieu!

Every wish of my heart beats for the dear Queen.




IV.


Send me word, Dearest Emma! how the invaluable, adorable Queen, finds
herself.

The weather changed so unmercifully, yesterday, that Lovel and I
both grew ill; and this makes me the more anxious to hear of our
too sensible and inestimable Queen. My warmest wishes--physical,
political, and moral--ever attend her.

  B.




V.


Here is my cousin's answer, Dearest Emma--"_Io lo capisco_." Her
brother assured me, there is not the semblance of an insurrection;
and, that our dear, dear Queen, is misled by a set of scoundrels.

Send me word where you will be. Adieu!




VI.


Yesterday, we dined on Mount Vesuvius; to-day, we were to have dined
on its victim, Pompeii: but, "by the grace of God, which passeth all
understanding," since Bartolomeo himself, that weather-soothsayer, did
not foresee this British weather, we are prevented.

In the mean time, all this week and the next, is replete with projects
to Ischia, Procita, &c. &c. so God only knows when I can worship,
again, my Diana of Ephesus.

Write me word, explicitly, how you are, _what_ you are, and where you
are; and be sure that, wheresoever I am, still I am your's, my dearest
Emma.




VII.


  Wednesday.

MY DEAREST EMMA,

The very unexpected intelligence, which Prince Augustus has most
delicately communicated to me, of poor Lord Hervey's _decease_, has
quite _bouleversee_ my already shattered frame.

I would not allow your friendly mind to learn an event so interesting
to me from any other hand than that of your affectionate and devoted
friend,

  BRISTOL.




VIII.


MY EVER DEAREST LADY HAMILTON,

I should certainly have made this Sunday an holy day to me, and have
taken a Sabbath day's journey to Caserta, had not poor Mr. Lovel been
confined to his bed above three days with a fever.

To-day, it is departed; to-morrow, Dr. Nudi has secured us from its
resurrection; and, after to-morrow, I hope, virtue will be its own
reward, and that my friendship for Lovel will be recompensed with the
enjoyment.

This moment I receive your _billet-doux_, and very dulcet it is!

All public and private accounts agree, in the immediate prospect of a
general peace. It will make a delicious foreground in the picture of
the new year; many of which, I wish, from the top, bottom, and centre
of my heart, to the incomparable Emma--_quella senza paragona_!

_Dans ce moment, on m'assure que Mayence est prise. Je ne vous
garantis pas cette maudite nouvelle--mais je me flatte que la paix se
fait_.




IX.


EVER DEAREST EMMA,

I went down to your Opera box two minutes after you left it; and
should have seen you on the morning of your departure--but was
detained in the _arms_ of _Murphy_, as Lady Eden expressed it, and was
too late.

You say nothing of the adorable Queen; I hope, she has not forgot me:
but, as Shakespeare says, "Who doats, must doubt;" and I verily deem
her the very best edition of a woman I ever saw--I mean; of such as
are not in _folio_, and are to be _had_ in _sheets_.

I will come on Friday or Saturday; but our British colony are so
numerous, that my duties obstruct my pleasures.

Ever, and invariably, dearest, dear Emma, most affectionately, your

  B.

You see, I am but the second letter of your alphabet, though you are
the first of _mine_.




X.


  Milan, 24th November 1798.

I know not, Dearest Emma, whether friend Sir William has been able
to obtain my passport, or not; but this I know--that, if they have
refused it, they are damned fools for their pains: for, never was a
_Malta orange_ better worth squeezing or sucking; and if they leave me
to die, without a tombstone over me, to tell the contents--"_tant pis
pour eux_!"

In the mean time, I will frankly confess to you, that my health most
seriously and urgently requires the balmy air of dear Naples, and the
more balmy atmosphere of those I love, and who love me; and that I
shall forego my garret with more regret than most people of my silly
rank in society forego a palace or a drawing-room.

But I will augur better things from the justice of my neighbour; and
that they will not condemn, against all rules of probability, one of
their best friends, unheard: especially, one who, if he be heard, can
say so much.

My project, then, in case I receive the passport, is to travel on
horseback as far as _Spalato_ in Dalmatia; and, from thence, cross
over to Manfredonia--a passage of a few hours--and which, in the year
1772, I performed with my horses on board; and, afterwards, had a most
delightful jaunt through that unexplored region, Dalmatia; where the
very first object that strikes both the eye and the imagination, is
a modern city built within the precincts of an ancient palace--for
Spalato stands within the innermost walls of Diocletian's palace.
For that wise Sovereign quitted the sceptre for the pleasures of
an architect's rule; and, when he had completed his mansion in that
delightful climate, enjoyed that, and life, to a most advanced old
age--

  "The world forgetting, by the world forgot."

_A-propos_ to _Spalato_! Do not fail hinting to Sir William, that
a most safe, convenient, and expeditious packet-boat, might be
established, in these perilous times, between that and Manfredonia:
by which all dispatches, and all travellers, either for business or
pleasure, might make a very short and safe cut between Naples and
Vienna, and Naples and the rest of Europe, without touching one palm
of any ground but Austrian and Neapolitan; and, of course, without the
risk of being ever stopped.

The small towns, too, are in quick succession; and, the whole country
being a limestone rock, the roads will make themselves, and afterwards
pay themselves, by means of good turnpikes.

Nothing can exceed the dreariness, gloominess, and humidity, of a
Milanese sky in winter; which, I conclude, under the _old regime_,
led to all the hospitality, and conviviality, practised here, by their
voluptuous but social nobility.

Now, we have nothing left to _comfort_, but another _Nudi_--a son of
Esculapius, born in Italy; but an enthusiast for England, and all that
is English--an excellent physician, but a still better friend; and,
like Nudi, when he has a pint of Madeira in his belly, and the fumes
of it in his brain, a most cheerful and improving companion: for, I
protest to you that, during my convalescence, I made greater strides
to recovery by his Attic evenings, than by his morning potions, or
even his beef broth.

Sweet Emma, adieu! Remember me in the warmest and most enthusiastic
stile, to your friend, and my friend, and the friend of human kind.

If Sir William does not contrive to send me my passport, I will--I
will--excommunicate him, and send him to the devil before his time.




                Letter

                 FROM

           THE HONOURABLE

          CHARLES GREVILLE,

  _Nephew of Sir William Hamilton_,

                  TO

           LADY HAMILTON.




Letter OF THE HONOURABLE CHARLES GREVILLE, _&c_.


  August 18th, 1794.

DEAR LADY HAMILTON,

You will, I am sure, be glad to hear, that a favourable change
has been announced to me; and that I am reinstated in the King's
household, and honoured with a gold key, as his Vice-Chamberlain--and
I hope, in a few days, to be in parliament.

You have seen me in prosperity, and in adversity; and know how much I
estimate worldly concerns, according to their influencing the opinion
of my real friends. Friendship has borne me up in the most difficult
times; and the general satisfaction which my friends express, on my
promotion, renders me very happy at present: and, to make me more so,
I have anticipated to my own mind the sincere satisfaction with which
you will receive this news.

I should not flatter myself so far, if I was not very sincerely
interested in your happiness; and, ever, affectionately your's,

  C.F.G.




              Letters

                FROM

           LADY HAMILTON

                 TO

      THE HON. CHARLES GREVILLE,

  _Nephew of Sir William Hamilton_.




Letters OF LADY HAMILTON, &c.




I.


  25th of February, [1800.]

DEAR SIR,

I received your letter by Mr. Campbell. He is lodged with us. We find
him a pleasant man; and shall write fully by him. He will tell you a
little how we go on, as to our domestic happiness. We are more united
and comfortable than ever, in spite of the infamous Jacobin papers,
jealous of Lord Nelson's glory, and Sir William's and mine. But we do
not mind them. Lord N. is a truly virtuous and great man; and, because
we have been fagging, and ruining our health, and sacrificing every
comfort, in the cause of loyalty, our private characters are to be
stabbed in the dark. First, it was said, Sir W. and Lord N. fought;
then, that we played, and lost. First, Sir W. and Lord N. live like
brothers; next, Lord N. never plays: and this I give you my word of
honour. So I beg you will contradict any of these vile reports. Not
that Sir W. and Lord N. mind it; and I get scolded by the Queen, and
all of them, for having suffered one day's uneasiness.

Our fleet is off Malta: Lord Nelson has taken Le Genereux, and was
after the frigates; so the attempt to relieve Malta has failed.

I have had a letter from the Emperor of Russia, with the Cross of
Malta. Sir William has sent his Imperial Majesty's letter to Lord
Grenville, to get me the permission to wear it. I have rendered some
services to the poor Maltese. I got them ten thousand pounds, and sent
corn when they were in distress. The deputies have been lodged in my
house; I have been their Ambassadress, so his [I.]M. has rewarded me.
If the King will give me leave to wear it abroad, it is of use to me.
The Q----n is having the order set in diamonds for me; but the one the
Emperor sent is gold. I tell you this little history of it, that you
may be _au fait_. Ball has it also, but I am the first Englishwoman
that ever had it. Sir W. is pleased, so _I am happy_. We are coming
home; and I am miserable, to leave my dearest friend, the Q----. She
cannot be consoled. We have sworn to be back in six months; and I will
not quit her, till Sir William binds himself to come back. However,
I shall have a comfort in seeing some of my old friends; and you, in
particular. We have also many things to settle. I think, I can situate
the person you mention about the Court, as a _Camerist_ to some of the
R. F----y, if her education _is good_.

It is a comfortable situation _for life_; so, I will bring her out.
The Q. has promised me. Let this remain _entre nous_.




II.


  [April 1803.]

Lady Hamilton will be glad to know how long Mr. Greville can permit
her to remain in the house in Piccadilly, as she must instantly look
out for a lodging; and, therefore, it is right for her to know the
full extent of time she can remain there. She also begs to know, if he
will pay her debts, and what she may depend upon; that she may reduce
her expences and establishment immediately.


END OF VOL. I.

Printed by Macdonald and Son, Cloth Fair, London.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Letters of Lord Nelson to Lady
Hamilton, Vol. I., by Horatio Nelson

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LETTERS OF LORD NELSON ***

***** This file should be named 15469.txt or 15469.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/5/4/6/15469/

Produced by Steven Gibbs, Stephen Ellison and the PG Online
Distributed Proofreading Team.


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
