Project Gutenberg's Notes and Queries, Number 62, January 4, 1851, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Notes and Queries, Number 62, January 4, 1851

Author: Various

Release Date: April 17, 2005 [EBook #15638]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NOTES AND QUERIES, NUMBER ***




Produced by The Internet Library of Early Journals; Jon Ingram, Keith
Edkins and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team.





{1}

NOTES AND QUERIES:

A MEDIUM OF INTER-COMMUNICATION FOR LITERARY MEN, ARTISTS, ANTIQUARIES,
GENEALOGISTS, ETC.

       *       *       *       *       *

"When found, make a note of."--CAPTAIN CUTTLE.

       *       *       *       *       *


No. 62.]
SATURDAY, JANUARY 4, 1851.
[Price Threepence. Stamped Edition 4d.

       *       *       *       *       *

CONTENTS.

  NOTES:--                                                        Page
    Old Ballads upon the "Winter's Tale," by J. Payne Collier        1
    Crossing Rivers on Skins, by Janus Dousa                         3
    Folk Lore of South Northamptonshire, No 3.                       3
    Minor Notes:--Kentish Town in the last Century--
      Murray's Hand-book for Devon and Cornwall--Judges'
      Walk, Hampstead--Gray's Alcaic Ode--Fleet Marriages            4

  QUERIES:--
    Histoire des Severambes                                          4
    Origin of present Penny Postage, by E. Venables                  6
    Red Book of the Irish Exchequer                                  6
    Minor Queries:--Abbey of Shapp, or Hepp--"Talk
      not of Love"--Lucy and Colin--Chapel, Printing-office
      --Cockade--Suem, Ferling, Grasson--Cranmer's
      Descendants--Collections of Pasquinades--
      Portraits of Bishops--The Butcher Duke--Rodolph
      Gualter--Passage in St. Mark--"Fronte capillata," &c.          7

  REPLIES:--
    "God speed the Plough"                                           8
    "Defender of the Faith," by Robert Anstruther                    9
    Beatrix Lady Talbot, by Sir F. Madden                           10
    Replies to Minor Queries:--Passage in Hamlet--Passage
      in Tennyson--Was Quarles pensioned?--Old Hewson
      the Cobbler--The Inquisition--Mrs. Tempest--Cardinal
      Allen's Declaration--Scandal against Queen
      Elizabeth--Church of St. Saviour, Canterbury--Pope
      Ganganelli-Nicholas Ferrar's Digest--Nicholas Ferrar--
      Cardinal Erskine--The Author of "Peter Wilkins"
      --"The Toast," by Dr. King--"The Widow of the
      Wood"--Damasked Linen                                         10

  MISCELLANEOUS:--
    Notes on Books, Sales, Catalogues, &c.                          13
    Notices to Correspondents                                       14
    Books and Odd Volumes Wanted                                    14
    Advertisements                                                  15

       *       *       *       *       *

OUR THIRD VOLUME.

The commencement of our Third Volume affords an opportunity, which we
gladly seize, of returning our best thanks to those kind friends and
correspondents to whom we are indebted for our continued success. We thank
them all heartily and sincerely; and we trust that the volume, of which we
now present them with the First Number, will afford better proof of our
gratitude than mere words. Such improvements as have suggested themselves
in the course of the fourteen months during which NOTES AND QUERIES has
been steadily working up its way to its present high position shall be
effected; and nothing shall be wanting, on our part, which may conduce to
maintain or increase its usefulness. And here we would announce a slight
change in our mode of publication, which we have acceded to at the
suggestion of several parties, in order to meet what may appear to many of
our readers a trivial matter, but which is found very inconvenient in a
business point of view--we allude to the diversity of price in our Monthly
Parts.

To avoid this, and, as we have said, to meet the wishes of many of our
friends, we propose to publish a fifth or supplementary number in every
month in which there are only four Saturdays, so as to make the Monthly
Parts one shilling and threepence each in all cases, with the exception of
the months of January and July, which will include the Index of the
preceding Half-yearly Volume, at the price of one shilling and ninepence
each. Thus the yearly subscription to NOTES AND QUERIES, either in
unstamped weekly Numbers or Monthly Parts, will be eighteen shillings.

Trusting that this, and all the other arrangements we are proposing to
ourselves, may meet with the approbation of our friends and subscribers, we
bid them Farewell! and wish them,--what we trust they wish to NOTES AND
QUERIES--a Happy New Year, and many of them!

       *       *       *       *       *


NOTES.

OLD BALLAD UPON THE "WINTER'S TALE."

Some of your correspondents may be able to give me information respecting
an old ballad that has very recently fallen in my way, on a story similar
to that of Shakspeare's _Winter's Tale_, and in some particulars still more
like Greene's novel of _Pandosto_, upon which the _Winter's Tale_ was
founded. You are aware that the earliest known edition of Greene's novel is
dated 1588, although there is room to suspect that it had been originally
{2} printed before that year: the first we hear of the _Winter's Tale_ is
in 1611, when it was acted at court, and it was not printed until it
appeared in the folio of 1623.

The ballad to which I refer has for title _The Royal Courtly Garland, or
Joy after Sorrow_: it is in ordinary type, and was "Printed and sold in
Aldermary Churchyard, London." It has no date, and in appearance does not
look older than from perhaps, 1690 to 1720; it may even be more recent, as
at that period it is not easy to form a correct opinion either from
typography or orthography: black-letter has a distinguishing character at
various periods, so as to enable a judgment to be formed within, perhaps,
ten years, as regards an undated production: but such is not the case with
Roman type, or white-letter. What I suspect, however, is that this ballad
is considerably older, and that my copy is only a comparatively modern
reprint with some alterations; it requires no proof, at this time of day,
to show that it was the constant habit of our old publishers of ephemeral
literature to reprint ballads without the slightest notice that they had
ever appeared before. This, in fact, is the point on which I want
information, as to _The Royal Courtly Garland, or Joy after Sorrow_. Can
any of your correspondents refer me to an older copy, or do they know of
the existence of one which belongs to a later period? I cannot be ignorant
of DR. RIMBAULT'S learning on such matters, and I make my appeal especially
to him.

It is very possible that it may bear a different title in other copies, and
for the sake of identification I will furnish a few extracts from the
various "parts" (no fewer than six) into which the ballad is divided;
observing that they fill a closely printed broadside, and that the
production is entirely different from Jordan's versification of the
_Winter's Tale_, under the title of _The Jealous Duke and the injured
Duchess_, which came out in his _Royal Arbor of Loyal Poesie_, 8vo. 1664.
It is singular that two ballads, hitherto wholly unknown, should have been
written upon the same incidents of the same drama, although we are yet
without evidence that Jordan's effusion was ever published as a broadside.

Not a single name is given to any of the persons in my _Royal Courtly
Garland_, but the places of action are reversed exactly in the same way as
in Greene's novel of _Pandosto_, where what Shakspeare represents as
passing in Sicily occurs in Bohemia, and _vice versa_; moreover, the error
of representing Bohemia as a maritime country belongs to my ballad, as well
as to the novelist and the dramatist. The King of Bohemia, jealous of an
"outlandish prince," who he suspected had intrigued with his queen, employs
his cup-bearer to poison the prince, who is informed by the cup-bearer of
the design against his life.

  "For fear of the king the prince dare not stay:
  The wind being fair, he sailed away,
  Saying, I will escape from his blood-thirsty hand
  By steering away to my native land."

Not long after his departure, the queen, "who had never conceived before"
(which varies both from Greene and Shakspeare), produces a daughter, which
the king resolves to get rid of by turning it adrift at sea in "a little
boat." He so informs the queen, and she in great grief provides the outfit
for the infant voyager:

  "A purse of rare jewels she placed next her skin,
  And fasten'd it likewise securely within;
  A chain round her neck, and a mantle of gold,
  Because she her infant no more should behold."

It is revealed to the king in a dream that his wife is innocent, but she
soon dies of a broken-heart. Meanwhile, the prince, on his return to his
own dominions, marries, and has a son. The infant princess is driven on
shore in his kingdom, and is saved by an old shepherd, and brought up by
him and his wife as their own child, they carefully concealing the riches
they had found in the "little boat."

  "This child grew up, endued with grace,
  A modest behaviour, a sweet comely face;
  And being arrived at the age of fifteen,
  For beauty and wisdom few like _her_ were seen."

"Her" is misprinted _him_ in the original, and the whole, as may be
expected, is not a first-rate specimen of typography. The son of the prince
sees and falls in love with the supposed shepherd's daughter, and, to avoid
the anger of the prince his father, he secretly sails away with her and the
old shepherd. By a storm they are driven on the coast of Bohemia:

  "A violent storm on the sea did arise,
  Drove them to Bohemia; they are took for spies;
  Their ship was seized, and they to prison sent:
  To confine them a while the king's fully bent."

Here we arrive at an incident which is found in Greene, but which
Shakspeare had the judgment to avoid, making the termination of his drama
as wonderful for its art, as delightful for its poetry. Greene and my
ballad represent the king of Bohemia falling in love with his own daughter,
whom he did not recognise. She effectually resisted his entreaties, and he
resolves "to hang or burn" the whole party; but the old shepherd, to save
himself, reveals that she is not his daughter, and produces "the mantle of
gold" in which he had found her:

  "He likewise produced the mantle of gold.
  The king was amazed the sight to behold;
  Though long time the shepherd had used the same,
  The king knew it marked with his own name."

This discovery leads directly to the unwinding of the plot: the young
prince makes himself known, and his father being sent for, the lovers are
{3} "married in triumph" in Bohemia, and the old shepherd is made "a lord
of the court."

If any of your readers can inform me of another copy of the above ballad,
especially unmodernised (the versification must have suffered in the
frequent reprints) and in black-letter of an early date, they will do me a
favour. At present I am unable to decide whether it was founded upon
Greene's novel, Shakspeare's play, or upon some independent, possibly
foreign, narrative. I am by no means satisfied that Greene's novel was not
a translation, and we know that he was skilful in Italian, Spanish, and
French.

J. PAYNE COLLIER.

I cannot find the particular Number of NOTES AND QUERIES, but unless I am
greatly mistaken, in one of them, a correspondent gave praise (I am the
last to say it was not deserved) to DR. MAGINN for suggesting that _miching
mallecho_, in _Hamlet_, Act III. Sc. 2., was from the Spanish _mucho
malhecho_. I never heard of DR. MAGINN's opinion until I saw it in your
pages; but if you happen to be able to refer to the Shakspeare I
superintended through the press in 1843, vol. vii. p 271., note 9., you
will see that I propose the Spanish word _malhecho_ as the origin of
"mallecho." I did not think this point worth notice at the time, and I
doubt whether it is worth notice now. If you leave out this postscript, as
you are at perfect liberty to do, I shall conclude that you are of my
opinion.

J.P.C.

    [The passage to which our valued correspondent refers is in our Second
    Volume, p. 358., where J.M.B. points out that the suggestion of a
    writer in the _Quarterly Review_ for March 1850, that Shakspeare's
    _miching mallecho_ was a mere misprint of the Spanish words _mucho
    malhecho_, had been anticipated by DR. MAGINN. It now appears that he
    had also been anticipated by MR. COLLIER.]

       *       *       *       *       *

CROSSING RIVERS ON SKINS.

The mode of crossing a river on skins, mentioned by Layard (_Nineveh and
its Remains_, 5th edition, vol. i. p. 129., vol. ii. p. 381.) is also
referred to in the works of the following ancient writers. I quote
_Facciolati Lexicon Totius Latinitatis_, in vocibus _Uter_ et
_Utricularius_. [Edit. _Furlanetto_, 4to.]

"Frequens fuit apud veteres utrium usus ad flumina trananda, _Liv._ 21. 27.
Hispani, sine ulla mole, in utres vestimentis conjectis, ipsi cetris
suppositis incubantes, flumen tranavere, _Caes._ B.G. i. 48. Lusitani,
peritique earum regionum cetrati citerioris Hispaniae, consectabantur,
quibus erat proclive transnare flumen, quod consuetudo eorum omnium est, ut
sine utribus ad exercitum non eant, (Cf. _Herzog._, qui longam huic loco
adnotationem adscripsit), _Curt._ 7. 5. Utres quam plurimos stramentis
refertos dividit; his incubantes transnavere amnem, _Plin._ 6. 29. 35.
Arabes Ascitae appellati, quoniam bubulos utres binos sternentes ponte
piraticam exercent, _h.e._ utribus junctis tabulas instar pontis
sternentes. Adde _Front. Strat._ 3. 13., et _Ammian._ 30. 1. _med._"

"Utricularii vocabantur qui utriculos, seu utres inflatos ratibus ita
subjiciebant, ut iisdem flumina transnare possent. Eorum collegium in
quibusdam urbibus ad flumen aliquod sitis habebatur, ideoque utricularii
saepe cum nautis conjunguntur, _Inscr._ ap. _Mur._ 531, n. 4. Ex voto a solo
templum ex suo fecerunt collegio utriculariorum."

JANUS DOUSA.

Manpadt House, near Haarlem.

       *       *       *       *       *

FOLK LORE OF SOUTH NORTHAMPTONSHIRE, NO. 3.

_Hedgehog._--Among other animals looked upon in a superstitious light, we
have the hedgehog, who, in addition to his still credited attribute of
sucking cows, is looked upon by our rustics as the emblem of craft and
cunning; playing the same part in our popular stories as Reynard in the
more southern _fabliaux_. They tell concerning him, the legend given by
M.M. Grimm, of the race between the Hare and Hedgehog. The Northamptonshire
version makes the trial of speed between a _fox_ and hedgehog. In all other
respects the English tale runs word for word with the German.

_Hares._--Besides the ancient superstition attached to the crossing of the
path by one of these animals, there is also a belief that the running of
one along the street or mainway of a village, portends fire to some house
in the immediate vicinity.

_Toads._--Belief in their venomous nature is yet far from being extinct.
This, added to the ill-defined species of fascination which they are
supposed to exercise, has caused them here, as elsewhere, to be held in
great abhorrence. I have heard persons who ought to have known better,
exclaim on the danger of gazing upon one of the harmless reptiles. The idea
respecting the fascinating powers of the toad, is by no means confined to
our district. Witness the learned Cardan:

"Fascinari pueros fixo intuitu magnorum bufonum et maxime qui e subterraneo
specu aut sepulchris prodierint, utque ob id occulto morbo perire, haud
absurdum est."--_De Rerum Varietate_, lib. xvi. c. 90.

_Crickets_, contrary to the idea prevailing in the western counties, are
supposed to presage good luck, and are therefore most carefully preserved.
Their presence is believed to be a sure omen of prosperity; while, on the
other hand, their sudden departure from a hearth which has long echoed with
their cry, betokens approaching misfortune, and is regarded as the direst
calamity that can happen to the family.

_Magpies._--To see one magpie alone bodes bad luck; two, good luck; three,
a "berrin;" four, a wedding. This is our version of the saying: Grose gives
it differently.

_Spiders._--When a spider is found upon your {4} clothes, or about your
person, it signifies that you will shortly receive some money. Old Fuller,
who was a native of Northamptonshire, thus quaintly moralises this
superstition:

    "When a spider is found upon our clothes, we use to say, some money is
    coming towards us. The moral is this: such who imitate the industry of
    that contemptible creature may, by God's blessing, weave themselves
    into wealth and procure a plentiful estate."--_Worthies_, p.58. Pt. 2.
    ed. 1662.

Omens of death and misfortune are also drawn from the howling of dogs--the
sight of a trio of butterflies--the flying down the chimney of swallows or
jackdaws; and swine are sometimes said to give their master warning of his
death by giving utterance to a peculiar whine, known and understood only by
the initiated in such matters. Gaule, in his _Mag-astromancers Posed and
Puzzled_, Lond. 1652, p. 181, ranks among evil omens "the falling of
swallows down the chimney" and "the grunting of swine."

T.S.

       *       *       *       *       *

MINOR NOTES.

_Kentish Town in the last Century_--

    "Thursday night some villains robbed the Kentish Town Stage, and
    stripped the passengers of their money, watches, and buckles. In the
    hurry they spared the pockets of Mr. Corbyn, the druggist; but he,
    content to have neighbour's fare, called out to one of the rogues,
    'Stop, friend, you have forgot to take my money'."--_Morning Chron. and
    Land Advertiser_, Jan. 9. 1773.

_Murray's Hand-book for Devon and Cornwall._--The author does not mention
Haccombe Chapel or the Oswell Rocks, both near Newton; the latter is a most
picturesque spot, and the view near and far most interesting!--A notice of
the tiles, and of the 2ft. 2in effigy at Haccombe, appears in the _Arch.
Journal_, iii. 151. 237.--The monuments are in fine preservation up to the
last of the "Haccombes" _ante_ 1342, which is _perfect_. The chapel would
be improved by the removal of the two pews and of the family arms from the
velvet cloth on the communion-table!--Tavistock Church has an east window
by Williment; pattern, and our Saviour in the centre.--The church by
Dartmouth Castle contains a brass and armorial gallery; the visitor should
sail round the rock at the harbour entrance, it's appearance from seaward
is fine.--Littleham Church has a decorated wooden screen, very elegant.--A
work on the Devonshire pulpits and screens would be valuable.

A.C.

_Judges Walk, Hampstead._--A friend of mine, residing at Hampstead, has
communicated to me the following information, which I forward to you as
likely to instruct your readers.

He states that the oldest inhabitant of Hampstead, Mr. Rowbotham, a clock
and watchmaker, died recently, at the age of ninety. He told his son and
many other persons, that in his youth the _Upper Terrace Avenue_, on the
south-west side of Hampstead Heath was known by the name of "The Judges'
Walk," from the circumstance of prisoners having been tried there during
the plague of London. He further stated, that he had received this
information from his grandmother.

C.R. WELD

Somerset House.

_Gray's Alcaic Ode._--A question asked in Vol. i., p. 382, whether "Gray's
celebrated Latin Ode is actually to be found entered at the Grande
Chartreuse?" is satisfactorily answered in the negative at p. 416. of the
same volume, and its disappearance traced to the destructive influence of
the first French Revolution.

It may not, however, be without interest to some of your readers to know,
that this elegant "Alcaic" was to be found at the Chartreuse not very long
before the outbreak of that great political tempest, proof of which will be
found in the following extract taken from the 9th volume of Malte-Brun's
_Annales des Voyages_, Paris, 1809. It is found in a paper entitled "Voyage
a la Grande Chartreuse en 1789. Par M. T*******," and is in p. 230:

    "L'Album, ou le grand livre dans lequel les etrangers inscrivent leurs
    noms, presente quelquefois une lecture interessante. Nous en copiames
    quelques pages. Le morceau le plus digne d'etre conserve est sans doute
    l'Ode latine suivante du celebre poete anglais Gray. Je ne crois pas
    qu'elle ait ete publiee encore."

Then follows the ode, as usually printed, excepting that in the third line,

  "Nativa nam certe fluentia,"

the words "nam certe" are transposed.

G.B.

_Fleet Marriages._--_The General Evening Post_, June 27-29, 1745, contains
the following singular Note of a Fleet Marriage:--

    "Yesterday came on a cause at Doctors' Commons, wherein the plaintiff
    brought his action against the defendant for pretending to be his wife.
    She in her justification pleaded a marriage at the Fleet the 6th of
    February, 1737, and produced a Fleet certificate, which was not allowed
    as evidence: she likewise offered to produce the minister she pretended
    married them, but he being excommunicate for clandestine marriages,
    could not be received as a witness. The court thereupon pronounced
    against the marriage, and condemned her in 28l., the costs of the
    suit."

Y.S.

       *       *       *       *       *


QUERIES.

_HISTORIE DES SEVARAMBES._

The authorship of _Gaudentio di Lucca_ has recently been discussed by some
of your correspondents, and it has been shown that this _Voyage Imaginaire_
{5} was written by Simon Berington, a Catholic priest, and the member of a
family resident for many years in Herefordshire. The following Query will
relate to another work of the same class, but of an earlier date.

The _Histoire des Sevarambes_ is a fictitious account of a nation in the
Southern Ocean, visited by a supposed navigator named Siden. It's first
appearance was as an English work, with this title:

    "The History of the Sevarites or Sevarambi, a nation inhabiting part of
    the third continent, commonly called Terrae Australes Incognitae; with an
    account of their admirable government, religion, customs, and language.
    Written by one Captain Siden, a worthy person, who, together with many
    others, was cast upon those coasts, and lived many years in that
    country. London: printed for Henry Brome, at the Gun, at the west end
    of St. Paul's Churchyard, 1675. 12mo. pp. 114." No preface.

There is a second part, "more wonderful and delightful than the first,"
published in 1679 (pp. 140.). The licence by Roger Lestrange bears date
Feb. 25. 1678/9. There is a short preface, without signature, arguing that
the country of the Sevarites is not fabulous.

A copy of the original edition of these two parts is in the British Museum.

Shortly after its publication in England, this work appeared in France with
the following title:--

    "Histoire des Sevarambes, peuples qui habitent une partie du troisieme
    continent ordinairement appelle Terre Australe, contenant un compte
    exact du gouvernement, des moeurs, de la religion et du langage de
    cette nation, jusques aujourd'hui inconnue aux peuples de l'Europe.
    Traduite de l'Anglois." First Part, Paris, 1677. 2 vols. 12mo. Second
    Part, 1678-9. 3 vols. 12mo.

Both parts are dedicated to Monsieur Riquet, Baron de Bonrepos; and the
dedications are both signed with the initials D.V.D.E.L.

The British Museum contains no French edition of this work earlier than an
Amsterdam reprint of 1716. The above account of the early French edition is
taken from the _Dictionnaire Historique_ of Prosper Marchand (La Haye,
1758), tom. i. p. 11., art. ALLAIS. This article (which may be cited as a
model of bibliographical research) attributes the authorship of the
_Histoire des Sevarambes_, upon evidence, which, if not conclusive, is very
strong, to Denis Vairasse, or Vayrasse. Marchand explains the initials
appended to the dedications of the French edition to mean, _Denis Vairasse
d'Allais en Languedoc_. He likewise considers _Siden_ as the anagram of
_Denis_; and _Sevarias_, the legislator of the Sevarambians, as the anagram
of _Vairasse_. Some of the religious opinions expressed in this fiction
were thought bold, and the authorship of the work was at one time much
discussed: it was attributed both to Isaac Vossius and Leibnitz. It was
translated into Dutch, German, and Italian; and there is an English
edition, London, 1738, in 1 vol. 8vo., in which the preface from the French
edition, alluding to Plato's _Republic_, More's _Utopia_, and Bacon's _New
Atlantis_, not to be found in the original English edition, is introduced.
This volume is entitled--

    "The History of the Sevarambians, a people of the south continent, in
    five parts, containing, &c. Translated from the Memoirs of Capt. Siden,
    who lived fifteen years amongst them."

The work is included in the collection of _Voyages Imaginaires_, tom. v.,
where the editor speaks of the distinguished place which it holds among the
fictions of that class; but he says that its authorship was unknown or
uncertain. An account of another fictitious voyage to the Terra Australis,
with a description of an imaginary people, published in 1692, may be seen
in Bayle's _Dict._, art. SADEUR, _Voyages Imaginaires_, tom. xxiv.

According to the account given by Marchand, Vairasse began life by serving
in the army in Piedmont, and he afterwards studied the law. Subsequently he
went to England, where he is stated to have attempted to penetrate the
intrigues of the court, and to discover the maxims of the English
Government. In 1665, he was in the ship commanded by the Duke of York
against the Dutch; and some years afterwards, having been regarded as an
accomplice in the designs of a public minister (apparently Lord Clarendon),
he was forced to retire with him, and follow him to Paris. He re-entered
the military service, and was with the French army which invaded Holland in
1672. Afterwards he taught English and French at Paris; he likewise
published a French Grammar, and an abridgment of it in the English language
(1683). He was of the reformed religion.

It is possible that Vairasse's visit to England may have been connected
with his religion. He appears, during his residence here, to have acquired
the English language; but it is difficult to understand what are the
designs of Lord Clarendon in which he was an "accomplice." Lord Clarendon's
exile took place in 1667; which hardly accords with the expression "some
years" after 1665. No person of the name of Vairasse is mentioned as having
accompanied Lord Clarendon in his banishment.

The first part of the _History of the Sevarambians_ was published in
English in 1675, two years before the French edition of the first part. The
second parts were published at London and Paris in the same year. Even if
Vairasse did not leave England with Lord Clarendon, he had left it before
the year in which the first part of this {6} work appeared in English: for
he is stated to have been with the French army in Holland in 1672. It is
therefore difficult to account for the publication of the English version
of the _History of the Sevarambians_ before its publication in France, upon
the assumption that Vairasse was the author. The writer of the life of
Vairasse (art. ALLAIS) in the _Biographical Dictionary of the Society of
Useful Knowledge_ thinks that he may have been only the translator: but the
facts collected by Marchand show that he claimed the authorship; and there
is no trace of its composition by any Englishman. Besides, its prior
publication in England is just as inexplicable upon the assumption of his
being the translator, as upon that of his being the author.

Query, Is Vairasse's residence in England mentioned by any English writer?
And can any light be thrown upon the authorship of the _History of the
Sevarambians_ from any English source?

L.

       *       *       *       *       *

ORIGINS OF PRESENT PENNY POSTAGE.

Many of your readers have, I doubt not, perused with interest the vivid
sketch of the origin of the Penny Postage System, given by Miss Martineau
in her _History of England during the Thirty Years' Peace_, vol. ii. p.
425., and have seen in the incident of the shilling letter delivered to the
poor cottager, somewhere in the Lake district--refused by her from
professed inability to pay the postage--paid for by Mr. Rowland Hill, who
happened most opportunely to be passing that way--and, when opened, found
to be blank (this plan being preconcerted between the woman and her
correspondent, to know of each other's welfare without the expense of
postage). A remarkable instance of "how great events from little causes
spring," and have bestowed much admiration on the penetration of Mr. Hill's
mind, which "wakened up at once to a significance of the fact," nor ever
rested till he had devised and effected his scheme of Post-office Reform;
though all the while an uncomfortable feeling might be lurking behind as to
the perfect credibility of so interesting a mode of accounting for the
initiation of this great social benefit.

I confess to having had some suspicions myself as to the trustworthiness of
this story; and a few days since my suspicions were fully confirmed by
discovering that the real hero of the tale was not the Post-office
Reformer, but the poet Coleridge; unless, indeed, which is surely out of
the range of ordinary probabilities, the same event, _corresponding exactly
as to place and amount of postage_, happened to two persons at separate
times.

Coleridge relates the story himself, in one of his "conversations," of
which memoranda are preserved in the interesting volumes published by Moxon
in 1836 (ii. 114.). "One day,"

    "when I had not a shilling to spare, I was passing by a cottage at
    _Keswick_ where a carter was demanding _a shilling_ for a letter, which
    the woman of the house appeared unwilling to give, and at last declined
    to take. I paid the postage, and when the man was out of sight, she
    told me that the letter was from her son, who took that means of
    letting her know that he was well. The letter was not to be paid for.
    It was then opened and _found to be blank_."

Now, while so many copies of "NOTES AND QUERIES" pass through the
Post-office, it is to be hoped one at least may remain there, and be the
means of inducing Mr. Hill to inform us whether Miss Martineau had any
authority for fathering this story upon him; and whether the Post-office
Reform is really indebted to any such trivial incident for its original
idea.

E. VENABLES.

       *       *       *       *       *

RED BOOK OF THE IRISH EXCHEQUER.

On one of the vellum leaves of which the Red Book of the Irish Exchequer is
composed, there is depicted a pen and ink sketch of that court. In the
centre of the picture is the table, which is covered (as it is at this day)
with a chequered cloth, whereon are placed a bag upon which are the words
"Baga cum rotulis," a book with a clasp, five large pieces of money, and a
strip of parchment, upon which is written, "Ceo vous, &c." The table is
surrounded on its four equal sides by thirteen human figures, namely, six
at the top of the picture, three on the left hand, three on the right, and
one at the bottom. Of the six figures at the top of the sketch, all of whom
wear robes, he who is on the right hand holds a wand, bears upon his head a
cap, and is in the act of leaving the court, exclaiming, "Ademayn." To the
right of this man, who is probably the crier of the court, is one of the
officers carrying a piece of parchment, upon which is written in contracted
law Latin, "Preceptum fuit Vicecomiti per breve hujus Scaccarii." To the
right of the last-named figure is another officer of the court, who is in
the act of examining his pen by placing its nib at a short distance from
his eyes; and this person carries in his left hand a piece of parchment
upon which are written, in like character, the words "Memorandum quod x die
Maii, &c." To the right of this officer, who is probably the Chief
Remembrancer, is placed another officer, wearing a cap, who is in the act
of writing upon a piece of parchment bearing the words "Henricus dei
gratia." The two remaining figures at the top of the picture are apparently
conversing together: to one of them are applied the words, "Eynt bre vic.,"
with another word following the last which {7} is scarcely decypherable;
and to the other the word "Elgyn" seems to have reference; such word being
placed upon the ample sleeve of his gown. The three figures on the left of
the picture are probably the three Barons. The head-dress of the judge who
is sitting at the extreme right of the bench, varies in its form from that
which is worn by the baron who is seated in the centre; and the third
baron, who is sitting at the left, has his head uncovered. The first-named
baron seems in the act of counting or reckoning the pieces of coin which
are placed before him upon the table, and says "xx d.;" the baron in the
centre, who wears a cap similar in form to the night-cap now commonly used,
says "Voyr dire;" and the third baron says "Soient forfez." Opposite to the
judges, and to the right of the picture, are three persons wearing gowns,
and standing at the bar of the court. One of these points towards his face
with the first finger of his right hand, and says, "Oy de brie;" the figure
to his left extends his right arm towards the bench, and exclaims, "Soit
oughte;" and the third figure says, "Chalange." This man, the handle of
whose sword is distinctly visible on his right side, whose outer sleeves
are wide and flowing, whose under garment is buttoned tightly at the wrist,
and whose boots are in shape similar to ladies' boots of modern times,
closely laced to the leg, has placed the thumb of his left hand between the
thumb and first finger of his right. And, lastly, at the bottom of the
picture is seated the sheriff, bearing upon his head a hood or cap, upon
which the words "Vic. tot & unit" are written. Query, Are the persons here
represented the barons and officers of the Exchequer? and, more especially,
who are the persons who exclaim "Oy de brie," "Soit oughte," and
"Chalange"?

J.F.F.

       *       *       *       *       *

MINOR QUERIES.

_Abbey of Shapp, or Hepp._--I shall be much obliged to any of your readers
who can inform me whether the Chartulary of the Abbey of Shapp, or Hepp, in
Westmoreland, is now in existence; and if so, where it is. In the
_Monasticon_, vol. vi. p. 869., it is stated that in 1638 it was in the
possession of Lord William Howard, of Naworth; but though a search has been
made among Lord William's papers and MSS. in the possession of his
descendant, the Earl of Carlisle, at Castle Howard, the Chartulary is not
now to be found among them.

J.C.

"_Talk not of Love._"--Do any of your musical correspondents know the
author of the following song, and whether it has ever appeared in print? I
have it in manuscript, set to a very fine tune, but have never seen or
heard it elsewhere.

  "Talk not of love, it gives me pain,
    For love hath been my foe;
  He bound me with an iron chain,
    And plunged me deep in woe.

  "But friendship's pure and lasting joys
    My soul was form'd to prove,
  Then welcome, win, and wear the prize,
    But never talk of love."

A.M.

_Lucy and Colin._--Can you tell me who was the author of "Lucy and Colin,"
so beautifully translated by Vincent Bourne, and by him entitled "Lucia et
Corydon"?

In Southey's _Common-place Book_, 3d series, I found the following in p.
712.:--

    "Of the wretched poem _Colin and Lucy_ (Tickel?) published as a
    fragment of Elizabeth's age, the reviewer says, 'Is this the language
    of Q. Elizabeth's time, or something better? But to whatever age, or to
    whatever author we are indebted for this beautiful piece, it must be
    allowed an honour to both, and therefore worth contending for on behalf
    of our own time.'"

I wonder whether this be the "Colin and Lucy" that V. Bourne translated.

I have not Tickel's works, and therefore cannot discover whether he be the
author of that beautiful (whatever Southey may say) ballad beginning with--

  "In Leinster famed for maidens fair," &c.

A.B.

_Chapel, Printing-office._--Is there any other authority than Creery's
_Press_ for the statement that printing-offices are called chapels?
Whatever may have been the case, at present the word "chapel" is applied to
the persons, or companionship, employed in the office, not to the office
itself.

GOMER.

    [_Moxon_, in his _Mechanick Exercises_, vol. ii. p. 356. 4to. 1683,
    says: "Every printing-house is by the custom of time out of mind called
    a chappel; and all the workmen that belong to it are members of the
    chappel: and the oldest freeman is father of the chappel. I suppose the
    style was originally conferred upon it by the courtesie of some great
    Churchman, or men, (doubtless, when chappels were in more veneration
    than of late years they have been here in England), who, for the books
    of divinity that proceeded from a printing-house, gave it the reverend
    title of chappel."]

_Cockade_ is a ribband worn in the hat, as defined by Dr. Johnson. Query,
What is the origin of its use by officers of the army and navy; who are
privileged to wear it; when was it first introduced; and by what authority,
if any, is it sanctioned or confined to the army and navy?

A.E.

_Suem, Ferling, Grasson_--In a copy of Court Roll, dated the 40th year of
Elizabeth, and relating {8} to the manor of Rotherfield, co. Sussex,
these words occur:--

    "R. K. cepit extra manus domini unam suem tr[~e] nat' de ferling," &c.

I shall be obliged to any of your correspondents who will explain the words
_suem_ and _ferling_.

What is the etymology of _grasson_, a word used in some north-country
manors for a fine paid on alienation of copyhold lands?

C.W.G.

_Cranmer's Descendants._--Being much interested in everything that concerns
the martyrs of the Reformation, and not the less so from being descended
(in the female line) from the father of Archbishop Cranmer, I should be
very glad if any of your correspondents could inform me whether there are
any of his male descendants still in existence. Gilpin, in his _Lives of
the Reformers_, says that the Archbishop's wife and children lived in great
obscurity. This was probably on account of the prejudice, which had hardly
passed away, against the marriage of the clergy; but surely the descendants
of so great a man, if there be such, have not lost the records or pedigree
by which their descent can be verified.

C.D.F.

_Collections of Pasquinades._--Can any of your correspondents inform me
whether a collection has ever been published of the satirical verses
affixed to the _torso_ of Menelaus, at the corner of the Palazzo Braschi at
Rome, and commonly known as _Pasquinades_, from the name of a tailor whose
shop stood near the place of its discovery? (See Nibby _Itinerario di
Roma_, ii. 409.) I send you a specimen which I do not remember to have seen
in print. It was occasioned by the Pope Pius VI. (Braschi) having placed
his own coat of arms in various parts of St. Peter's. They consisted of the
double-headed eagle, two stars, a lily, and the head of a boy, puffing at
it.

  "Redde aquilam imperio; Gallorum lilia regi;
    Sidera redde polo; caetera Brasche tibi."

The eagle being restored to the Holy Roman Empire, the lily to the Most
Christian King, and the stars to the firmament, there remained for the Pope
himself--an empty puff.

MARFORIO.

_Portraits of Bishops._--Can any of your correspondents inform me of
portraits of John Williams, archbishop of York (previously bishop of
Lincoln); John Owen, bishop of St. Asaph; George Griffith, bishop of St.
Asaph; Lewis Bayley, bishop of Bangor; Humphrey Henchman, bishop of London
(previously bishop of Salisbury); Lord Chief Justice Glynne; and Sir Thomas
Milward, chief justice of Chester.

Cassan, in his _Bishops of Salisbury_, mentions one of Henchman; but I mean
exclusively of this.

Y.Y.

_The Butcher Duke._--Can any of your readers furnish me with the rest of a
Scotch song of which I have heard these two couplets?

  "The Deil sat girning in a nook,
  Breaking sticks to burn the duke.
  A' the Whigs sal gae to hell!
  Geordie sal gae there hissel."

And who was the writer?

MEZZOTINTO.

_Rodolph Gualter._-I think I have somewhere seen it stated that Rodolph
Gualter (minister at Zurich, and well known as a correspondent of our
divines in the age of the Reformation) was a Scotchman. Will any of your
correspondents oblige me by supplying either a reference for this
statement, or a disproof of it--or both?

J.C.R.

_Passage in St. Mark._--What Fathers of the early Christian Church have
annotated that remarkable text, Mark xiii. 32., "[Greek: oude ho hyios],"
"Neither the Son?"

As this subject has certainly engaged the attention of many of your
readers, it will be a great favour conferred on the present writer, if
their replies should indicate the authors' names, the date and place of the
edition, the page, and such other distinctive marks as shall lead to a
prompt investigation of the subject: among them, whether the authors quoted
are in the library of the British Museum.

CALMET.

"_Fronte Capillata," &c._--On the Grammar School at Guilsbro, in
Northamptonshire, is inscribed the following hexameter:--

  "Fronte capillata post est Occasio calva."

I suppose it alludes to some allegorical representation of _Occasio_; and
is intended to convey the same meaning as our English proverb, "Seize time
by the forelocks." From what author is this inscription taken?

E.H.A.

       *       *       *       *       *


REPLIES.

"GOD SPEED THE PLOUGH."

(Vol. i., p. 230.)

L.S. asks, in what rebellion was the banner carried with the motto "God
speed the plough?"--(_Homily against Wilful Rebellion._)

Probably in the rebellion of the Earls of Northumberland and Westmoreland
in the north of England, during the autumn of A.D. 1569. In the passage of
the homily which immediately follows the one quoted by L.S., occur these
words:--

    "And though some rebels bear the picture of the five wounds painted,
    against those who put their only hope of salvation in the wounds of
    Christ ... and though they do bear the image of the cross painted in a
    rag ... yet let no good and godly subject ... follow such
    standard-bearers of rebellion."

Again: just _before_ the quotation cited by L.S. {9} is an allusion to the
"defacing or deformation" which the rebels have made, "where through they
tarry but a little while they make such reformation, that they destroy all
places, and undo all men where they come."

Collier, in his _Eccles. History_, vol. vi. p. 469. edit. Straker, 1840,
part ii. b. vi., says,--

    "However, the insurrection went on, and the rebels made their first
    march to Durham. And here going into the churches _they tore the
    English Bible_ and the _Common Prayer_. They officiated in the service
    of the mass, _had the five wounds of Christ represented in some of
    their colours_, and a chalice in others. One Richard Norton, an ancient
    gentleman, carried the standard _with a cross in it_."

In this passage we have three out of four facts enumerated: 1st. The
defacing of places; 2d. The banner with the five wounds; 3d. The standard
with the cross. It does not, therefore, seem unreasonable to infer, that
the other fact alluded to, viz. the banner with the motto, is to be
referred to the same rebellion.

It is not, however, impossible that the rebellion, which broke out A.D.
1549, first in the western counties, and then in Oxfordshire, Bucks,
Norfolk, Suffolk, and Yorkshire, may be also alluded to in the homily. For
Cranmer, in his answer to the Devonshire and Cornish rebels, urges this
amongst other reasons:--

    "Fourthly, for that they let the harvest, which is the chief
    sustentation of our life; and God of his goodness hath sent it
    abundantly. And they by their folly do cause it to be lost and
    abandoned."--Strype's _Mem. of C._, ed. Oxf. 1840, vol. ii. p. 841.

An argument similar to the one used in the homily.

The insurrection, in fact, in the midland and north-eastern counties, began
with an attempt to redress an agricultural grievance; according to Fox
(_E.H._ vol. ii. p. 665. edit. 1641); "about plucking down of enclosures
and enlarging of commons." The date of the homily itself offers no
objection; for though it is said (Oxf. ed. Pref. p. v.) not to occur in any
collected edition printed before 1571, yet there exists a separate edition
of it printed in 4to. by Jugge and Cawood, probably _earlier_ than A.D.
1563. Collier does not quote his authority for the statement about the
banners, but probably it was either Camden or Holinshed, and a reference to
these authors, which I regret I have no means of making, might established
the particular point in question.

E.A.D.

       *       *       *       *       *

"DEFENDER OF THE FAITH."

(Vol. ii., pp. 442. 481.)

I regret that my Note, inserted in your paper of Nov. 30th, was so
ambiguously written as to elicit such a reply as it has been favoured with
by MR. GIBSON of Newcastle-upon-Tyne.

What I meant to say in my last Note was simply this--that two persons, viz.
Messrs. Christopher Wren and Chamberlayne, have asserted that the title
"Defender of the Faith" had been used by our monarchs anterior to 1521; and
in support of their assertions, cite the Black Book of the order of the
garter, and several charters granted to the University of Oxford: that is,
each gives a distinct proof of his allegation.

Had MR. GIBSON understood my Note, as I trust he now will, he will see at
once that the expression "untrue" is totally inapplicable to their
statements, at least upon any showing upon his part; for he does not appear
to me to have consulted either the Black Book or the charters, on which
alone their assertions are based, to which alone we must in common honesty
refer, and by which alone their veracity must be judged.

That their "startling" statements do not appear in Selden, nor in Luder's
brief paper in the 19th vol. of the _Archaeologia_, is conceded; but I think
it might have occurred to the mind of one of less acumen than MR. GIBSON,
that it was precisely because the allegations do not appear in these or any
other writers or authorities that I considered them not unworthy of the
attention of the readers of the "NOTES AND QUERIES". I am at a loss to
reconcile MR. GIBSON'S expression "startling," as applied to the assertions
of Messrs. Wren and Chamberlayne (and I need not add, that had they not
been startling to myself as to him, they would never have found their way
to your paper), with the following paragraph:

    "In this sense, the sovereign and every knight became a sworn defender
    of the faith. Can this duty have come to be popularly attributed as
    part of the royal style and title?"

I do not allude to this statement in a critical point of view, but simply,
as, from the general tenor of his communication, MR. GIBSON appears to
labour under an impression, that, from ignorance of historical authorities,
I have merely given utterance to a _popular_ fallacy, unheard of by him and
other learned men; and, like the "curfew," to be found in no
contemporaneous writer. I beg, however, to assure him, that before
forwarding the note and question to your paper, I had examined not only the
Bulls, and our best historians, but also the works of such writers as
Prynne, Lord Herbert, Spelman, Camdem, and others, who have in any way
treated of regal titles and prerogatives.

I have only to add, that beyond the investigation of the truth of the
assertions of Messrs. Wren and Chamberlayne, I am not in any way
interested. I care not for the result. I only seek for the elucidation of
that which is at once "startling" and a "popular fallacy".

ROBERT ANSTRUTHER.

Bayswater.

       *       *       *       *       *

{10}

BEATRIX LADY TALBOT.

In reference to the Query of SCOTUS (Vol. ii., p 478.) respecting Beatrix
Lady Talbot (so long confounded by genealogists with her more illustrious
contemporary, Beatrix Countess of Arundel), perhaps I may be permitted to
state, that the merit, whatever it may be, of having been the first to
discover this error, belongs to myself; and that the whole of the facts and
authorities to prove the non-identity of the two ladies were supplied by me
to the late Sir H. Nicolas, to enable him to compile the article on the
subject in the _Collectanea Topographica_, vol. i.; the notes to which also
were almost entirely written by myself. From the note of SCOTUS, one would
suppose that _he_ had made the discovery that Lady Talbot belonged to the
Portuguese family of _Pinto_; whereas he merely transcribes my words in p.
405. of the Addenda to vol. i. of the _Collectanea_.

I had originally supposed that this lady was a member of the house of
_Sousa_, which bore a coat of four crescents, quartered with the arms of
Portugal (without the border); and in that belief a paragraph was written
by Sir H. Nicolas, accompanied by a pedigree, to show the connexion of
Beatrix Lady Talbot, through her great-great-grandfather, with the royal
line of Portugal, and, consequently, with Beatrix Countess of Arundel; but
these were subsequently struck out. By an oversight, however, the note
referring to some works on the genealogy of the house of Sousa has been
allowed to remain at p. 87. of the _Collectanea_; and as it stands at
present, it has no corresponding passage in the text. For the information
that Lady Talbot bore the arms of Pinto, I was really indebted to a
Portuguese gentleman, the Chevalier M.T. de Moraes Sarmento, who published
(anonymously) a small volume entitled _Russell de Albuquerque, Conto Moral,
por um Portuguez_, 12mo. Cintra, 1833, at p. 331-2. of which work is a
brief notice of the two Beatrixes, from memoranda furnished by myself. At
the time I collected the information given to Sir H. Nicolas, I wrote to
the Earl of Shrewsbury, to inquire whether among the family papers any
evidence could be found, to clear up the history of his ancestress; but his
lordship informed me he had no means of elucidating the difficulty, and
that in the earliest pedigree in his possession (drawn up in the reign of
Elizabeth), Beatrix Lady Talbot was not only described as daughter of the
King of Portugal, but had the royal arms of Portugal assigned to her,--a
proof, by the way, that even in pedigrees compiled and attested by heralds,
there are statements which are not borne out by historic documents. I am
still, therefore, like SCOTUS, anxious to know more about this lady, and
hope some of your correspondents versed in Portuguese genealogies may
supply the required information.

F. MADDEN.

       *       *       *       *       *

REPLIES TO MINOR QUERIES.

_Passage in Hamlet_ (Vol. ii., p.494.).--The word _modern_, instead of
_moderate_, in my editions of Shakspeare, is a printer's error, which shall
be corrected in the edition I am now publishing. To a person unfamiliar
with printing, it might appear impossible that any compositor, with this
copy before him,--

  "While one with moderate haste might tell a hundred,"

should substitute--

  "While one with modern haste might tell a hundred."

And yet such substitution of one word for another is a constant anxiety to
every editor. Some may consider that a competent editor would detect such a
gross blunder. Unfortunately, the more familiar the mind is with the
correct reading, the more likely is such an error to escape the eye. Your
correspondent who did me the favour to point out this blunder will, I
trust, receive this explanation, as also your other readers, in a candid
spirit. The error has run through three editions, from the circumstance
that the first edition furnished the copy for the subsequent ones. The
passage in question was not a doubtful text, and therefore required no
special editorial attention. The typographical blunder is, however, an
illustration of the difficulties which beset the editors of our old
dramatists especially. Had the word _modern_ occurred in an early edition
of Shakspeare, it would have perplexed very commentator; but few would have
ventured to substitute the correct word, _moderate_. The difficulty lies in
finding the just mean between timidity and rashness. With regard to
typographical errors, the obvious ones naturally supply their own
correction; but in the instance before us, as in many others, it is not
easy to detect the substitution, and the blunder is perpetuated. If a
compositor puts _one_ for _won_--a very common blunder--the context will
show that the ear has misled the eye; but if he change an epithet in a
well-known passage, the first syllable of the right and the wrong words
being the same, and the violation of the propriety not very startling, the
best diligence may pass over the mistake. It must not be forgotten that
many gross errors in typography occur after the sheet is gone to press,
through the accidents that are constantly happening to the movable types.

CHARLES KNIGHT.

_Passage in Tennyson_ (Vol. ii., p. 479.)--The following extract from Sir
James Mackintosh's _History of England_ vol. ii. p. 185., will explain this
passage:

    "The love of Margaret Roper continued to display itself in those
    outwardly unavailing tokens of tenderness to his (her father, Sir
    Thomas More's) remains, by which affection seeks to perpetuate itself;
    ineffectually, indeed, for the object, but very effectually for {11}
    softening the heart and exalting the soul. She procured his head be
    taken down from London Bridge, where more odious passions had struggled
    in pursuit of a species of infernal immortality by placing it. She kept
    it during her life as a sacred relic, and was buried with that object
    of fondness in her arms, nine years after she was separated from her
    father."

X.Z.

_Was Quarles pensioned?_ (Vol. i., p. 201.).--I believe that no reply has
been made to this Query. The following passage, transcribed from the
_Epistle Dedicatory_ to the surreptitious edition of Quarles's _Judgment
and Mercy_, affords a slight negative proof to the contrary;--

    "And being so usefull, dare not doubt your patronage of this _child_,
    which survives a _father_, whose utmost abilities were (till death
    darkned that great light in his soule) sacrificed to your service."

Now if Charles had conferred a pension on Quarles, is it not exceedingly
probable that the publisher and dedicator, Richard Royston, would have
recalled so honourable a circumstance to the memory of his "Most gratious
soveraigne King Charles" in this _Epistle Dedicatory_, when he had so
excellent an opportunity of doing so?

J.M.B.

_Old Hewson the Cobbler_ (Vol. ii., p. 442.).--I remember that there was a
low song sung at some wine parties in Oxford about fifteen years ago, which
began with the words, "My name is old Hewson," &c. I do not remember the
words, but they were gross: the chief _fun_ seemed to consist in the
chorus,--a sort of _burring_ noise being made with the lips, while the
doubled fists were rubbed and thumped upon the thigh, as if the cobbler's
lapstone had been there.

Was Hewson, the Parliamentarian colonel, a cobbler?

C.P.

_The Inquisition_ (Vol. ii., p. 358.).--The following reply to IOTA'S
Queries is extracted from _Walchii Bibliotheca Theologica_, tom. iii. p.
739.:

    "Auctor libri: Histoire de l'Inquisition et son origine. Coloniae
    MDCXCIII. 12. qui Jacob Marsollierius est."[1]

Of the history of the Bohemians I can ascertain only that J. Amos Comenius
was the author of the original. (See Walch, tom. iii. p. 265.)

[Footnote 1: _Journal des Savans_, MDCXCIV, p. 331.; _Niceronii Memoir.,_
tom. vii. p. 64.]

T.J.

_Mrs. Tempest_ (Vol. ii., p. 407.).--In reply to your correspondent
requesting information respecting this lady, I have much pleasure in
sending you the following particulars, which I leave obtained through the
kindness of Colonel Tempest of Tong Hall, the present representative of the
ancient family of Tempest of Tong. Henry Tempest, the oldest son of Sir
John Tempest, Bart., of Tong Hall, by Henrietta his wife, daughter and heir
of Sir Henry Cholmley of Newton Grange, married Alathea, daughter of Sir
Henry Thompson of Marston, county of York, and had two daughters, Alathea
and Henrietta; one of these ladies was celebrated as Pope's Daphne. Henry
Tempest died very young, before his father Sir John; the next brother,
George, succeeded to the title and Tong estates. Daphne was on the point of
being, married very highly, tradition says to the Duke of Wharton, but died
of the small-pox before the celebration.

In the library at Tong Hall there is a painting, by Sir Godfrey Kneller, of
Pope's Daphne.

OLIVER THOMLINSON WYNDOWE.

_Cardinal Allen's Declaration_ (Vol ii., p. 497.).--I am happy to inform
H.P. that the _Declaration of the Sentence and Deposition of Elizabeth, the
Usurper and pretended Queen of England_, alluded to in his note, is in the
Bodleian Library; where, a few days since, I saw Dr. Cumming poring over
it; and where, I have no doubt, he, or any friend, can easily obtain a
sight of it by applying to any of the librarians.

Z.X.Z.

_Cardinal Allen's Admonition_ (Vol. ii., p. 497.).--The _Declaration of the
Sentence and Deposition of Elizabeth, the Usurper and pretended Queen of
England_, will be found accurately reprinted in the Appendix to vol. iii.
of Dodd's _Church History_, edited and enlarged by the Rev. M.A. Tierney,
F.R.S., F.S.A., in whose possession a copy of the Declaration is stated to
be.

D.

_Scandal against Queen Elizabeth_ (Vol. ii., p. 393.).--Although many of
your correspondents must be well able to reply to P.T.'s Query, I have seen
no notice of it as yet. The note to Burton's _Diary_, in citing Osborn,
ought to have begun with the word which precedes the words quoted. The note
would then have run thus:--

    "That Queen Elizabeth had a son, &c., I neglect to insert, as fitter
    for a romance than to mingle with so much truth and integrity as I
    profess."

In the Add. MSS. 5524. is an apparently modern note, stated to be in the
handwriting of Mr. Ives, to the following effect:--

    "I have heard it confidently asserted, that Queen Elizabeth was with
    child by the Earl of Essex, and that she was delivered of a child at
    Kenilworth Castle, which died soon after its birth, was interred at
    Kenilworth, and had a stone put over it, inscribed '_Silentium_.'"

This is doubtless one of the many tales, which, as Osborn says, "may be
found in the black relations of the Jesuits, and some French and Spanish
Pasquilers." These slanderers were chiefly, I believe, Parsons or Persons,
and Sanders, who scrupled at nothing that would tend to blacken the
character and reputation of Elizabeth. Thus besides the above, and other
stories of Elizabeth {12} herself, it was stated by Sanders that her
mother, Anne Boleyn, was Henry VIII.'s own daughter; and that he intrigued,
not only with Anne's mother, but with her sister. P.T. will find these
points, and others which are hardly suited for public discussion, noticed
in the article on ELIZABETH in Bayle's _Dictionary_.

CUDYN GWYN.

_Church of St. Saviour, Canterbury_ (Vol. ii., p. 478.).--I would submit to
Sir Henry Ellis, that the church at Canterbury which is mentioned in the
charter from which he quotes, is termed _Mater et Domina_, not on account
of its greater antiquity, but by reason of its superior dignity; and that
the church referred to is clearly the cathedral church. The charter is one
of confirmation of privileges: it proceeded upon the "admonition of the
most pious Archbishop Liuingus," and "upon consideration of the liberties
_of the monasteries_ situated within Kent." It granted that the church of
the Saviour (_ecclesia Salvatoris_), situated in Canterbury, the mother and
lady of all the churches in the kingdom of England, should be free, and
that no one should have any right therein _save the archbishop and the
monks there serving God_. The whole tenor of the charter, and more
particularly the words last referred to, "archiepiscopum et monachos ibidem
deo famulantes," seem to me to indicate the cathedral church, and no other.
If it be inquired, How then came it to pass that the cathedral, which is
dedicated to Christ, should be described as _ecclesia Salvatoris?_ some
persons may answer, that this apparent blunder is an indication that the
charter is not genuine. But that is not my opinion. The charter is printed
from the register of the cathedral, and if it had been forged by the monks,
they would scarcely have made a mistake upon such a point as the dedication
of their own church. Coming out of such custody, the unusual designation,
as we now esteem it, seems clear proof that the charter is genuine. I would
suggest, either that the cathedral, or a part of it, was really dedicated
to the Saviour; or that the words are to be understood not as indicating
the church of St. Saviour, but the church of the Saviour, that is, Christ.

JOHN BRUCE.

_Pope Ganganelli_ (Vol. ii., p. 464.).--In reply to the inquiry of CEPHAS,
I give you the following anecdote, in the words of the Rev. Dr. Kirk, of
Lichfield, who still survives (and long may he yet survive!) to bear
testimony to its correctness:--

    "Charles Plowden travelled with Mr. Middleton; and when at Rome, he
    called with Mr. Thorpe to see me at the English college. We walked
    together for some time in St. George's Hall, and he quite scandalised
    me with the manner in which he spoke of Ganganelli. There is no doubt
    that Mr. Plowden had a principal hand in the _Life of Ganganelli_,
    which was published in London in 1785. Father Thorpe supplied the
    materials (J.T. is subscribed to the letters printed), and Mr. Plowden
    arranged them. I brought a packet of letters from Mr. Thorpe to Mr. C.
    Plowden, and one or two other packets were brought from him to Mr.
    Plowden by other students. 'The contents were so scandalous,' said
    Bishop Milner in my hearing, at Oscott, 'that Mr. Weld, with whom Mr.
    C. Plowden lived, insisted on the work being suppressed.' The copies
    were all bought up, and I have never seen or heard of a copy since I
    saw it in Coghlan's shop in 1785. Mr. Cordell, of Newcastle, wrote some
    observations upon it. Mr. Conolly, S.J., told me at Oxford, October 17,
    1814, that he 'once saw in a corner of Mr. C. Plowden's room, a heap of
    papers, some torn, and put there apparently to be burnt. I took up one
    of them,' he said, 'which was torn in two.' It contained anecdotes and
    observations _against Ganganelli_."

It was doubtless from this collection that Mr. Keon was supplied with those
papers, which he published in _Dolman's Magazine_ in 1846, concerning "The
Preservation of the Society of Jesus in the Empire of Russia."

M.A. TIERNEY.

Arundel.

_Pope Ganganelli_ (Vol. ii., p. 464.).--The Rev. Charles Cordell, a priest
of the Roman Catholic Church, who was stationed at Newcastle-upon-Tyne
about the date mentioned by your correspondent CEPHAS (he was there in
1787), was the translator of the letters of Pope Clement XIV. (Ganganelli);
but as I have not the book, I do not know whether it contained also a life
of that pontiff. Mr. Cordell was editor of other works.

W.S.G.

_Nicholas Ferrar's Digest_ (Vol. ii., p.446.).--One of the copies of the
Gidding _Digest of the History of our Saviour's Life_, inquired after by
J.H.M. (a most beautiful book), is in the library of the Marquis of
Salisbury. I believe it to be the copy presented to Charles I.

W.H.C.

_Ferrar, Nicholas._--The following extract from a very interesting paper on
"Illustrated Books" in the _Quarterly Review_, vol. lxxiv. p. 173, will aid
J.H.M. in his researches after the curious volumes arranged by the members
of the Ferrar family:

    "King Charles's statues, pictures, jewels, and curiosities, were sold
    and dispersed by the regicide powers; from this fate, happily, the
    royal collection of manuscripts and books was preserved; neither was
    it, like the archiepiscopal library at Lambeth, doled out piecemeal to
    Hugh Peters and his brother fanatics. This good service was mainly
    owing to Bolstrode Whitelocke. When the British Museum was founded,
    King George II. presented to it the whole of the royal library; and
    Ferrar's _Concordance_, with another similarly illustrated compilation
    by him, is there preserved in safety. The Rev. Thomas Bowdler of
    Sydenham, the representative of the last baronet of the Cotton family,
    the founders of the Cottonian Library, possesses another of the Ferrar
    volumes. Of those which were presented by Ferrar to George Herbert and
    Dr. Jackson, no record remains."

JOHN I. DREDGE.

{13}

_Cardinal Erskine_ (Vol. ii., p. 406.) flourished later than your
correspondent G.W. supposes. He was in communication with Mr. Pitt about
1799-1800. Query, was he then in England?

W.H.C.

_The Author of Peter Wilkins_ (Vol. ii., p. 480.).--An advertisement
prefixed to the edition of this remarkable work in Smith's _Standard
Library_, 1839, gives the following information respecting the author:--

    "In the year 1835, Mr. Nicol the printer sold by auction a number of
    books and manuscripts in his possession, which had formerly belonged to
    the well-known publisher Dodsley; and in arranging them for sale, the
    original agreement for the sale of the manuscript of 'Peter Wilkins,'
    by the author, 'Robert Pultock of Clement's Inn' to Dodsley, was
    discovered. From this document it appears that Mr. Pultock received
    twenty pounds, twelve copies of the work, and 'the cuts of the first
    impression,' that is, a set of proof impressions of the fanciful
    engravings that professed to illustrate the first edition, as the price
    of the entire copyright. This curious document was sold to John Wilks,
    Esq., M.P. on the 17th December, 1835."

Mr. Leigh Hunt, in his _Book for a Corner_, remarks upon this,--

    "The reader will observe that the words 'by the author,' in this
    extract, are not accompanied by marks of quotation. The fact, however,
    is stated as if he knew it for such, by the quoter of the document."

The difference mentioned by DR. RIMBAULT between the initials in the
title-page and those appended to the dedication, occurs also in Mr. Smith's
edition. But the dedication to which the initials R.P. are affixed, speaks
of the book as the work of the writer in the most unmistakeable terms. Was
the S. in the place of the P. a typographical error, perpetuated by
carelessness and oversight; or a mystification of the author, adopted when
the success of the book was uncertain, and continued after the dedication
had contradicted it, by that want of attention to minutiae which was more
frequently manifest in former times than at present?

Mr. Leigh Hunt informs us that the Countess of Northumberland, to whom the
dedication is made, was the lady to whom Percy addressed his _Reliques of
Ancient Poetry_. "She was a Wriothesley descended of Shakspeare's Earl of
Southampton, and appears to have been a very amiable woman."

Permit me to take this opportunity of saying, that there is a misprint in
the poem by Barry Cornwall (Vol. ii., p. 451.), by which the title of a
poem from which a quotation is made, appears as the name of a _dramatis
persona_. "Paris" is the title of a poem by the Rev. Geo. Croly, from which
the "motto" is quoted.

G.J. DE WILDE.

_Peter Wilkins_ (Vol. ii., p. 480.).--In the preface to a garbled and
mutilated edition of this work, which appeared Lond. 1839, sq. 12mo., it is
stated that the author was Robert Pultock, of Clement's Inn, which is in
accordance with the initials to the dedication. Those of R.S. on the title
I consider as mere fiction. Lowndes gives the 1st ed. 1750, 2 vols. 12mo.
and I have a note of a reprint, Dublin, Geo. Falkner, 1751, 2 vols. 12mo.,
"illustrated with several cuts." My copy is Lond. 1816, 2 vols. 12mo., with
a few indifferent engravings.

F.R.A.

_"The Toast," by Dr. King_ (Vol. ii., p. 480.).--DR. RIMBAULT will find the
_key_ to the characters named in this poem printed in Davis's _Second
Journey round the Library, &c._, p. 106.

F.R.A.

    [W.A. informs us that there is a key to this work in Martin's _Account
    of Privately Printed Books_.]

_The Widow of the Wood_ (Vol. ii., p. 406.).--The history of this
publication can hardly be given without raking up a piece of scandal
affecting an honourable family still in existence. If DR. RIMBAULT wishes
to see the book, and has any difficulty in meeting with it, I shall be
happy to forward him my copy by the post on learning his address. I inclose
you mine, and will thank you to communicate it to him if he should wish for
it.

The maiden name of this "widow" was Anne Northey. Her second husband was
Sir Wm. Wolseley; her _fourth_, Mr. Hargrave, father of the celebrated
jurist. Every copy of the work which could be found was destroyed by the
latter gentleman.

H.C.

_Damasked Linen_ (Vol. ii., p. 199.).--It may interest R.G.P.M. to learn
that portion of the damasked linen which formed part of the establishment
of James II. when in Ireland, still exists in the possession of R. Ely,
Esq., of Ballaghmore Castle in the Queen's County. I have seen with that
gentleman several large napkins beautifully damasked with the then royal
arms, together with the initials J.R. of large size, and elaborately
flourished. The tradition of the family is, that they were obtained from
the plunder of James's camp equipage, after the defeat of the Boyne. Mr.
Ely's ancestor was in William's army.

X.Y.A.

       *       *       *       *       *


MISCELLANEOUS.

NOTES ON BOOKS, SALES, CATALOGUES, ETC.

Every one who had an opportunity of inspecting the glorious assemblage of
masterpieces of workmanship and design which were collected together at the
_Exhibition of Ancient and Mediaeval Art_ last spring, must have felt a
desire to possess some more lasting memorial of that unparalleled display
than the mere catalogue. {14} So strong, indeed, was this feeling at the
time, as to call several announcements of works in preparation,
commemorative of the Exhibition, including one by the accomplished Honorary
Secretary of the Committee, Mr. Franks. Mr. Franks has, however, we regret
to hear, now abandoned that intention, so that of these promised memorials,
we shall probably only see the one which has just been published under the
title of _Choice Examples of Art Workmanship, selected from the Exhibition
of Ancient and Mediaeval Art at the Society of Arts_; and, whether as a
pleasant record to those who visited the collection, or as a compensation
for their disappointment to those who were not so fortunate, the book will,
doubtless, find favour with the rapidly increasing class who take an
interest in works of this character. That the publishers anticipate a large
sale, is obvious, from the remarkably low price at which they have
published this beautiful volume, which contains upwards of sixty
engravings, drawn from the gems of the collection, by Mr. De la Motte, and
engraved under his superintendence; and furnishes representations of
objects of the most varied kinds, from the _Nautilus Cup_ belonging to Her
Majesty, to Mr. Vulliamy's _Ivory Bas-reliefs_ ascribed to Fiamingo, Mr.
Slade's matchless specimens of _Glass_, and Dr. Rock's _Superaltare_.

Mr. Charles Knight has just put forth a small pamphlet, entitled _Case of
the Authors as regards the Paper Duty_, in which he shows most ably and
most clearly the social advantages which must result from the repeal of a
tax which, as Mr. Knight proves, "encourages the production of inferior and
injurious works by unskilled labourers in literature."

The _Gentleman's Magazine_ of the present month is a capital number. Mr.
Cunningham has commenced in it, what promises to be an interesting series
of papers upon a subject which that gentleman's well-known tact and
judgment ill prevent from being objectionable, _The Story of Nell Gwyn_;
and the numerous friends of the late Mr. Amyot--and how numerous were his
friends!--cannot but be pleased with the characteristic portrait which
accompanies the interesting memoir of that kind-hearted and accomplished
gentleman.

_Oracles from the British Poets, A Drawing-Room Table Book and pleasant
Companion for a Round Party_, by James Smith exhibits a good idea carried
out with excellent taste, and justifies the author's motto:

  "Out of them scatter'd Sibyl's leaves,
  Strange prophecies my fancy weaves."

A game which, while it amuses the family circle, will make its members
acquainted with so many beautiful passages from our poets as are here
assembled, must find a welcome in many a home at the present season. The
publisher of the _Oracles_ has availed himself of the demand, at this
period of the year, for "Song of knight and lady bright," to re-issue in
one volume instead of two, and at a reduced price, his _Pictorial Book of
Ballads Traditional and Romantic_.

_A Monumentarium of Exeter Cathedral_, carefully compiled by the Rev. J.W.
Hewett, the result of six months regular labour, has been printed in the
_Transactions of the Exeter Architectural Society_. By this work Mr. Hewett
has done good service to all genealogists, local and general historians,
&c., and we know no greater benefit that could be conferred on this branch
of literature, than that some of our now super-abundant brass-rubbers
should follow Mr. Hewett's example, and note with accuracy all the
inscriptions, monuments, coats of arms, &c., preserved in the churches in
their respective neighbourhoods. They may then either hand them over for
publication to the nearest Archaeological Society, or the Archaeological
Institute, or the Society of Antiquaries; or transmit a copy of them to the
MS. department of the British Museum.

Messrs. Sotheby and Wilkinson, of Wellington Street, will sell, on Monday
next and two following days, the valuable Collection of Ancient and Modern
Engravings of the late James Brown, Esq.

We have received the following Catalogues:--W.S. Lincoln's (Cheltenham
House, Westminster Road) Sixty-fourth Catalogue of Cheap Second-hand
English and Foreign Books; John Miller's (43. Chandos Street) Catalogue
Number Sixteen of Books Old and New.

       *       *       *       *       *

BOOKS AND ODD VOLUMES WANTED TO PURCHASE.

LELAND'S HISTORY OF IRELAND. Vol. II.

GRETSER OPERA OMNIA. Folio. Ingolst. 1616.

HEYWOOD'S SPIDER AND FLIE. London. 1556. Title-page and first leaf of
Table.

ESSAY ON MUSIC, ENCYC. METROPOLITANA.

HODGSON'S LADY JANE GREY.

ZACCHIAS QUESTIONES MEDICO LEGALES.

PULLEYN'S ETYMOLOGICAL COMPENDIUM. London. 8vo. 1850.

SHAKSPEARE'S DRAMATIC WORKS. Vol. IV. of Whittingham's edition in 7 vols.
1814.

*** Letters, stating particulars and lowest price, _carriage free_, to be
sent to MR. BELL, Publisher of "NOTES AND QUERIES," 186. Fleet Street.

       *       *       *       *       *

NOTICES TO CORRESPONDENTS.

ETYMOLOGICUS _will find a full reply to his Query, under the word
_"Aiguillette,"_ in the _Dictionnaire Infernal_ of M. Collin de Plancy; and
by so doing he will also learn why we do not here enter into a fuller
explanation_.

MARCH. _There is no question but that we derived the name _April fool_ from
the French _Poisson d'Avril_. See Ellis'_ Brand, vol. i. p. 82 (ed. 1841).

INVESTIGATOR _is referred to Lowndes' _Bibliographer's Manual_, under the
title "Huloet," for an account of Huloet's _Abecedarium_, as well as of the
newly corrected edition of it by Higgins_.

A SUBSCRIBER _who wishes for an abridged translation of Dugdale's account
of Norton Priory, Lincolnshire, is referred to Wright's English Abridgment
of the _Monasticon_, published in_ 1718.

J.K. (Medical Use of Mice) _is thanked for his friendly Postscript. He
will, we trust, see a great alteration in future_.

CURIOSUS. _The best account of the Domestic Fool is in Douce's
_Illustrations of Shakespeare_, and Flaegel's_ Geschichte der Hofnarren.

PHILO-STEVENS. _Rask's _Anglo-Saxon Grammar_, by Thorpe; and Vernon's
_Guide to Anglo-Saxon_, are considered the best elementary books_.

_The _INDEX_ to our _SECOND VOLUME_ will, we trust, be ready by the middle
of the present month_.

NOTES AND QUERIES _may be procured, by order, of all Booksellers and
Newsvenders. It is published at noon on Friday, so that our country
Subscribers ought not to experience any difficulty in procuring it
regularly. Many of the country Booksellers, &c., are, probably, not yet
aware of this arrangement, which will enable them to receive _NOTES AND
QUERIES_ in their Saturday parcels_.

_All communications for the Editor of _NOTES AND QUERIES_ should be
addressed to the care of_ MR. BELL, No. 186, Fleet Street.

{15}

       *       *       *       *       *


Mr. T. Richards (late of St. Martin's Lane), PRINTER and Agent to the PERCY
and HAKLUYT SOCIETIES, has removed to 37. Great Queen Street, near Drury
Lane, where he respectfully requests all Letters may be addressed to him.

       *       *       *       *       *

On the 1st of January, No. IV., price 2s. 6d. Continued monthly.

DETAILS OF GOTHIC ARCHITECTURE, measured and drawn from existing examples,
by J.K. COLLING, Architect.--CONTENTS: Window on South Side of Chancel,
Burnby Church, Yorkshire; Oak Chest in Vestry, South Church, Lincolnshire;
West Doorway, St. Mary's Church, Beverley; Details of West Doorway, Ditto;
Portions from the West Doorway, Ditto. The work is intended to illustrate
those features which have not been given in Messrs. Brandon's "Analysis:"
it will be uniform with that work, and also the "Gothic Ornaments." Each
number contains five 4to. Plates.

D. BOGUE, Fleet Street; sold also by GEORGE BELL, Fleet Street.

       *       *       *       *       *

NEW AND IMPROVED EDITION..

Price 25s. Large Square octavo, illustrated by numerous examples of the
most exquisite Greek and Roman Coins, executed in fac-simile of the
Originals, in actual relief, and in their respective metals.

ANCIENT COINS AND MEDALS: An Historical Account of the Origin of Coined
Money, the Development of the Art of Coining in Greece and her Colonies,
its progress during the extension of the Roman Empire, and its decline as
an Art with the decay of that power. By H.N. HUMPHREYS.

"This work is a condensation of all that is known respecting the coins of
ancient nations, and a lucid and well-arranged narrative of monetary
history. A novel and excellent mode of illustration has been adopted,
representing the coins in exact fac-simile in gold, silver, and copper,
produced by casts from the originals, many of which would be quite
unattainable, and all costly."--_Art Journal._

"It is needless to remark how desirable an addition such a work as this
must be to the library of the historian, the classical scholar, and the
clergyman, no less than to the artist."--_Daily News._

GRANT AND GRIFFITH, Corner of St. Paul's Churchyard.

       *       *       *       *       *

JOURNAL OF SACRED LITERATURE.

Edited by JOHN KITTO, D.D., F.S.A.

Contents of No. XIII., for January, 1851:--

  1. Nineveh.
  2. The Jansenists and their remnant in Holland.
  3. The Septuagint.
  4. The Theory of Human Progression.
  5. Letter and Spirit in the Old Testament.
  6. John Calvin.
  7. First Lessons in Biblical Criticism.
  8. On the interpretation of 1 Cor. vii. 25-40.
  9. Brown on Our Lord's Discourses and Sayings.
  l0. Bloomfield's Additional Annotations.

Correspondence; Notices of Books, Biblical Intelligence; Lists of
Publications.

SIMPKIN, MARSHALL, AND CO., Stationers' Hall Court.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE LONDON HOMOEOPATHIC HOSPITAL, 32. Golden Square. Founded by the BRITISH
HOMOEOPATHIC ASSOCIATION.

  Patron: H.R.H. THE DUCHESS OF CAMBRIDGE.
  Vice-Patron: HIS GRACE THE DUKE OF BEAUFORT, K.G.
  President: F.M. THE MARQUIS OF ANGLESEY, K.G. K.C.B.
  Chairman: CULLING C. SMITH, Esq.
  Treasurer: JOHN DEAN PAUL, Esq., 217. Strand.

This Hospital is open every Monday, Tuesday, Thursday, and Friday, at 2
o'clock, for the reception of Out-Patients without Letters of
Recommendation. In-Patients admitted every Tuesday at 3 o'clock upon the
Recommendation of a Governor or Subscribers.

Subscriptions to the Hospital Funds will be thankfully received by the
Bankers, Messrs. Strahan and Co, Strand, and Messrs. Prescott and Co.,
Threadneedle Street, and by

RALPH BUCHAN, Honorary Secretary, 32. Golden Square.

       *       *       *       *       *

Price 1d., by Post 2d., or 5s. per Hundred for Distribution.

WESTMINSTER AND DR. WISEMAN or, FACTS _v._ FICTION. BY WILLIAM PAGE WOOD,
Esq., M.P., Q.C. Reprinted from _The Times_, with an Advertisement on the
subject of the WESTMINSTER SPIRITUAL AID FUND, and more especially on the
Duty and Justice of applying the Revenues of the suspended Stalls of the
Abbey for the adequate Endowment of the District Churches in the immediate
neighbourhood.

Second Edition, with an Appendix.

London GEORGE BELL, 186. Fleet Street; MESSRS. RIVINGTON'S, St. Paul's
Church-yard, and Waterloo Place, and THOMAS HATCHARD, 187. Piccadilly; and
_by Order_ of all Booksellers.

       *       *       *       *       *

Now ready, fcap. 8vo., price 7s. 6d.

A THIRD SERIES OF PLAIN SERMONS, addressed to a Country Congregation. By
the late REV. EDWARD BLENCOWE, Curate of Teversal, Notts, and formerly
Fellow of Oriel College, Oxford.

ALSO, A NEW EDITION OF THE FIRST SERIES, and A SECOND EDITION OF THE SECOND
SERIES, price 7s. 6d. each.

"Their style is simple; the sentences are not artfully constructed; and
there is an utter absence of all attempt at rhetoric. The language is plain
Saxon language, from which 'the men on the wall' can easily gather what it
most concerns them to know."--_Theologian._

Also, 2 vols. 12mo., sold separately, 8s. each,

SERMONS. BY the REV. ALFRED GATTY, M.A., Vicar of Ecclesfield.

"Sermons of a high and solid character--earnest and
affectionate."--_Theologian._

"Plain and practical, but close and scholarly discourses."--_Spectator._

London: GEORGE BELL, 186. Fleet Street.

       *       *       *       *       *

JOURNAL FRANCAIS, publie a Londres.--Le COURRIER de l'EUROPE, fonde en
1840, paraissant le Samedi, donne dans chaque numero les nouvelles de la
semaine, les meilleurs articles de tous les journaux de Paris, la Semaine
Dramatique par Th. Gautier ou J. Janin, la Revue de Paris par Pierre
Durand, et reproduit en entier les romans, nouvelles, etc., en vogue par
les premiers ecrivains de France. Prix 6d.

London: JOSEPH THOMAS, 1. Finch Lane.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE GIRLHOOD OF SHAKSPEARE'S HERIONES; in a Series of fifteen Tales, by
MARY COWDEN CLARKE, Author of the "Concordance to Shakspeare."

          "As petty to his ends,
  As is the morn dew on the myrtle leaf
  To his grand sea."--_Shakspeare._

To be published periodically in One Shilling books, each containing a
complete story, one of the following subjects:--

  Portia; the Heiress of Belmont
  The Thane's Daughter
  Helena; the Physician's Orphan
  Desdemona; the Magnifico's Child
  Meg and Alice; the Merry Maids of Windsor.
  Isabella; the Votaress
  Katharina and Bianca; the Shrew and the Demure
  Ophelia; the Rose of Elsinore
  Rosalind and Celia; the Friends
  Juliet; the White Dove of Verona
  Beatrice and Hero; the Cousins
  Olivia; the Lady of Illyria
  Hermione; the Russian Princess
  Viola; the Twin
  Imogen; the Peerless.

Tale 2 (THE THANE'S DAUGHTER), 1st January, 1851.

London: W.H. SMITH and SON, 136. Strand; and SIMPKIN, MARSHALL, and Co.,
Stationers' Hall Court.

       *       *       *       *       *

{16}

BOOKS PRINTED FOR THE UNIVERSITY OF OXFORD, AT THE PRICES ANNEXED, IN
BOARDS.

       *       *       *       *       *

These Books are also supplied in neat library binding, and Specimens may be
seen at MR. PARKER'S, either in Oxford, or at 377. Strand, London.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE WYCLIFFE VERSIONS.

THE HOLY BIBLE, containing the OLD and NEW TESTAMENT, with the Apocryphal
Books, in the earliest English Versions made from the Latin Vulgate, by
JOHN WYCLIFFE and his Followers. Edited by the REV. JOSIAH FORSHALL,
F.R.S., &c., late Fellow of Exeter College, and SIR FREDERIC MADDEN, K.H.,
F.R.S., &c., Keeper of the MSS. in the British Museum. Four vols. 4to. 5l.
15s. 6d.

REFORMATIO LEGUM.

THE REFORMATION OF THE ECCLESIASTICAL LAWS, as attempted in the Reigns of
Henry VIII., King Edward VI., and Queen Elizabeth. A new Edition. Edited by
the REV. E. CARDWELL. 8vo. 6s. 6d.

THE TWO BOOKS OF COMMON PRAYER.

Set forth by Authority of Parliament, in the Reign of King Edward VI.
Compared with each other. By EDWARD CARDWELL, D.D., principal of St.
Alban's Hall. Second Edition. 8vo. 8s.

By the same Editor,

HISTORY OF CONFERENCES,

And other PROCEEDINGS connected with the REVISION of the BOOK of COMMON
PRAYER, from the year 1558 to the year 1690. Third Edition. 8vo. 7s. 6d.

DOCUMENTARY ANNALS

Of the REFORMED CHURCH of ENGLAND. Being a Collection of Injunctions,
Declarations, Orders, Articles of Inquiry, &c., from the year 1546 to the
year 1716. With Notes, Historical and Explanatory. 2 vols. 8vo. 18s.

SYNODALIA.

A COLLECTIONS of ARTICLES of RELIGION, CANONS, and PROCEEDINGS of
CONVOCATIONS in the PROVINCE of CANTERBURY, from the year 1547 to the year
1717. With Notes, Historical and Explanatory. 2 vols. 8vo. 19s.

WORKS ON ROMANISM.

THE WORKS OF WILLIAM CHILLINGWORTH, M.A. Containing the Religion of
Protestants a Safe Way to Salvation, &c. 3 vols. 8vo. 1l. 1s. 6d.

MISCELLANEOUS TRACTS ON THE POINTS AT ISSUE BETWEEN THE CHURCHES OF ENGLAND
AND ROME. Selected from Burnet, Wake, Patrick, Stillingfleet, Sherlock,
Tillotson, Clagett, and others. 8vo. 11s.

A RATIONAL ACCOUNT OF THE GROUNDS OF PROTESTANT RELIGION. By EDWARD
STILLINGFLEET, D.D., Dean of St. Paul's, &c. A New Edition. 2 vols. 8vo.
17s.

THE CRITERION; or, Rules by which the True Miracles recorded in the NEW
TESTAMENT are distinguished from the Spurious Miracles of Pagans and
Papists. By JOHN DOUGLAS, D.D., Bishop of Salisbury. Fourth Edition. 8vo.
5s. 6d.

HISTORY OF THE REFORMATION.

THE COMPLETE WORKS OF JOHN STRYPE, M.A. With a General Index. 27 vols. 8vo.
14l. 10s.

THE ANNALS OF THE REFORMATION AND ESTABLISHMENT OF RELIGION, and other
various occurrences in the CHURCH of ENGLAND during Queen Elizabeth's happy
Reign. 7 vols. 8vo. 4l. 4s.

ECCLESIASTICAL MEMORIALS relating chiefly to RELIGION, and the Reformation
of it in the Church of England under King Henry VIII., Edward VI., and
Queen Mary. 6 vols. 8vo. 3l. 3s.

ORIGINES BRITANNICAE; or, the Antiquities of the British Churches. By EDWARD
STILLINGFLEET, D.D. To which is added, an Historical Account of Church
Government. By W. LLOYD, D.D. A New Edition, with Additional Notes. By the
REV. THOMAS P. Pantin, M.A. 2 vols. 8vo. 1l. 1s.

THE CHURCH HISTORY OF BRITAIN to the Year 1848, endeavoured by THOMAS
FULLER, D.D., Prebendary of Sarum. Edited by the REV. J.S. BREWER, M.A. 6
vols. 8vo. 3l. 3s.

THE HISTORY OF THE REFORMATION OF THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND. By GILBERT BURNET,
D.D., late Lord Bishop of Sarum. A New Edition, with a Copious Index. 7
vols. 8vo. 3l. 10s.

FORMULARIES OF FAITH put forth by Authority during the Reign of Henry VIII.
8vo. 7s.

THREE PRIMERS put forth in the Reign of Henry VIII. A New Edition. 8vo. 9s.

SYLLOGE CONFESSIONUM, sub tempus Reformandae Ecclesiae editarum. 8vo. 8s.

CATECHISMUS sive prima institutio disciplinaque pietatis Christianae Latine
explicatae. Authore ALEXANDRO NOWELLO. A New Edition. Edited by the REV. W.
JACOBSON, D.D. 8vo. 5s. 6d.

STANDARD THEOLOGICAL WORKS.

THE WORKS OF THOMAS JACKSON, D.D., sometime President of the Corpus Christi
College, Oxford, and Dean of Peterborough. A New Edition, with a Copious
Index. 12 vols. 8vo. 4l. 16s.

THE WORKS OF RICHARD HOOKER. With an Account of his Life and Death. By
ISAAC WALTON. A New Edition, with Additions. Arranged by the REV. JOHN
KEBLE, M.A., late Fellow of Oriel College, Oxford, Professor of Poetry. 3
vols. 8vo. 1l. 11s. 6d.

THE WORKS OF RICHARD HOOKER. With an Account of his Life and Death. By
ISAAC WALTON. 2 vols. 8vo. A New Edition. 11s.

THE THEOLOGICAL WORKS OF ISAAC BARROW, D.D. 8 vols. 8vo. 3l. 17s. 6d.

A PARAPHRASE AND ANNOTATIONS upon all the BOOKS of the NEW TESTAMENT,
briefly explaining all the difficult Places thereof, by H. HAMMOND, D.D. 4
vols. 8vo. 1l. 10s.

A PARAPHRASE AND ANNOTATIONS on the BOOKS of PSALMS. By H. HAMMOND, D.D. 2
vols. 8vo. 1l. 1s.

THE THEOLOGICAL WORKS OF GEORGE BULL, D.D., sometime Lord Bishop of St.
David's. With his Life, by GEORGE NELSON, Esq. Edited by EDWARD BURTON,
D.D., late Regius Professor of Divinity. New Edition, in 8 vols. 8vo. 2l.
9s.

ARCHBISHOP SHARP'S THEOLOGICAL WORKS. New Edition. 5 vols. 8vo. 1l. 16s.

       *       *       *       *       *

Sold by JOHN HENRY PARKER, Oxford, and 377. Strand, London; and E. GARDNER,
7. Paternoster-row.

       *       *       *       *       *


Printed by THOMAS CLARK SHAW, of No. 8. New Street Square, at No. 5. New
Street Square, in the parish of St. Bride in the City of London; and
published by GEORGE BELL, of No. 186. Fleet Street, in the Parish of St.
Dunstan in the West, in the City of London, Publisher, at No. 186. Fleet
Street aforesaid.--Saturday, January 4. 1851.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Notes and Queries, Number 62, January
4, 1851, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NOTES AND QUERIES, NUMBER ***

***** This file should be named 15638.txt or 15638.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/1/5/6/3/15638/

Produced by The Internet Library of Early Journals; Jon Ingram, Keith
Edkins and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team.


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
