The Project Gutenberg EBook of Notes and Queries, Number 64, January 18,
1851, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Notes and Queries, Number 64, January 18, 1851

Author: Various

Release Date: April 17, 2005 [EBook #15640]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NOTES AND QUERIES, NUMBER ***




Produced by The Internet Library of Early Journals; Jon Ingram, Keith
Edkins and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team.





{33}

NOTES AND QUERIES:

A MEDIUM OF INTER-COMMUNICATION FOR LITERARY MEN, ARTISTS, ANTIQUARIES,
GENEALOGISTS, ETC.

       *       *       *       *       *

"When found, make a note of."--CAPTAIN CUTTLE.

       *       *       *       *       *


No. 64.]
SATURDAY, JANUARY 18, 1851.
[Price, with Index to Vol. II., 9d. Stamped Edition, 10d.

       *       *       *       *       *

CONTENTS.

  NOTES:--                                                   Page
    Authorship of Henry VIII., by Samuel Hickson               33
    The Cavalier's Farewell, by F.H.                           34
    Gray's Elegy, by Henry H. Breen                            35
    The "Nineveh" Monuments and Milton's Nativity Ode
      illustrated from Lucian                                  35
    Minor Notes:--Gaudentia di Lucca--George Wither
      the Poet, a Printer--"Preached as a dying man to dying
      Men"--Authors of Anonymous Works--Umbrellas              36

  QUERIES:--
    Sonnet (query, by Milton) on the Library at Cambridge,
      by C. Howard Kenyon                                      37
    Burying in Church Walls                                    37
    Minor Queries:--Meaning of Venwell or Venville--
      Erasmus and Farel--Early Culture of the Imagination--
      Sir Thomas Bullen's Drinking Horn--Peter
      Sterry--"Words are Men's Daughters," &c.--Robert
      Henryson--Gawyn Douglas--Darby and Joan--
      William Chilcot--Benj. Wheeler's Theological Lectures--
      Sir Alexander Cumming--Cross between a
      Wolf and Hound--Landwade Church, and Moated
      Grange--Dr. Bolton, Archbishop of Cashel--Genealogy
      of the Talbots, &c. &c.                                  38

  REPLIES:--
    Dragons                                                    40
    Origin of the Family Name of Bacon, by ProBa ConScientia   41
    Replies to Minor Queries:--Cockade--Form of Prayer
      for King's Evil--"Aver," Hogs not Pigs--Pilgarlic
      --Collar of Esses--Filthy Gingram--The Life and
      Death of Clancie--"Rab. Surdam"--"Fronte Capillata"
      --Taylor's Holy Living--Portrait of Bishop
      Henchman--Lines attributed to Charles Yorke--
      Rodolph Gualter--"Annoy" used as a Noun--Culprit,
      Origin of the Word--Passage in Bishop Butler
      --Wat the Hare--The Letter Yogh--Did Elizabeth
      visit Bacon in Twickenham Park--Mock-Beggar--
      Cardinal Chalmers--Binsey, God help me!--Midwives
      Licensed--Dr. Timothy Thristcross--History
      of the Bohemian persecution--"Earth has no Rage"
      --Couplet in De Foe--Private Memoirs of Queen
      Elizabeth--Abbot's House at Bucksden--Bab in the
      Bowster--Sir Cloudesley Shovel--Noli me tangere
      --Cad                                                    42

  MISCELLANEOUS:--
    Notes on Books, Sales, Catalogues, &c.                     46
    Notices to Correspondents                                  46
    Advertisements                                             47

       *       *       *       *       *


NOTES.

AUTHORSHIP OF HENRY VIII.

In my last communication on the subject of _Henry VIII._, I referred to
certain characteristic _tricks_ of Fletcher's style of frequent occurrence
in that play, and I now beg leave to furnish you with a few instances. I
wish it, however, to be understood, that I advance these merely as
illustrative specimens selected at random; as there is scarcely a line of
the portions of the play I assume to be Fletcher's but would furnish some
evidence to a diligent student of this writer's style: and that, although I
think each separate instance as strongly characteristic of Fletcher as it
is unlike Shakspeare, it is only in their aggregate number that I insist
upon their importance.

The first instance to which I call attention is the use of the substantive
"one" in a manner which, though not very uncommon, is used by no writer so
frequently as Fletcher. Take the following:--

  "_So_ great ones."--_Woman's Prize_, II. 2.
  "And yet his songs are sad ones."--_Two Noble Kinsmen_, II. 4.

and the title of the play, _The False One_.

Compare with these from _Henry VIII._:--

  "This night he make a supper, and a great one."--Act I. 3.
  "Shrewd ones."--"Lame ones."--"_so_ great ones."--_Ibid._
                  "I had my trial,
  And must needs say a noble one."--Act II. 1.
  "A wife--a true one."--Act III. 1.
  "They are a sweet society of fair ones."--Act I. 4.

Fletcher habitually uses "thousand" without the indefinite article, as in
the following instances:

  "Carried before 'em thousand desolations."--_False One_, II. 9.
  "Offers herself in thousand safeties to you."--_Rollo_, II. 1.
  "This sword shall cut thee into thousand pieces."--_Knight of Malta_, IV.
      2.

In _Henry VIII._ we have in the prologue:

              "Of thousand friends."
  "Cast thousand beams upon me."--Act IV. 2.

The use of the word "else" is peculiar in its position in Fletcher:--

  "'Twere fit I were hang'd else."--_Rule a Wife_, II.
  "I were to blame else."--_Ibid._
  "I've lost me end else."--Act IV.
  "I am wide else."--_Pilgrim_, IV. 1.

In _Henry VIII._, the word occurs in precisely the same position:--

  "Pray God he do! He'll never know himself, else."--Act II. 2.
  "I were malicious, else."--Act IV. 2.

{34} The peculiarly idiomatic expression "I take it" is of frequent
occurrence in Fletcher, as witness the following:--

  "This is no lining for a trench, I take it."--_Rule a Wife_, III.
  "And you have land i' th' Indies, as I take it."--_Ibid._ IV.
  "A fault without forgiveness, as I take it."--_Pilgrim_, IV. 1.
  "In noble emulation (so I take it)."--_Ibid._ IV. 2.

In one scene of _Henry VIII._, Act I. 3., the expression occurs twice: "One
would take it;" "There, I take it."

Of a peculiar manner of introducing a negative condition, one instance from
Fletcher, and one from _Henry VIII._ in reference to the same substantive,
though used in different senses, will suffice:

                  "All noble battles,
  Maintain'd in thirst of honour, not of blood."--_Bonduca_, V. 1.
                  "And those about her
  From her shall read the perfect ways of honour,
  And by those claim their greatness, not by blood."--_Henry VIII._, V. 4.

Of a kind of parenthetical asseveration, a single instance, also, from each
will suffice:

  "My innocent life (I dare maintain it, Sir)."--_Wife for a Month, IV. 1._
  "A woman (I dare say, without vain glory)
  Never yet branded with suspicion."--_Henry VIII., III. 1._

"A great patience," in _Henry VIII._, may be paralleled by "a brave
patience," in _The Two Noble Kinsmen_: and the expression "aim at,"
_occurring at the close of the verse_ (as, by the bye, almost all
Fletcher's peculiarities do) as seen in Act III. 1.,

  "Madam, you wander from the good we aim at,"

is so frequently to be met with in Fletcher, that, having noted four
instances in the _Pilgrim_, three in the _Custom of the Country_, and four
in the _Elder Brother_, I thought I had found more than enough.

Now, Sir, on reading _Henry VIII._, and meeting with each of these
instances, I felt that I remembered "the trick of that voice;" and, without
having at present by me any means for reference, I feel confident that of
the commonest examples not so many can be found among all the rest of the
reputed plays of Shakspeare, as in _Henry VIII._ alone, or rather in those
parts of _Henry VIII._ which I reject as Shakspeare's; while of the more
remarkable, I think I might challenge the production of a single instance.

My original intention in the present paper was merely to call attention to
a few such expressions as the foregoing; but I cannot resist the impulse to
quote one or two parallels of a different character:--

  _Henry VIII._:
  "The dews of heaven fall thick in blessings on her!"--Act IV. 2.

  Fletcher:
  "The dew of sleep fall gently on you, sweet one!"--_Elder Brother_, IV.
      3.
  "Blessings from heaven in thousand showers fall on ye!"--_Rollo_, II. 3.
  "And all the plagues they can inflict, I wish it,
  Fall thick upon me!"--_Knight of Malta_, III. 2.

  _Henry VIII._:
                  "To-day he puts forth
  The tender leaves of hope, to-morrow blossoms."--Act III. 2.

  Fletcher:
  "My long-since-blasted hopes shoot out in blossoms."--_Rollo_, II. 3.

These instances, of course, prove nothing; yet they are worth the noting.
If, however, I were called upon to produce two passages from the whole of
Fletcher's writings most strikingly characteristic of his style, and not
more in expression than in thought, I should fix upon the third scene of
the first act of _Henry VIII._, and the soliloquy of Wolsey, Beginning--

  "Farewell, a long farewell to all my greatness!"

In conclusion, allow me to remark, that I am quite content to have been
anticipated by MR. SPEDDING in this discovery (if discovery you and your
readers will allow it to be), for the satisfaction I am thereby assured of
in the concurrence of so acute a critic as himself, and of a poet so true
as the poet-laureate.

SAMUEL HICKSON.

Dec. 10. 1850.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE CAVALIER'S FAREWELL.

The following song is extracted from the MS. Diary of the Rev. John Adamson
(afterwards Rector of Burton Coggles, Lincolnshire) commencing in 1658. Can
any of your readers point out who was the author?--

  "THE CAVALIER'S FAREWELL TO HIS MISTRESS BEING CALLED TO THE WARRS."

                  1.

  "Ffair Ffidelia tempt no more,
  I may no more thy deity adore
  Nor offer to thy shrine,
  I serve one more divine
  And farr more great y{^n} you:
    I must goe,
    Lest the foe
  Gaine the cause and win the day.
  Let's march bravely on
  Charge ym in the Van
  Our Cause God's is,
  Though their odds is
    Ten to one.

  {35}

                  2.

  "Tempt no more, I may not yeeld
    Although thine eyes
    A Kingdome may surprize:
    Leave off thy wanton toiles
    The high borne Prince of Wales
  Is mounted in the field,
    Where the Royall Gentry flocke.
      Though alone
      Nobly borne
    Of a ne're decaying Stocke,
    Cavaleers be bold
    Bravely hold your hold,
    He that loyters
    Is by Traytors
      Bought and sold.

                  3.

  "One Kisse more and yn farewell
      Oh no, no more,
      I prethee giue me ore.
    Why cloudest thou thy beames,
    I see by these extreames,
  A Woman's Heaven or Hell.
    Pray the King may haue his owne,
      And the Queen
      May be seen
    With her babes on England's Throne.
    Rally up your Men,
    One shall vanquish ten,
    Victory we
    Come to try thee
      Once agen.

Query: Who was the author of the above?

F.H.

       *       *       *       *       *

GRAY'S ELEGY.

J.F.M. (Vol. i., p. 101.) remarks, "I would venture to throw out a hint,
that an edition of this _Elegy_, exhibiting all the known translations,
arranged in double columns, might be made a noble monument to the memory of
Gray." It has been asserted that there is scarcely a thought in this
_Elegy_ that Gray has not borrowed from some writer, ancient or modern and
if this be true, I would take the liberty of adding a hint to that of
J.F.M., namely, that the proposed edition should contain a _third_ column,
exhibiting all the known plagiarisms in this famous _Elegy_. To begin with
the first line--

  "The curfew tolls the knell of parting day."

Lord Byron, in his notes to the third canto of _Don Juan_, says that this
was adopted from the following passage in Dante's _Purgatory_, canto viii.:

  ---- "si ode squilla di lontano
  Che paja 'l giorno pianger che si muore."

And it is worthy of notice that this passage corresponds with the first
line of Giannini's translation of the Elegy, as quoted by J.F.M.:--

  "Piange la squilla 'l giorno, che si muore."

I must add, however, that long before Lord Byron thought of writing _Don
Juan_, Mr. Cary, in his excellent translation of the Italian poet, had
noticed this plagiarism in Gray; and what is more, had shown that the
principal thought, the "giorno che si muore," was borrowed by Dante from
Statius's

  "Jam moriente die."

HENRY H. BREEN.

St. Lucia, West Indies, Nov. 1850.

    [The preceding communication was accompanied by several others, and by
    the following gratifying letter, which we print as a fresh proof that
    our paper is fulfilling the object for which it was instituted, namely,
    that of promoting literary intercourse between men of letters
    throughout the world and that it is as favourably received by our
    fellow countrymen abroad, as it has been by those who are enabled to
    receive it wet from the press:--

    "Owing to the difficulty of procuring the early numbers of 'NOTES AND
    QUERIES,' especially at this distance from Britain, I have been
    compelled to wait for its publication in a collected form. I am now in
    possession of the first volume, and beg leave to offer you a few Notes
    which have occurred to me on perusing its contents. I am fully sensible
    of the disadvantage of corresponding with you from so remote a corner
    of the globe, and am prepared to find some of my remarks anticipated by
    other correspondents nearer home; but having deeply suffered from the
    literary isolation consequent upon a residence of twenty-one years in
    this country, I shall gladly submit to any disadvantage which shall not
    involve a total exclusion from the means of inter-communication so
    opportunely afforded by your excellent periodical.

    "HENRY H. BREEN."]

       *       *       *       *       *

THE NINEVEH MONUMENTS AND MILTON'S NATIVITY ODE ILLUSTRATED FROM LUCIAN.

Layard in his _Nineveh_, vol. ii., p. 471., in his description of "the
sacred emblems carried by the priests," says, they are principally the
fruit or cone of the pine.

    "... and the square utensil which, as I have already remarked, appears
    to have been of embossed or engraved metal, or of metal carved to
    represent wicker work, or sometimes actually of wicker work."

He adds, that M. Lajard "has shown the connection between the cone of the
cypress and the worship of Venus in the religious systems of the East;"
that it has been suggested that "the square vessel held the holy water,"
that, "however this may be, it is evident from their constant occurrence on
Assyrian monuments, that they were very important objects in religious
ceremonies. Any attempt to explain their use and their typical {36}
meaning, can at present be little better than ingenious speculation."

There is a passage in Lucian _De Dea Syria_, Sec. 13., which may serve to
elucidate this feature in the Nineveh marbles. He is referring to the
temple of Hierapolis and a ceremony which Deucalion was said to have
introduced, as a memorial of the great flood and the escaping of the
waters:

    [Greek: "Dis ekastou eteos ek thalasses ydor es ton neon apikneetai;
    pherousi de ouk irees mounon alla pasa Syrie kai Arabie, kai perethen
    tou Euphreteo, polloi anthropoi es thalassan erchontai, kai pantes ydor
    pherousai, ta, prota men en toi neoi ekchrousi,"] &c.

"Twice every year water is brought from the sea to the temple. Not only the
priests, but" all Syria and Arabia, "and many from the country beyond the
Euphrates come to the sea, and all bring away water, which they first pour
out in the temple," and then into a chasm which Lucian had previously
explained had suddenly opened and swallowed up the flood of waters which
had threatened to destroy the world. Tyndale, in his recent book on
Sardinia, refers to this passage in support of a similar utensil appearing
in the Sarde paganism.

It may be interesting to refer to another passage in the _Dea Syria_, in
which Lucian is describing the splendour of the temple of Hierapolis; he
says that the deities themselves are really present:--

    [Greek: "Kai Theoi de karta autoisi emphanees; idroei gar de on para
    sphisi ta xoata,"]

When the very images sweat, and he adds, are moved and utter oracles. It is
probable Milton had this in recollection when, in his noble _Nativity Ode_,
he sings of the approach of the true Deity, at whose coming

  "... the chill marble seems to sweat,
  While each peculiar power foregoes his wonted seat."

L.I.M.

       *       *       *       *       *

MINOR NOTES.

_Gaudentio di Lucca._--Sir James Mackinstosh, in his _Dissertation on the
Progress of Ethical Philosophy_, adverts to the belief that Bishop Berkeley
was the author of _Gaudentio di Lucca_, but without adopting it.

    "A romance," he says, "of which a journey to an Utopia, in the centre
    of Africa, forms the chief part, called _The Adventures of Signor
    Gaudentio di Lucca_, has been commonly ascribed to him; probably on no
    other ground than its union of pleasing invention with benevolence and
    elegance."--_Works_, vol. i. p. 132. ed. 1846.

Sir J. Mackintosh, like most other modern writers who mention the book,
seems not to have been aware of the decisive denial of this report, by
Bishop Berkeley's son, inserted in the third volume of Kippis's _Biographia
Britannica_.

L.

_George Wither, the Poet, a Printer_ (Vol. ii., p. 390.).--In addition to
DR. RIMBAULT'S extract from Wither's _Britain's Remembrancer_, showing that
he printed (or rather composed) every sheet thereof with his own hand, I
find, in a note to Mr. R.A. Willmott's volume of the _Lives of the English
Sacred Poets_, in that interesting one of George Wither, the following
corroboration of this singular labour of his: the poem, independent of the
address to the King and the praemonition, consisting of between nine and ten
thousand lines, many of which, I doubt not, were the production of his
brain while he stood at the printing-case. A MS. note of Mr. Park's, in one
of the many volumes of Wither which I possess, confirms me in this opinion.

    "Ben Jonson, in _Time Vindicated_, has satirized the custom, then very
    prevalent among the pamphleteers of the day, of providing themselves
    with a portable press, which they moved from one hiding-place to
    another with great facility. He insinuates that Chronomastix, under
    whom he intended to represent Wither, employed one of these presses.
    Thus, upon the entrance of the Mutes,--

  "_Fame._ What are this pair?

  _Eyes._ The ragged rascals?

  _Fame._ Yes.

  _Eyes._ These rogues; you'd think them rogues,
      But they are friends;
      One is his printer in disguise, and keeps
      His press in a hollow tree."

From this extract it should seem that Wither not only composed the poem at
case (the printer's phrase), but worked it off at press with his own hands.

J.M.G.

Worcester.

"_Preached as a dying Man to dying Men_" (Vol. i., p. 415.; Vol. ii., p.
28.).--Some time ago there appeared in this series (Vol. i., p. 415.) a
question respecting a pulpit-phrase which has occasionally been used by
preachers, delivering their messages as "dying men to dying men." This was
rightly traced (Vol. ii., p. 28.) to a couplet of the celebrated Richard
Baxter, who, in one of his latest works, speaking of his ministerial
exercises, says,--

  "I preach'd as never sure to preach again,
  And as a dying man to dying men."

The passage occurs in one of his "Poetical Fragments," entitled "Love
breathing Thanks and Praise."

This small volume of devotional verse is further entitled, _Heart
Imployment with _GOD_ and Itself; the concordant Discord of a Broken-healed
Heart; Sorrowing, Rejoicing, Fearing, Hoping, Dying, Living: published for
the Use of the Afflicted_. The Introduction is dated "London: at the Door
of Eternity, Aug. 7. 1681."

He yet survived ten years, in the course of which he was twice imprisoned
and fined under {37} the profligate and persecuting reigns of Charles II.
and James II. for his zeal and piety.

J.M.G.

Hallamshire.

_Authors of Anonymous Works._--On the title-page of the first volume of my
copy of _The Monthly Intelligencer_ for 1728 and 1729, which was published
anonymously, is written in MS., "By the Rev. Mr. Kimber."

This book belonged to, and is marked with the autograph of D. Hughes, 1730;
but the MS. note was written by another hand.

P.H.F.

_Umbrellas_ (Vol. ii., pp. 491. 523., &c.).--I have talked with an old lady
who remembered the first umbrella used in Oxford, and with another who
described the surprise elicited by the first in Birmingham. An aunt of
mine, born 1754, could not remember when the house was without one, though
in her youth they were little used. May not the word umbrella have been
applied to various sorts of _impluvia_? Swift, in his "Description of a
City Shower," says:--

  "Now in contiguous drops the flood comes down,
  Threatening with deluge this devoted town.
  To shops in crowds the dangled females fly,
  Pretend to cheapen goods, but nothing buy.
  The Templar spruce, while every spout's abroach,
  Stays till 'tis fair, yet seems to call a coach.
  The tuck'd-up sempstress walks with hasty strides,
  While _streams run down her oil'd umbrella's sides_."

          _Tatler_, No. 238. Oct. 17. 1710.

This might be applied to an oiled cape, but I think the passage quoted by
MR. CORNEY (Vol. ii., p. 523.) signifies something carried over the head.

By the way, the "Description of a City Shower" contains one of the latest
examples of _ache_ as a dissyllable:--

  "A coming shower your shooting corns presage,
  Old _aches_ throb, your hollow tooth will rage."

H.B.C.

U.U. Club, Jan.

       *       *       *       *       *


QUERIES.

SONNET (QUERY, BY MILTON) ON THE LIBRARY AT CAMBRIDGE.

In a _Collection of Recente and Witty Pieces by several eminente hands_,
London, printed by W.S. for Simon Waterfou, 1628, p. 109., is the following
sonnet, far the best thing in the book:--

  "ON THE LIBRARIE AT CAMBRIDGE.

  "In that great maze of books I sighed and said,--
    It is a grave-yard, and each tome a tombe;
    Shrouded in hempen rags, behold the dead,
    Coffined and ranged in crypts of dismal gloom,
    Food for the worm and redolent of mold,
    Traced with brief epitaph in tarnished gold--
    Ah, golden lettered hope!--ah, dolorous doom!
    Yet mid the common death, where all is cold,
    And mildewed pride in desolation dwells,
    A few great immortalities of old
    Stand brightly forth--not tombes but living shrines,
    Where from high sainte or martyr virtue wells,
    Which on the living yet work miracles,
  Spreading a relic wealth richer than golden mines.

  "J.M. 1627."

Attached to it, it will be seen, are the initials J.M. and the date 1627.
Is it possible that this may be an early and neglected sonnet of Milton?
and yet, could Milton have seriously perpetrated the pun in the second
line?

C. HOWARD KENYON.

       *       *       *       *       *

BURYING IN CHURCH WALLS.

(Vol. ii., p. 513.)

MR. W. DURRANT COOPER has mentioned some instances of burials in the walls
of churches; it is not however clear whether in these the monument, or
coffin lid, is in the inside or the outside of the wall.

Stone coffin lids, with and without effigies, are very frequently found
placed under low arches hollowed in the wall in the _interior_ of the
church: tombs placed in the _exterior_ of the wall are much less common;
and the singularity of their position, leads one to look for some peculiar
reason for it. Tradition often accounts for it by such stories as those
mentioned by MR. COOPER. Such is the case with a handsome canopied tomb (I
think with an effigy) on the south side of the choir of the cathedral of
Lichfield, where we are told that the person interred died under censure of
the church. Other instances which I have noticed, are, at--

Little Casterton, Rutland.--Tomb, with an effigy, apparently of an
ecclesiastic, but much decayed, of the 13th century, in the south wall of
the nave.

Warbleton, Sussex.--Circular arch over a sort of altar tomb, no effigy
remains. Probably of the earlier half of the 13th century. In the south
wall of chancel.

Basildon, Berks.--A very elegant canopy. There was once an effigy, now
destroyed, with the tomb, and a door made under the canopy! About 1300. In
the south wall of the chancel.

Bridewater, Somerset.--Two arches, with foliations, over effigies between
them, a door leading, down to a crypt. The effigies are too much decayed to
enable a decided opinion to be formed as to sex or station. In the north
wall of north transept. Date probably between 1270 and 1300.

St. Stephen's, Vienna.--A fine tomb, with canopy and effigy, by the side of
the south door of the nave. Probably of the 14th century.

I have been disposed to think that the most {38} probable motive which may
have led to tombs and effigies, sometimes of an elaborate and costly
character, being placed in such exposed positions, was the desire of
obtaining the prayers of the passers-by for the soul of the deceased. It is
worth notice, that the usage seems in England to have been very much
limited to the 13th, or early part of the 14th century. I should, however,
be very glad if any one who may possess information bearing on the subject
would communicate it.

N.

       *       *       *       *       *

MINOR QUERIES.

_Meaning of Venwell or Venville._--Will you allow me to make the following
Query as to the custom of "Ven_well_" or "Ven_ville_"? Risdon, in his
_Survey of Devon_, states it to be a right enjoyed by the tenants of land
adjoining to Dartmoor of pasturage and cutting turf within the limits of
the forest. He calls it "Fenfield, antiently Fengfield," but makes no
allusion to the etymology of the word, or to the origin of the custom. Some
of your correspondents can most probably afford information on both these
points.

R.E.G.

4. Lidlington Place, Harrington Square.

_Erasmus and Farel._--In D'Aubigne's _History of the Reformation_, ii. 149.
(White's Translation), it is said that Erasmus "instead of Farellus would
often write _Fallicus_, thus designating one of the frankest men of his day
with the epithets of cheat and deceiver."

But Mr. Dyer, in his late _Life of Calvin_, spells the word _Phallicus_,
and supposes it to allude to some amorous propensities of the reformer.

Which of these authorities are we to believe?

J.C.R.

_Early Culture of the Imagination._--I have somewhere read, possibly in an
article of the _Quarterly Review_, the opinion very strikingly expressed,
and attributed to Mr. Lockhart, that children's imaginative faculty ought
to be more prominently cultivated than their reason; and, on this ground,
the reading of _Fairy Tales_, _The Arabian Nights_, &c. was recommended for
children. Will any one kindly refer me to this passage? And, as it is
wanted for an immediate purpose, an early insertion and reply to this query
will oblige me.

ALFRED GATTY.

_Sir Thomas Bullen's Drinking Horn._--Does any one know whether the
drinking horn which belonged to Sir Thomas Bullen still exists? By the will
it was directed to be kept as a heir-loom.

P.

_Peter Sterry._--In the title-page and address to the reader of Peter
Sterry's _Appearance of God to Man in the Gospel_, &c., and other his
posthumous discourses, 4to. 1710, mention is made of certain miscellaneous
tracts, letters, &c., taken from original MSS. left by him, whose
publication was made to depend on the success of the above work. Sterry was
spoken of by Baxter in complimentary terms, notwithstanding his peculiar
sentiments and manner of writing; and in a MS. note on the title-page of
Sterry's _Discourse of the Freedom of the Will_, folio, 1675, he is said to
have been "chaplain first to Lord Brooke, afterwards to Oliver Cromwell."
If any of your readers can say whether the "miscellaneous tracts," &c.,
were ever published, and, if not, where the MSS. are likely to be found,
with any further information concerning him, which is desired by many
persons deeply interested in his history and writings, it will confer a
favour on me.

Lord Clarendon notices a work of Sir Harry Vane (who was an associate of
Sterry's), entitled _Love to God_, &c.[1] I should also be glad to know
where that work may be found.

[Footnote 1:  [The title of Vane's work is, _Of the Love of God, and Union
with God_, 4to. 1657. It is not to be found in the Catalogues of the
British Museum, Bodleian, Sion College, D. Williams' library, or London
Institution.]]

J.P.

_"Words are Men's Daughters," &c._--

  "Words are men's daughters, but God's sons are things."

Where does this verse occur? Who was the author? Can any parallel passages
be adduced?

T.J.

_Robert Henryson--Gawyn Douglas._--Complete uniform editions of the poems
of these celebrated authors, accompanied with biographical notices and
illustrative notes, being a desideratum in Scottish literature, permit me
to ask, through the medium of your entertaining and useful "NOTES AND
QUERIES," if such publications be in contemplation by any of the various
literary societies, or individual member thereof, in this kingdom; and if
so, are they likely to appear soon?

T.G.S.

Edinburgh, Dec. 31. 1850.

_Darby and Joan._--Can any of your readers refer me to a copy of the ballad
of Darby and Joan? There is a tradition in the parish of Helaugh, near
Tadcaster, that they were inhabitants of that village, and that the ballad
is the composition of some poet who was a constant visitor to the Duke of
Wharton, when living in the manor house.

H.

_William Chilcot._--As I am about to reprint an excellent little work,
entitled, _Practical Treatise concerning Evil Thoughts_, by William
Chilcot, can any of your readers give me any account of his life? The work
was originally, I believe, printed in Exeter, 1698, or thereabouts, as I
find it in a {39} catalogue of "Books printed for and sold by Philip
Bishop, at the Golden Bible over against the Guildhall in Exon, 1702." It
was reprinted, "London, 1734," for "Edward Score, over against the
Guildhall in Exeter." And again (_privately_), a few years ago. Of the
_first_ edition I have never seen a copy, although I am not aware that it
is particularly scarce; of the second, copies are not uncommon.

If any of your readers could communicate any information regarding the
author, I should feel much obliged.

RICHARD HOOPER.

University Club, Suffolk Street.

_Benj. Wheeler's Theological Lectures._--In the year 1819 was published
Vol. i. of the _Theological Lectures_ of Benjamin Wheeler, late Regius
Professor of Divinity in Oxford. In the preface, it is said--

    "The first of the three volumes, in which the Lectures will be
    comprised, is offered to the public as an experiment of its disposition
    towards the completion of the work; the favourable entertainment of
    which will determine the editor's purpose of sending the two remaining
    volumes after it with all convenient expedition."

Can any of your readers inform me whether the MSS. of the two unpublished
volumes are preserved, and where they are to be found?

W.A.

_Sir Alexander Cumming._--A Nova Scotia baronet, living in 1730, of
Coulter, called by some, "King of the Cherokees." He married Elizabeth, one
of the last coheiresses of the ancient family of _Dennis_, of Pucclechurch,
co. Gloucester. Where may be found any account of his connection with the
Cherokees; also any thing of his death or descendants?

S.S.

_Cross between a Wolf and Hound._--May I call the attention of such of your
correspondents as are versed in natural history, to an account that I have
lately received from a gentleman of intelligence, education, and undoubted
veracity. I am informed by him that he has lately seen, in the south of
France, a she-wolf that had been caught at a very early age, and brought up
on very friendly terms with a kennel of hounds. The animal had come to its
maturity when my friend observed it and its good understanding with its
canine neighbours had never been interrupted. So far from it, indeed, that
the she-wolf has had and reared a litter of pups by one of the dogs, and
does duty in hunting as well as any dog of the pack. Buffon states that he
had found that an experiment continued for a considerable time, to bring
about the like result between the like animals, never showed the least
appearance of success. The circumstances which he mentions as to the
capture and habits of the she-wolf are nearly the same as I have above
described, and from the failure of the experiments, Buffon doubted the
possibility of any sexual conjunction between these kinds of animals. Some
of your correspondents may be able to say how far subsequent observation
confirms Buffon's conclusion.

T----N.

Athenaeum.

_Landwade Church, and Moated Grange._--About five miles from the town of
Newmarket, the metropolis of the racing world, and from Eening, a village
in the county of Suffolk, there is a secluded hamlet called "Landwade,"
which contains a "_moated grange_," and a church to all appearances very
ancient.

The church contains several antique tombs, together with curious monumental
brasses, nearly all, I believe I may say all, to the memory of the Cotton
family; amongst whom, judging from the inscriptions, were crusaders and
knights of mighty emprize, and other worthies. There is only one grave and
gravestone in the churchyard, and that is to an old domestic servant of the
said Cotton family.

Can any of your readers or antiquaries give any information touching the
church, the ancient tombs and effigies, the Cotton family, the grange, &c.

When a boy I used to look upon the old house and the quaint little church
with a deal of awe.

It is very distressing, but I cannot find any published account of this
ancient and remarkable place and its antiquities.

JONATHAN OLDBUCK, JUN.

_Dr. Bolton, Archbishop of Cashel._--Any information respecting the family,
the arms, or descent of Doctor Theophilus Bolton, Archbishop of Cashel, in
the early part of the last century, will oblige.

X.X.

Dec. 31. 1850.

_Genealogy of the Talbots._--In some of the printed genealogies of the
Talbots, to whose ancestry you have lately made several references, descent
is claimed for that noble family from the emperors of the East, through
Anne, wife of Henry I., King of France, and daughter of Iaroslaf, or
Georges, King of Russia, whose father, the great Vladimir, married Anne,
sister of Basilius, Emperor of Byzantium.

Now that excellent authority, _L'Art de Verifier les Dates_, gives the date
of 988 for the conquest of the Chersonese by Vladimir and his marriage with
the emperor's sister, and that of 978 for the birth of Iaroslaf, who must,
therefore, be a son of one of the many concubines mentioned in that work as
preceding his wife Anne.

Can the rare honour of descent from the Eastern emperors be substantiated
by the correspondents who appear to take interest in the pedigree of this
house?

I may add, that _L'Art de Verifier les Dates_, though seldom incorrect,
seems to err when it asserts Enguerherde, wife of the above-named Iaroslaf,
to be {40} the daughter of Olaus, or Olaf, "King of _Norway_, and not of
_Sweden_," as the _Heims Kringla_ of Snorro Sturleson gives a long account
of the betrothal of Ingigerd or Enguerherde, daughter of Olaf Ericson, King
of _Sweden_, to St. Olaf, King of _Norway_, and of her subsequent marriage
to Iaroslaf, or Jarislief, King of Russia.

Can you say where the best pedigree of the early kings of Sweden is to be
found?

E.H.Y.

_Robertson of Muirtown_ (Vol. ii., p. 253.).--In thanking A.R.X. for his
reference to a pedigree of Robertson of Muirtown, I should be glad if he
can explain to me the connection with that branch of _George_ Robertson, of
St. Anne's, Soho, who lived in the middle of the last century, and married
Elizabeth Love, of Ormsby, co. Norfolk. He was uncle, I believe, to Mr.
Robertson Barclay (who assumed the last name), of Keavil, co. Fife, and
nearly related, though I cannot say in what degree, to William Robertson,
of Richmond, whose daughter Isabella married David Dundas, created a
baronet by George III., and one of whose granddaughters was married to Sir
James Moncreiff, and another to Dr. Sumner, the present Archbishop of
Canterbury. This William Robertson, I believe sold the Muirtown property.
Is he one of those mentioned in the work to which A.R.X. has referred me?
and was he the _first_ cousin to Robertson the historian? Perhaps A.R.X.
can also say whether the arms properly borne by the Muirtown branch are
those given to them in Burke's _Armory_, viz. Gu. three crescents
interlaced or, between as many wolves' heads erased arg. armed and langued
az., all within a bordure of the third, charged with eight mullets of the
first. The late Rev. Love Robertson, Prebendary of Hereford (son of the
above George Robertson), was accustomed to use: Gu. three wolves' heads
erased arg., armed and langued az., which are the arms of the original
stock of Strowan. As I am entitled to quarter his coat, I should be glad to
know the correct blazonry.

C.R.M.

_Booty's Case._--Where can an authentic report be found of "Booty's case,"
and before what judge was it tried? The writer would also be obliged with
an account of the result of the case, and a note of the summing up, as far
as it is to be ascertained. The case is said to be well known in the navy.

DEMONOLOGIST.

    [We have seen it stated that this case was tried in the Court of King's
    Bench about the year 1687 or 1688.]

_Did St. Paul's Clock ever strike Thirteen._--There is a very popular
tradition that a soldier, who was taxed with having fallen asleep at
midnight, whilst on guard, managed to escape the severe punishment annexed
to so flagrant a dereliction of duty, by positively averring, as evidence
of his having been "wide awake," that he had heard the clock of St. Paul's
Cathedral strike _thirteen_ at the very time at which he was charged with
having indulged in forbidden slumbers. The tradition of course adds, indeed
this is its point, that, upon inquiry, it was found that the famous horary
monitor of London city had, "for that night only," actually treated those
whose ears were open, with the, till then, unheard of phenomenon of
"thirteen to the dozen." Can any of your readers state how this story
originated, or whether it really has any foundation in fact?

HENRY CAMPKIN.

Jan. 9. 1851.

       *       *       *       *       *


REPLIES.

DRAGONS.

(Vol. ii., p. 517.)

The subject on which R.S. jun. writes in No. 61. is one of so much interest
in many points of view, that I hope that a few notices relating to it may
not be considered unworthy of insertion in "NOTES AND QUERIES."

In Murray's _Handbook of Northern Italy_, mention is made, in the account
of the church of St. Maria delle Grazie, near Mantua, of a stuffed lizard,
crocodile, or other reptile, which is preserved suspended in the church.
This is said to have been killed in the adjacent swamps, about the year
1406. It is stated to be six or seven feet long.

Eight or ten years ago, I saw an animal of the same order, and about the
same size, hanging from the roof of the cathedral of Abbeville, in Picardy.
I then took it for a small crocodile, but I cannot say positively that it
was one. I am not sure whether it still remains in the cathedral. I do not
know whether any legend exists respecting this specimen, or whether it owed
its distinguished post to its being deemed an appropriate ornament.

At the west door of the cathedral of Cracow are hanging some bones, said to
have belonged to the dragon which inhabited the cave at the foot of the
rock (the Wawel) on which the cathedral and the royal castle stand; and was
destroyed by Krak, the founder of the city. I regret that my want of
osteological science prevented me from ascertaining to what animal these
bones had belonged. I thought them the bones of some small species of
whale.

I hope that some competent observer may inform us of what animals these and
the lindwurm at Bruenn are the remains.

It has struck me as possible that the real history of these crocodiles or
alligators, if they are such, may be, that they were brought home by
crusaders as specimens of dragons, just as Henry the Lion, Duke of
Brunswick, brought from the Holy Land the antelope's horn which had been
palmed upon {41} him as a specimen of a griffin's claw, and which may still
be seen in the cathedral of that city. That they should afterwards be
fitted with appropriate legends, is not surprising.

Some years since, when walking down the valley of St. Nicholas, on the
south side of the Valais, my guide, a native of the valley, pointed out to
me a wood on the mountain side, and told me that therein dwelt great
serpents, about 24 feet long, which carried off lambs from the pastures. He
had, however, never seen one of these monsters, but had only seen those who
had, and I failed in procuring any testimony of a more decisive character.
My guide, however, affirmed that their existence was generally believed in
the valley.

N.

       *       *       *       *       *

ORIGIN OF THE FAMILY NAME OF BACON.

(Vol. ii., p. 247.)

The Query proposed by NOCAB evidently possesses some interest, having
already elicited two or three replies. I trust, therefore, I shall be
excused for submitting yet another solution, which appears to me more
satisfactory, if not _conclusive_. The answers to such questions are for
the most part merely ingenious _conjectures_; but these to be of weight,
should be supported by antiquarian learning. They claim perhaps more regard
when they seem to elucidate collateral difficulties; but are of most value
when _authenticated_ by independent evidence, especially the evidence of
_documents_ or of _facts_. Fortunately, in the case before us, all these
desiderata are supplied.

Old Richard Verstegan, famous for Saxon lore and archaeological research,
explains it thus:--

    "Bacon, _of the Beechen tree_, anciently called BUCON; and, whereas
    swinesflesh is now called by the name of BACON, it grew only at the
    first unto such as were fatted with BUCON or _beechmast_."--Chap. ix.
    p. 299.

There is one agreeable feature in this explanation, viz., that it professes
somewhat naturally to account for the mysterious relation between the flesh
of the unclean animal, and the name of a very ancient and honourable
family. But its chief value is to be found in the singular _authentication_
of it which I accidentally discovered in Collins's _Baronetage_. In the
very ample and particular account there given of the pedigree of the
Premier Baronet, it will be seen that the _first_ man who assumed the
surname of Bacon, was one William (temp. Rich. I.), a great grandson of the
Grimbaldus, who came over with the Conqueror and settled in Norfolk. Of
course there was _some_ reason for his taking that name; and though Collins
makes no comment on it, he does in fact unconsciously supply that reason
(elucidated by Verstegan) by happily noting of this _sole_ individual, that
he _bore for his arms_, "argent, _a beech tree_ proper!" Thank you, Mr.
Collins! thank you kindly, Richard Verstegan! You are both excellent and
honest men. You cannot have been in collusion. You have not, until _now_,
even reaped the merit of truthfulness and accuracy, which you silently
reflect upon each other. The family name, Bacon, then, undoubtedly
signifies "of the beechen tree," and is therefore of the same class with
many others such as ash, beech, &c., latinized in ancient records by De
Fraxino, De Fago, &c.

The motto of the Somersetshire Bacons, noticed by NOCAB, when read as
written, is supposed to be in the _ablative_ case; when transposed, the
evident ellipse may be supplied _ad libitum_. From Grimbaldus, downwards,
it does not appear that these _beechen_ men ever signalized themselves by
_deeds of arms_, the favourite boast of heralds and genealogists. Nor
indeed could we expect them to have "hearts of _oak_." But several have
rendered the name illustrious by their contributions to literature,
science, and the fine arts. Its _appropriateness_, therefore, must be
apology for the motto; which, like most others, is by no means too modest
and unassuming.

Duly blushing, I subscribe myself, yours,

PROBA CONSCIENTIA.

P.S. The pedigree of the Norfolk Bacons is one of the most _perfect_ in the
Herald's College. Any of your readers fond of genealogy might find himself
repaid in seeking further information regarding the _particular coat of
arms_ above referred to, and might throw still more light on the subject.

In Vol. ii., p. 247., your correspondent, NOCAB, quotes (without reference)
the remark _en passant_ of a previous correspondent "that the word _bacon_
had the obsolete signification of 'dried wood.'" I have searched in vain
for this allusion in your preceding Numbers.[2] The information is too
curious, however, to be lost sight of. The _Saxon_ word _bacon_ is, without
doubt, simply and purely _beechen_--pertaining to, or relating to the beech
tree.

It is probable enough, therefore, that the word _has_ borne the
signification of "dried wood." But it is very desirable to know on what
authority the assertion rests. Will your correspondent refer us to the
book? Or can any of your learned readers say how, where, and when _bacon_
has signified "dried wood?"

The subject is well worth the bestowal of some pains upon its elucidation;
for the meaning and derivation of the word _bacon_, both as a substantive
noun and as a proper name, have been frequently discussed by etymologists
and philologists for the last 300 years; and yet, apparently, without any
satisfactory determination of the question. The family is ancient, and has
been highly distinguished {42} in literature, and science and art. The
pedigree is one of the most perfect on record. But Lord Bacon himself, "who
knew everything" else, knew nothing of his own name.

[Footnote 2: See vol. ii., p. 138.]

SAMOHT NEHCEEB.

_Meaning of Bacon_ (Vol. ii., pp. 138. 247.).--As, on reconsideration, I
perceive there is some doubt as to the meaning of the word _bacons_ in
Foulques Fitzwarin, I send you the passage in which it occurs, that your
readers may form their own opinion concerning it:--

    "Pus apres, furent les portes de le chastel, qe treblees erent, ars e
    espris par feu que fust illumee de bacons e de grece."

I must in addition add, that I was mistaken as to the meaning of
_hosebaunde_, which was possibly only the French mode of writing husband.

B.W.

       *       *       *       *       *

REPLIES TO MINOR QUERIES.

_Cockade_ (Vol. iii., p.7.).--The black cockade worn by the officers of the
army and navy is the relic of a custom which probably dated from the
Hanoverian succession; the black cockade being the Hanoverian badge, the
white that of the Stuart. In _Waverley_, when the hero for the first time
meets the Baron Bradwardine, he is accosted by the latter thus:--

    "And so ye have mounted the cockade? Right, right; though I could have
    wished the colour different."

APODLIKTES.

Erechtheum Club.

_Form of Prayer for King's Evil._--Mr. Lathbury, in his _Convocation_, p.
361., states that this form appeared in Prayer-book of 1709. This was not,
however, its earliest appearance, as it is found in a quarto one bearing
date 1707, printed by the Queen's printers, Charles Bill and the Executrix
of Thomas Newcomb. It occurs immediately before the Articles, and is simply
entitled, "At the healing."

N.E.R. (a Subscriber.)

    [Prayers at the Healing may be found in Sparrow's _Collection of
    Articles, Injunctions, Canons, &c._, p. 223. 4to. 1661. Consult also,
    Nichols's _Anecdotes of Bowyer_, p. 573; _The Antiquary's Portfolio_,
    vol. ii. p. 179.; Aubrey's _Letters_, vol. i. p. 250.; Nichols's
    _Literary Anecdotes of the Eighteenth Century_, vol. ii. pp. 495-505.;
    _Christian Observer_ (1831), p. 119.]

"_Aver._"--_Hogs not Pigs_ (Vol. ii., p. 461.).--In Wensleydale, North
Yorkshire, the thin oat-cake (common in many mountainous parts of England)
is called "_aver-cake_," or "_haver-cake_." The Loyal Dales Volunteers were
surnamed "The Haver-cake Lads." Previously to seeing the Note of G.M., I
imagined the "aver" to be derived from "avena" (Lat.), "avoine" (Fr.). What
_dictionary_ defines "aver" (French) as denoting the _annual_ stock or
produce of a farm?

D.2.

E.M., in his Note on J. MN.'s remarks on hogs, mentions that the term
_aver_, _averium_, is still used in Guernsey. Is not this word closely
connected with the _Eber_ of the German Jaegers?

E.H.K.

_Pilgarlic_ (Vol. ii., p. 393.).--Sir John Denham spelt this word
_Peel_-garlick--it may be found in one of his _Directions to a
Painter_--but the passage in which it appears is scarcely fit for
quotation. The George of the couplet referred to was Albemarle, who had
been wounded during the fight in the part of his person which Hudibras
alludes to when he tells us that one wound there

                  "hurts honour more
  Than twenty wounds laid on before."

Denham seems to compare Albemarle's wounded buttocks to a peeled onion! The
resemblance (to Denham) would account for his use of the word in this
instance; but it is pretty evident that the word was not coined by him. We
must, at least, give him credit for a witty application of it.

Carlisle.

_Collar of Esses_ (Vol. ii., p. 393.).--With reference to the suggestion in
No. 54., to give examples of effigies bearing the collar, I beg to mention
those at Northleigh Church, Oxon. The following extract is from the _Guide
to Neighbourhood of Oxford_:--

    "In Northleigh church, beneath an arch between the chancel and a
    chapel, is a fine perpendicular tomb, with two recumbent figures in
    alabaster,--a knight in armour, with the Collar of SS; the lady with a
    rich turban and reticulated head-dress, and also with the Collar of SS.
    The figures are Lord and Lady Wilmot; and attached to the monument are
    two small figures of angels holding shields of arms; on one is a spread
    eagle, on the other three cockle shells, with an engrailed band."

JASPER.

_Filthy Gingram_ (Vol. ii., p. 467.).--The name "toad-flax" is evidently
put by mistake, in Owen's _Dictionary_, for "toad-stool," a fungus, the
_Agaricus virosus_ of Linnaeus. The common name in the North of England is
"poisonous toad-stool." It is a virulent poison. See * 248. 407, 408., in
Sowerby's _English Fungi_.

D.2.

Toad-flax, the yellow _Antirrhinum_, certainly does stink.

C.B.

_The Life and Death of Clancie, by E.S._ (Vol. ii., p. 375.).--There is a
copy in the Bodleian Library.

J.O.H.

"_Rab. Surdam_" (Vol. ii., p. 493.).--EDINENSIS. gives the above as the
inscription on a tomb-stone, and requests an explanation. It is very
probable that the stone-cutter made a mistake, and cut "Rab. Surdam"
instead of "Rap. Surum," which would be a contraction for "Rapax Suorum,"
alluding to Death or the Grave. It seems {43} impossible to extract a
meaning, from "Rab. Surdam" by any stretch of Latinity.

G.F.G.

Edinburgh.

_"Fronte Capillata," &c._ (Vol. iii., p. 8.).--The hexameter cited vol.
iii., p. 8., and rightly interpreted by E.H.A., is taken (with the slight
alteration of _est_ for the original _es_) from "Occasio: Drama, P. Joannis
David, Soc. Jesu Sacerd. Antv. MDCV.," appended to that writer's _Occasio,
Arrepta, Neglecta_; in which the same implied moral is expressed, with this
variation:

  "Fronte capillitium gerit, ast glabrum occiput illi."

G.A.S.

This verse is alluded to by Lord Bacon in his Essay on Delays:

    "Occasion (as it is in the common verse) turneth a bald noddle after
    she hath presented her locks in front, and no hold taken; or, at least,
    turneth the handle of the bottle first to be received, and after the
    belly, which is hard to clasp."

L.

_Taylor's Holy Living._--I should be obliged by any of your readers kindly
informing me whether there is any and what foundation for the statement in
the _Morning Chronicle_ of Dec. 27th last, that that excellent work, _Holy
Living_, which I have always understood to be Bishop Taylor's, "is now
_known_" (so says a constant reader) "not to be the production of that
great prelate, but to have been written by a Spanish friar. On this account
it is not included in the works of Bishop Taylor, lately printed at the
Oxford University Press." I do not possess the Oxford edition here
mentioned, so cannot test the accuracy of the assertion in the last
sentence but if the first part of the above extract be correct, it is, to
say the least, singular that Mr. Bohn, in his recent edition of the work,
should be entirely silent on the subject. I should like to know who and
what is this "Spanish friar?" has he not "a local habitation and a name?"

W.R.M.

    [A fraud was practised on the memory of Bishop Jeremy Taylor soon after
    his death, in ascribing to him a work entitled _Contemplations of the
    State of Man in this Life, and in that which is to come_, and which
    Archdeacon Churton, in _A Letter to Joshua Watson, Esq._, has shown,
    with great acuteness and learning, was in reality a compilation from a
    work written by a Spanish Jesuit, named John Eusebius Nieremberg. The
    treatise _Holy Living and Dying_ is unquestionably Bishop Taylor's, and
    forms Vol. III. of his works, now in the course of publication under
    the editorship the Rev. Charles Page Eden.]

_Portrait of Bishop Henchman_ (Vol. iii., p. 8.).--Your correspondent Y.Y.
is informed, that there is in the collection of the Earl of Clarendon, at
the Grove, a full-length portrait of Bishop Henchman, by Sir Peter Lely.
This picture, doubtless, belonged to the Chancellor Clarendon. Lord
Clarendon, in his _History of the Rebellion_, b. xiii. (vol. vi. p. 540.
ed. Oxford, 1826), describes the share which Dr. Henchman, then a
prebendary of Salisbury, had in facilitating the escape of Charles II.,
after the battle of Worcester. Dr. Henchman conducted the king to a place
called Heale, near Salisbury, then belonging to Serjeant Hyde, afterwards
made chief justice of the King's Bench by his cousin the chancellor.

L.

_Lines attributed to Charles Yorke_ (Vol. ii., p. 7.).--The editor of
Bishop Warburton's _Literary Remains_ is informed, that the lines
transcribed by him, "Stript to the naked soul," &c., have been printed
lately in a work entitled _The Sussex Garland_, published by James Taylor,
formerly an eminent bookseller at Brighton, but now removed to Newick,
Sussex. The lines appear to have been written on Mrs. Grace Butler, who
died at Rowdel, in Sussex, in the 86th year of her age, by Alexander Pope,
but, according to Taylor, not inserted in any edition of Pope's works. The
lines will be found in the 9th and 10th Nos. of _The Sussex Garland_, p.
285., under "Warminghurst."

W.S.

Richmond, Surrey.

_Rodolph Gualter_ (Vol. iii., p. 8.).--

    "Rodolph Gualter naquit a Zurich en 1519, et y mourut en 1586. Il fit
    ses etudes dans sa ville natale, a Lausanne, a Marbourg, et en
    Angleterre. Rodolph, son fils, mort en 1577, avait fait de tres bonnes
    etudes a Geneve, en Allemagne, et a l'universite d'Oxford."

The above I have extracted from the account of him given in the _Biographie
Universelle_, which refers as authority to "J.B. Huldrici Gualtherus
redivivus seu de vita et morte Rod. Gualtheri oratio, 1723," in the
Biblioth. Bremens., viii. p. 635. In this memoir I find it stated:

    "quod Gualtherus noster una cum Nicolao Partrigio Anglo in Angliam iter
    suscepit. Quatuor illud mensibus et aliquot diebus finitum est,
    inciditque in annum seculi trigesimum."

But neither in this, nor in the account of his life by Melchior Adam, nor
in that contained in Rose's _Biographical Dictionary_, can I find any trace
of the opinion that he was a Scotchman; and as Huldricus was himself a
professor in the Athenaeum at Zurich, he would probably be correctly
informed on the subject.

TYRO.

Dublin.

_"Annoy" used as a Noun_ (Vol. ii., p. 139.).--Your correspondent CH. will
find three good instances of the use of the word _annoy_ as a noun (in
addition to the lines cited by him from Wordsworth) by Queen Elizabeth,
George Gascoigne, and Mr. Keble:

  "The doubt of future woes exiles my present joy,
  And wit me warns to shun such snares as threaten mine _annoy_."
          See Ellis' _Specimens of Early English Poets_, ii. p. 136.

{44}

  "And as they more esteeme that merth
    Than dread the night's _annoy_,
  So must we deeme our dayes on erth
    But hell to heauenly joye."
          _Good morrowe_; see Farr's _Select Poetry, &c._, p. 38.

  "High heaven, in mercy to your sad _annoy_,
  Still greets you with glad tidings of immortal joy."
          _Christian year_, "Christmas Day."

H.G.T.

_Culprit, Origin of the Word_ (Vol. ii., p. 475.).--See Stephen's
_Commentaries on the Laws of England_, iv. 408. note (_p_).

C.H. COOPER.

Cambridge, Dec. 14. 1850.

Passage in Bishop Butler (Vol. ii., p. 464.).--The "peculiar term" referred
to by Bishop Butler is evidently the verb "to Blackguard." It is for this
reason that he inserts the condition, "when the person it respects is
present." We may abuse, revile, vituperate an absent person; but we can
only "blackguard" a man when he is present. The word "blackguard" is not
recognised by Johnson. Richardson inserts it as a noun, but not as a verb.

L.

_Wat the Hare_ (Vol. ii., p. 315.).--Your correspondent K. asks what other
instances there are of _Wat_ as the name of a _hare_? I know of one. On the
market-house at Watton the spandrils of an Elizabethan doorway have been
placed, taken from some old building in the town. This has a _hare_ on one
side, a _ton_ on the other,--a rebus of the town name Watton.

H.H.

_The Letter Yogh_ (Vol. ii., p. 492.).--_Yerl_ for _Earl_, and _yirth_ for
_earth_, &c., are, to this day, quite common in Scottish orthoepy among
many of the lower classes.

G.F.G.

_Did Elizabeth visit Bacon at Twickenham Park?_ (Vol. ii., pp. 408.
468.).--To this question your correspondent J.I.D. replies with a quotation
from Nicols (edition of 1823), who dates her visit in 1592 or 1593. I had
looked into Nichols's first edition (1788) without finding the subject
mentioned; and I am now inclined to think, as at first, that it is
altogether a misapprehension. Sir Francis Bacon, in _His Apologie in
Certaine Imputations concerning the late Earl of Essex, written to the
Right Hon. his very Good Lord the Earle of Devonshire, Lord-lieutenant of
Ireland_. Lond. 1604, in 16mo. pp. 74., says, at p. 32.:--

    "A little before that time, being about the middle of Michaelmas terme,
    her Maiestie had a purpose to dine at my Lodge at Twickna[m] Parke, at
    which time I had (though I professe not to be a poet) prepared a
    Sonnet, directly tending and alluding to draw on her Maiesties
    reconciliation to my Lord," &c. &c.

This I conceive to have reference to an intention of Elizabeth, rather than
to an accomplished fact.

At p. 14. of this work, Bacon says he had sold Twickenham park some time
ago to Reynold Nicholas. I consider Lysons to have been the first author
who mentions the subject and at _Environs_, vol. iii. (1795), p. 565.,
there is a note: "From the information of the Earl of Orford." And I
therefore conclude it to have been some mistake of Lord Orford's.

YOUR FORMER CORRESPONDENT.

Dec. 27. 1850.

_Mock-Beggar_ (Vol. ii., p. 478.).--The origin of this term was discussed
in the _Gentleman's Magazine_ in 1840. Two localities so called were cited
(vol. xiv. p. 114.), with the opinion of Sir William Burrell, that some
buildings so named at Brighton had been "a mendicant priory." Another
writer (p. 331.) suggested that the term was applied to country houses when
deserted or unoccupied; or to rocks, as one near Bakewell, where the
semblance of a ham might attract a wayfarer from the high road, only to
deceive his expectations of relief.

J.G.N.

_Cardinal Chalmers_ (Vol. ii., p. 493.).--The insignia mentioned by your
correspondent S.P., in No. 60, are very common among Roman Catholic
ecclesiastics on the Continent, and are frequently to be seen on tombs. The
hat and tassels are appropriated to Notaries Apostolic of the Holy Roman
See, as well as to Cardinals and the dignity having some privileges
attached to it, it is sought after by ecclesiastics of standing.

HYDE CLARKE.

_Binsey, God help me!_ (Vol. i., p. 247.).--I remember the _same_ words
respecting the village of Binsey, half-way between Oxford and Godstow.
During the winter and spring months it was nearly all under water, like
Port Meadow, on the opposite side of the river: so if you asked a Binseyite
in winter where he came from, the answer was as above; if in summer,
"Binsey, where else?"

CHAS. PASLAM.

_Midwives Licensed_ (Vol. ii., p. 408.).--On this subject I would refer
S.P.H.T. to Burn's _Ecclesiastical Law_, under the head of "Midwives,"
which is all nearly that can be ascertained at present on that head. Among
other things it says in the oath taken of them,--

    "You shall not in anywise use or exercise any manner of witchcraft,
    charm, or sorcery, invocation, or other prayers, than may stand with
    God's law and the king's."

M.C.R.

_Dr. Timothy Thruscross_ (Vol. ii., p. 441.)--There are frequent notices of
Dr. Thristcross, or Thruscross, in Dr. Worthington's correspondence. (See
Vol. i. of same, edited for the Chetham Society. Index, voc.
"Thristcross.") Dr. Worthington observes, p. 219., "I did love to talk with
worthy Mr. Thirstcross, who knew Mr. Ferrar and Little Gidding."

JAS. CROSSLEY.

{45}

_History of Bohemian Persecution_ (Vol. ii., p. 358.).--See note to
Worthington's _Diary and Correspondence_, vol. i. p. 154., for a notice of
this work of Comenius, and his other publications relating to the Bohemian
church.

JAS. CROSSLEY.

"_Earth has no Rage_" (Vol. iii., p. 23.).--

  "Earth has no rage like love to hatred turn'd,
  And hell no fury like a woman scorn'd."

These are the concluding lines of Act III. of Congreve's _Mourning Bride_.
They stand, however, thus, in the edition to which I have referred:

  "Heaven has no rage like love to hatred turn'd,
  Nor hell a fury like a woman scorn'd."

JAS. CROSSLEY.

Manchester, 11. Jan. 1851.

_Couplet in De Foe_ (vol. ii., p. 310.).

  "Restraint from ill is freedom to the wise,
  And good men wicked liberties despise."

The couplet is altered from the following couplet in De Foe's _True Born
Englishman_:--

  "Restraint from ill is freedom to the wise,
  But Englishmen do all restraint despise."

See collection of his writings, vol. i. p. 20., edit. 1703.

JAS. CROSSLEY.

_Private memoirs of Queen Elizabeth_ (Vol. iii., p. 23.).--"_The Secret
History of the most renowned Queen Elizabeth and the Earl of Essex_. In two
parts. By a person of Quality. Cologne: printed for Will with the Wisp, at
the Sign of the Moon in the Ecliptick. M.D.CLXXXI."--is the title of a
small volume in my possession, containing some curious hints corroborative
of the first part of Mr. Ives' MS. note mentioned in "NOTES AND QUERIES"
(Vol. iii. p. 11.). If this be the book to which your correspondent,
J.E.C., refers in your last number, he is perfectly welcome to the perusal
of my copy.

WILLIAM J.D. ROPER.

Vane House, Hampstead, Jan. 18. 1851.

_Abbot's House at Buckden_ (Vol. ii., p. 494.).--MR. C.H. COOPER asks,
"will M.C.R. explain his allusion to the Abbot's House at Buckden?" Being
only an occasional visitor there, I can give no other explanation than it
is universally called so by the inhabitants of the place. The house is very
low-roomed, and only one story high; it has been compoed over, so that
there is nothing very ancient in the look of the brickwork, excepting the
chimneys, which form a cluster in the centre. The door I mentioned,
evidently is an ancient one. A good deal of iron about it, and in square
compartments.

When I was there recently, I was informed of a discovery in a public-house
_formerly_ called the Lion--now, the _Lamb_. A gentleman in the place came
into possession of some pamphlets respecting Buckden; in one of which it is
said, that this house was originally the hostel where the visitors and
domestics used to go when the bishop had not room at the palace for them,
and that it would be found there was an "Agnus Dei" in the ceiling of one
of the lower rooms. The consequence was, search was made for it: and what
seemed a plain boss, where two beams crossed each other, on being cleansed
and scraped, turned out to be as the book said, and which I saw only last
week. The clergyman has the pamphlet above alluded to. Whether this, and
the abbot's house, belonged to the palace I cannot say. The road now runs
between them.

The "Agnus Dei" is seven or eight inches in diameter; the lamb, &c., in the
centre, and the words "Ecce Agnus Dei" in a circular border round it.

This is all the information I can now give.

M.C.R.

_Bab in the Bowster_ (Vol. ii., p. 518.).--In your valuable periodical your
correspondent "MAC." makes an observation regarding "Bab in the Bowster,"
which is not correct so far as regards this part of the country at least.
He says "it is now danced with a handkerchief instead of a cushion,"
whereas the fact is I have never seen it danced but with a pillow, as its
name "Bab in the Bowster (Anglice bolster)" would seem to denote. The
manner of dancing it is, the company having formed itself into a circle,
one, either male or female, goes into the centre, carrying a pillow, and
dances round the circle with a sort of shuffling quick step, while the
others sing,--

  "Wha learn'd you to dance, you to dance, you to dance,
  Wha learn'd you to dance, Bab in the Bowster brawly?"

To which the dancer replies:

  "Mother learn'd me to dance, me to dance, me to dance,
  Mother learn'd me to dance, Bab in the Bowster brawly."

He or she then lays down the pillow before one of the opposite sex, when
they both kneel on it and kiss; the person to whom the pillow has been
presented going over the above again, &c, till the company tires.

I may add that the above is a favourite dance here, particularly among
young people, and at children's parties in particular it is never omitted.
If your correspondent wishes the air to which it is danced, I shall be glad
to send it to him.

GLENIFFER.

Paisley.

_Sir Cloudesley Shovel_ (Vol. iii., p. 23.).--"H.J." will find a "Note" in
Cunningham's _Lives of Eminent Englishmen_ (vol. iv. p. 47.), of the
circumstances attendant upon Sir Cloudesley's death, as preserved in the
family of the Earl of Romney, detailing the fact of his murder, and the
mode of {46} its discovery. I shall be happy to supply your correspondent
with an extract, if he has not the above work at hand.

J.B. COLMAR.

_Noli me tangere_ (Vol. ii., p. 153.).--In addition to the painters already
enumerated as having treated this subject, the artist Le Sueur, commonly
called the Raphael of France, may be mentioned. In his picture, the figures
are somewhat above half nature.

W.J. MERCER.

_Cad_ (Vol. i., p.250.).--Jamieson derives this word, or rather its Scotch
diminutive, "cadie," from the French, _cadet_. I have heard it fancifully
traced to the Latin "cauda."

W.J. MERCER.

       *       *       *       *       *


MISCELLANEOUS.

NOTES ON BOOKS, SALES, CATALOGUES, ETC.

Mr. Disraeli's work, entitled _Commentaries on the Life and Reign of
Charles the First_, has been pronounced by one of the great critical
authorities of our own days, "the most important work" on the subject that
modern times have produced. Those who differ from Mr. Disraeli's view of
the character of the king and the part he played in the great drama of his
age may, in some degree, dissent from this eulogy. None will, however, deny
that the work, looking to its anecdotical character, and the great use made
in it of sources of information hitherto unemployed, is one of the most
amusing as well as interesting histories of that eventful period. While
those who share with the editor, Mr. B. Disraeli, and many reflecting men,
the opinion that in the great questions which are now agitating the public
mind, history is only repeating itself; and that the "chapters _on the
Genius of the Papacy; on the Critical Position of our earlier Protestant
Sovereigns with regard to their Roman Catholic Subjects_, from the
consequences of the oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy; _on the Study of
Polemical Divinity prevalent at the commencement of the Seventeenth
Century_, and kindred themes, are, in fact, the history of the events, the
thoughts, the passions, and the perplexities of the present agitated
epoch," will agree that the republication of the work at this moment is at
once opportune and acceptable.

We have received a copy of Dr. Rimbault's _Musical Illustrations of Bishop
Percy's Reliques of Ancient English Poetry: a Collection of Old Ballad
Tunes, chiefly from rare MSS. and Early printed Books, deciphered from the
obsolete Notation, and harmonized and arranged according to Modern Usage_.
If any thing could add to the extensive popularity which Percy's work has
continued to enjoy ever since its first appearance, (for have we not
Washbourne's handsome reprint of it, published within this year or two?) it
must be the quaint and racy melodies, the "old antique strains," to which
these fine old ballads were anciently sung. Dr. Rimbault, who combines
great musical acquirements with a rich store of antiquarian knowledge, in
giving us these, has produced a work as carefully executed as it is
original in its character; one which can only be exceeded in interest by
the _Musical Illustrations of Shakspeare's Plays_, which we are glad to see
promised from the same competent authority.

We are at length enabled to announce that _The Treatise on Equivocation_,
so often referred to in our columns, is about to be published under the
editorship of Mr. Jardine, whose attention has long been directed to it
from its connexion with the Gunpowder Conspiracy; and whose intimate
acquaintance with that subject, as shown in his _Criminal Trials_, is a
sufficient pledge for his ability to do justice to this curious and
important historical document.

We regret to learn, from the _Catalogue of the Museum of Mediaeval Art,
collected by the late Mr. Cottingham_, which has been very carefully drawn
up, with a preface by Mr. Shaw, that, if the Family are disappointed in
disposing of the Museum to the Government, or by private contract, it will
be submitted to Public Sale in April next, and a Collection of the most
ample and varied examples of Mediaeval Architecture ever brought together,
which has been formed at a vast outlay both of labour and cost, will be
dispersed, and be thereby rendered inaccessible and valueless to the
architectural student.

The Rev. W.H. Kelke has published some _Notices of Sepulchral Monuments in
English Churches_, a work which is not intended for professed antiquaries,
but for that large class of persons who, although they have some taste for
the subject of which it treats, have neither time nor inclination to enter
deeply into it, and as will, we have no doubt, be very acceptable to those
to whom it is immediately addressed.

We regret to announce the death of one of our earliest and most valued
contributors, Professor T.S. Davies of Woolwich. "Probably few men in
England," says the _Athenaeum_, "were better versed in the methods of the
old geometers, or possessed a more critical appreciation of their relative
merits." His death is a great loss to geometrical science, as well as to a
large circle of friends.

We have received the following Catalogues:--Stacey and Co. (19. Southampton
Street, Strand) Catalogue of Books chiefly relating to History, Commerce,
and Legislation; G. Bumstead's (205. High Holborn) Catalogue of Interesting
and Rare Books on the Occult Sciences, America, Asia, &c.

       *       *       *       *       *

NOTICES TO CORRESPONDENTS.

_To meet the wishes of many friends, and to avoid the inconvenience arising
from the diversity of prices in our Monthly Parts, we propose in future to
publish a fifth, or Supplementary Number, every Month in which there are
only four Saturdays. By this arrangement our Monthly Parts will be of the
uniform price of One shilling and Three pence, with the exception of those
for January and July, which will include the Index of the preceding
half-year at the price of One shilling and Ninepence each. Thus the yearly
subscription to _NOTES AND QUERIES_, either in unstamped Weekly Numbers or
Monthly Parts, will be _SIXTEEN SHILLINGS_. The subscription for the
Stamped Edition, with which Gentlemen may be supplied regularly by giving
their Orders direct to the Publisher, _MR. GEORGE BELL, 186. Fleet Street_
(accompanied by a Post Office Order), is One pound and Fourpence for a
twelve-month, or Ten shillings and Two pence for six months_.

REPLIED RECEIVED.--_It has been suggested to us that we should here
acknowledge all communications received by us. We would willingly do so,
but that, from their number, such acknowledgment would necessarily occupy
far more space than our readers would like to see so employed. But we
propose in future to notice all replies that have reached us; by which
means those who _have replied_ will be aware that their communications have
come to hand, and those who are _about to {47} reply_ will be enabled to
judge whether or not they have been anticipated. The following have reached
us between the publication of our Number on Saturday last and Wednesday.
Our future Lists will comprise those received in the week ending on the
Wednesday previous to publication._

_Lynch Law--Curse of Scotland--Butcher Willie--Midwives--Steam
Navigation--Frozen Horn--Collar of SS.--Holland Land--Umbrellas--Passage in
Tennyson--Sword of the Conqueror--Couplet in Defoe--Thruscross--Earth has
no rage--Private Memoirs of Elizabeth--By-the-bye--Swearing by Swans--Sir
Cloudesley Shovel--Chapel--Difformis--Grasson--Savez--Land Holland--Peter
Wilkins--Passage in St. Mark--Cockade and True Blue--Mocker--Mythology of
the Stars--Cauking--Ten Children at a Birth--Swans._

W.H.B. _will find, on referring to Chappell's _National English Airs_, that
the words of _RULE BRITANNIA_ were written by Thomson (in the _Masque of
Alfred_), and the music composed by Dr. Arne._

TAPETIA.--_Miss Linwood's _Salvator Mundi, after Carlo Dolce_, is, we
believe, in one of her Majesty's private apartments at Windsor Castle. We
do not insert _TAPETIA'S_ letter, because we by no means agree with the
writer in his views of the property of the Crown. The Queen behaved most
kindly and liberally on the occasion of the late _Exhibition of Mediaeval
Art_: but that is a very different thing from calling for a transfer of the
Holbein or Da Vinci drawings to some public museum._

R.W.E. _will find the custom of "_Going a Gooding_," which appears to
prevail on St. Thomas's Day in many parts of the country, described in
Brand's _Popular Antiquities_ (ed. Ellis)._

S.G. (C.C.C.C.) _is thanked for his friendly Note. Had we been aware of the
facts with which he has now furnished us, of course, the communication to
which he refers would not have been inserted in its present shape._

VOLUME THE SECOND OF NOTES AND QUERIES.--_We this day issue the INDEX to
our Second Volume. Copies of which Volume, strongly bound in cloth, may now
be had price_ 9s. 6d.

_We hope next week, by the publication of a Double Number, under our new
arrangement, to clear off a large accumulation of correspondence._

NOTES AND QUERIES _may be procured, by order, of all Booksellers and
newsvenders. It is published at noon on Friday, so that our country
Subscribers ought not to experience any difficulty in procuring it
regularly. Many of the country Booksellers, &c., are probably, not yet
aware of this arrangement, which will enable them to receive _NOTES AND
QUERIES_ in their Saturday parcels._

_All communications for the Editor of _NOTES AND QUERIES_ should be
addressed to the care of_ MR. BELL, No. 186. Fleet Street.

       *       *       *       *       *


MUSICAL ILLUSTRATIONS of PERCY'S RELIQUES of ANCIENT POETRY. A Collection
of Old Ballad Tunes, &c., chiefly from rare Manuscript and early printed
Books, with some Account of the Ballads. By EDWARD F. RIMBAULT, LL.D. In
cloth, 12s.

London: CRAMER AND CO., 201. Regent Street.

       *       *       *       *       *

TO BOOKBUYERS.

This day is published, PART I., for January, of C. SKEET'S MONTHLY
CATALOGUE of NEW and SECOND-HAND BOOKS, marked at unusually low prices, for
Cash. To be had gratis, and post free, upon application at 21. King William
Street, Charing Cross.

       *       *       *       *       *

Pocket Editions, neatly and uniformly printed, royal 32mo.

GEORGE HERBERT.--The Temple, Sacred Poems, and Private Ejaculations. Very
neatly printed, 32mo., cloth, 2s. 6d.; morocco, 5s.; morocco extra, by
HAYDAY, at various prices.

A PRIEST TO THE TEMPLE; or, THE COUNTRY PARSON, his Character and Rule of
Holy Life. Cloth 2s.; morocco, 4s. 6d.

JOHN SELDEN.--TABLE TALK, being the Discourses of JOHN SELDEN, or is Sense
of various Matters of Weight and High Consequence, relating especially to
Religion and the State. Royal 32mo. cloth, 2s.; morocco. 4s. 6d.; morocco
extra, by Hayday, at various prices.

GEORGE BELL, 186. Fleet Street.

       *       *       *       *       *

Committee for the Repair of the

TOMB OF GEOFFREY CHAUCER.

  JOHN BRUCE, Esq., Treas. S.A.
  J. PAYNE COLLIER, Esq., V.P.S.A.
  PETER CUNNINGHAM, Esq., F.S.A.
  THOMAS W. KING, Esq., F.S.A.
  SIR FREDERICK MADDEN, K.H.
  JOHN GOUGH NICHOLS, Esq., F.S.A.
  HENRY SHAW, Esq., F.S.A.
  SAMUEL SHEPHERD, Esq., F.S.A.
  WILLIAM J. THOMS, Esq., F.S.A.

The Tomb of Geoffrey Chaucer in Westminster Abbey is fast mouldering into
irretrievable decay. A sum of One Hundred Pounds will effect a perfect
repair. The Committee have not thought it right to fix any limit to the
subscription; they themselves, have opened the list with a contribution
from each of them of Five Shillings; but they will be ready to receive any
amount, more or less, which those who value poetry and honour Chaucer may
be kind enough to remit to them.

Subscriptions have been received from the Earls of Carlisle, Ellesmere, and
Shaftesbury, Viscounts Strangford and Mahon, Pres. Soc. Antiq., The Lords
Braybrooke and Londesborough, and many other noblemen and gentlemen.

Subscriptions are received by all the members of the Committee, and at the
Union Bank, Pall Mall East. Post-office orders may be made payable at the
Charing Cross Office, to William Richard Drake, Esq., the Treasurer, 46.
Parliament Street, or William J. Thomas, Esq., Hon Sec., 25. Holy-Well
Street, Millbank.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE GENTLEMAN'S MAGAZINE for DECEMBER contains the following articles:--1.
An Evening with Voltaire, by Mr. R.N. Neville; 2. The New Cratylus; 3. Old
Ballads from the Bright Collection; 4. The Abbe de Saint-Pierre; 5 Norman
Crosses (with Engravings); 6. Duchess of Queensberry and Gay; 7. Dryden and
Flecknoe; 8. Legends of the Monastic Orders; 9. T. Lodge and his Works; 10.
Birth of the Old Pretender; 11. History of Winchelsea (with Engravings);
12. Autobiography of Mr. Britton; 13. The recent Papal Bull historically
considered: with Notes of the Month. Review of New Publications, Literary
and Antiquarian Intelligence, Historical Chronicle, and OBITUARY, including
Memoirs of Lord Rancliffe, Lord Stanley of Alderley, Lord Leigh, Chief
Justice Doherty, Rev. Dr. Thackeray, John Jardine, Esq., Thomas Hodgson,
Esq., F.S.A., Newcastle, &c., &c. Price 2s. 6d.

"The Gentleman's Magazine has been revived with a degree of spirit and
talent which promises the best assurance of its former
popularity."--_Taunton Courier._

"The additional talent which the new year has brought to its assistance,
will give an impetus advantageous to the circulation of The Gentleman's,
and, high as it previously stood, will advance it still more in the
estimation of those who are enabled to appreciate its worth."--_Poole
Herald._

The Magazine for January, 1851, will contain a portrait of the late Thomas
Amyot, Esq., Treasurer of the Society of Antiquaries.

NICHOLS AND SON, 25. Parliament Street.

       *       *       *       *       *

Price 1d., by Post 2d., or 5s. per Hundred for Distribution.

WESTMINSTER AND DR. WISEMAN; or, FACTS _v._ FICTION. By WILLIAM PAGE WOOD,
Esq., M.P., Q.C. Reprinted from _The Times_, with an Advertisement on the
subject of the WESTMINSTER SPIRITUAL AID FUND, and especially on the Duty
and Justice of applying the Revenues of the suspended Stalls of the Abbey
for the adequate Endowment of the District Churches in the immediate
neighbourhood.

Second Edition, with an Appendix.

London: GEORGE BELL, 186. Fleet Street; MESSRS. RIVINGTONS, St. Paul's
Church-yard, and Waterloo Place; and THOMAS HATCHARD, 187. Piccadilly; and
_by Order_ of all Booksellers.

{48}

MR. MURRAY'S LIST OF NEW BOOKS.

I.

THE QUARTERLY REVIEW, No. CLXXV. 8vo. 6s.

          CONTENTS:
  1. MR. GORDON CUMMING'S HUNTING IN AFRICA.
  2. SOCRATES.
  3. THE IGNATIAN EPISTLES.
  4. MYSTERIES OF CEYLON.
  5. CHEAP SUGAR AND SLAVE TRADE.
  6. BRITISH MUSEUM.
  7. GENERAL RADOWITZ ON GERMANY.
  8. LIFE OF SOUTHEY.
  9. THE MINISTRY AND THE POPE.
  10. SIR F. HEAD ON THE DEFENCELESS STATE OF GREAT BRITAIN.

*** The INDEX to Vols. 61. to 79. inclusive (forming Vol. 80.) is now
ready.

II.

THE SCHOOLS OF PAINTING IN ITALY From the German of KUGLER. Edited by SIR
CHARLES EASTLAKE, P.R.A. A New and Revised Edition. Illustrated with 100
Woodcuts, from the Works of the Old Masters. 2 vols. Post 8vo. 24s.

III.

WHAT OUGHT LANDLORDS AND FARMERS TO DO? By PH. PUSEY, Esq., M.P. Reprinted
from the Royal Agricultural Journal. With Map. 8vo. 1s.

IV.

PALACES OF NINIVEH AND PERSEPOLIS RESTORED. An Essay on Ancient Assyrian
and Persian Architecture. By JAMES FERGUSSON. With 45 Woodcuts. 8vo. 16s.

V.

MILITARY EVENTS IN ITALY, 1848-9. Translated from the German. By LORD
ELLESMERE. Map. Post 8vo. 9s.

VI.

THE LEXINGTON PAPERS. Extracted from the Official and Private
Correspondence of LORD LEXINGTON, while Minister at Vienna, 1694-98. Edited
by the Hon. H. MANNERS SUTTON. 8vo 14s.

VII.

"THE FORTY-FIVE." Being the Narrative of the Rebellion in Scotland of 1745,
By LORD MAHON. Post 8vo. 8s. (Extracted from his History of England)

VIII.

LAW AND PRACTICE OF NAVAL COURTS MARTIAL. By WILLIAM HICKMAN, R.N. 8vo 10s.
6d.

IX.

MANUAL OF ELEMENTARY GEOLOGY; or the ANCIENT CHANGES of the EARTH and its
INHABITANTS. By SIR CHARLES LYELL. Third Edition, revised. With 500
Woodcuts. 8vo. 12s.

X.

ENGLAND AS IT IS: POLITICAL, SOCIAL, and INDUSTRIAL, in the middle of the
19th CENTURY. By WM. JOHNSTON. 2 vols. Post 8vo. 18s.

XI.

CHRISTIANITY IN CEYLON. Its Introduction and Progress under the Portuguese,
Dutch, British, and American Missions. By SIR J. EMERSON TENNENT. Woodcuts.
8vo. 14s.

XII.

PROGRESS OF THE NATION, in its various Social and Economical Relations. By
G.R. Porter. Third Edition, corrected. 8vo. 24s.

XIII.

BYRON'S WORKS. IN ONE VOLUME. Cheaper Edition. Portrait. Royal 8vo. 12s.

XIV.

BYRON'S LIFE. IN ONE VOLUME. Cheaper Edition. Portraits. Royal 8vo. 12s.

XV.

CRABBE'S LIFE AND POEMS. IN ONE VOLUME. Cheaper Edition. Portrait. Royal
8vo. 10s. 6d.

XVI.

CROKER'S BOSWELL'S JOHNSON. IN ONE VOLUME. Cheaper Edition. Portraits.
Royal 8vo. 15s.

XVII.

SPECIMENS OF THE TABLE-TALK OF THE LATE S.T. COLERIDGE. Third Edition.
Portrait. Fcap. 8vo. 6s.

XVIII.

CONSOLATIONS IN TRAVEL. BY SIR HUMPHRY DAVY, Fifth Edition. Woodcuts. Fcap.
8vo. 6s.

XIX.

SALMONIA: or, DAYS OF FLY-FISHING. By SIR HUMPHRY DAVY. Fourth Edition,.
Woodcuts. Fcap. 8vo 6s.

[_Next Week_]

LAVENGRO: THE SCHOLAR,--GIPSY,--and PRIEST. BY GEORGE BORROW, Author of
"THE BIBLE IN SPAIN." With Portrait. 3 vols. Post 8vo.

XXI.

A VOYAGE TO THE MAURITIUS. By Author of "PADDIANA," Post 8vo.

XXII.

MURRAY'S MODERN COOKERY, based on the Work of MRS. RUNDELL; but entirely
revised, and brought down to the present time, by A LADY. Woodcuts. Post
8vo. 6s.

XXIII.

MEMOIRS OF SIR THOMAS FOWELL BUXTON, BART. With Selections from his
Correspondence. BY HIS SON. A New Library Edition. Portrait. 8vo. 16s.

       *       *       *       *       *


Printed by THOMAS CLARK SHAW, Of No. 8. New Street Square, at No 5. New
Street Square, in the Parish of St. Bride, in the City of London; and
published by GEORGE BELL, of No. 186. Fleet Street, in the Parish of St.
Dunstan in the West, in the City of London, Publisher, at No. 186. Fleet
Street aforesaid,--Saturday, January 18. 1851.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Notes and Queries, Number 64, January
18, 1851, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NOTES AND QUERIES, NUMBER ***

***** This file should be named 15640.txt or 15640.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/1/5/6/4/15640/

Produced by The Internet Library of Early Journals; Jon Ingram, Keith
Edkins and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team.


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
