The Project Gutenberg EBook of New Latin Grammar, by Charles E. Bennett

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: New Latin Grammar

Author: Charles E. Bennett

Release Date: April 20, 2005 [EBook #15665]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NEW LATIN GRAMMAR ***




Produced by Nathan Gibson, Keith Edkins and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team.






[Transcriber's Note: The original text has many, many accents
denoting pronunciation, which cannot be shown in this plain
ASCII character set. Please refer to the Unicode or HTML
versions of this text to see them.]



NEW LATIN GRAMMAR

BY

CHARLES E. BENNETT

Goldwin Smith Professor of Latin in Cornell University

  _Quicquid praecipies, esto brevis, ut cito dicta_
  _Percipiant animi dociles teneantque fideles:_
  _Omne supervacuum pleno de pectore manat._
                  --HORACE, _Ars Poetica_.

COPYRIGHT, 1895; 1908; 1918 BY CHARLES E. BENNETT

       *       *       *       *       *

PREFACE.

The present work is a revision of that published in 1908. No radical
alterations have been introduced, although a number of minor changes will
be noted. I have added an Introduction on the origin and development of the
Latin language, which it is hoped will prove interesting and instructive to
the more ambitious pupil. At the end of the book will be found an Index to
the Sources of the Illustrative Examples cited in the Syntax.

C.E.B.

ITHACA, NEW YORK,
May 4, 1918

       *       *       *       *       *

PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION.

The present book is a revision of my _Latin Grammar_ originally published
in 1895. Wherever greater accuracy or precision of statement seemed
possible, I have endeavored to secure this. The rules for syllable division
have been changed and made to conform to the prevailing practice of the
Romans themselves. In the Perfect Subjunctive Active, the endings _-is_,
_-imus_, _-itis_ are now marked long. The theory of vowel length before the
suffixes -gnus, -gna, -gnum, and also before j, has been discarded. In the
Syntax I have recognized a special category of Ablative of Association, and
have abandoned the original doctrine as to the force of tenses in the
Prohibitive.

Apart from the foregoing, only minor and unessential modifications have
been introduced. In its main lines the work remains unchanged.

ITHACA, NEW YORK,
October 16, 1907.

       *       *       *       *       *

FROM THE PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION.

The object of this book is to present _the essential facts_ of Latin
grammar in a direct and simple manner, and within the smallest compass
consistent with scholarly standards. While intended primarily for the
secondary school, it has not neglected the needs of the college student,
and aims to furnish such grammatical information as is ordinarily required
in undergraduate courses.

The experience of foreign educators in recent years has tended to restrict
the size of school-grammars of Latin, and has demanded an incorporation of
the main principles of the language in compact manuals of 250 pages. Within
the past decade, several grammars of this scope have appeared abroad which
have amply met the most exacting demands.

The publication in this country of a grammar of similar plan and scope
seems fully justified at the present time, as all recent editions of
classic texts summarize in introductions the special idioms of grammar and
style peculiar to individual authors. This makes it feasible to dispense
with the enumeration of many _minutiae_ of usage which would otherwise
demand consideration in a student's grammar.

In the chapter on Prosody, I have designedly omitted all special treatment
of the lyric metres of Horace and Catullus, as well as of the measures of
the comic poets. Our standard editions of these authors all give such
thorough consideration to versification that repetition in a separate place
seems superfluous.

ITHACA, NEW YORK,
December 15, 1894.

TABLE OF CONTENTS.

  Introduction--The Latin language

PART I.

SOUNDS, ACCENT, QUANTITY, ETC.

  The Alphabet Sec. 1
  Classification of Sounds Sec. 2
  Sounds of the Letters Sec. 3
  Syllables Sec. 4
  Quantity Sec. 5
  Accent Sec. 6
  Vowel Changes Sec. 7
  Consonant Changes Sec. 8
  Peculiarities of Orthography Sec. 9

PART II.

INFLECTIONS.

    CHAPTER I.--_Declension._

          A. NOUNS. Sec. 10

  Gender of Nouns Sec. 13
  Number Sec. 16
  Cases Sec. 17
  The Five Declensions Sec. 18
  First Declension Sec. 20
  Second Declension Sec. 23
  Third Declension Sec. 28
  Fourth Declension Sec. 48
  Fifth Declension Sec. 51
  Defective Nouns Sec. 54

          B. ADJECTIVES. Sec. 62

  Adjectives of the First and Second Declensions Sec. 63
  Adjectives of the Third Declension Sec. 67
  Comparison of Adjectives Sec. 71
  Formation and Comparison of Adverbs Sec. 76
  Numerals Sec. 78

          C. PRONOUNS. Sec. 82

  Personal Pronouns Sec. 84
  Reflexive Pronouns Sec. 85
  Possessive Pronouns Sec. 86
  Demonstrative Pronouns Sec. 87
  The Intensive Pronoun Sec. 88
  The Relative Pronoun Sec. 89
  Interrogative Pronouns Sec. 90
  Indefinite Pronouns Sec. 91
  Pronominal Adjectives Sec. 92

    CHAPTER II.--_Conjugation. Sec. 93_

  Verb Stems Sec. 97
  The Four Conjugations Sec. 98
  Conjugation of _Sum_ Sec. 100
  First Conjugation Sec. 101
  Second Conjugation Sec. 103
  Third Conjugation Sec. 105
  Fourth Conjugation Sec. 107
  Verbs in _-io_ of the Third Conjugation Sec. 109
  Deponent Verbs Sec. 112
  Semi-Deponents Sec. 114
  Periphrastic Conjugation Sec. 115
  Peculiarities of Conjugation Sec. 116
  Formation of the Verb Stems Sec. 117
  List of the Most Important Verbs with Principal Parts Sec. 120
  Irregular Verbs Sec. 124
  Defective Verbs Sec. 133
  Impersonal Verbs Sec. 138

PART III.

PARTICLES. Sec. 139

  Adverbs Sec. 140
  Prepositions Sec. 141
  Interjections Sec. 145

PART IV.

WORD FORMATION.

  I. DERIVATIVES. Sec. 146

  Nouns Sec. 147
  Adjectives Sec. 150
  Verbs Sec. 155
  Adverbs Sec. 157

  II. COMPOUNDS. Sec. 158

  Examples of Compounds Sec. 159

PART V.

SYNTAX.

    CHAPTER I.--_Sentences._

  Classification of Sentences Sec. 161
  Form of Interrogative Sentences Sec. 162
  Subject and Predicate Sec. 163
  Simple and Compound Sentences Sec. 164

    CHAPTER II.--_Syntax of Nouns._

  Subject Sec. 166
  Predicate Nouns Sec. 167
  Appositives Sec. 169
  The Nominative Sec. 170
  The Accusative Sec. 172
  The Dative Sec. 186
  The Genitive Sec. 194
  The Ablative Sec. 213
  The Locative Sec. 232

    CHAPTER III.--_Syntax of Adjectives._

  Agreement of Adjectives Sec. 234
  Adjectives used Substantively Sec. 236
  Adjectives with the Force of Adverbs Sec. 239
  Comparatives and Superlatives Sec. 240
  Other Peculiarities Sec. 241

    CHAPTER IV.--_Syntax of Pronouns._

  Personal Pronouns Sec. 242
  Possessive Pronouns Sec. 243
  Reflexive Pronouns Sec. 244
  Reciprocal Pronouns Sec. 245
  Demonstrative Pronouns Sec. 246
  Relative Pronouns Sec. 250
  Indefinite Pronouns Sec. 252
  Pronominal Adjectives Sec. 253

    CHAPTER V.--_Syntax of Verbs._

  Agreement of Verbs Sec. 254
  Voices Sec. 256
  Tenses
  -- Of the Indicative Sec. 257
  -- Of the Subjunctive Sec. 266
  -- Of the Infinitive Sec. 270
  Moods
  -- In Independent Sentences Sec. 271
  -- -- Volitive Subjunctive Sec. 273
  -- -- Optative Subjunctive Sec. 279
  -- -- Potential Subjunctive Sec. 280
  -- -- Imperative Sec. 281
  -- In Dependent Clauses
  -- -- Clauses of Purpose Sec. 282
  -- -- Clauses of Characteristic Sec. 283
  -- -- Clauses of Result Sec. 284
  -- -- Causal Clauses Sec. 285
  -- -- Temporal Clauses
  -- -- -- Introduced by _Postquam_, _Ut_, _Ubi_, etc. Sec. 287
  -- -- -- _Cum_-Clauses Sec. 288
  -- -- -- Introduced by _Antequam_ and _Priusquam_ Sec. 291
  -- -- -- Introduced by _Dum_, _Donec_, _Quoad_ Sec. 293
  -- -- Substantive Clauses Sec. 294
  -- -- -- Developed from the Volitive Sec. 295
  -- -- -- Developed from the Optative Sec. 296
  -- -- -- Of Result Sec. 297
  -- -- -- After _non dubito_, etc. Sec. 298
  -- -- -- Introduced by _Quod_ Sec. 299
  -- -- -- Indirect Questions Sec. 300
  -- -- Conditional Sentences Sec. 301
  -- -- Use of _Si_, _Nisi_, _Sin_ Sec. 306
  -- -- Conditional Clauses of Comparison Sec. 307
  -- -- Concessive Clauses Sec. 308
  -- -- Adversative Clauses with _Quamvis_, _Quamquam_, etc. Sec. 309
  -- -- Clauses of Wish and Proviso Sec. 310
  -- -- Relative Clauses Sec. 311
  -- -- Indirect Discourse Sec. 313
  -- -- -- Moods in Indirect Discourse Sec. 314
  -- -- -- Tenses in Indirect Discourse Sec. 317
  -- -- -- Conditional Sentences in Indirect Discourse Sec. 319
  -- -- Implied Indirect Discourse Sec. 323
  -- -- Subjunctive by Attraction Sec. 324
  Noun and Adjective Forms of the Verb Sec. 325
  -- Infinitive Sec. 326
  -- Participles Sec. 336
  -- Gerund Sec. 338
  -- Supine Sec. 340

    CHAPTER VI.--_Particles._

  Cooerdinate Conjunctions Sec. 341
  Adverbs Sec. 347

    CHAPTER VII.--_Word-Order and Sentence-Structure._

  Word-Order Sec. 348
  Sentence-Structure Sec. 351

    CHAPTER VIII.--_Hints on Latin Style. Sec. 352_

  Nouns Sec. 353
  Adjectives Sec. 354
  Pronouns Sec. 355
  Verbs Sec. 356
  The Cases Sec. 357

PART VI.

PROSODY. Sec. 360

  Quantity of Vowels and Syllables Sec. 362
  Verse-Structure Sec. 366
  The Dactylic Hexameter Sec. 368
  The Dactylic Pentameter Sec. 369
  Iambic Measures Sec. 370

SUPPLEMENTS TO THE GRAMMAR.

    I. Roman Calendar Sec. 371
   II. Roman Names Sec. 373
  III. Figures of Syntax and Rhetoric Sec. 374

       *       *       *       *       *

  Index to the Illustrative Examples Cited in the Syntax
  Index to the Principal Parts of Latin Verbs
  General Index
  Footnotes

       *       *       *       *       *

INTRODUCTION.

THE LATIN LANGUAGE.

1. The Indo-European Family of Languages.--Latin belongs to one group of a
large family of languages, known as _Indo-European_.[1] This Indo-European
family of languages embraces the following groups:

ASIATIC MEMBERS OF THE INDO-EUROPEAN FAMILY.

a. _The Sanskrit_, spoken in ancient India. Of this there were several
stages, the oldest of which is the Vedic, or language of the Vedic Hymns.
These Hymns are the oldest literary productions known to us among all the
branches of the Indo-European family. A conservative estimate places them
as far back as 1500 B.C. Some scholars have even set them more than a
thousand years earlier than this, i.e. anterior to 2500 B.C.

The Sanskrit, in modified form, has always continued to be spoken in India,
and is represented to-day by a large number of dialects descended from the
ancient Sanskrit, and spoken by millions of people.

b. _The Iranian_, spoken in ancient Persia, and closely related to the
Sanskrit. There were two main branches of the Iranian group, viz. the Old
Persian and the Avestan. The Old Persian was the official language of the
court, and appears in a number of so-called cuneiform[2] inscriptions, the
earliest of which date from the time of Darius I (sixth century B.C.). The
other branch of the Iranian, the Avestan,[3] is the language of the Avesta
or sacred books of the Parsees, the followers of Zoroaster, founder of the
religion of the fire-worshippers. Portions of these sacred books may have
been composed as early as 1000 B.C.

Modern Persian is a living representative of the old Iranian speech. It has
naturally been much modified by time, particularly through the introduction
of many words from the Arabic.

c. _The Armenian_, spoken in Armenia, the district near the Black Sea and
Caucasus Mountains. This is closely related to the Iranian, and was
formerly classified under that group. It is now recognized as entitled to
independent rank. The earliest literary productions of the Armenian
language date from the fourth and fifth centuries of the Christian era. To
this period belong the translation of the Scriptures and the old Armenian
Chronicle. The Armenian is still a living language, though spoken in widely
separated districts, owing to the scattered locations in which the
Armenians are found to-day.

d. _The Tokharian_. This language, only recently discovered and identified
as Indo-European, was spoken in the districts east of the Caspian Sea
(modern Turkestan). While in some respects closely related to the three
Asiatic branches of the Indo-European family already considered, in others
it shows close relationship to the European members of the family. The
literature of the Tokharian, so far as it has been brought to light,
consists mainly of translations from the Sanskrit sacred writings, and
dates from the seventh century of our era.

EUROPEAN MEMBERS OF THE INDO-EUROPEAN FAMILY.

e. _The Greek_. The Greeks had apparently long been settled in Greece and
Asia Minor as far back as 1500 B.C. Probably they arrived in these
districts much earlier. The earliest literary productions are the Iliad and
the Odyssey of Homer, which very likely go back to the ninth century B.C.
From the sixth century B.C. on, Greek literature is continuous. Modern
Greek, when we consider its distance in time from antiquity, is remarkably
similar to the classical Greek of the fourth and fifth centuries B.C.

f. _The Italic Group._ The Italic Group embraces the Umbrian, spoken in the
northern part of the Italian peninsula (in ancient Umbria); the Latin,
spoken in the central part (in Latium); the Oscan, spoken in the southern
part (in Samnium, Campania, Lucania, etc.). Besides these, there were a
number of minor dialects, such as the Marsian, Volscian, etc. Of all these
(barring the Latin), there are no remains except a few scanty inscriptions.
Latin literature begins shortly after 250 B.C. in the works of Livius
Andronicus, Naevius, and Plautus, although a few brief inscriptions are
found belonging to a much earlier period.

g. _The Celtic._ In the earliest historical times of which we have any
record, the Celts occupied extensive portions of northern Italy, as well as
certain areas in central Europe; but after the second century B.C., they
are found only in Gaul and the British Isles. Among the chief languages
belonging to the Celtic group are the Gallic, spoken in ancient Gaul; the
Breton, still spoken in the modern French province of Brittany; the Irish,
which is still extensively spoken in Ireland among the common people, the
Welsh; and the Gaelic of the Scotch Highlanders.

h. _The Teutonic._ The Teutonic group is very extensive. Its earliest
representative is the Gothic, preserved for us in the translation of the
scriptures by the Gothic Bishop Ulfilas (about 375 A.D.). Other languages
belonging to this group are the Old Norse, once spoken in Scandinavia, and
from which are descended the modern Icelandic, Norwegian, Swedish, Danish;
German; Dutch; Anglo-Saxon, from which is descended the modern English.

i. _The Balto-Slavic._ The languages of this group belong to eastern
Europe. The Baltic division of the group embraces the Lithuanian and
Lettic, spoken to-day by the people living on the eastern shores of the
Baltic Sea. The earliest literary productions of these languages date from
the sixteenth century. The Slavic division comprises a large number of
languages, the most important of which are the Russian, the Bulgarian, the
Serbian, the Bohemian, the Polish. All of these were late in developing a
literature, the earliest to do so being the Old Bulgarian, in which we find
a translation of the Bible dating from the ninth century.

j. _The Albanian_, spoken in Albania and parts of Greece, Italy, and
Sicily. This is most nearly related to the Balto-Slavic group, and is
characterized by the very large proportion of words borrowed from Latin,
Turkish, Greek, and Slavic. Its literature does not begin till the
seventeenth century.

2. Home of the Indo-European Family.--Despite the many outward differences
of the various languages of the foregoing groups, a careful examination of
their structure and vocabulary demonstrates their intimate relationship and
proves overwhelmingly their descent from a common parent. We must believe,
therefore, that at one time there existed a homogeneous clan or tribe of
people speaking a language from which all the above enumerated languages
are descended. The precise location of the home of this ancient tribe
cannot be determined. For a long time it was assumed that it was in central
Asia north of the Himalaya Mountains, but this view has long been rejected
as untenable. It arose from the exaggerated importance attached for a long
while to Sanskrit. The great antiquity of the earliest literary remains of
the Sanskrit (the Vedic Hymns) suggested that the inhabitants of India were
geographically close to the original seat of the Indo-European Family.
Hence the home was sought in the elevated plateau to the north. To-day it
is thought that central or southeastern Europe is much more likely to have
been the cradle of the Indo-European parent-speech, though anything like a
logical demonstration of so difficult a problem can hardly be expected.

As to the size and extent of the original tribe whence the Indo-European
languages have sprung, we can only speculate. It probably was not large,
and very likely formed a compact racial and linguistic unit for centuries,
possibly for thousands of years.

The time at which Indo-European unity ceased and the various individual
languages began their separate existence, is likewise shrouded in
obscurity. When we consider that the separate existence of the Sanskrit may
antedate 2500 B.C., it may well be believed that people speaking the
Indo-European parent-speech belonged to a period as far back as 5000 B.C.,
or possibly earlier.

3. Stages in the Development of the Latin Language.--The earliest remains
of the Latin language are found in certain very archaic inscriptions. The
oldest of these belong to the sixth and seventh centuries B.C. Roman
literature does not begin till several centuries later, viz. shortly after
the middle of the third century B.C. We may recognize the following clearly
marked periods of the language and literature:

a. _The Preliterary Period_, from the earliest times down to 240 B.C., when
Livius Andronicus brought out his first play. For this period our knowledge
of Latin depends almost exclusively upon the scanty inscriptions that have
survived from this remote time. Few of these are of any length.

b. _The Archaic Period_, from Livius Andronicus (240 B.C.) to Cicero (81
B.C.). Even in this age the language had already become highly developed as
a medium of expression. In the hands of certain gifted writers it had even
become a vehicle of power and beauty. In its simplicity, however, it
naturally marks a contrast with the more finished diction of later days. To
this period belong:

  Livius Andronicus, about 275-204 B.C. (Translation of Homer's Odyssey;
      Tragedies).
  Plautus, about 250-184 B.C. (Comedies).
  Naevius, about 270-199 B.C. ("Punic War"; Comedies).
  Ennius, 239-169 B.C. ("Annals"; Tragedies).
  Terence, about 190-159 B.C. (Comedies).
  Lucilius, 180-103 B.C. (Satires).
  Pacuvius, 220-about 130 B.C. (Tragedies).
  Accius, 170-about 85 B.C. (Tragedies).

c. _The Golden Age_, from Cicero (81 B.C.) to the death of Augustus (14
A.D.). In this period the language, especially in the hands of Cicero,
reaches a high degree of stylistic perfection. Its vocabulary, however, has
not yet attained its greatest fullness and range. Traces of the diction of
the Archaic Period are often noticed, especially in the poets, who
naturally sought their effects by reverting to the speech of olden times.
Literature reached its culmination in this epoch, especially in the great
poets of the Augustan Age. The following writers belong here:

  Lucretius, about 95-55 B.C. (Poem on Epicurean Philosophy).
  Catullus, 87-about 54 B.C. (Poet).
  Cicero, 106-43 B.C. (Orations; Rhetorical Works; Philosophical Works;
      Letters).
  Caesar, 102-44 B.C. (Commentaries on Gallic and Civil Wars),
  Sallust, 86-36 B.C. (Historian).
  Nepos, about 100-about 30 B.C. (Historian).
  Virgil, 70-19 B.C. ("Aeneid"; "Georgics"; "Bucolics").
  Horace, 65-8 B.C. (Odes; Satires, Epistles).
  Tibullus, about 54-19 B.C. (Poet).
  Propertius, about 50-about 15 B.C. (Poet).
  Ovid, 43 B.C.-17 A.D. ("Metamorphoses" and other poems).
  Livy. 59 B.C.-17 A.D. (Historian).

d. _The Silver Latinity_, from the death of Augustus (14 A.D.) to the death
of Marcus Aurelius (180 A.D.), This period is marked by a certain reaction
against the excessive precision of the previous age. It had become the
practice to pay too much attention to standardized forms of expression, and
to leave too little play to the individual writer. In the healthy reaction
against this formalism, greater freedom of expression now manifests itself.
We note also the introduction of idioms from the colloquial language, along
with many poetical words and usages. The following authors deserve mention:

  Phaedrus, flourished about 40 A.D. (Fables in Verse)
  Velleius Paterculus, flourished about 30 A.D. (Historian).
  Lucan, 39-65 A.D. (Poem on the Civil War).
  Seneca, about 1-65 A.D. (Tragedies; Philosophical Works).
  Pliny the Elder, 23-79 A.D. ("Natural History").
  Pliny the Younger, 62-about 115 A.D. ("Letters").
  Martial, about 45-about 104 A.D. (Epigrams).
  Quintilian, about 35-about 100 A.D. (Treatise on Oratory and Education).
  Tacitus, about 55-about 118 A.D. (Historian).
  Juvenal, about 55-about 135 A.D. (Satirist).
  Suetonius, about 73-about 118 A.D. ("Lives of the Twelve Caesars").
  Minucius Felix, flourished about 160 A.D. (First Christian Apologist).
  Apuleius, 125-about 200 A.D. ("Metamorphoses," or "Golden Ass").

e. _The Archaizing Period._ This period is characterized by a conscious
imitation of the Archaic Period of the second and first centuries B.C.; it
overlaps the preceding period, and is of importance from a linguistic
rather than from a literary point of view. Of writers who manifest the
archaizing tendency most conspicuously may be mentioned Fronto, from whose
hand we have a collection of letters addressed to the Emperors Antoninus
Pius and Marcus Aurelius; also Aulus Gellius, author of the "Attic Nights."
Both of these writers flourished in the second half of the second century
A.D.

f. _The Period of the Decline_, from 180 to the close of literary activity
in the sixth century A.D. This period is characterized by rapid and radical
alterations in the language. The features of the conversational idiom of
the lower strata of society invade the literature, while in the remote
provinces, such as Gaul, Spain, Africa, the language suffers from the
incorporation of local peculiarities. Representative writers of this period
are:

  Tertullian, about 160-about 240 A.D. (Christian Writer).
  Cyprian, about 200-258 A.D. (Christian Writer).
  Lactantius, flourished about 300 A.D. (Defense of Christianity).
  Ausonius, about 310-about 395 A.D. (Poet).
  Jerome, 340-420 A.D. (Translator of the Scriptures).
  Ambrose, about 340-397 (Christian Father).
  Augustine, 354-430 (Christian Father--"City of God").
  Prudentius, flourished 400 A.D. (Christian Poet).
  Claudian, flourished 400 A.D. (Poet).
  Boethius, about 480-524 A.D. ("Consolation of Philosophy ").

4. Subsequent History of the Latin Language.--After the sixth century A.D.
Latin divides into two entirely different streams. One of these is the
literary language maintained in courts, in the Church, and among scholars.
This was no longer the language of people in general, and as time went on,
became more and more artificial. The other stream is the colloquial idiom
of the common people, which developed ultimately in the provinces into the
modern so-called Romance idioms. These are the Italian, Spanish,
Portuguese, French, Provencal (spoken in Provence, i.e. southeastern
France), the Rhaeto-Romance (spoken in the Canton of the Grisons in
Switzerland), and the Roumanian, spoken in modern Roumania and adjacent
districts. All these Romance languages bear the same relation to the Latin
as the different groups of the Indo-European family of languages bear to
the parent speech.

       *       *       *       *       *

PART I.

       *       *       *       *       *

SOUNDS, ACCENT, QUANTITY.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE ALPHABET.

1. The Latin Alphabet is the same as the English, except that the Latin has
no w.

1. K occurs only in _Kalendae_ and a few other words; y and z were
introduced from the Greek about 50 B.C., and occur only in foreign
words--chiefly Greek.

2. With the Romans, who regularly employed only capitals, I served both as
vowel and consonant; so also V. For us, however, it is more convenient to
distinguish the vowel and consonant sounds, and to write i and u for the
former, j and v for the latter. Yet some scholars prefer to employ i and u
in the function of consonants as well as vowels.

CLASSIFICATION OF SOUNDS.

2. 1. The Vowels are a, e, i, o, u, y. The other letters are Consonants.
The Diphthongs are ae, oe, ei, au, eu, ui.

2. Consonants are further subdivided into Mutes, Liquids, Nasals, and
Spirants.

3. The Mutes are p, t, c, k, q; b, d, g; ph, th, ch. Of these,--

  a) p, t, c, k, q are voiceless,[4] i.e. sounded _without_ voice or
  vibration of the vocal cords.

  b) b, d, g are voiced,[5] i.e. sounded _with_ vibration of the vocal
  cords.

  c) ph, th, ch are aspirates. These are confined almost exclusively to
  words derived from the Greek, and were equivalent to p + h, t + h, c + h,
  i.e. to the corresponding voiceless mutes with a following breath, as in
  Eng. _loop-hole_, _hot-house_, _block-house_.

4. The Mutes admit of classification also as

  Labials,                        p, b, ph.
  Dentals (or Linguals),          t, d, th.
  Gutturals (or Palatals),        c, k, q, g, ch.

5. The Liquids are l, r. These sounds were voiced.

6. The Nasals are m, n. These were voiced. Besides its ordinary sound, n,
when followed by a guttural mute also had another sound,--that of ng in
_sing_,--the so-called n _adulterinum_; as,--

  anceps, _double_, pronounced angceps.

7. The Spirants (sometimes called Fricatives) are f, s, h. These were
voiceless.

8. The Semivowels are j and v. These were voiced.

9. Double Consonants are x and z. Of these, x was equivalent to cs, while
the equivalence of z is uncertain. See Sec. 3, 3.

10. The following table will indicate the relations of the consonant
sounds:--

                 VOICELESS.     VOICED.      ASPIRATES.
                     p,            b,           ph,       (Labials).
  Mutes,             t,            d,           th,       (Dentals).
                  c, k, q,         g,           ch,       (Gutturals).
  Liquids,                       l, r,
  Nasals,                        m, n,
                     f,                                   (Labial).
  Spirants,          s,                                   (Dental).
                     h,                                   (Guttural).
  Semivowels,                    j, v.

  a. The Double Consonants, x and z, being compound sounds, do not admit of
  classification in the above table.

SOUNDS OF THE LETTERS.

3. The following pronunciation (often called Roman) is substantially that
employed by the Romans at the height of their civilization; i.e., roughly,
from 50 B.C. to 50 A.D.

1. Vowels.

  a as in _father_;          a as in the first syllable _aha_;
  e as in _they_;            e as in _met_;
  i as in _machine_;         i as in _pin_;
  o as in _note_;            o as in _obey_, _melody_;
  u as in _rude_;            u as in _put_;
  y like French _u_, German
  _ue_.

2. Diphthongs.

  ae like _ai_ in            eu with its two elements, e and u,
  _aisle_;                   pronounced in rapid succession;
  oe like _oi_ in _oil_;     ui occurs almost exclusively in
  ei as in _rein_;           _cui_ and _huic_. These words may
  au like _ow_ in _how_;     be pronounced as  though written
                             _kwee_ and _wheek_.

3. Consonants.

  b, d, f, h, k, l, m, n, p, qu are pronounced as in English, except that
  bs, bt are pronounced _ps_, _pt_.

  c is always pronounced as _k_.

  t is always a plain _t_, never with the sound of _sh_ as in Eng.
  _oration_.

  g always as in _get_; when ngu precedes a vowel, gu has the sound of
  _gw_, as in anguis, languidus.

  j has the sound of _y_ as in _yet_.

  r was probably slightly trilled with the tip of the tongue.

  s always voiceless as in _sin_; in suadeo, suavis, suesco, and in
  compounds and derivatives of these words, su has the sound of _sw_.

  v like _w_.

  x always like _ks_; never like Eng. _gz_ or _z_.

  z uncertain in sound; possibly like Eng. _zd_, possibly like _z_. The
  latter sound is recommended.

  The aspirates ph, ch, th were pronounced very nearly like our stressed
  Eng. _p_, c, _t_--so nearly so, that, for practical purposes, the latter
  sounds suffice.

  Doubled letters, like ll, mm, tt, etc., should be so pronounced that both
  members of the combination are distinctly articulated.

SYLLABLES.

4. There are as many syllables in a Latin word as there are separate vowels
and diphthongs.

In the division of words into syllables,--

1. A single consonant is joined to the following vowel; as, vo-lat, ge-rit,
pe-rit, a-dest.

2. Doubled consonants, like tt, ss, etc., are always separated; as, vit-ta,
mis-sus.

3. Other combinations of two or more consonants are regularly separated,
and the first consonant of the combination is joined with the preceding
vowel; as, ma-gis-tri, dig-nus, mon-strum, sis-te-re.

4. An exception to Rule 3 occurs when the two consonants consist of a mute
followed by l or r (pl, cl, tl; pr, cr, tr, etc.). In such cases both
consonants are regularly joined to the following vowel; as, a-gri,
vo-lu-cris, pa-tris, ma-tris. Yet if the l or r introduces the second part
of a compound, the two consonants are separated; as, ab-rumpo, ad-latus.

5. The double consonant x is joined to the preceding vowel; as, ax-is,
tex-i.

QUANTITY.

5. A. Quantity of Vowels.

A vowel is _long_ or _short_ according to the length of time required for
its pronunciation. No absolute rule can be given for determining the
quantity of Latin vowels. This knowledge must be gained, in large measure,
by experience; but the following principles are of aid:--

1. A vowel is long,[6]--

  a) before nf or ns; as, infans, inferior, consumo, censeo, insum.

  b) when the result of contraction; as, nilum for nihilum.

2. A vowel is short,--

  a) before nt, nd; as, amant, amandus. A few exceptions occur in compounds
  whose first member has a long vowel; as, nondum (non dum).

  b) before another vowel, or h; as, meus, traho. Some exceptions occur,
  chiefly in proper names derived from the Greek; as, Aeneas.

B. Quantity of Syllables.

Syllables are distinguished as _long_ or _short_ according to the length of
time required for their pronunciation.

1. A syllable is long,[7]--

  a) if it contains a long vowel; as, mater, regnum, dius.

  b) if it contains a diphthong; as, causae, foedus.

  c) if it contains a short vowel followed by x, z, or any two consonants
  (except a mute with l or r); as, axis, gaza, resto.

2. A syllable is short, if it contains a short vowel followed by a vowel or
by a single consonant; as, mea, amat.

3. Sometimes a syllable varies in quantity, _viz_. when its vowel is short
and is followed by a mute with l or r, i.e. by pl, cl, tl; pr, cr, tr,
etc.; as, agri, volucris.[8] Such syllables are called _common_. In prose
they were regularly short, but in verse they might be treated as long at
the option of the poet.

NOTE.--These distinctions of _long_ and _short_ are not arbitrary and
artificial, but are purely natural. Thus, a syllable containing a short
vowel followed by two consonants, as ng, is long, because such a syllable
requires _more time_ for its pronunciation; while a syllable containing a
short vowel followed by one consonant is short, because it takes _less
time_ to pronounce it. In case of the common syllables, the mute and the
liquid blend so easily as to produce a combination which takes no more time
than a single consonant. Yet by separating the two elements (as ag-ri) the
poets were able to use such syllables as long.

ACCENT.

6. 1. Words of two syllables are accented upon the first; as, tegit,
mo'rem.

2. Words of more than two syllables are accented upon the penult (next to
the last) if that is a long syllable, otherwise upon the antepenult (second
from the last); as, ama'vi, amantis, miserum.

3. When the enclitics -que, -ne, -ve, -ce, -met, -dum are appended to
words, if the syllable preceding the enclitic is long (either originally or
as a result of adding the enclitic) it is accented; as, misero'que,
hominisque. But if the syllable still remains short after the enclitic has
been added, it is not accented unless the word originally took the accent
on the antepenult. Thus, portaque; but miseraque.

4. Sometimes the final -e of -ne and -ce disappears, but without affecting
the accent; as, tanto'n, isti'c, illu'c.

5. In utra'que, _each_, and plera'que, _most_, -que is not properly an
enclitic; yet these words accent the penult, owing to the influence of
their other cases,--uterque, utrumque, plerumque.

VOWEL CHANGES.[9]

7.. 1. In Compounds,

  a) e before a single consonant becomes i; as,--

    colligo     for con-lego.

  b) a before a single consonant becomes i: as,--

    adigo       for ad-ago.

  c) a before two consonants becomes e; as,--

    expers      for ex-pars.

  d) ae becomes i; as,--

    conquiro    for con-quaero.

  e) au becomes u, sometimes o; as,--

    concludo    for con-claudo;
    explodo     for ex-plaudo.

2. Contraction. Concurrent vowels were frequently contracted into one long
vowel. The first of the two vowels regularly prevailed; as,--

  tres      for tre-es;         copia     for co-opia;
  malo      for ma(v)elo;       cogo      for co-ago;
  amasti    for ama(v)isti;     como      for co-emo;
  debeo     for de(h)abeo;      junior    for ju(v)enior.
  nil       for nihil;

3. Parasitic Vowels. In the environment of liquids and nasals a parasitic
vowel sometimes develops; as,--

  vinculum for earlier vinclum.

So periculum, saeculum.

4. Syncope. Sometimes a vowel drops out by syncope; as,--

  ardor for aridor (compare _aridus_);
  valde for valide (compare _validus_).

CONSONANT CHANGES[10]

8. 1. Rhotacism. An original s between vowels became r; as,--

  arbos, Gen. arboris (for arbosis);
  genus, Gen. generis (for genesis);
  dirimo (for dis-emo).

2. dt, tt, ts each give s or ss; as,--

  pensum for pend-tum;
  versum for vert-tum;
  miles for milet-s;
  sessus for sedtus;
  passus for pattus.

3. Final consonants were often omitted; as,--

  cor for cord;
  lac for lact.

4. Assimilation of Consonants. Consonants are often assimilated to a
following sound. Thus: accurro (adc-); aggero (adg-); assero (ads-);
allatus (adl-); apporto (adp-); attuli (adt-); arrideo (adr-); affero
(adf-); occurro (obc-); suppono (subp-); offero (obf-); corruo (comr-);
collatus (coml-); etc.

5. Partial Assimilation. Sometimes the assimilation is only partial.
Thus:--

  a) b before s or t becomes p; as,--

    scripsi (scrib-si), scriptum (scrib-tum).

  b) g before s or t becomes c; as,--

    actus (ag-tus).

  c) m before a dental or guttural becomes n; as,--

    eundem (eum-dem); princeps (prim-ceps).

PECULIARITIES OF ORTHOGRAPHY.

9. Many words have variable orthography.

1. Sometimes the different forms belong to different periods of the
language. Thus, quom, voltus, volnus, volt, etc., were the prevailing forms
almost down to the Augustan age; after that, cum, vultus, vulnus, vult,
etc. So optumus, maxumus, lubet, lubido, etc. down to about the same era;
later, optimus, maximus, libet, libido, etc.

2. In some words the orthography varies at one and the same period of the
language. Examples are exspecto, expecto; exsisto, existo; epistula,
epistola; adulescens, adolescens; paulus, paullus; cottidie, cotidie; and,
particularly, prepositional compounds, which often made a concession to the
etymology in the spelling; as,--

  ad-gero or aggero;            ad-sero or assero;
  ad-licio or allicio;          in-latus or illatus;
  ad-rogans or arrogans;        sub-moveo or summoveo;
                       and many others.

3. Compounds of jacio were usually written eicio, deicio, adicio, obicio,
etc., but were probably pronounced as though written adjicio, objicio, etc.

4. Adjectives and nouns in -quus, -quum; -vus, -vum; -uus, -uum preserved
the earlier forms in -quos, -quom; -vos, -vom; -uos, -uom, down through the
Ciceronian age; as, antiquos, antiquom; saevos; perpetuos; equos; servos.
Similarly verbs in the 3d plural present indicative exhibit the
terminations -quont, -quontur; -vont, -vontur; -uont, -uontur, for the same
period; as, relinquont, loquontur; vivont, metuont.

The older spelling, while generally followed in editions of Plautus and
Terence, has not yet been adopted in our prose texts.

       *       *       *       *       *

PART II.

       *       *       *       *       *

INFLECTIONS.

       *       *       *       *       *

10. The Parts of Speech in Latin are the same as in English, viz. Nouns,
Adjectives, Pronouns, Verbs, Adverbs, Prepositions, Conjunctions, and
Interjections; but the Latin has no article.

11. Of these eight parts of speech the first four are capable of
Inflection, i.e. of undergoing change of form to express modifications of
meaning. In case of Nouns, Adjectives, and Pronouns, this process is called
Declension; in case of verbs, Conjugation.

       *       *       *       *       *

CHAPTER I.--_Declension._

A. NOUNS.

12. A Noun is the name of a _person_, _place_, _thing_, or _quality_; as,
Caesar, _Caesar_; Roma, _Rome_; penna, _feather_; virtus, _courage_.

1. Nouns are either Proper or Common. Proper nouns are permanent names of
persons or places; as, Caesar, Roma. Other nouns are Common: as, penna,
virtus.

2. Nouns are also distinguished as Concrete or Abstract.

  a) Concrete nouns are those which designate individual objects; as, mons,
  _mountain_; pes, _foot_; dies, _day_; mens, _mind_.

  Under concrete nouns are included, also, collective nouns; as, legio,
  _legion_; comitatus, _retinue_.

  b) Abstract nouns designate qualities; as, constantia, _steadfastness_;
  paupertas, _poverty_.

GENDER OF NOUNS.

13. There are three Genders,--Masculine, Feminine, and Neuter. Gender in
Latin is either natural or grammatical.

Natural Gender.

14. The gender of nouns is natural when it is based upon sex. Natural
gender is confined entirely to names of persons; and these are--

1. Masculine, if they denote males; as,--

  nauta, _sailor_; agricola, _farmer_.

2. Feminine, if they denote females; as,--

  mater, _mother_; regina, _queen_.

Grammatical Gender.

15. Grammatical gender is determined not by sex, but by the general
signification of the word, or the ending of its Nominative Singular. By
grammatical gender, nouns denoting things or qualities are often Masculine
or Feminine, simply by virtue of their signification or the ending of the
Nominative Singular. The following are the general principles for
determining grammatical gender:--

_A. Gender determined by Signification._

1. Names of _Rivers_, _Winds_, and _Months_ are Masculine; as,--

  Sequana, _Seine_; Eurus, _east wind_; Aprilis, _April_.

2. Names of _Trees_, and such names of _Towns_ and _Islands_ as end in -us,
are Feminine; as,--

  quercus, _oak_; Corinthus, _Corinth_; Rhodus, _Rhodes_.

Other names of towns and islands follow the gender of their endings (see
_B_, below); as,--

  Delphi, n.; Leuctra, n.; Tibur, n.; Carthago, f.

3. Indeclinable nouns, also infinitives and phrases, are Neuter; as,--

  nihil, _nothing_; nefas, _wrong_; amare, _to love_.

NOTE.--Exceptions to the above principles sometimes occur; as, Allia (the
river), f.

_B. Gender determined by Ending of Nominative Singular._

The gender of other nouns is determined by the ending of the Nominative
Singular.[11]

NOTE 1.--_Common Gender._ Certain nouns are sometimes Masculine, sometimes
Feminine. Thus, sacerdos may mean either _priest_ or _priestess_, and is
Masculine or Feminine accordingly. So also civis, _citizen_; parens,
_parent_; etc. The gender of such nouns is said to be _common_.

NOTE 2.--Names of animals usually have grammatical gender, according to the
ending of the Nominative Singular, but the one form may designate either
the male or female; as, anser, m., _goose_ or _gander_. So vulpes, f.,
_fox_; aquila, f., _eagle_.

NUMBER.

16. The Latin has two Numbers,--the Singular and Plural. The Singular
denotes one object, the Plural, more than one.

CASES.

17. There are six Cases in Latin:--

  Nominative,     Case of Subject;
  Genitive,       Objective with _of_, or Possessive;
  Dative,         Objective with _to_ or _for_;
  Accusative,     Case of Direct Object;
  Vocative,       Case of Address;
  Ablative,       Objective with _by_, _from_, _in_,
                  _with_.

1. LOCATIVE. Vestiges of another case, the Locative (denoting place where),
occur in names of towns and in a few other words.

2. OBLIQUE CASES. The Genitive, Dative, Accusative, and Ablative are called
Oblique Cases.

3. STEM AND CASE-ENDINGS. The different cases are formed by appending
certain case-endings to a fundamental part called the Stem.[12] Thus,
_portam_ (Accusative Singular) is formed by adding the case-ending -m to
the stem porta-. But in most cases the final vowel of the stem has
coalesced so closely with the actual case-ending that the latter has become
more or less obscured. The _apparent case-ending_ thus resulting is called
a termination.

THE FIVE DECLENSIONS.

18. There are five Declensions in Latin, distinguished from each other by
the final letter of the Stem, and also by the Termination of the Genitive
Singular, as follows:--

  DECLENSION.     FINAL LETTER OF STEM.   GEN. TERMINATION.
  First           a                       -ae
  Second          o                       -i
  Third           i / Some consonant      -is
  Fourth          u                       -us
  Fifth           e                       -ei / -ei

Cases alike in Form.

19. 1. The Vocative is regularly like the Nominative, except in the
singular of nouns in -us of the Second Declension.

2. The Dative and Ablative Plural are always alike.

3. In Neuters the Accusative and Nominative are always alike, and in the
Plural end in -a.

4. In the Third, Fourth, and Fifth Declensions, the Accusative Plural is
regularly like the Nominative.

       *       *       *       *       *

FIRST DECLENSION.

a-Stems.

20. Pure Latin nouns of the First Declension regularly end, in the
Nominative Singular, in -a, weakened from -a, and are of the Feminine
Gender. They are declined as follows:--

                   Porta, _gate_; stem, porta-.

                            SINGULAR.
       CASES.                 MEANINGS.            TERMINATIONS.
  _Nom._  porta      _a gate_ (as subject)         -a
  _Gen._  portae     _of a gate_                   -ae
  _Dat._  portae     _to_ or _for a gate_          -ae
  _Acc._  portam     _a gate_ (as object)          -am
  _Voc._  porta      _O gate!_                     -a
  _Abl._  porta      _with, by, from, in a gate_   -a

                             PLURAL.
  _Nom._  portae     _gates_ (as subject)          -ae
  _Gen._  portarum   _of gates_                    -arum
  _Dat._  portis     _to_ or _for gates_           -is
  _Acc._  portas     _gates_ (as object)           -as
  _Voc._  portae     _O gates!_                    -ae
  _Abl._  portis     _with, by, from, in gates_    -is

1. The Latin has no article, and porta may mean either _a gate_ or _the
gate_; and in the Plural, _gates_ or _the gates_.

Peculiarities of Nouns of the First Declension.

21. 1. EXCEPTIONS IN GENDER. Nouns denoting males are Masculine; as, nauta,
_sailor_; agricola, _farmer_; also, Hadria, _Adriatic Sea_.

2. Rare Case-Endings,--

  a) An old form of the Genitive Singular in -as is preserved in the
  combination pater familias, _father of a family_; also in mater familias,
  filius familias, filia familias. But the regular form of the Genitive in
  -ae is also admissible in these expressions; as, pater familiae.

  b) In poetry a Genitive in -ai also occurs; as, aulai.

  c) The Locative Singular ends in -ae; as, Romae, _at Rome_.

  d) A Genitive Plural in -um instead of -arum sometimes occurs; as,
  Dardanidum instead of Dardanidarum. This termination -um is not a
  contraction of -arum, but represents an entirely different case-ending.

  e) Instead of the regular ending -is, we usually find -abus in the Dative
  and Ablative Plural of dea, _goddess_, and filia, _daughter_, especially
  when it is important to distinguish these nouns from the corresponding
  forms of deus, _god_, and filius, _son_. A few other words sometimes have
  the same peculiarity; as, libertabus (from liberta, _freedwoman_),
  equabus (_mares_), to avoid confusion with libertis (from libertus,
  _freedman_) and equis (from equus, _horse_).

Greek Nouns.

22. These end in -e (Feminine); -as and -es (Masculine). In the Plural they
are declined like regular Latin nouns of the First Declension. In the
Singular they are declined as follows:--

          Archias,           Epitome,           Cometes, _comet_.
          _Archias_.         _epitome_.
  _Nom._  Archias            epitome            cometes
  _Gen._  Archiae            epitomes           cometae
  _Dat._  Archiae            epitomae           cometae
  _Acc._  Archiam (or -an)   epitomen           cometen
  _Voc._  Archia             epitome            comete (or -a)
  _Abl._  Archia             epitome            comete (or -a)

1. But most Greek nouns in -e become regular Latin nouns in -a, and are
declined like porta; as, grammatica, _grammar_; musica, _music_; rhetorica,
_rhetoric_.

2. Some other peculiarities occur, especially in poetry.

       *       *       *       *       *

SECOND DECLENSION.

o-Stems.

23. Pure Latin nouns of the Second Declension end in -us, -er, -ir,
Masculine; -um, Neuter. Originally -us in the Nominative of the Masculine
was -os; and -um of the Neuters -om. So also in the Accusative.

Nouns in -us and -um are declined as follows:--

          Hortus, _garden_;    Bellum, _war_;
          stem, horto-.        stem, bello-.
                     SINGULAR.
                       TERMINATION.         TERMINATION.
  _Nom._  hortus       -us     bellum       -um
  _Gen._  horti        -i      belli        -i
  _Dat._  horto        -o      bello        -o
  _Acc._  hortum       -um     bellum       -um
  _Voc._  horte        -e      bellum       -um
  _Abl._  horto        -o      bello        -o

                      PLURAL.
  _Nom._  horti        -i      bella        -a
  _Gen._  hortorum     -orum   bellorum     -orum
  _Dat._  hortis       -is     bellis       -is
  _Acc._  hortos       -os     bella        -a
  _Voc._  horti        -i      bella        -a
  _Abl._  hortis       -is     bellis       -is

Nouns in -er and -ir are declined as follows:--

          Puer, _boy_;     Ager, _field_;  Vir, _man_;
          stem, puero-     stem, agro-     stem, viro-
                         SINGULAR.                         TERMINATION.
  _Nom._  puer             ager            vir               Wanting
  _Gen._  pueri            agri            viri            -i
  _Dat._  puero            agro            viro            -o
  _Acc._  puerum           agrum           virum           -um
  _Voc._  puer             ager            vir               Wanting
  _Abl._  puero            agro            viro            -o

                          PLURAL.
  _Nom._  pueri            agri            viri            -i
  _Gen._  puerorum         agrorum         virorum         -orum
  _Dat._  pueris           agris           viris           -is
  _Acc._  pueros           agros           viros           -os
  _Voc._  pueri            agri            viri            -i
  _Abl._  pueris           agris           viris           -is

1. Note that in words of the type of puer and vir the final vowel of the
stem has disappeared in the Nominative and Vocative Singular.

In the Nominative and Vocative Singular of ager, the stem is further
modified by the development of e before r.

2. The following nouns in -er are declined like puer: adulter, _adulterer_;
gener, _son-in-law_; Liber, _Bacchus_; socer, _father-in-law_; vesper,
_evening_; and compounds in -fer and -ger, as signifer, armiger.

Nouns in _-vus_, _-vum_, _-quus_.

24. Nouns ending in the Nominative Singular in -vus, -vum, -quus, exhibited
two types of inflection in the classical Latin,--an earlier and a
later,--as follows:--

   _Earlier Inflection (including Caesar and Cicero)._
          Servos, m.,     Aevom, n.,      Equos, m.,
          _slave_.        _age_.          _horse_.
                        SINGULAR.
  _Nom._  servos          aevom           equos
  _Gen._  servi           aevi            equi
  _Dat._  servo           aevo            equo
  _Acc._  servom          aevom           equom
  _Voc._  serve           aevom           eque
  _Abl._  servo           aevo            equo

            _Later inflection (after Cicero)._
                        SINGULAR.
  _Nom._  servus          aevum           equus
  _Gen._  servi           aevi            equi
  _Dat._  servo           aevo            equo
  _Act._  servum          aevum           equum
  _Voc._  serve           aevum           eque
  _Abl._  servo           aevo            equo

1. The Plural of these nouns is regular, and always uniform.

Peculiarities of Inflection in the Second Declension.

25. 1. Proper names in -ius regularly form the Genitive Singular in -i
(instead of -ii), and the Vocative Singular in -i (for -ie); as Vergili,
_of Virgil_, or _O Virgil_ (instead of Vergilii, Vergilie). In such words
the accent stands upon the penult, even though that be short. Nouns in
-ajus, -ejus form the Gen. in -ai, -ei, as Pompejus, Pompei.

2. Nouns in -ius and -ium, until after the beginning of the reign of
Augustus (31 B.C.), regularly formed the Genitive Singular in -i (instead
of -ii); as,--

  _Nom._  ingenium        filius
  _Gen._  ingeni          fili

These Genitives accent the penult, even when it is short.

3. Filius forms the Vocative Singular in -i (for -ie); _viz_. fili, _O
son!_

4. Deus, _god_, lacks the Vocative Singular. The Plural is inflected as
follows:--

  _Nom._  di              (dei)
  _Gen._  deorum          (deum)
  _Dat._  dis             (deis)
  _Acc._  deos
  _Voc._  di              (dei)
  _Abl._  dis             (deis)

5. The Locative Singular ends in -i; as, Corinthi, _at Corinth_.

6. The Genitive Plural has -um, instead of -orum,--

  a) in words denoting money and measure; as, talentum, _of talents_;
  modium, _of pecks_; sestertium, _of sesterces_.

  b) in duumvir, triumvir, decemvir; as, duumvirum.

  c) sometimes in other words; as, liberum, _of the children_; socium, _of
  the allies_.

Exceptions to Gender in the Second Declension.

26. 1. The following nouns in -us are Feminine by exception:--

  a) Names of towns, islands, trees--according to the general rule laid
  down in Sec. 15, 2; also some names of countries; as Aegyptus, _Egypt_.

  b) Five special words,--

    alvus, _belly_;
    carbasus, _flax_;
    colus, _distaff_;
    humus, _ground_;
    vannus, _winnowing-fan_.

  c) A few Greek Feminines; as,--

    atomus, _atom_;
    diphthongus, _diphthong_.

2. The following nouns in -us are Neuter:--

  pelagus, _sea_;
  virus, _poison_;
  vulgus, _crowd_.

Greek Nouns of the Second Declension.

27. These end in -os, -os, Masculine or Feminine; and -on, Neuter. They are
mainly proper names, and are declined as follows:--

          Barbitos, m.    Androgeos, m.,  Ilion, n.,
          and f.,         _Androgeos._    _Troy._
          _lyre._
  _Nom._  barbitos        Androgeos       Ilion
  _Gen._  barbiti         Androgeo, -i    Ilii
  _Dat._  barbito         Androgeo        Ilio
  _Acc._  barbiton        Androgeo, -on   Ilion
  _Voc._  barbite         Androgeos       Ilion
  _Abl._  barbito         Androgeo        Ilio

1. Nouns in -os sometimes form the Accusative Singular in -um instead of
-on; as, Delum, _Delos_.

2. The Plural of Greek nouns, when it occurs, is usually regular.

3. For other rare forms of Greek nouns the lexicon may be consulted.

       *       *       *       *       *

THIRD DECLENSION.

28. Nouns of the Third Declension end in -a, -e, -i, -o, -y, -c, -l, -n,
-r, -s, -t, -x. The Third Declension includes several distinct classes of
Stems,--

    I.  Pure Consonant-Stems.
   II.  i-Stems.
  III.  Consonant-Stems which have partially adapted themselves to the
        inflection of i-Stems.
   IV.  A very few stems ending in a long vowel or a diphthong.
    V.  Irregular Nouns.

I. Consonant-Stems.

29. 1. In these the stem appears in its unaltered form in all the oblique
cases, so that the actual case-endings may be clearly recognized.

2. Consonant-Stems fall into several natural subdivisions, according as the
stem ends in a Mute, Liquid, Nasal, or Spirant.

_A. Mute-Stems._

30. Mute-Stems may end,--

1. In a Labial (p); as, princep-s.

2. In a Guttural (g or c); as, remex (remeg-s); dux (duc-s).

3. In a Dental (d or t); as, lapis (lapid-s); miles (milet-s).

1. STEMS IN A LABIAL MUTE (p).

31. Princeps, m., _chief_.

          SINGULAR.       TERMINATION.
  _Nom._  princeps        -s
  _Gen._  principis       -is
  _Dat._  principi        -i
  _Acc._  principem       -em
  _Voc._  princeps        -s
  _Abl._  principe        -e

          PLURAL.
  _Nom._  principes       -es
  _Gen._  principum       -um
  _Dat._  principibus     -ibus
  _Acc._  principes       -es
  _Voc._  principes       -es
  _Abl._  principibus     -ibus

2. STEMS IN A GUTTURAL MUTE (g, c).

32. In these the termination -s of the Nominative Singular unites with the
guttural, thus producing -x.

              Remex, m., _rower_.              Dux, c., _leader_.
          SINGULAR.       PLURAL.         SINGULAR.       PLURAL.
  _Nom._  remex           remiges         dux             duces
  _Gen._  remigis         remigum         ducis           ducum
  _Dat._  remigi          remigibus       duci            ducibus
  _Acc._  remigem         remiges         ducem           duces
  _Voc._  remex           remiges         dux             duces
  _Abl._  remige          remigibus       duce            ducibus

3. STEMS IN A DENTAL MUTE (d, t).

33. In these the final d or t of the stem disappears in the Nominative
Singular before the ending -s.

              Lapis, m., _stone_.            Miles, m., _soldier_.
          SINGULAR.       PLURAL.         SINGULAR.       PLURAL.
  _Nom._  lapis           lapides         miles           milites
  _Gen._  lapidis         lapidum         militis         militum
  _Dat._  lapidi          lapidibus       militi          militibus
  _Acc._  lapidem         lapides         militem         milites
  _Voc._  lapis           lapides         miles           milites
  _Abl._  lapide          lapidibus       milite          militibus

_B. Liquid Stems._

34. These end in -l or -r.

          Vigil, m.,      Victor, m.,     Aequor, n.,
          _watchman_.     _conqueror_.    _sea_.

                        SINGULAR.
  _Nom._  vigil           victor          aequor
  _Gen._  vigilis         victoris        aequoris
  _Dat._  vigili          victori         aequori
  _Acc._  vigilem         victorem        aequor
  _Voc._  vigil           victor          aequor
  _Abl._  vigile          victore         aequore

                         PLURAL.
  _Nom._  vigiles         victores        aequora
  _Gen._  vigilum         victorum        aequorum
  _Dat._  vigilibus       victoribus      aequoribus
  _Acc._  vigiles         victores        aequora
  _Voc._  vigiles         victores        aequora
  _Abl._  vigilibus       victoribus      aequoribus

1. Masculine and Feminine stems ending in a liquid form the Nominative and
Vocative Singular without termination.

2. The termination is also lacking in the Nominative, Accusative and
Vocative Singular of all neuters of the Third Declension.

_C. Nasal Stems._

35. These end in -n,[13] which often disappears in the Nom. Sing.

                Leo, m., _lion_.               Nomen, n., _name_
          SINGULAR.       PLURAL.         SINGULAR.       PLURAL.
  _Nom._  leo             leones          nomen           nomina
  _Gen._  leonis          leonum          nominis         nominum
  _Dat._  leoni           leonibus        nomini          nominibus
  _Acc._  leonem          leones          nomen           nomina
  _Voc._  leo             leones          nomen           nomina
  _Abl._  leone           leonibus        nomine          nominibus

_D. s-Stems._


36.       Mos, m.         Genus, n.,      Honor, m.,
          _custom_.       _race_.         _honor_.

                        SINGULAR.
  _Nom._  mos             genus           honor
  _Gen._  moris           generis         honoris
  _Dat._  mori            generi          honori
  _Acc._  morem           genus           honorem
  _Voc._  mos             genus           honor
  _Abl._  more            genere          honore

                         PLURAL.
  _Nom._  mores           genera          honores
  _Gen._  morum           generum         honorum
  _Dat._  moribus         generibus       honoribus
  _Acc._  mores           genera          honores
  _Voc._  mores           genera          honores
  _Abl._  moribus         generibus       honoribus

1. Note that the final s of the stem becomes r (between vowels) in the
oblique cases. In many words (honor, color, and the like) the r of the
oblique cases has, by analogy, crept into the Nominative, displacing the
earlier s, though the forms honos, colos, etc., also occur, particularly in
early Latin and in poetry.

II. i-Stems.

_A. Masculine and Feminine i-Stems._

37. These regularly end in -is in the Nominative Singular, and always have
-ium in the Genitive Plural. Originally the Accusative Singular ended in
-im, the Ablative Singular in -i, and the Accusative Plural in -is; but
these endings have been largely displaced by -em, -e, and -es, the endings
of Consonant-Stems.


38.       Tussis, f.,     Ignis, m.,      Hostis, c.,
          _cough_; stem,  _fire_; stem,   _enemy_; stem,
          tussi-.         igni-.          hosti-.

                        SINGULAR.                         TERMINATION.
  _Nom._  tussis          ignis           hostis          -is
  _Gen._  tussis          ignis           hostis          -is
  _Dat._  tussi           igni            hosti           -i
  _Acc._  tussim          ignem           hostem          -im, -em
  _Voc._  tussis          ignis           hostis          -is
  _Abl._  tussi           igni or e       hoste           -i, -e

                               PLURAL.
  _Nom._  tusses          ignes           hostes          -es
  _Gen._  tussium         ignium          hostium         -ium
  _Dat._  tussibus        ignibus         hostibus        -ibus
  _Acc._  tussis or -es   ignis or -es    hostis or -es   -is, -es
  _Voc._  tusses          ignes           hostes          -es
  _Abl._  tussibus        ignibus         hostibus        -ibus

1. To the same class belong--

   apis, _bee_.            cratis, _hurdle_.      +*securis, _axe_.
   auris, _ear_.          *febris, _fever_.         sementis, _sowing_.
   avis, _bird_.           orbis, _circle_.       +*sitis, _thirst_.
   axis, _axle_.           ovis, _sheep_.           torris, _brand_.
  *buris, _plough-beam_.   pelvis, _basin_.       +*turris, _tower_.
   clavis, _key_.          puppis, _stern_.         trudis, _pole_.
   collis, _hill_.         restis, _rope_.          vectis, _lever_.
                           and many others.

Words marked with a star regularly have Acc. -im; those marked with a +
regularly have Abl. -i. Of the others, many at times show -im and -i. Town
and river names in -is regularly have -im, -i.

2. Not all nouns in -is are i-Stems. Some are genuine consonant-stems, and
have the regular consonant terminations throughout, notably, canis, _dog_;
juvenis, _youth_.[14]

3. Some genuine i-Stems have become disguised in the Nominative Singular;
as, pars, _part_, for par(ti)s; anas, _duck_, for ana(ti)s; so also mors,
_death_; dos, _dowry_; nox, _night_; sors, _lot_; mens, _mind_; ars, _art_;
gens, _tribe_; and some others.

_B. Neuter i-Stems._

39. These end in the Nominative Singular in -e, -al, and -ar. They always
have -i in the Ablative Singular, -ia in the Nominative, Accusative, and
Vocative Plural, and -ium in the Genitive Plural, thus holding more
steadfastly to the i-character than do Masculine and Feminine i-Stems.

          Sedile,         Animal,         Calcar,
          _seat_;         _animal_;       _spur_;
          stem, sedili-.  stem,           stem,
                          animali-.       calcari-.

                        SINGULAR.                         TERMINATION.
  _Nom._  sedile          animal          calcar          -e or wanting
  _Gen._  sedilis         animalis        calcaris        -is
  _Dat._  sedili          animali         calcari         -i
  _Acc._  sedile          animal          calcar          -e or wanting
  _Voc._  sedile          animal          calcar          -e or wanting
  _Abl._  sedili          animali         calcari         -i

                         PLURAL.
  _Nom._  sedilia         animalia        calcaria        -ia
  _Gen._  sedilium        animalium       calcarium       -ium
  _Dat._  sedilibus       animalibus      calcaribus      -ibus
  _Acc._  sedilia         animalia        calcaria        -ia
  _Voc._  sedilia         animalia        calcaria        -ia
  _Abl._  sedilibus       animalibus      calcaribus      -ibus

1. In most words of this class the final -i of the stem is lost in the
Nominative Singular; in others it appears as -e.

2. Proper names in -e form the Ablative Singular in -e; as, Soracte, _Mt.
Soracte_; so also sometimes mare, _sea_.

III. Consonant-Stems that have partially adapted themselves
to the Inflection of _i_-Stems.

40. Many Consonant-Stems have so far adapted themselves to the inflection
of i-stems as to take -ium in the Genitive Plural, and -is in the
Accusative Plural. Their true character as Consonant-Stems, however, is
shown by the fact that they never take -im in the Accusative Singular, or
-i in the Ablative Singular. The following words are examples of this
class:--

          Caedes, f.,     Arx, f.,        Linter, f.,
          _slaughter_;    _citadel_;      _skiff_;
          stem, caed-.    stem, arc-.     stem, lintr-.

                        SINGULAR.
  _Nom._  caedes          arx             linter
  _Gen._  caedis          arcis           lintris
  _Dat._  caedi           arci            lintri
  _Acc._  caedem          arcem           lintrem
  _Voc._  caedes          arx             linter
  _Abl._  caede           arce            lintre

                         PLURAL.
  _Nom._  caedes          arces           lintres
  _Gen._  caedium         arcium          lintrium
  _Dat._  caedibus        arcibus         lintribus
  _Acc._  caedes, -is     arces, -is      lintres, -is
  _Voc._  caedes          arces           lintres
  _Abl._  caedibus        arcibus         lintribus

1. The following classes of nouns belong here:--

  a) Nouns in -es, with Genitive in -is; as, nubes, aedes, clades, etc.

  b) Many monosyllables in -s or -x preceded by one or more consonants; as,
  urbs, mons, stirps, lanx.

  c) Most nouns in -ns and -rs as, cliens, cohors.

  d) Uter, venter; fur, lis, mas, mus, nix; and the Plurals fauces,
  penates, Optimates, Samnites, Quirites.

  e) Sometimes nouns in -tas with Genitive -tatis; as, civitas, aetas.
  Civitas _usually_ has civitatium.

IV. Stems in _-i_, _-u_, and Diphthongs.


41.       Vis, f.,        Sus, c.,        Bos, c., _ox_,  Juppiter, m.,
          _force_;        _swine_;        _cow_;          _Jupiter_;
          stem, vi-.      stem, su-.      stem, bou-.     stem, Jou-.

                                SINGULAR.
  _Nom._  vis             sus             bos             Juppiter
  _Gen._  ----            suis            bovis           Jovis
  _Dat._  ----            sui             bovi            Jovi
  _Acc._  vim             suem            bovem           Jovem
  _Voc._  vis             sus             bos             Juppiter
  _Abl._  vi              sue             bove            Jove

                                 PLURAL.
  _Nom._  vires           sues            boves
  _Gen._  virium          suum            bovum, boum
  _Dat._  viribus         suibus, subus   bobus, bubus
  _Acc._  vires           sues            boves
  _Voc._  vires           sues            boves
  _Abl._  viribus         suibus, subus   bobus, bubus

1. Notice that the oblique cases of sus have u in the root syllable.

2. Grus is declined like sus, except that the Dative and Ablative Plural
are always gruibus.

3. Juppiter is for Jou-pater, and therefore contains the same stem as in
Jov-is, Jov-i, etc.

Navis was originally a diphthong stem ending in au-, but it has passed over
to the i-stems (Sec. 37). Its ablative often ends in -i.

V. Irregular Nouns.


42.       Senex, m.,      Caro, f.,       Os, n.,
          _old man_.      _flesh_.        _bone_.

                        SINGULAR.
  _Nom._  senex           caro            os
  _Gen._  senis           carnis          ossis
  _Dat._  seni            carni           ossi
  _Acc._  senem           carnem          os
  _Voc._  senex           caro            os
  _Abl._  sene            carne           osse

                         PLURAL.
  _Nom._  senes           carnes          ossa
  _Gen._  senum           carnium         ossium
  _Dat._  senibus         carnibus        ossibus
  _Acc._  senes           carnes          ossa
  _Voc._  senes           carnes          ossa
  _Abl._  senibus         carnibus        ossibus

1. Iter, itineris, n., _way_, is inflected regularly throughout from the
stem itiner-.

2. Supellex, supellectilis, f., _furniture_, is confined to the Singular.
The oblique cases are formed from the stem supellectil-. The ablative has
both -i and -e.

3. Jecur, n., _liver_, forms its oblique cases from two stems,--jecor- and
jecinor-. Thus, Gen. jecoris or jecinoris.

4. Femur, n., _thigh_, usually forms its oblique cases from the stem
femor-, but sometimes from the stem femin-. Thus, Gen. femoris or feminis.

General Principles of Gender in the Third Declension.

43. 1. Nouns in -o, -or, -os, -er, -es are Masculine.

2. Nouns in -as, -es, -is, -ys, -x, -s (preceded by a consonant); -do, -go
(Genitive -inis); -io (abstract and collective), -us (Genitive -atis or
-udis) are Feminine.

3. Nouns ending in -a, -e, -i, -y, -o, -l, -n, -t, -ar, -ur, -us are
Neuter.

Chief Exceptions to Gender in the Third Declension.

44. Exceptions to the Rule for Masculines.

1. Nouns in -o.

  a. Feminine: caro, _flesh_.

2. Nouns in -or.

  a. Feminine: arbor, _tree_.

  b. Neuter: aequor, _sea_; cor, _heart_; marmor, _marble_.

3. Nouns in -os.

  a. Feminine: dos, _dowry_.

  b. Neuter: os (oris), _mouth_.

4. Nouns in -er.

  a. Feminine: linter, _skiff_.

  b. Neuter: cadaver, _corpse_; iter, _way_; tuber, _tumor_; uber, _udder_.
  Also botanical names in -er; as, acer, _maple_.

5. Nouns in -es.

  a. Feminine: seges, _crop_.

45. Exceptions to the Rule for Feminines.

1. Nouns in -as.

  a. Masculine: vas, _bondsman_.

  b. Neuter: vas, _vessel_.

2. Nouns in -es.

  a. Masculine: aries, _ram_; paries, _wall_; pes, _foot_.

3. Nouns in -is.

  a. Masculine: all nouns in -nis and -guis; as, amnis, _river_; ignis,
  _fire_; panis, _bread_; sanguis, _blood_; unguis, _nail_.

  Also--

  axis, _axle_.           piscis, _fish_.
  collis, _hill_.         postis, _post_.
  fascis, _bundle_.       pulvis, _dust_.
  lapis, _stone_.         orbis, _circle_.
  mensis, _month_.        sentis, _brier_.

4. Nouns in -x.

  a. Masculine: apex, _peak_; codex, _tree-trunk_; grex, _flock_; imbrex,
  _tile_; pollex, _thumb_; vertex, _summit_; calix, _cup_.

5. Nouns in -s preceded by a consonant.

  a. Masculine: dens, _tooth_; fons, _fountain_; mons, _mountain_; pons,
  _bridge_.

6. Nouns in -do.

  a. Masculine: cardo, _hinge_; ordo, _order_.

46. Exceptions to the Rule for Neuters.

1. Nouns in -l.

  a. Masculine: sol, _sun_; sal, _salt_.

2. Nouns in -n.

  a. Masculine: pecten, _comb_.

3. Nouns in -ur.

  a. Masculine: vultur, _vulture_.

4. Nouns in -us.

  a. Masculine: lepus, _hare_.

Greek Nouns of the Third Declension.

47. The following are the chief peculiarities of these:--

1. The ending -a in the Accusative Singular; as, aethera, _aether_;
Salamina, _Salamis_.

2. The ending -es in the Nominative Plural; as, Phryges, _Phrygians_.

3. The ending -as in the Accusative Plural; as, Phrygas, _Phrygians_.

4. Proper names in -as (Genitive -antis) have -a in the Vocative Singular;
as, Atlas (Atlantis), Vocative Atla, _Atlas_.

5. Neuters in -ma (Genitive -matis) have -is instead of -ibus in the Dative
and Ablative Plural; as, poematis, _poems_.

6. Orpheus, and other proper names ending in -eus, form the Vocative
Singular in -eu (Orpheu, etc.). But in prose the other cases usually follow
the second declension; as, Orphei, Orpheo, etc.

7. Proper names in -es, like Pericles, form the Genitive Singular sometimes
in -is, sometimes in -i, as, Periclis or Pericli.

8. Feminine proper names in -o have -us in the Genitive, but -o in the
other oblique cases; as,--

  _Nom._  Dido            _Acc._  Dido
  _Gen._  Didus           _Voc._  Dido
  _Dat._  Dido            _Abl._  Dido

9. The regular Latin endings often occur in Greek nouns.

       *       *       *       *       *

FOURTH DECLENSION.

_u_-Stems.

48. Nouns of the Fourth Declension end in -us Masculine, and -u Neuter.
They are declined as follows:--

             Fructus, m., _fruit_.             Cornu, n., _horn_.
          SINGULAR.       PLURAL.         SINGULAR.       PLURAL.
  _Nom._  fructus         fructus         cornu           cornua
  _Gen._  fructus         fructuum        cornus          cornuum
  _Dat._  fructui         fructibus       cornu           cornibus
  _Acc._  fructum         fructus         cornu           cornua
  _Voc._  fructus         fructus         cornu           cornua
  _Abl._  fructu          fructibus       cornu           cornibus

Peculiarities of Nouns of the Fourth Declension.

49. 1. Nouns in -us, particularly in early Latin, often form the Genitive
Singular in -i, following the analogy of nouns in -us of the Second
Declension; as, senati, ornati. This is usually the case in Plautus and
Terence.

2. Nouns in -us sometimes have -u in the Dative Singular, instead of -ui;
as, fructu (for fructui).

3. The ending -ubus, instead of -ibus, occurs in the Dative and Ablative
Plural of artus (Plural), _limbs_; tribus, _tribe_; and in dis-syllables in
-cus; as, artubus, tribubus, arcubus, lacubus. But with the exception of
tribus, all these words admit the forms in -ibus as well as those in -ubus.

4. Domus, _house_, is declined according to the Fourth Declension, but has
also the following forms of the Second:--

  domi (locative), _at home_;
  domo, _from home_;
  domum, _homewards_, _to one's home_;
  domos, _homewards_, _to their_ (etc.) _homes_

5. The only Neuters of this declension in common use are: cornu, _horn_;
genu, _knee_; and veru, _spit_.

Exceptions to Gender in the Fourth Declension.

50. The following nouns in -us are Feminine: acus, _needle_; domus,
_house_; manus, _hand_; porticus, _colonnade_; tribus, _tribe_; Idus
(Plural), _Ides_; also names of trees (Sec. 15, 2).

       *       *       *       *       *

FIFTH DECLENSION.

e-Stems.

51. Nouns of the Fifth Declension end in -es, and are declined as
follows:--

                Dies, m., _day_.               Res, f., _thing_.
          SINGULAR.       PLURAL.         SINGULAR.       PLURAL.
  _Nom._  dies            dies            res             res
  _Gen._  diei            dierum          rei             rerum
  _Dat._  diei            diebus          rei             rebus
  _Acc._  diem            dies            rem             res
  _Voc._  dies            dies            res             res
  _Abl._  die             diebus          re              rebus

Peculiarities of Nouns of the Fifth Declension.

52. 1. The ending of the Genitive and Dative Singular is -ei, instead of
-ei, when a consonant precedes; as, spei, rei, fidei.

2. A Genitive ending -i (for -ei) is found in plebi (from plebes = plebs)
in the expressions tribunus plebi, _tribune of the people_, and plebi
scitum, _decree of the people_; sometimes also in other words.

3. A Genitive and Dative form in -e sometimes occurs; as, acie.

4. With the exception of dies and res, most nouns of the Fifth Declension
are not declined in the Plural. But acies, series, species, spes, and a few
others are used in the Nominative and Accusative Plural.

Gender in the Fifth Declension.

53. Nouns of the Fifth Declension are regularly Feminine, except dies,
_day_, and meridies, _mid-day_. But dies is sometimes Feminine in the
Singular, particularly when it means an _appointed day_.

       *       *       *       *       *

DEFECTIVE NOUNS.

54. Here belong--

  1. Nouns used in the Singular only.

  2. Nouns used in the Plural only.

  3. Nouns used only in certain cases.

  4. Indeclinable Nouns.

Nouns used in the Singular only.

55. Many nouns, from the nature of their signification, are regularly used
in the Singular only. Thus:--

1. Proper names; as, Cicero, _Cicero_; Italia, _Italy_.

2. Nouns denoting material; as, aes, _copper_; lac, _milk_.

3. Abstract nouns; as, ignorantia, _ignorance_; bonitas, _goodness_.

4. But the above classes of words are sometimes used in the Plural. Thus:--

  a) Proper names,--to denote different members of a family, or specimens
  of a type; as, Cicerones, _the Ciceros_; Catones, _men like Cato_.

  b) Names of materials,--to denote objects made of the material, or
  different kinds of the substance; as, aera, _bronzes_ (i.e. bronze
  figures); ligna, _woods_.

  c) Abstract nouns,--to denote instances of the quality; as, ignorantiae,
  _cases of ignorance_.

Nouns used in the Plural only.

56. Here belong--

1. Many geographical names; as, Thebae, _Thebes_; Leuctra, _Leuctra_;
Pompeji, _Pompeii_.

2. Many names of festivals; as, Megalesia, _the Megalesian festival_.

3. Many special words, of which the following are the most important:--

  angustiae, _narrow pass_.       manes, _spirits of the
  arma, _weapons_.                dead_.
  deliciae, _delight_.            moenia, _city walls_.
  divitiae, _riches_.             minae, _threats_.
  Idus, _Ides_.                   nuptiae, _marriage_.
  indutiae, _truce_.              posteri, _descendants_.
  insidiae, _ambush_.             reliquiae, _remainder_.
  majores, _ancestors_.           tenebrae, _darkness_.
                                  verbera, _blows_.

Also in classical prose regularly--

  cervices, _neck_.               nares, _nose_.
  fides, _lyre_.                  viscera, _viscera_.

Nouns used only in Certain Cases.

57. 1. Used in only One Case. Many nouns of the Fourth Declension are found
only in the Ablative Singular as, jussu, _by the order_; injussu, _without
the order_; natu, _by birth_.

2. Used in Two Cases.

  a. Fors (_chance_), Nom. Sing.; forte, Abl. Sing.

  b. Spontis (_free-will_), Gen. Sing.; sponte, Abl. Sing.

3. Used in Three Cases. Nemo, _no one_ (Nom.), has also the Dat. nemini and
the Acc. neminem. The Gen. and Abl. are supplied by the corresponding cases
of nullus; viz. nullius and nullo.

4. Impetus has the Nom., Acc., and Abl. Sing., and the Nom. and Acc. Plu.;
viz. impetus, impetum, impetu, impetus.


5. a. Preci, precem, prece, lacks the Nom. and Gen. Sing.

  b. Vicis, vicem, vice, lacks the Nom. and Dat. Sing.

6. Opis, dapis, and frugis,--all lack the Nom. Sing.

7. Many monosyllables of the Third Declension lack the Gen. Plu.: as, cor,
lux, sol, aes, os (oris), rus, sal, tus.

Indeclinable Nouns.

58. Here belong--

  fas, n., _right_.               nefas, n., _impiety_.
  instar, n., _likeness_.         nihil, n., _nothing_.
  mane, n., _morning_.            secus, n., _sex_.

1. With the exception of mane (which may serve also as Ablative, _in the
morning_), the nouns in this list are simply Neuters confined in use to the
Nominative and Accusative Singular.

Heteroclites.

59. These are nouns whose forms are partly of one declension, and partly of
another. Thus:--

1. Several nouns have the entire Singular of one declension, while the
Plural is of another; as,--

  vas, vasis (_vessel_);     Plu., vasa, vasoroum, vasis, etc.
  jugerum, jugeri (_acre_);  Plu., jugera, jugerum, jugeribus, etc.

2. Several nouns, while belonging in the main to one declension, have
certain special forms belonging to another. Thus:--

  a) Many nouns of the First Declension ending in -ia take also a Nom. and
  Acc. of the Fifth; as, materies, materiem, _material_, as well as
  materia, materiam.

  b) Fames, _hunger_, regularly of the Third Declension, has the Abl. fame
  of the Fifth.

  c) Requies, requietis, _rest_, regularly of the Third Declension, takes
  an Acc. of the Fifth, requiem, in addition to requietem.

  d) Besides plebs, plebis, _common people_, of the Third Declension, we
  find plebes, plebei (also plebi, see Sec. 52, 2), of the Fifth.

Heterogeneous Nouns.

60. Heterogeneous nouns vary in Gender. Thus:--

1. Several nouns of the Second Declension have two forms,--one Masc. in
-us, and one Neuter in -um; as, clipeus, clipeum, _shield_; carrus, carrum,
_cart_.

2. Other nouns have one gender in the Singular, another in the Plural;
as,--

  SINGULAR.                  PLURAL.
  balneum, n., _bath_;       balneae, f., _bath-house_.
  epulum, n., _feast_;       epulae, f., _feast_.
  frenum, n., _bridle_;      freni, m.(rarely frena, n.), _bridle_.
  jocus, m., _jest_;         joca, n. (also joci, m.), _jests_.
  locus, m., _place_;        loca, n., _places_; loci, m., _passages
                             or topics in an author_.
  rastrum, n., _rake_;       rastri, m.; rastra, n., _rakes_.

  a. Heterogeneous nouns may at the same time be heteroclites, as in case
  of the first two examples above.

Plurals with Change of Meaning.

61. The following nouns have one meaning in the Singular, and another in
the Plural:--

  SINGULAR.                  PLURAL.
  aedes, _temple_;           aedes, _house_.
  auxilium, _help_;          auxilia, _auxiliary troops_.
  carcer, _prison_;          carceres, _stalls for racing-chariot_.
  castrum, _fort_;           castra, _camp_.
  copia, _abundance_;        copiae, _troops_, _resources_.
  finis, _end_;              fines, _borders_, _territory_.
  fortuna, _fortune_;        fortunae, _possessions_, _wealth_.
  gratia, _favor_,           gratiae, _thanks_.
  _gratitude_;
  impedimentum,              impedimenta, _baggage_.
  _hindrance_;
  littera, _letter_ (of the  litterae, _epistle; literature_.
  alphabet);
  mos, _habit_, _custom_;    mores, _character_.
  opera, _help_, _service_;  operae, _laborers_.
  (ops) opis, _help_;        opes, _resources_.
  pars, _part_;              partes, _party_; _role_.
  sal, _salt_;               sales, _wit_.

       *       *       *       *       *

B. ADJECTIVES.

62. Adjectives denote _quality_. They are declined like nouns, and fall
into two classes,--

1. Adjectives of the First and Second Declensions.

2. Adjectives of the Third Declension.

       *       *       *       *       *

ADJECTIVES OF THE FIRST AND SECOND DECLENSIONS.

63. In these the Masculine is declined like hortus, puer, or ager, the
Feminine like porta, and the Neuter like bellum. Thus, Masculine like
hortus:--

                      Bonus, _good_.

                        SINGULAR.
          MASCULINE.      FEMININE.       NEUTER.
  _Nom._  bonus           bona            bonum
  _Gen._  boni            bonae           boni
  _Dat._  bono            bonae           bono
  _Acc._  bonum           bonam           bonum
  _Voc._  bone            bona            bonum
  _Abl._  bono            bona            bono

                         PLURAL.
  _Nom._  boni            bonae           bona
  _Gen._  bonorum         bonarum         bonorum
  _Dat._  bonis           bonis           bonis
  _Acc._  bonos           bonas           bona
  _Voc._  boni            bonae           bona
  _Abl._  bonis           bonis           bonis

1. The Gen. Sing. Masc. and Neut. of Adjectives in -ius ends in -ii (not in
-i as in case of Nouns; see Sec. 25, 1; 2). So also the Voc. Sing. of such
Adjectives ends in -ie, not in i. Thus eximius forms Gen. eximii; Voc.
eximie.

2. Distributives (see Sec. 78, 1, c) regularly form the Gen. Plu. Masc. and
Neut. in -um instead of -orum (compare Sec. 25, 6); as, denum centenum; but
always singulorum.

64. Masculine like puer:--

                     Tener, _tender_.

                        SINGULAR.
          MASCULINE.      FEMININE        NEUTER.
  _Nom._  tener           tenera          tenerum
  _Gen._  teneri          tenerae         teneri
  _Dat._  tenero          tenerae         tenero
  _Acc._  tenerum         teneram         tenerum
  _Voc._  tener           tenera          tenerum
  _Abl._  tenero          tenera          tenero

                         PLURAL.
  _Nom._  teneri          tenerae         tenera
  _Gen._  tenerorum       tenerarum       tenerorum
  _Dat._  teneris         teneris         teneris
  _Acc._  teneros         teneras         tenera
  _Voc._  teneri          tenerae         tenera
  _Abl._  teneris         teneris         teneris

65. Masculine like ager:--

                     Sacer, _sacred_.

                        SINGULAR.
          MASCULINE.      FEMININE.       NEUTER.
  _Nom._  sacer           sacra           sacrum
  _Gen._  sacri           sacrae          sacri
  _Dat._  sacro           sacrae          sacro
  _Acc._  sacrum          sacram          sacrum
  _Voc._  sacer           sacra           sacrum
  _Abl._  sacro           sacra           sacro

                         PLURAL.
  _Nom._  sacri           sacrae          sacra
  _Gen._  sacrorum        sacrarum        sacrorum
  _Dat._  sacris          sacris          sacris
  _Acc._  sacros          sacras          sacra
  _Voc._  sacri           sacrae          sacra
  _Abl._  sacris          sacris          sacris

1. Most adjectives in -er are declined like sacer. The following however,
are declined like tener: asper, _rough_; lacer, _torn_; liber, _free_;
miser, _wretched_; prosper, _prosperous_; compounds in -fer and -ger;
sometimes dexter, _right_.

2. Satur, _full_, is declined: satur, satura, saturum.

Nine Irregular Adjectives.

66. Here belong--

  alius, _another_;           alter, _the other_;
  ullus, _any_;               nullus, _none_;
  uter, _which?_ (of two);    neuter, _neither_;
  solus, _alone_;             totus, _whole_;
                unus, _one_, _alone_.

They are declined as follows:--

                        SINGULAR.
          MASCULINE.      FEMININE.       NEUTER.
  _Nom._  alius           alia            aliud
  _Gen._  alterius        alterius        alterius[15]
  _Dat._  alii            alii            alii
  _Acc._  alium           aliam           aliud
  _Voc._  ----            ----            ----
  _Abl._  alio            alia            alio

  _Nom._  alter           altera          alterum
  _Gen._  alterius        alterius        alterius
  _Dat._  alteri          alteri[16]      alteri
  _Acc._  alterum         alteram         alterum
  _Voc._  ----            ----            ----
  _Abl._  altero          altera          altero

  _Nom._  uter            utra            utrum
  _Gen._  utrius          utrius          utrius
  _Dat._  utri            utri            utri
  _Acc._  utrum           utram           utrum
  _Voc._  ----            ----            ----
  _Abl._  utro            utra            utro

  _Nom._  totus           tota            totum
  _Gen._  totius          totius          totius
  _Dat._  toti            toti            toti
  _Acc._  totum           totam           totum
  _Voc._  ----            ----            ----
  _Abl._  toto            tota            toto

1. All these words lack the Vocative. The Plural is regular.

2. Neuter is declined like uter.

       *       *       *       *       *

ADJECTIVES OF THE THIRD DECLENSION.

67. These fall into three classes,--

1. Adjectives of three terminations in the Nominative Singular,--one for
each gender.

2. Adjectives of two terminations.

3. Adjectives of one termination.

  a. With the exception of Comparatives, and a few other words mentioned
  below in Sec. 70, 1, all Adjectives of the Third Declension follow the
  inflection of i-stems; i.e. they have the Ablative Singular in -i, the
  Genitive Plural in -ium, the Accusative Plural in -is (as well as -es) in
  the Masculine and Feminine, and the Nominative and Accusative Plural in
  -ia in Neuters.

Adjectives of Three Terminations.

68. These are declined as follows:--

                      Acer, _sharp_.

                        SINGULAR.
          MASCULINE.      FEMININE.       NEUTER.
  _Nom._  acer            acris           acre
  _Gen._  acris           acris           acris
  _Dat._  acri            acri            acri
  _Acc._  acrem           acrem           acre
  _Voc._  acer            acris           acre
  _Abl._  acri            acri            acri

                         PLURAL.
  _Nom._  acres           acres           acria
  _Gen._  acrium          acrium          acrium
  _Dat_,  acribus         acribus         acribus
  _Acc._  acres, -is      acres, -is      acria
  _Voc._  acres           acres           acria
  _Abl._  acribus         acribus         acribus

1. Like acer are declined alacer, _lively_; campester, _level_; celeber,
_famous_; equester, _equestrian_; paluster, _marshy_; pedester,
_pedestrian_; puter, _rotten_; saluber, _wholesome_; silvester, _woody_;
terrester, _terrestrial_; volucer, _winged_; also names of months in -ber,
as September.

2. Celer, celeris, celere, _swift_, retains the e before r, but lacks the
Genitive Plural.

3. In the Nominative Singular of Adjectives of this class the Feminine form
is sometimes used for the Masculine. This is regularly true of salubris,
silvestris, and terrestris. In case of the other words in the list, the use
of the Feminine for the Masculine is confined chiefly to early and late
Latin, and to poetry.

Adjectives of Two Terminations.

69. These are declined as follows:--

               Fortis, _strong._              Fortior, _stronger._
                                SINGULAR.
          M. AND F.       NEUT.           M. AND F.       NEUT.
  _Nom._  fortis          forte           fortior         fortius
  _Gen._  fortis          fortis          fortioris       fortioris
  _Dat._  forti           forti           fortiori        fortiori
  _Acc._  fortem          forte           fortiorem       fortius
  _Voc._  fortis          forte           fortior         fortius
  _Abl._  forti           forti           fortiore        fortiore

                                 PLURAL.
  _Nom._  fortes          fortia          fortiores       fortiora
  _Gen._  fortium         fortium         fortiorum       fortiorum
  _Dat._  fortibus        fortibus        fortioribus     fortioribus
  _Acc._  fortes, -is     fortia          fortiores, -is  fortiora
  _Voc._  fortes          fortia          fortiores       fortiora
  _Abl._  fortibus        fortibus        fortioribus     fortioribus

1. Fortior is the Comparative of fortis. All Comparatives are regularly
declined in the same way. The Acc. Plu. in -is is rare.

Adjectives of One Termination.


70.             Felix, _happy._.              Prudens, _prudent._

                                SINGULAR.
          M. AND F.       NEUT.           M. AND F.       NEUT.
  _Nom._  felix           felix           prudens         prudens
  _Gen._  felicis         felicis         prudentis       prudentis
  _Dat._  felici          felici          prudenti        prudenti
  _Acc._  felicem         felix           prudentem       prudens
  _Voc._  felix           felix           prudens         prudens
  _Abl._  felici          felici          prudenti        prudenti

                                 PLURAL.
  _Nom._  felices         felicia         prudentes       prudentia
  _Gen._  felicium        felicium        prudentium      prudentium
  _Dat._  felicibus       felicibus       prudentibus     prudentibus
  _Acc._  felices, -is    felicia         prudentes, -is  prudentia
  _Voc._  felices         felicia         prudentes       prudentia
  _Abl._  felicibus       felicibus       prudentibus     prudentibus

                 Vetus, _old_.                   Plus, _more_.

                                SINGULAR.
          M. AND F.       NEUT.           M. AND F.       NEUT.
  _Nom._  vetus           vetus           ----            plus
  _Gen._  veteris         veteris         ----            pluris
  _Dat._  veteri          veteri          ----            ----
  _Acc._  veterem         vetus           ----            plus
  _Voc._  vetus           vetus           ----            ----
  _Abl._  vetere          vetere          ----            plure

                                 PLURAL.
  _Nom._  veteres         vetera          plures          plura
  _Gen._  veterum         veterum         plurium         plurium
  _Dat._  veteribus       veteribus       pluribus        pluribus
  _Acc._  veteres         vetera          plures, -is     plura
  _Voc._  veteres         vetera          ----            ----
  _Abl._  veteribus       veteribus       pluribus        pluribus

1. It will be observed that vetus is declined as a pure Consonant-Stem;
i.e. Ablative Singular in -e, Genitive Plural in -um, Nominative Plural
Neuter in -a, and Accusative Plural Masculine and Feminine in -es only. In
the same way are declined compos, _controlling_; dives, _rich_; particeps,
_sharing_; pauper, _poor_; princeps, _chief_; sospes, _safe_; superstes,
_surviving_. Yet dives always has Neut. Plu. ditia.

2. Inops, _needy_, and memor, _mindful_, have Ablative Singular inopi,
memori, but Genitive Plural inopum, memorum.

3. Participles in -ans and -ens follow the declension of i-stems. But they
do not have -i the Ablative, except when employed as adjectives; when used
as participles or as substantives, they have -e; as,--

  a sapienti viro, _by a wise man_; but
  a sapiente, _by a philosopher._
  Tarquinio regnante, _under the reign of Tarquin._

4. Plus, in the Singular, is always a noun.

5. In the Ablative Singular, adjectives, when used as substantives,--

  a) usually retain the adjective declension; as,--

    aequalis, _contemporary_, Abl. aequali.
    consularis, _ex-consul_, Abl. consulari

  So names of Months; as, Aprili, _April_; Decembri, _December_.

  b) But adjectives used as proper names have -e in the Ablative Singular;
  as, Celere, Celer; Juvenale, _Juvenal_.

  c) Patrials in -as, -atis and -is, -itis, when designating places
  regularly have -i; as, in Arpinati, _on the estate at Arpinum_, yet -e,
  when used of persons; as, ab Arpinate, _by an Arpinatian_.

6. A very few indeclinable adjectives occur, the chief of which are frugi,
_frugal_; nequam, _worthless_.

7. In poetry, adjectives and participles in -ns sometimes form the Gen.
Plu. in -um instead of -ium; as, venientum, _of those coming_.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMPARISON OF ADJECTIVES.

71. 1. There are three degrees of Comparison,--the Positive, the
Comparative, and the Superlative.

2. The Comparative is regularly formed by adding -ior (Neut. -ius), and the
Superlative by adding -issimus (-a, -um), to the Stem of the Positive
deprived of its final vowel; as,--

  altus, _high_,              altior, _higher_,   altissimus, _highest_,
                                                  _very high_.
  fortis, _brave_,            fortior,            fortissimus.
  felix, _fortunate_,         felicior,           felicissimus.

So also Participles, when used as Adjectives; as,--

  doctus, _learned_,          doctior,            doctissimus.
  egens, _needy_,             egentior,           egentissimus.

3. Adjectives in -er form the Superlative by appending -rimus to the
Nominative of the Positive. The Comparative is regular. Thus:--

  asper, _rough_,             asperior,           asperrimus.
  pulcher, _beautiful_,       pulchrior,          pulcherrimus.
  acer, _sharp_,              acrior,             acerrimus.
  celer, _swift_,             celerior,           celerrimus.

  a. Notice maturus, maturior, maturissimus or maturrimus.

4. Five Adjectives in -ilis form the Superlative by adding -limus to the
Stem of the Positive deprived of its final vowel. The Comparative is
regular. Thus:--

  facilis, _easy_,            facilior,           facillimus.
  difficilis, _diffcult_,     difficilior,        difficillimus.
  similis, _like_,            similior,           simillimus.
  dissimilis, _unlike_,       dissimilior,        dissimillimus.
  humilis, _low_,             humilior,           humillimus.

5. Adjectives in -dicus, -ficus, and -volus form the Comparative and
Superlative as though from forms in -dicens, -ficens, -volens. Thus:--

  maledicus, _slanderous_,    maledicentior,      maledicentissimus.
  magnificus, _magnificent_,  magnificentior,     magnificentissimus.
  benevolus, _kindly_,        benevolentior,      benevolentissimus.

  a. Positives in -dicens and -volens occur in early Latin; as maledicens,
  benevolens.

6. Dives has the Comparative divitior or ditior; Superlative divitissimus
or ditissimus.

Irregular Comparison.

72. Several Adjectives vary the Stem in Comparison; _viz_.--

  bonus, _good_,              melior,             optimus.
  malus, _bad_,               pejor,              pessimus.
  parvus, _small_,            minor,              minimus.
  magnus, _large_,            major,              maximus.
  multus, _much_,             plus,               plurimus,
  frugi, _thrifty_,           frugalior,          frugalissimus,
  nequam, _worthless_,        nequior,            nequissimus.

Defective Comparison.

73. 1. Positive lacking entirely,--

  (Cf. prae, _in front    prior, _former_,        primus, _first_
  of_.)
  (Cf. citra, _this side  citerior, _on this      citimus, _near_.
  of_.)                   side_,
  (Cf. ultra, _beyond_.)  ulterior, _farther_,    ultimus, _farthest_.
  (Cf. intra, _within_.)  interior, _inner_,      intimus, _inmost_
  (Cf. prope, _near_.)    propior, _nearer_,      proximus, _nearest_.
  (Cf. de, _down_.)       deterior, _inferior_,   deterrimus, _worst_.
  (Cf. archaic potis,     potior, _preferable_,   potissimus, _chiefest_
  _possible_.)

2. Positive occurring only in special cases,--

  postero die, anno,      posterior, _later_,     postremus, _latest_,
  etc. _the following                             _last_.
  day_, etc.,                                     postumus, _late-born_,
  posteri,                                        _posthumous_.
  _descendants_,
  exteri,                 exterior, _outer_       extremus, extimus,
  _foreigners_,                                   _outermost_.
  nationes exterae,
  _foreign nations_,
  inferi, _gods of the    inferior, _lower_,      infimus, imus,
  lower world_,                                   _lowest_.
  Mare Inferum,
  _Mediterranean Sea_,
  superi, _gods           superior, _higher_,     supremus, _last_.
  above_,                                         summus, _highest_.
  Mare Superum,
  _Adriatic Sea_,

3. Comparative lacking.

  vetus, _old_,            ----[17]              veterrimus.
  fidus, _faithful_,       ----                  fidissimus.
  novus, _new_,            ----[18]              novissimus,[19] _last_.
  sacer, _sacred_,         ----                  sacerrimus.
  falsus, _false_,         ----                  falsissimus.

Also in some other words less frequently used.

4. Superlative lacking.

  alacer, _lively_,        alacrior,             ----
  ingens, _great_,         ingentior,            ----
  salutaris, _wholesome_,  salutarior,           ----
  juvenis, _young_,        junior,               ----[20]
  senex, _old_,            senior.               ----[21]

  a. The Superlative is lacking also in many adjectives in -alis, -ilis,
  -ilis, -bilis, and in a few others.

Comparison by _Magis_ and _Maxime_.

74. Many adjectives do not admit terminational comparison, but form the
Comparative and Superlative degrees by prefixing magis (_more_) and maxime
(_most_). Here belong--

1. Many adjectives ending in -alis, -aris, -idus, -ilis, -icus, imus, inus,
-orus.

2. Adjectives in -us, preceded by a vowel; as, idoneus, _adapted_; arduus,
_steep_; necessarius, _necessary_.

  a. Adjectives in -quus, of course, do not come under this rule. The first
  u in such cases is not a vowel, but a consonant.

Adjectives not admitting Comparison.

75. Here belong--

1. Many adjectives, which, from the nature of their signification, do not
admit of comparison; as, hodiernus, _of to-day_; annuus, _annual_;
mortalis, _mortal_.

2. Some special words; as, mirus, gnarus, merus; and a few others.

       *       *       *       *       *

FORMATION AND COMPARISON OF ADVERBS.

76. Adverbs are for the most part derived from adjectives, and depend upon
them for their comparison.

1. Adverbs derived from adjectives of the First and Second Declensions form
the Positive by changing -i of the Genitive Singular to -e; those derived
from adjectives of the Third Declension, by changing -is of the Genitive
Singular to -iter; as,--

  carus,      care, _dearly_;
  pulcher,    pulchre, _beautifully_;
  acer,       acriter, _fiercely_;
  levis,      leviter, _lightly_.

  a. But Adjectives in -ns, and a few others, add -er (instead of -iter),
  to form the Adverb; as,--

  sapiens,    sapienter, _wisely_;
  sollers,    sollerter, _skillfully_.

Note audax, audacter, _boldly_.

2. The Comparative of all Adverbs regularly consists of the Accusative
Singular Neuter of the Comparative of the Adjective; while the Superlative
of the Adverb is formed by changing the -i of the Genitive Singular of the
Superlative of the Adjective to -e. Thus--

  (carus)    care, _dearly_,          carius,      carissime.
  (pulcher)  pulchre, _beautifully_,  pulchrius,   pulcherrime.
  (acer)     acriter, _fiercely_,     acrius,      acerrime.
  (levis)    leviter, _lightly_,      levius,      levissime.
  (sapiens)  sapienter, _wisely_,     sapientius,  sapientissime.
  (audax)    audacter, _boldly_,      audacius,    audacissime.

Adverbs Peculiar in Comparison and Formation.


77. 1., _well_,             melius,               optime.
  male, _ill_,              pejus,                pessime.
  magnopere, _greatly_,     magis,                maxime.
  multum, _much_,           plus,                 plurimum.
  non multum, _little_,     minus,                minime.
  parum,
  diu, _long_,              diutius,              diutissime.
  nequiter, _worthlessly_,  nequius,              nequissime.
  saepe, _often_,           saepius,              saepissime.
  mature, _betimes_,        maturius,             maturrime.
                                                  maturissime.
  prope, _near_,            propius,              proxime.
  nuper, _recently_,        ----                  nuperrime.
  ----                      potius, _rather_,     potissimum,
                                                  _especially_.
  ----                      prius, _previously_,  primum, _first_.
                            _before_,
  secus, _otherwise_,       setius, _less_.

2. A number of adjectives of the First and Second Declensions form an
Adverb in -o, instead of -e; as,--

  crebro, _frequently_;   falso, _falsely_;
  continuo,               subito, _suddenly_;
  _immediately_;
              raro, _rarely_, and a few
              others.

  a. cito, quickly, has -o.

3. A few adjectives employ the Accusative Singular Neuter as the Positive
of the Adverb; as,--

  multum, _much_;   paulum,           facile,
                    _little_;         _easily_.

4. A few adjectives of the First and Second Declensions form the Positive
in -iter; as,--

  firmus, firmiter, _firmly_;     humanus, humaniter, _humanly_;
  largus, largiter, _copiously_;  alius, aliter, _otherwise_.

  a. violentus has violenter.

5. Various other adverbial suffixes occur, the most important of which are
-tus and -tim; as, antiquitus, _anciently_; paulatim, _gradually_.

       *       *       *       *       *

NUMERALS.

78. Numerals may be divided into--

I. Numeral Adjectives, comprising--

  a. _Cardinals_; as, unus, _one_; duo, _two_; etc.

  b. _Ordinals_; as, primus, _first_; secundus, _second_; etc.

  c. _Distributives_; as, singuli, _one by one_; bini, _two by two_; etc.

II. Numeral Adverbs; as, semel, _once_; bis, _twice_; etc.

79. TABLE OF NUMERAL ADJECTIVES AND ADVERBS.

              CARDINALS.                 ORDINALS.
          1.  unus, una, unum            primus, _first_
          2.  duo, duae, duo             secundus, _second_
          3.  tres, tria                 tertius, _third_
          4.  quattuor                   quartus, _fourth_
          5.  quinque                    quintus, _fifth_
          6.  sex                        sextus
          7.  septem                     septimus
          8.  octo                       octavus
          9.  novem                      nonus
         10.  decem                      decimus
         11.  undecim                    undecimus
         12.  duodecim                   duodecimus
         13.  tredecim                   tertius decimus
         14.  quattuordecim              quartus decimus
         15.  quindecim                  quintus decimus
         16.  sedecim,                   sextus decimus
              sexdecim
         17.  septendecim                septimus decimus
         18.  duodeviginti               duodevicesimus
         19.  undeviginti                undevicesimus
         20.  viginti                    vicesimus
         21.  viginti unus,              vicesimus primus,
              unus et viginti            unus et vicesimus
         22.  viginti duo,               vicesimus secundus,
              duo et viginti             alter et vicesimus
         30.  triginta                   tricesimus
         40.  quadraginta                quadragesimus
         50.  quinquaginta               quinquagesimus
         60.  sexaginta                  sexagesimus
         70.  septuaginta                septuagesimus
         80.  octoginta                  octogesimus
         90.  nonaginta                  nonagesimus
        100.  centum                     centesimus
        101.  centum unus,               centesimus primus,
              centum et unus             centesimus et primus
        200.  ducenti, -ae, -a           ducentesimus
        300.  trecenti                   trecentesimus
        400.  quadringenti               quadringentesimus
        500.  quingenti                  quingentesimus
        600.  sescenti                   sescentesimus
        700.  septingenti                septingentesimus
        800.  octingenti                 octingentesimus
        900.  nongenti                   nongentesimus
      1,000.  mille                      millesimus
      2,000.  duo milia                  bis millesimus
    100,000.  centum milia               centies millesimus
  1,000,000.  decies centena milia       decies centies millesimus

              DISTRIBUTIVES.             ADVERBS.
          1.  singuli, _one by one_      semel, _once_
          2.  bini, _two by two_         bis
          3.  terni (trini)              ter
          4.  quaterni                   quater
          5.  quini                      quinquies
          6.  seni                       sexies
          7.  septeni                    septies
          8.  octoni                     octies
          9.  noveni                     novies
         10.  deni                       decies
         11.  undeni                     undecies
         12.  duodeni                    duodecies
         13.  terni deni                 terdecies
         14.  quaterni deni              quaterdecies
         15.  quini deni                 quinquies decies
         16.  seni deni                  sexies decies
         17.  septeni deni               septies decies
         18.  duodeviceni                octies decies
         19.  undeviceni                 novies decies
         20.  viceni                     vicies
         21.  viceni singuli,            vicies semel
              singuli et viceni
         22.  viceni bini,               vicies bis
              bini et viceni
         30.  triceni                    tricies
         40.  quadrageni                 quadragies
         50.  quinquageni                quinquagies
         60.  sexageni                   sexagies
         70.  septuageni                 septuagies
         80.  octogeni                   octogies
         90.  nonageni                   nonagies
        100.  centeni                    centies
        101.  centeni singuli,           centies semel
              centeni et singuli
        200.  duceni                     ducenties
        300.  treceni                    trecenties
        400.  quadringeni                quadringenties
        500.  quingeni                   quingenties
        600.  sesceni                    sescenties
        700.  septingeni                 septingenties
        800.  octingeni                  octingenties
        900.  nongeni                    nongenties
      1,000.  singula milia              milies
      2,000.  bina milia                 bis milies
    100,000.  centena milia              centies milies
  1,000,000.  decies centena milia       decies centies milies

NOTE.-- -ensimus and -iens are often written in the numerals instead of
-esimus and -ies.

Declension of the Cardinals.

80. 1. The declension of unus has already been given under Sec. 66.

2. Duo is declined as follows:--

  _Nom._  duo             duae            duo
  _Gen._  duorum          duarum          duorum
  _Dat._  duobus          duabus          duobus
  _Acc._  duos, duo       duas            duo
  _Abl._  duobus          duabus          duobus

  a. So ambo, _both_, except that its final o is long.

3. Tres is declined,--

  _Nom._  tres            tria
  _Gen._  trium           trium
  _Dat._  tribus          tribus
  _Acc._  tres (tris)     tria
  _Abl._  tribus          tribus

4. The hundreds (except centum) are declined like the Plural of bonus.

5. Mille is regularly an adjective in the Singular, and indeclinable. In
the Plural it is a substantive (followed by the Genitive of the objects
enumerated; Sec. 201, 1), and is declined,--

  _Nom._  milia       _Acc._  milia
  _Gen._  milium      _Voc._  milia
  _Dat._  milibus     _Abl._  milibus

Thus mille homines, _a thousand men_; but duo milia hominum, _two thousand
men_, literally _two thousands of men_.

  a. Occasionally the Singular admits the Genitive construction; as, mille
  hominum.

6. Other Cardinals are indeclinable. Ordinals and Distributives are
declined like Adjectives of the First and Second Declensions.

Peculiarities in the Use of Numerals.

81. 1. The compounds from 21 to 99 may be expressed either with the larger
or the smaller numeral first. In the latter case, et is used. Thus:--

    triginta sex or sex et triginta, _thirty-six_.

2. The numerals under 90, ending in 8 and 9, are often expressed by
subtraction; as,--

    duodeviginti, _eighteen_ (but also octodecim);

    undequadraginta, _thirty-nine_ (but also triginta novem or novem et
    triginta).

3. Compounds over 100 regularly have the largest number first; the others
follow without et; as,--

    centum viginti septem, _one hundred and twenty-seven_.

    anno octingentesimo octogesimo secundo, _in the year 882_.

Yet et may be inserted where the smaller number is either a digit or one of
the tens; as,--

    centum et septem, _one hundred and seven_;

    centum et quadraginta, _one hundred and forty_.

4. The Distributives are used--

  a) To denote _so much each_, _so many apiece_; as,--

    bina talenta eis dedit, _he gave them two talents each_.

  b) When those nouns that are ordinarily Plural in form, but Singular in
  meaning, are employed in a Plural sense; as,--

    binae litterae, _two epistles_.

  But in such cases, uni (not singuli) is regularly employed for _one_, and
  trini (not terni) for three; as,--

    unae litterae, _one epistle_; trinae litterae, _three epistles_.

  c) In multiplication; as,--

    bis bina sunt quattuor, _twice two are four_.

  d) Often in poetry, instead of the cardinals; as,--

    bina hastilia, _two spears_.

       *       *       *       *       *

C. PRONOUNS.

82. A Pronoun is a word that indicates something without naming it.

83. There are the following classes of pronouns:--

     I.  Personal.                V.  Intensive.
    II.  Reflexive.              VI.  Relative.
   III.  Possessive.            VII.  Interrogative.
    IV.  Demonstrative.        VIII.  Indefinite.

I. PERSONAL PRONOUNS.

84. These correspond to the English _I_, _you_, _he_, _she_, _it_, etc.,
and are declined as follows:--

          First Person.     Second Person.    Third Person.

                            SINGULAR.
  _Nom._  ego, _I_          tu, _thou_        is, _he_; ea, _she_; id,
                                              _it_
  _Gen._  mei               tui               (For declension see Sec. 87.)
  _Dat._  mihi[22]          tibi[22]
  _Acc._  me                te
  _Voc._  ----              tu
  _Abl._  me                te

                            PLURAL.
  _Nom._  nos, _we_         vos, _you_
  _Gen._  nostrum, nostri   vestrum, vestri
  _Dat._  nobis             vobis
  _Acc._  nos               vos
  _Voc._  ----              vos
  _Abl._  nobis             vobis

1. A Dative Singular mi occurs in poetry.

2. Emphatic forms in -met are occasionally found; as, egomet, _I myself_;
tibimet, _to you yourself_; tu has tute and tutemet (written also tutimet).

3. In early Latin, med and ted occur as Accusative and Ablative forms.

       *       *       *       *       *

II. REFLEXIVE PRONOUNS.

85. These refer to the subject of the sentence or clause in which they
stand; like _myself_, _yourself_, in '_I see myself_,' etc. They are
declined as follows:--

          _First Person._         _Second Person._        _Third Person._
          Supplied by oblique     Supplied by oblique
          cases of ego.           cases of tu.
  _Gen._  mei, _of myself_        tui, _of thyself_       sui
  _Dat._  mihi, _to myself_       tibi, _to thyself_      sibi[22]
  _Acc._  me, _myself_            te, _thyself_           se or sese
  _Voc._  ----                    ----                    ----
  _Abl._  me, _with myself_,      te, _with thyself_,     se or sese
          etc.                    etc.

1. The Reflexive of the Third Person serves for _all genders_ and for _both
numbers_. Thus sui may mean, _of himself_, _herself_, _itself_, or _of
themselves_; and so with the other forms.

2. All of the Reflexive Pronouns have at times a _reciprocal_ force; as,--

    inter se pugnant, _they fight with each other_.

3. In early Latin, sed occurs as Accusative and Ablative.

       *       *       *       *       *

III. POSSESSIVE PRONOUNS.

86. These are strictly adjectives of the First and Second Declensions, and
are inflected as such. They are--

  _First Person._                 _Second Person._
  meus, -a, -um, _my_;            tuus, -a, -um, _thy_;
  noster, nostra, nostrum,        vester, vestra, vestrum,
  _our_;                          _your_;

                  _Third Person._
                  suus, -a, -um, _his_, _her_, _its_, _their_.

1. Suus is exclusively Reflexive; as,--

    pater liberos suos amat, _the father loves his children_.

Otherwise, _his_, _her_, _its_ are regularly expressed by the Genitive
Singular of is, viz. ejus; and _their_ by the Genitive Plural, eorum,
earum.

2. The Vocative Singular Masculine of meus is mi.

3. The enclitic -pte may be joined to the Ablative Singular of the
Possessive Pronouns for the purpose of emphasis. This is particularly
common in case of suo, sua; as, suopte, suapte.

       *       *       *       *       *

IV. DEMONSTRATIVE PRONOUNS.

87. These point out an object as here or there, or as previously mentioned.
They are--

  hic, _this_ (where I am);
  iste, _that_ (where you are);
  ille, _that_ (something distinct from the speaker);
  is, _that_ (weaker than ille);
  idem, _the same_.

Hic, iste, and ille are accordingly the Demonstratives of the First,
Second, and Third Persons respectively.

                                 Hic, _this_.
                    SINGULAR                          PLURAL.
          MASCULINE.  FEMININE.  NEUTER.    MASCULINE.  FEMININE.  NEUTER.
  _Nom._  hic         haec       hoc        hi          hae        haec
  _Gen._  hujus[23]   hujus      hujus      horum       harum      horum
  _Dat._  huic        huic       huic       his         his        his
  _Acc._  hunc        hanc       hoc        hos         has        haec
  _Abl._  hoc         hac        hoc        his         his        his

                        Iste, _that_, _that of yours._
                   SINGULAR.                          PLURAL.
          MASCULINE.  FEMININE.  NEUTER.    MASCULINE.  FEMININE.  NEUTER.
  _Nom._  iste        ista       istud[24]  isti        istae      ista[24]
  _Gen._  istius      istius     istius     istorum     istarum    istorum
  _Dat._  isti        isti       isti       istis       istis      istis
  _Acc._  istum       istam      istud      istos       istas      ista[24]
  _Abl._  isto        ista       isto       istis       istis      istis

Ille (archaic olle), _that_, _that one_, _he_, is declined like iste.[25]

                          Is, _he_, _this_, _that_.
                    SINGULAR                          PLURAL.
          MASCULINE.  FEMININE.  NEUTER.    MASCULINE.  FEMININE.  NEUTER.
  _Nom_.  is          ea         id         ei, ii,     eae        ea
                                            (i)
  _Gen._  ejus        ejus       ejus       eorum       earum      eorum
  _Dat._  ei          ei         ei         eis, iis    eis, iis   eis, iis
  _Acc._  eum         eam        id         eos         eas        ea
  _Abl._  eo          ea         eo         eis, iis    eis, iis   eis, iis

                              Idem, _the same_.
                   SINGULAR.                          PLURAL.
          MASCULINE.  FEMININE.  NEUTER.    MASCULINE.  FEMININE.  NEUTER.
  _Nom_.  idem        eadem      idem       eidem,      eaedem     eadem
                                            iidem
  _Gen._  ejusdem     ejusdem    ejusdem    eorundem    earundem   eorundem
  _Dat._  eidem       eidem      eidem      eisdem      eisdem     eisdem
  _Acc._  eundem      eandem     idem       eosdem      easdem     eadem
  _Abl._  eodem       eadem      eodem      eisdem      eisdem     eisdem

  The Nom. Plu. Masc. also has idem, and the Dat. Abl. Plu. isdem or iisdem

       *       *       *       *       *

V. THE INTENSIVE PRONOUN.

88. The Intensive Pronoun in Latin is ipse. It corresponds to the English
_myself_, etc., in '_I myself_, _he himself._'

                    SINGULAR                          PLURAL.
          MASCULINE.  FEMININE.  NEUTER.    MASCULINE.  FEMININE.  NEUTER.
  _Nom._  ipse        ipsa       ipsum      ipsi        ipsae      ipsa
  _Gen._  ipsius      ipsius     ipsius     ipsorum     ipsarum    ipsorum
  _Dat._  ipsi        ipsi       ipsi       ipsis       ipsis      ipsis
  _Acc._  ipsum       ipsam      ipsum      ipsos       ipsas      ipsa
  _Abl._  ipso        ipsa       ipso       ipsis       ipsis      ipsis

       *       *       *       *       *

VI. THE RELATIVE PRONOUN.

89. The Relative Pronoun is qui, who. It is declined:--

                    SINGULAR                          PLURAL.
          MASCULINE.  FEMININE.  NEUTER.    MASCULINE.  FEMININE.  NEUTER.
  _Nom._  qui         quae       quod       qui         quae       quae
  _Gen._  cujus       cujus      cujus      quorum      quarum     quorum
  _Dat._  cui         cui        cui        quibus[26]  quibus     quibus
  _Acc._  quem        quam       quod       quos        quas       quae
  _Abl._  quo[27]     qua[27]    quo        quibus[26]  quibus     quibus

       *       *       *       *       *

VII. INTERROGATIVE PRONOUNS.

90. The Interrogative Pronouns are quis, _who?_ (substantive) and qui,
_what? what kind of?_ (adjective).

1. Quis, _who_?

                    SINGULAR.               PLURAL.
          MASC. AND FEM.   NEUTER
  _Nom._  quis             quid             The rare Plural
  _Gen._  cujus            cujus            follows the declension
  _Dat._  cui              cui              of the Relative Pronoun.
  _Acc._  quem             quid
  _Abl._  quo              quo

2. Qui, _what? what kind of?_ is declined precisely like the Relative
Pronoun; viz. qui, quae, quod, etc.

  a. An old Ablative qui occurs, in the sense of _how? why?_

  b. Qui is sometimes used for quis in Indirect Questions.

  c. Quis, when limiting words denoting persons, is sometimes an adjective.
  But in such cases quis homo = _what man?_ whereas qui homo = _what sort
  of man?_

  d. Quis and qui may be strengthened by adding -nam. Thus:--

  Substantive:    quisnam, _who, pray?_ quidnam, _what, pray?_
  Adjective:      quinam, quaenam, quodnam, _of what kind, pray?_

       *       *       *       *       *

VIII. INDEFINITE PRONOUNS.

91. These have the general force of _some one_, _any one_.

      SUBSTANTIVES.                 ADJECTIVES.
  M. AND F.               NEUT.         MASC.       FEM.        NEUT.
  quis,                   quid,         qui,        quae, qua,  quod,
  _any one_, _anything_.               _any_.
  aliquis,                aliquid,      aliqui,     aliqua,     aliquod,
       _some one_,                     _any_.
       _something_.
  quisquam,               quidquam,     quisquam,               quidquam,
  _any one_, _anything_.            _any_ (rare)
  quispiam,               quidpiam,     quispiam,   quaepiam,   quodpiam,
  _any one_, _anything_.               _any_.
  quisque,                quidque,      quisque,    quaeque,    quodque,
         _each_.                      _each_.
  quivis,     quaevis,    quidvis,      quivis,     quaevis,    quodvis,
  quilibet,   quaelibet,  quidlibet     quilibet,   quaelibet,  quodlibet,
  _any one_ (_anything_)           _any you wish_
        _you wish_
  quidam,     quaedam,    quiddam,      quidam,     quaedam,    quoddam,
  _a certain person_, or            _a certain_
         _thing_.

1. In the Indefinite Pronouns, only the pronominal part is declined. Thus:
Genitive Singular alicujus, cujuslibet, etc.

2. Note that aliqui has aliqua in the Nominative Singular Feminine, also in
the Nominative and Accusative Plural Neuter. Qui has both qua and quae in
these same cases.

3. Quidam forms Accusative Singular quendam, quandam; Genitive Plural
quorundam, quarundam; the m being assimilated to n before d.

4. Aliquis may be used adjectively, and (occasionally) aliqui
substantively.

5. In combination with ne, si, nisi, num, either quis or qui may stand as a
Substantive. Thus: si quis or si qui.

6. Ecquis, _any one_, though strictly an Indefinite, generally has
interrogative force. It has both substantive and adjective
forms,--substantive, ecquis, ecquid; adjective, ecqui, ecquae and ecqua,
ecquod.

7. Quisquam is not used in the Plural.

8. There are two Indefinite Relatives,--quicumque and quisquis, _whoever_.
Quicumque declines only the first part; quisquis declines both but has only
quisquis, quidquid, quoquo, in common use.

       *       *       *       *       *

PRONOMINAL ADJECTIVES.

92. The following adjectives, also, frequently have pronominal force:--


1.  alius, _another;_                    alter, _the other;_
    uter, _which of two?_ (interr.);     neuter, _neither;_
    _whichever of two_ (rel.);
    unus, _one_;                         nullus, _no one_ (in oblique
                                         cases)

2. The compounds,--

  uterque, utraque, utrumque, _each of two;_
  utercumque, utracumque, utrumcumque, _whoever of two;_
  uterlibet, utralibet, utrumlibet, _either one you please;_
  utervis, utravis, utrumvis, _either one you please;_
  alteruter, alterutra, alterutrum, _the one or the other_.

In these, uter alone is declined. The rest of the word remains unchanged,
except in case of alteruter, which may decline both parts; as,--

  _Nom._  alteruter       altera utra     alterum utrum
  _Gen._  alterius utrius, etc.

       *       *       *       *       *

CHAPTER II.--_Conjugation._

93. A Verb is a word which asserts something; as, est, _he is_; amat, _he
loves_. The Inflection of Verbs is called Conjugation.

94. Verbs have Voice, Mood, Tense, Number, and Person:--

  1. Two Voices,--Active and Passive.

  2. Three Moods,--Indicative, Subjunctive, Imperative.

  3. Six Tenses,--

    Present,         Perfect,
    Imperfect,       Pluperfect,
    Future,          Future
                     Perfect.

  But the Subjunctive lacks the Future and Future Perfect; while the
  Imperative employs only the Present and Future.

  4. Two Numbers,--Singular and Plural.

  5. Three Persons,--First, Second, and Third.

95. These make up the so-called _Finite Verb_. Besides this, we have the
following Noun and Adjective Forms:--

  1. Noun Forms,--Infinitive, Gerund, and Supine.

  2. Adjective Forms,--Participles (including the Gerundive).

96. The Personal Endings of the Verb are,--

              Active.                       Passive.
  _Sing_. 1.  -o; -m; -i (Perf. Ind.);      -r.
          2.  -s; -sti (Perf Ind.);         -ris, -re;
              -to or wanting (Impv.);       -re, -tor (Impv.).
          3.  -t; -to (Impv.);              -tur; -tor (Impv.).
   _Plu_. 1.  -mus;                         -mur.
          2.  -tis; -stis (Perf. Ind.);     -mini.
              -te, -tote (Impv.);
          3.  -nt; -erunt (Perf Ind.);      -ntur; -ntor (Impv.).
              -nto (Impv.);

VERB STEMS.

97. Conjugation consists in appending certain endings to the Stem. We
distinguish three different stems in a fully inflected verb,--

  I. Present Stem, from which are formed--
      1. Present, Imperfect, and Future Indicative,
      2. Present and Imperfect Subjunctive,
      3. The Imperative,
      4. The Present Infinitive,
      - (Active and Passive.)
      5. The Present Active Participle, the Gerund, and Gerundive.
  II. Perfect Stem, from which are formed--
      1. Perfect, Pluperfect, and Future Perfect Indicative,
      2. Perfect and Pluperfect Subjunctive,
      3. Perfect Infinitive,
      - (Active.)
  III. Participial Stem, from which are formed--
      1. Perfect Participle,
      2. Perfect, Pluperfect, and Future Perfect Indicative,
      3. Perfect and Pluperfect Subjunctive,
      4. Perfect Infinitive,
      - (Passive.)

Apparently from the same stem, though really of different origin, are the
Supine, the Future Active Participle, the Future Infinitive Active and
Passive.

THE FOUR CONJUGATIONS.

98. There are in Latin four regular Conjugations, distinguished from each
other by the vowel of the termination of the Present Infinitive Active, as
follows:--

         INFINITIVE   DISTINGUISHING
  CONJUGATION.  TERMINATION.      VOWEL.
    I.      -are            a
   II.      -ere            e
  III.      -ere            e
   IV.      -ire            i

99. PRINCIPAL PARTS. The Present Indicative, Present Infinitive, Perfect
Indicative, and the Perfect Participle[28] constitute the Principal Parts
of a Latin verb,--so called because they contain the different stems, from
which the full conjugation of the verb may be derived.

       *       *       *       *       *

CONJUGATION OF SUM.

100. The irregular verb sum is so important for the conjugation of all
other verbs that its inflection is given at the outset.

                             PRINCIPAL PARTS.
     PRES. IND.        PRES. INF.        PERF. IND.     FUT. PARTIC.[29]
        sum               esse              fui             futurus


                              INDICATIVE MOOD.

                               PRESENT TENSE.
               SINGULAR.                             PLURAL.
  sum, _I am_,                         sumus, _we are_,
  es, _thou art_,                      estis, _you are_,
  est, _he is_;                        sunt, _they are_.

                                 IMPERFECT.
  eram, _I was_,                       eramus, _we were_,
  eras, _thou wast_,                   eratis, _you were_,
  erat, _he was_;                      erant, _they were_.

                                  FUTURE.
  ero, _I shall be_,                   erimus, _we shall be_,
  eris, _thou wilt be_,                eritis, _you will be_,
  erit, _he will be_;                  erunt, _they will be_.

                                  PERFECT.
  fui, _I have been_, _I was_,         fuimus, _we have been_, _we were_,
  fuisti, _thou hast been_, _thou      fuistis, _you have been_, _you
  wast_,                               were_,
  fuit, _he has been_, _he was_;       fuerunt, fuere,
                                       _they have been_, _they were_.

                                PLUPERFECT.
  fueram, _I had been_,                fueramus, _we had been_,
  fueras, _thou hadst been_,           fueratis, _you had been_,
  fuerat, _he had been_;               fuerant, _they had been_.

                              FUTURE PERFECT.
  fuero, _I shall have been_,          fuerimus, _we shall have been_,
  fueris, _thou wilt have been_,       fueritis, _you will have been_,
  fuerit, _he will have been_;         fuerint, _they will have been_.

                              SUBJUNCTIVE.[30]

                                  PRESENT.
               SINGULAR.                             PLURAL.
  sim, _may I be_,                     simus, _let us be_,
  sis, _mayst thou be_,                sitis, _be ye_, _may you be_,
  sit, _let him be_, _may he be_;      sint, _let them be_.

                                 IMPERFECT.
  essem,[31] _I should be_,            essemus, _we should be_,
  esses,[31] _thou wouldst be_,        essetis, _you would be_,
  esset,[31] _he would be_;            essent,[31] _they would be_.

                                  PERFECT.
  fuerim, _I may have been_,           fuerimus, _we may have been_,
  fueris, _thou mayst have been_,      fueritis, _you may have been_,
  fuerit, _he may have been_;          fuerint, _they may have been_.

                                PLUPERFECT.
  fuissem, _I should have been_,       fuissemus, _we should have been_.
  fuisses, _thou wouldst have been_,   fuissetis, _you would have been_,
  fuisset, _he would have been_;       fuissent, _they would have been_.

                                IMPERATIVE.
  _Pres._  es, _be thou_;              este, _be ye_,
  _Fut._   esto, _thou shalt be_,      estote, _ye shall be_,
           esto, _he shall be_;        sunto, _they shall be_.

              INFINITIVE.                          PARTICIPLE.
  _Pres._  esse, _to be_.
  _Perf._  fuisse, _to have been_.
  _Fut._   futurus esse,[32] _to be    _Fut._ futurus,[33] _about to be_.
           about to be_.

       *       *       *       *       *

FIRST (OR A-) CONJUGATION.

101. Active Voice.--Amo, _I love_.

                             PRINCIPAL PARTS.
    PRES. IND.       PRES. INF.       PERF. IND.     PERF. PASS. PARTIC.
        amo             amare            amavi              amatus


                              INDICATIVE MOOD.

                               PRESENT TENSE.
               SINGULAR.                            PLURAL.
  amo, _I love_,                       amamus, _we love_,
  amas, _you love_,                    amatis, _you love_,
  amat, _he loves_;                    amant, _they love_.

                                 IMPERFECT.
  amabam, _I was loving_,[34]          amabamus, _we were loving_,
  amabas, _you were loving_,           amabatis, _you were loving_,
  amabat, _he was loving_;             amabant, _they were loving_

                                  FUTURE.
  amabo, _I shall love_,               amabimus, _we shall love_,
  amabis, _you will love_,             amabitis, _you will love_,
  amabit, _he will love_;              amabunt, _they will love_.

                                  PERFECT.
  amavi, _I have loved_, _I loved_,    amavimus, _we have loved_, _we
                                       loved_,
  amavisti, _you have loved_, _you     amavistis, _you have loved_, _you
  loved_                               loved_,
  amavit, _he has loved_, _he loved_;  amaverunt, -ere, _they have
                                       loved_, _they loved_.

                                PLUPERFECT.
  amaveram, _I had loved_,             amaveramus, _we had loved_,
  amaveras, _you had loved_,           amaveratis, _you had loved_,
  amaverat, _he had loved_;            amaverant, _they had loved_.

                              FUTURE PERFECT.
  amavero, _I shall have loved_,       amaverimus, _we shall have
                                       loved_,
  amaveris, _you will have loved_,     amaveritis, _you will have
                                       loved_,
  amaverit, _he will have loved_;      amaverint, _they will have
                                       loved_.

                                SUBJUNCTIVE.

                                  PRESENT.
  amem, _may I love_,                  amemus, _let us love_,
  ames, _may you love_,                ametis, _may you love_,
  amet, _let him love_;                ament, _let them love_.

                                 IMPERFECT.
  amarem, _I should love_,             amaremus, _we should love_,
  amares, _you would love_,            amaretis, _you would love_,
  amaret, _he would love_;             amarent, _they would love_.

                                  PERFECT.
  amaverim, _I may have loved_,        amaverimus, _we may have loved_,
  amaveris, _you may have loved_,      amaveritis, _you may have loved_,
  amaverit, _he may have loved_;       amaverint, _they may have loved_.

                                PLUPERFECT.
  amavissem, _I should have loved_,    amavissemus, _we should have
                                       loved_,
  amavisses, _you would have loved_,   amavissetis, _you would have
                                       loved_,
  amavisset, _he would have loved_;    amavissent, _they would have
                                       loved_.

                                IMPERATIVE.
  _Pres._  ama, _love thou_;           amate, _love ye_.
  _Fut._   amato, _thou shalt love_,   amatote, _ye shall love_,
           amato, _he shall love_;     amanto, _they shall love_.

              INFINITIVE.                         PARTICIPLE.
  _Pres._  amare, _to love_.           _Pres._  amans,[35] _loving_.
  _Perf._  amavisse, _to have loved_.           (Gen. amantis.)
  _Fut._   amaturus esse, _to be       _Fut._   amaturus, _about to love_.
           about to love_

                GERUND.                             SUPINE.
  _Gen._   amandi, _of loving_,
  _Dat._   amando, _for loving_,
  _Acc._   amandum, _loving_,          _Acc._   amatum, _to love_,
  _Abl._   amando, _by loving_.        _Abl._   amatu, _to love_, _be
                                                loved_.

102. Passive Voice.--Amor, _I am loved_.

                             PRINCIPAL PARTS.
        PRES. IND.              PRES. INF.              PERF. IND.
           amor                   amari                 amatus sum


                             INDICATIVE MOOD.

                              PRESENT TENSE.
                               _I am loved._
               SINGULAR.                           PLURAL.
           amor                                    amamur
           amaris                                  amamini
           amatur                                  amantur

                                 IMPERFECT
                              _I was loved._
           amabar                                  amabamur
           amabaris, _or_ -re                      amabamini
           amabatur                                amabantur

                                  FUTURE.
                            _I shall be loved._
           amabor                                  amabimur
           amaberis, _or_ -re                      amabimini
           amabitur                                amabuntur

                                  PERFECT
                  _I have been loved_, or _I was loved._
           amatus (-a, -um) sum[36]                amati (-ae, -a) sumus
           amatus es                               amati estis
           amatus est                              amati sunt

                                PLUPERFECT.
                            _I had been loved._
           amatus eram[36]                         amati eramus
           amatus eras                             amati eratis
           amatus erat                             amati erant

                              FUTURE PERFECT.
                        _I shall have been loved._
           amatus ero[36]                          amati erimus
           amatus eris                             amati eritis
           amatus erit                             amati erunt

                               SUBJUNCTIVE.

                                 PRESENT.
                   _May I be loved_, _let him be loved._
           amer                                    amemur
           ameris, _or_ -re                        amemini
           ametur                                  amentur

                                IMPERFECT.

                 _I should be loved_, _he would be loved._
           amarer                                  amaremur
           amareris, _or_ -re                      amaremini
           amaretur                                amarentur

                                 PERFECT.

                         _I may have been loved._
           amatus sim[37]                          amati simus
           amatus sis                              amati sitis
           amatus sit                              amati sint

                                PLUPERFECT.

          _I should have been loved_, _he would have been loved._
           amatus essem[37]                        amati essemus
           amatus esses                            amati essetis
           amatus esset                            amati essent

                                IMPERATIVE.
  _Pres._  amare,[38] _be thou         amamini, _be ye loved._
           loved_;
  _Fut._   amator, _thou shalt be
           loved_,
           amator, _he shall be        amantor, _they shall be loved_.
           loved_;

              INFINITIVE.                        PARTICIPLE.
  _Pres._  amari, _to be loved_.
  _Perf._  amatus esse, _to have been  _Perfect._  amatus, _loved_,
           loved_.                                 _having been loved_.
  _Fut._   amatum iri, _to be about    _Gerundive._  amandus, _to be
           to be loved_.                           loved_, _deserving to
                                                   be loved._

       *       *       *       *       *

SECOND (OR E-) CONJUGATION.

103. Active voice.--Moneo, _I advise._

                             PRINCIPAL PARTS.
    PRES. IND.       PRES. INF.       PERF. IND.     PERF. PASS. PARTIC.
       moneo           monere            monui             monitus


                              INDICATIVE MOOD.

                               PRESENT TENSE.
                                _I advise._

               SINGULAR.                            PLURAL.
           moneo                                   monemus
           mones                                   monetis
           monet                                   monent

                                 IMPERFECT.
                     _I was advising_, or _I advised._
           monebam                                 monebamus
           monebas                                 monebatis
           monebat                                 monebant

                                  FUTURE.
                             _I shall advise._
           monebo                                  monebimus
           monebis                                 monebitis
           monebit                                 monebunt

                                  PERFECT.
                     _I have advised_, or _I advised._
           monui                                   monuimus
           monuisti                                monuistis
           monuit                                  monuerunt, _or_ -ere

                                PLUPERFECT.
                              _I had advised._
           monueram                                monueramus
           monueras                                monueratis
           monuerat                                monuerant

                              FUTURE PERFECT.
                          _I shall have advised._
           monuero                                 monuerimus
           monueris                                monueritis
           monuerit                                monuerint

                                SUBJUNCTIVE.

                                  PRESENT.

                     _May I advise_, _let him advise._
           moneam                                  moneamus
           moneas                                  moneatis
           moneat                                  moneant

                                 IMPERFECT.
                   _I should advise_, _he would advise._
           monerem                                 moneremus
           moneres                                 moneretis
           moneret                                 monerent

                                  PERFECT.
                           _I may have advised._
           monuerim                                monuerimus
           monueris                                monueritis
           monuerit                                monuerint

                                PLUPERFECT.
             _I should have advised_, _he would have advised._
           monuissem                               monuissemus
           monuisses                               monuissetis
           monuisset                               monuissent

                                IMPERATIVE.
  _Pres._  mone, _advise thou_;        monete, _advise ye_.
  _Fut._   moneto, _thou shall         monetote, _ye shall advise_,
           advise_,
           moneto, _he shall advise_;  monento, _they shall advise._

              INFINITIVE.                         PARTICIPLE.
  _Pres._  monere, _to advise_.        _Pres._     monens, _advising_.
  _Perf._  monuisse, _to have                      (Gen. monentis.)
           advised_.
  _Fut._   moniturus esse, _to be      _Fut._      moniturus, _about to
           about to advise_.                       advise_.

                GERUND.                             SUPINE.
  _Gen._   monendi, _of advising_,
  _Dat._   monendo, _for advising_,
  _Acc._   monendum, _advising_,       _Acc._      monitum, _to advise_,
  _Abl._   monendo, _by advising_.     _Abl._      monitu, _to advise_,
                                                   _be advised_.

104. Passive voice.--Moneor, _I am advised_.

                             PRINCIPAL PARTS.
        PRES. IND.              PRES. INF.              PERF. IND.
          moneor                  moneri               monitus sum


                              INDICATIVE MOOD.

                               PRESENT TENSE.
                              _I am advised._

               SINGULAR.                            PLURAL.
           moneor                                  monemur
           moneris                                 monemini
           monetur                                 monentur

                                 IMPERFECT.
                              _I was advised._
           monebar                                 monebamur
           monebaris, _or_ -re                     monebamini
           monebatur                               monebantur

                                  FUTURE.
                           _I shall be advised._
           monebor                                 monebimur
           moneberis, _or_ -re                     monebimini
           monebitur                               monebuntur

                                  PERFECT.
                  _I have been advised_, _I was advised._
           monitus sum                             moniti sumus
           monitus es                              moniti estis
           monitus est                             moniti sunt

                                PLUPERFECT.
                           _I had been advised._
           monitus eram                            moniti eramus
           monitus eras                            moniti eratis
           monitus erat                            moniti erant

                              FUTURE PERFECT.
                        _I shall have been advised._
           monitus ero                             moniti erimus
           monitus eris                            moniti eritis
           monitus erit                            moniti erunt

                                SUBJUNCTIVE.

                                  PRESENT.
                 _May I be advised_, _let him be advised._
           monear                                  moneamur
           monearis, _or_ -re                      moneamini
           moneatur                                moneantur

                                 IMPERFECT.
               _I should be advised_, _he would be advised._
           monerer                                 moneremur
           monereris, _or_ -re                     moneremini
           moneretur                               monerentur

                                  PERFECT.
                         _I may have been advised._
           monitus sim                             moniti simus
           monitus sis                             moniti sitis
           monitus sit                             moniti sint

                                PLUPERFECT.
        _I should have been advised_, _he would have been advised._
           monitus essem                           moniti essemus
           monitus esses                           moniti essetis
           monitus esset                           moniti essent

                                IMPERATIVE.
  _Pres._  monere, _be thou advised_;  monemini, _be ye advised_.
  _Fut._   monetor, _thou shalt be
           advised_,
           monetor, _he shall be       monentor, _they shall be
           advised_.                   advised_.

              INFINITIVE.                         PARTICIPLE.
  _Pres._  moneri, _to be advised_.    _Perfect._  monitus, _advised_,
                                                   _having been advised_.
  _Perf._  monitus esse, _to have
           been advised_
  _Fut._   monitum iri, _to be about   _Gerundive._  monendus, _to be
           to be advised._                         advised_, _deserving to
                                                   be advised._

       *       *       *       *       *

THIRD (OR CONSONANT-) CONJUGATION.

105. Active Voice.--Rego, _I rule_.

                             PRINCIPAL PARTS.
    PRES. IND.       PRES. INF.       PERF. IND.     PERF. PASS. PARTIC.
       rego            regere            rexi               rectus


                              INDICATIVE MOOD.

                               PRESENT TENSE.
                                  _I rule_

               SINGULAR.                            PLURAL.
           rego                                    regimus
           regis                                   regitis
           regit                                   regunt

                                 IMPERFECT.
                       _I was ruling_, or _I ruled_.
           regebam                                 regebamus
           regebas                                 regebatis
           regebat                                 regebant

                                  FUTURE.
                              _I shall rule_.
           regam                                   regemus
           reges                                   regetis
           reget                                   regent

                                  PERFECT.
                        _I have ruled_, or _I ruled_
           rexi                                    reximus
           rexisti                                 rexistis
           rexit                                   rexerunt, _or_ -ere

                                PLUPERFECT.
                               _I had ruled_.
           rexeram                                 rexeramus
           rexeras                                 rexeratis
           rexerat                                 rexerant

                              FUTURE PERFECT.
                           _I shall have ruled_.
           rexero                                  rexerimus
           rexeris                                 rexeritis
           rexerit                                 rexerint

                                SUBJUNCTIVE.

                                  PRESENT.
                       _May I rule_, _let him rule._
           regam                                   regamus
           regas                                   regatis
           regat                                   regant

                                 IMPERFECT.
                     _I should rule_, _he would rule._
           regerem                                 regeremus
           regeres                                 regeretis
           regeret                                 regerent

                                  PERFECT.
                            _I may have ruled._
           rexerim                                 rexerimus
           rexeris                                 rexeritis
           rexerit                                 rexerint

                                PLUPERFECT.
               _I should have ruled_, _he would have ruled._
           rexissem                                rexissemus
           rexisses                                rexissetis
           rexisset                                rexissent

                                IMPERATIVE.
  rege, _rule thou_;                   regite, _rule ye_.
  regito, _thou shall rule_,           regitote, _ye shall rule_,
  regito, _he shall rule_;             regunto, _they shall rule_.

              INFINITIVE.                         PARTICIPLE.
  regere, _to rule_.                   _Pres._     regens, _ruling_.
  rexisse, _to have ruled_.                        (Gen. regentis.)
  recturus esse, _to be about to       _Fut._      recturus, _about to
  rule_                                            rule_.

                GERUND.                             SUPINE.
  regendi, _of ruling_,
  regendo, _for ruling_,
  regendum, _ruling_,                  _Acc._      rectum, _to rule_,
  regendo, _by ruling_.                _Abl._      rectu, _to rule_, _be
                                                   ruled_.

106. Passive Voice.--Regor, _I am ruled_.

                             PRINCIPAL PARTS.
        PRES. IND.              PRES. INF.              PERF. IND.
          regor                    regi                 rectus sum


                              INDICATIVE MOOD.

                               PRESENT TENSE.
                               _I am ruled._

               SINGULAR.                            PLURAL.
           regor                                   regimur
           regeris                                 regimini
           regitur                                 reguntur

                                 IMPERFECT.
                               _I was ruled._
           regebar                                 regebamur
           regebaris, _or_ -re                     regebamini
           regebatur                               regebantur

                                  FUTURE.
                            _I shall be ruled._
           regar                                   regemur
           regeris, _or_ -re                       regemini
           regetur                                 regentur

                                  PERFECT.
                   _I have been ruled_, or _I was ruled_.
           rectus sum                              recti sumus
           rectus es                               recti estis
           rectus est                              recti sunt

                                PLUPERFECT.
                            _I had been ruled._
           rectus eram                             recti eramus
           rectus eras                             recti eratis
           rectus erat                             recti erant

                              FUTURE PERFECT.
                         _I shall have been ruled_
           rectus ero                              recti erimus
           rectus eris                             recti eritis
           rectus erit                             recti erunt

                                SUBJUNCTIVE.

                                  PRESENT.
                   _May I be ruled_, _let him be ruled._
           regar                                   regamur
           regaris, _or_ -re                       regamini
           regatur                                 regantur

                                 IMPERFECT.
                 _I should be ruled_, _he would be ruled._
           regerer                                 regeremur
           regereris, _or_ -re                     regeremini
           regeretur                               regerentur

                                  PERFECT.
                          _I may have been ruled._
           rectus sim                              recti simus
           rectus sis                              recti sitis
           rectus sit                              recti sint

                                PLUPERFECT.
          _I should have been ruled_, _he would have been ruled._
           rectus essem                            recti essemus
           rectus esses                            recti essetis
           rectus esset                            recti essent

                                IMPERATIVE.
  _Pres._  regere, _be thou ruled_;    regimini, _be ye ruled_.
  _Fut._   regitor, _thou shalt be
           ruled_,
           regitor, _he shall be       reguntor, _they shall be ruled_.
           ruled_;

              INFINITIVE.                         PARTICIPLE.
  _Pres._  regi, _to be ruled_.        _Perfect._  rectus, _ruled_,
                                                   _having been ruled_.
  _Perf._  rectus esse, _to have been  _Gerundive._  regendus, _to be
           ruled_.                                 ruled_, _deserving to
                                                   be ruled_.
  _Fut._   rectum iri, _to be about
           to be ruled_.

       *       *       *       *       *

FOURTH (OR I-) CONJUGATION.

107. Active voice.--Audio, _I hear_.

                             PRINCIPAL PARTS.
    PRES. IND.       PRES. INF.       PERF. IND.     PERF. PASS. PARTIC.
       audio           audire           audivi             auditus


                              INDICATIVE MOOD.

                               PRESENT TENSE.
                                 _I hear._

               SINGULAR.                            PLURAL.
           audio                       audimus
           audis                       auditis
           audit                       audiunt

                                 IMPERFECT.
                       _I was hearing_, or _I heard._
           audiebam                    audiebamus
           audiebas                    audiebatis
           audiebat                    audiebant

                                  FUTURE.
                              _I shall hear._
           audiam                                  audiemus
           audies                                  audietis
           audiet                                  audient

                                  PERFECT.
                       _I have heard_, or _I heard._
           audivi                                  audivimus
           audivisti                               audivistis
           audivit                                 audiverunt, _or _-ere

                                PLUPERFECT.
                               _I had heard._
           audiveram                               audiveramus
           audiveras                               audiveratis
           audiverat                               audiverant

                              FUTURE PERFECT.
                           _I shall have heard._
           audivero                                audiverimus
           audiveris                               audiveritis
           audiverit                               audiverint

                                SUBJUNCTIVE.

                                  PRESENT.
                       _May I hear_, _let him hear._
           audiam                                  audiamus
           audias                                  audiatis
           audiat                                  audiant

                                 IMPERFECT.
                     _I should hear_, _he would hear._
           audirem                                 audiremus
           audires                                 audiretis
           audiret                                 audirent

                                  PERFECT.
                            _I may have heard._
           audiverim                               audiverimus
           audiveris                               audiveritis
           audiverit                               audiverint

                                PLUPERFECT.
               _I should have heard_, _he would have heard._
           audivissem                              audivissemus
           audivisses                              audivissetis
           audivisset                              audivissent

                                IMPERATIVE.
  _Pres._  audi, _hear thou_;          audite, _hear ye_.
  _Fut._   audito, _thou shalt hear_,  auditote, _ye shall hear_,
           audito, _he shall hear_;    audiunto, _they shall hear_.

              INFINITIVE.                         PARTICIPLE.
  _Pres._  audire, _to hear_.          _Pres._     audiens, _hearing_.
  _Perf._  audivisse, _to have                     (Gen. audientis.)
           heard_.
  _Fut._   auditurus esse, _to be      _Fut._      auditurus, _about to
           about to hear_.                         hear_.

                GERUND.                             SUPINE
  _Gen._   audiendi, _of hearing_,
  _Dat._   audiendo, _for hearing_,
  _Acc._   audiendum, _hearing_,       _Acc._      auditum, _to hear_,
  _Abl._   audiendo, _by hearing_.     _Abl._      auditu, _to hear, be
                                                   heard_.

108. Passive Voice.--Audior, _I am heard_.

                             PRINCIPAL PARTS.
        PRES. IND.              PRES. INF.              PERF. IND.
          audior                  audiri               auditus sum


                              INDICATIVE MOOD.

                               PRESENT TENSE.
                               _I am heard_.

               SINGULAR.                            PLURAL.
           audior                                  audimur
           audiris                                 audimini
           auditur                                 audiuntur

                                 IMPERFECT.
                               _I was heard_.
           audiebar                                audiebamur
           audiebaris, _or_ -re                    audiebamini
           audiebatur                              audiebantur

                                  FUTURE.
                            _I shall be heard_.
           audiar                                  audiemur
           audieris, _or_ -re                      audiemini
           audietur                                audientur

                                  PERFECT.
                   _I have been heard_, or _I was heard_.
           auditus sum                             auditi sumus
           auditus es                              auditi estis
           auditus est                             auditi sunt

                                PLUPERFECT.
                            _I had been heard_.
           auditus eram                            auditi eramus
           auditus eras                            auditi eratis
           auditus erat                            auditi erant

                              FUTURE PERFECT.
                         _I shall have been heard_.
           auditus ero                             auditi erimus
           auditus eris                            auditi eritis
           auditus erit                            auditi erunt

                                SUBJUNCTIVE.

                                  PRESENT.

                   _May I be heard_, _let him be heard_.
           audiar                                  audiamur
           audiaris, _or_ -re                      audiamini
           audiatur                                audiantur

                                 IMPERFECT.
                 _I should be heard_, _he would be heard_.
           audirer                                 audiremur
           audireris, _or_ -re                     audiremini
           audiretur                               audirentur

                                  PERFECT.
                          _I may have been heard_.
           auditus sim                             auditi simus
           auditus sis                             auditi sitis
           auditus sit                             auditi sint

                                PLUPERFECT.

          _I should have been heard_, _he would have been heard_.
           auditus essem                           auditi essemus
           auditus esses                           auditi essetis
           auditus esset                           auditi essent

                                IMPERATIVE.
  _Pres._  audire, _be thou heard_;    audimini, be ye heard.
  _Fut._   auditor, _thou shalt be
           heard_,
           auditor, _he shall be       audiuntor, _they shall be heard_.
           heard_;

              INFINITIVE.                         PARTICIPLE.
  _Pres._  audiri, _to be heard_.      _Perfect._  auditus, _heard_,
                                                   _having been heard_
  _Perf._  auditus esse, _to have      _Gerundive._  audiendus, _to be
           been heard_.                            heard_, _deserving to
                                                   be heard_
  _Fut._   auditum iri, _to be about
           to be heard_.

       *       *       *       *       *

VERBS IN -IO OF THE THIRD CONJUGATION.

109. 1. Verbs in -io of the Third Conjugation take the endings of the
Fourth Conjugation wherever the latter endings have two successive vowels.
This occurs only in the Present System.

2. Here belong--

  a) capio, _to take_; cupio, _to desire_; facio, _to make_; fodio, _to
  dig_; fugio, _to flee_; jacio, _to throw_; pario, _to bear_; quatio, _to
  shake_; rapio, _to seize_; sapio, _to taste_.

  b) Compounds of lacio and specio (both ante-classical); as, allicio,
  _entice_; conspicio, _behold_.

  c) The deponents gradior, _to go_; morior, _to die_, patior, _to suffer_.

110. Active voice.--Capio, _I take_.

                             PRINCIPAL PARTS.
    PRES. IND.       PRES. INF.       PERF. IND.     PERF. PASS. PARTIC.
      capio,           capere,           cepi,             captus.


                              INDICATIVE MOOD.

                               PRESENT TENSE.

               SINGULAR.                            PLURAL.
  capio, capis, capit;                 capimus, capitis, capiunt.

                                 IMPERFECT.
  capiebam, -iebas, -iebat;            capiebamus, -iebatis, -iebant.

                                  FUTURE.
  capiam, -ies, -iet;                  capiemus, -ietis, -ient.

                                  PERFECT.
  cepi, -isti, -it;                    cepimus, -istis, -erunt or -ere.

                                PLUPERFECT.
  ceperam, -eras, -erat;               ceperamus, -eratis, -erant.

                              FUTURE PERFECT.
  cepero, -eris, -erit;                ceperimus, -eritis, -erint.

                                SUBJUNCTIVE.

                                  PRESENT.
  capiam, -ias, -iat;                  capiamus, -iatis, -iant.

                                 IMPERFECT.
  caperem, -eres, -eret;               caperemus, -eretis, -erent.

                                  PERFECT.
  ceperim, -eris, -erit;               ceperimus, -eritis, -erint.

                                PLUPERFECT.
  cepissem, -isses, -isset;            cepissemus, -issetis, -issent.

                                IMPERATIVE.
  _Pres._  cape;                                   capite.
  _Fut._   capito,                                 capitote,
           capito;                                 capiunto.

              INFINITIVE.                         PARTICIPLE.
  _Pres._  capere                      _Pres._     capiens.
  _Perf._  cepisse.
  _Fut._   capturus esse.              _Fut._      capturus.

                GERUND.                             SUPINE.
  _Gen._   capiendi,
  _Dat._   capiendo,
  _Acc._   capiendum,                  _Acc._      captum,
  _Abl._   capiendo.                   _Abl._      captu.

111. Passive Voice.--Capior, _I am taken_.

                             PRINCIPAL PARTS.
        PRES. IND.              PRES. INF.              PERF. IND.
         capior,                  capi,                captus sum.


                              INDICATIVE MOOD.

                               PRESENT TENSE.

               SINGULAR.                            PLURAL.
  capior, caperis, capitur;            capimur, capimini, capiuntur.

                                 IMPERFECT.
  capiebar, -iebaris, -iebatur;        capiebamur, -iebamini, -iebantur.

                                  FUTURE.
  capiar, -ieris, -ietur;              capiemur, -iemini, -ientur.

                                  PERFECT.
  captus sum, es, est;                 capti sumus, estis, sunt.

                                PLUPERFECT.
  captus eram, eras, erat;             capti eramus, eratis, erant.

                              FUTURE PERFECT.
  captus ero, eris, erit;              capti erimus, eritis, erunt.

                                SUBJUNCTIVE.

                                  PRESENT.
  capiar, -iaris, -iatur;              capiamur, -iamini, -iantur.

                                 IMPERFECT.
  caperer, -ereris, -eretur;           caperemur, -eremini, -erentur.

                                  PERFECT.
  captus sim, sis, sit;                capti simus, sitis, sint.

                                PLUPERFECT.
  captus essem, esses, esset;          capti essemus, essetis, essent.

                                IMPERATIVE.
  _Pres._  capere;                                 capimini.
  _Fut._   capitor,
           capitor;                                capiuntor.

              INFINITIVE.                         PARTICIPLE.
  _Pres._  capi.
  _Perf._  captus esse.                _Perfect._  captus.
  _Fut._   captum iri.                 _Gerundive._  capiendus.

       *       *       *       *       *

DEPONENT VERBS.

112. Deponent Verbs have in the main Passive _forms_ with Active or Neuter
_meaning_. But--

  a. They have the following Active forms: Future Infinitive, Present and
  Future Participles, Gerund, and Supine.

  b. They have the following Passive meanings: always in the Gerundive, and
  sometimes in the Perfect Passive Participle; as--

    sequendus, _to be followed_; adeptus, _attained_.

113. Paradigms of Deponent Verbs are--

         I. Conj.  miror, mirari, miratus sum, _admire_.
        II. Conj.  vereor, vereri, veritus sum, _fear_.
       III. Conj.  sequor, sequi, secutus sum, _follow_.
        IV. Conj.  largior, largiri, largitus sum, _give_.
   III. (in -ior)  patior, pati, passus sum, _suffer_.


                              INDICATIVE MOOD.
           I.           II.          III.         IV.           III (in
                                                                -ior)
  _Pres._  miror        vereor       sequor       largior       patior
           miraris      vereris      sequeris     largiris      pateris
           miratur      veretur      sequitur     largitur      patitur
           miramur      veremur      sequimur     largimur      patimur
           miramini     veremini     sequimini    largimini     patimini
           mirantur     verentur     sequuntur    largiuntur    patiuntur
  _Impf._  mirabar      verebar      sequebar     largiebar     patiebar
  _Fut._   mirabor      verebor      sequar       largiar       patiar
  _Perf._  miratus sum  veritus sum  secutus sum  largitus sum  passus sum
  _Plup._  miratus      veritus      secutus      largitus      passus
           eram         eram         eram         eram          eram
  _F.P._   miratus ero  veritus ero  secutus ero  largitus ero  passus ero

                                SUBJUNCTIVE.
  _Pres._  mirer        verear       sequar       largiar       patiar
  _Impf._  mirarer      vererer      sequerer     largirer      paterer
  _Perf._  miratus sim  veritus sim  secutus sim  largitus sim  passus sim
  _Plup._  miratus      veritus      sectutus     largitus      passus
           essem        essem        essem        essem         essem

                                IMPERATIVE.
  _Pres._  mirare,      verere,      sequere,     largire,      patere,
           etc.         etc.         etc.         etc.          etc.
  _Fut._   mirator,     veretor,     sequitor,    largitor,     patitor,
           etc.         etc.         etc.         etc.          etc.

                                INFINITIVE.
  _Pres._  mirari       vereri       sequi        largiri       pati
  _Perf._  miratus      veritus      secutus      largitus      passus
           esse         esse         esse         esse          esse
  _Fut._   miraturus    veriturus    secuturus    largiturus    passurus
           esse         esse         esse         esse          esse

                                PARTICIPLES.
  _Pres._  mirans       verens       sequens      largiens      patiens
  _Fut._   miraturus    veriturus    secuturus    largiturus    passurus
  _Perf._  miratus      veritus      secutus      largitus      passus
  _Ger._   mirandus     verendus     sequendus    largiendus    patiendus

                                  GERUND.
           mirandi      verendi      sequendi     largiendi     patiendi
           mirando,     verendo,     sequendo,    largiendo,    patiendo,
           etc.         etc.         etc.         etc.          etc.

                                  SUPINE.
           miratum,     veritum,     secutum,     largitum,     passum,
           -tu          -tu          -tu          -tu           -su

       *       *       *       *       *

SEMI-DEPONENTS.

114. 1. Semi-Deponents are verbs which have the Present System in the
Active Voice, but the Perfect System in the Passive without change of
meaning. Here belong--

  audeo,     audere,    ausus sum, _to dare_.
  gaudeo,    gaudere,   gavisus sum, _to rejoice_.
  soleo,     solere,    solitus sum, _to be wont_.
  fido,      fidere,    fisus sum, _to trust_.

2. The following verbs have a Perfect Passive Participle with Active
meaning:--

  adolesco, _grow up_;  adultus, _having grown up_,
  cenare, _dine_;       cenatus, _having dined_.
  placere, _please_;    placitus, _having pleased_, _agreeable_.
  prandere, _lunch_;    pransus, _having lunched_.
  potare, _drink_;      potus, _having drunk_.
  jurare, _swear_;      juratus, _having sworn_.

  a. Juratus is used in a passive sense also.

3. Revertor and devertor both regularly form their Perfect in the Active
Voice; _viz_.--

  revertor,  reverti (Inf.),  reverti (Perf.), _to return_.
  devertor,  deverti (Inf.),  deverti (Perf.), _to turn aside_.

       *       *       *       *       *

PERIPHRASTIC CONJUGATION.

115. There are two Periphrastic Conjugations,--the Active and the Passive.
The Active is formed by combining the Future Active Participle with the
auxiliary sum, the Passive by combining the Gerundive with the same
auxiliary.

                      Active Periphrastic Conjugation.

                              INDICATIVE MOOD.
  _Pres._     amaturus (-a, -um) sum, _I am about to love_.
  _Inf._      amaturus eram, _I was about to love_.
  _Fut._      amaturus ero, _I shall be about to love_.
  _Perf._     amaturus fui, _I have been (was) about to love_.
  _Plup._     amaturus fueram, _I had been about to love_.
  _Fut. P._   amaturus fuero, _I shall have been about to love_.

                                SUBJUNCTIVE.
  _Pres._     amaturus sim, _may I be about to love_.
  _Imp._      amaturus essem, _I should be about to love_.
  _Perf._     amaturus fuerim, _I may have been about to love_.
  _Plup._     amaturus fuissem, _I should have been about to love_.

                                INFINITIVE.
  _Pres._     amaturus esse, _to be about to love_.
  _Perf._     amaturus fuisse, _to have been about to love_.

                     Passive Periphrastic Conjugation.

                                INDICATIVE.
  _Pres._     amandus (-a, -um) sum, _I am to be loved_, _must be loved_.
  _Imp._      amandus eram, _I was to be loved_.
  _Fut._      amandus ero, _I shall deserve to be loved_.
  _Perf._     amandus fui, _I was to be loved_.
  _Plup._     amandus fueram, _I had deserved to be loved_.
  _Fut. P._   amandus fuero, _I shall have deserved to be loved_.

                                SUBJUNCTIVE.
  _Pres._     amandus sim, _may I deserve to be loved_.
  _Imp._      amandus essem, _I should deserve to be loved_.
  _Perf._     amandus fuerim, _I may have deserved to be loved_.
  _Plup._     amendus fuissem, _I should have deserved to be loved_.

                                INFINITIVE.
  _Pres._     amandus esse, _to deserve to be loved_.
  _Perf._     amantus fuisse, _to have deserved to be loved_.

       *       *       *       *       *

PECULIARITIES OF CONJUGATION.

116. 1. Perfects in -avi, -evi, and -ivi, with the forms derived from them,
often drop the ve or vi before endings beginning with r or s. So also novi
(from nosco) and the compounds of movi (from moveo). Thus:--

  amavisti      amasti            delevisti     delesti
  amavisse      amasse            delevisse     delesse
  amaverunt     amarunt           deleverunt    delerunt
  amaverim      amarim            deleverim     delerim
  amaveram      amaram            deleveram     deleram
  amavero       amaro             delevero      delero
  novisti       nosti             noverim       norim
  novisse       nosse             noveram       noram
  audivisti     audisti           audivisse     audisse

2. In the Gerund and Gerundive of the Third and Fourth Conjugations, the
endings -undus, -undi, often occur instead of -endus and -endi, as
faciundus, faciundi.

3. Dico, duco, facio, form the Imperatives, dic, duc, fac. But compounds of
facio form the Imperative in -fice, as confice. Compounds of dico, duco,
accent the ultima; as, edu'c, edi'c.

4. Archaic and Poetic forms:--

  a. The ending -ier in the Present Infinitive Passive; as, amarier,
  monerier, dicier, for amari, moneri, dici.

  b. The ending -ibam for -iebam in Imperfects of the Fourth Conjugation,
  and -ibo for -iam in Futures; as, scibam, scibo, for sciebam, sciam.

  c. Instead of the fuller forms, in such words as dixisti, scripsistis,
  surrexisse, we sometimes find dixti, scripstis, surrexe, etc.

  d. The endings -im, -is, etc. (for -am, -as, etc.) occur in a few
  Subjunctive forms; as, edim (_eat_), duint, perduint.

5. In the Future Active and Perfect Passive Infinitive, the auxiliary esse
is often omitted; as, acturum for acturum esse; ejectus for ejectus esse.

       *       *       *       *       *

FORMATION OF THE VERB STEMS.

Formation of the Present Stem.

117. Many verbs employ the simple Verb Stem for the Present Stem;[39] as,
dicere, amare, monere, audire. Others modify the Verb Stem to form the
Present, as follows:--

1. By appending the vowels, a, e, i; as,--

            Present Stem   Verb Stem
  juvare,      juva-         juv-.
  augere,      auge-         aug-.
  vincire,     vinci-        vinc-.

2. By adding i, as capio, Present Stem capi- (Verb Stem cap-).

3. By the insertion of n (m before labial-mutes) before the final consonant
of the Verb Stem; as, fundo (Stem fud-), rumpo (Stem rup-).

4. By appending -n to the Verb Stem; as,--

  cern-o                    pell-o (for pel-no).

5. By appending t to the Verb Stem; as,--

             flect-o.

6. By appending sc to the Verb Stem; as,--

  cresc-o.                  scisc-o.

7. By Reduplication, that is, by prefixing the initial consonant of the
Verb Stem with i; as,--

  gi-gn-o (root gen-),      si-st-o (root sta-).

Formation of the Perfect Stem.

118. The Perfect Stem is formed from the Verb Stem--

1. By adding v (in case of Vowel Stems); as,--

  amav-i,          delev-i,         audiv-i.

2. By adding u (in case of some Consonant Stems); as,--

  strepu-i,        genu-i,          alu-i.

3. By adding s (in case of most Consonant Stems); as,--

  carp-o,    Perfect  carps-i.
  scrib-o,      "     scrips-i (for scrib-si).
  rid-eo,       "     ris-i (for rid-si).
  sent-io,      "     sens-i (for sent-si).
  dic-o,        "     dix-i (i.e. dic-si).

  a. Note that before the ending -si a Dental Mute (t, d) is lost; a
  Guttural Mute (c, g) unites with s to form x; while the Labial b is
  changed to p.

4. Without addition. Of this formation there are three types:--

  a) The Verb Stem is reduplicated by prefixing the initial consonant with
  the following vowel or e; as,--

  curro,     Perfect  cu-curri.
  posco,        "     po-posci.
  pello,        "     pe-puli.

NOTE 1.--Compounds, with the exception of do, sto, sisto, disco, posco,
omit the reduplication. Thus: com-puli, but re-poposci.

NOTE 2.--Verbs beginning with sp or st retain both consonants in the
reduplication, but drop s from the stem; as, spondeo, spo-pondi; sto,
steti.

  b) The short vowel of the Verb Stem is lengthened; as, lego, legi; ago,
  egi. Note that a by this process becomes e.

  c) The vowel of the Verb Stem is unchanged; as, verto, verti; minuo,
  minui.

Formation of the Participial Stem.

119. The Perfect Passive Participle, from which the Participial Stem is
derived by dropping -us, is formed:--

1. By adding -tus (sometimes to the Present Stem, sometimes to the Verb
Stem); as,--

  ama-re,      Participle  ama-tus.
  dele-re,         "       dele-tus,
  audi-re,         "       audi-tus,
  leg-ere,         "       lec-tus,
  scrib-ere,       "       scrip-tus,
  senti-re,        "       sen-sus (for sent-tus).
  caed-ere,        "       cae-sus (for caed-tus).

  a. Note that g, before t, becomes c (see Sec. 8, 5); b becomes p; while dt
  or tt becomes ss, which is then often simplified to s (Sec. 8, 2).

2. After the analogy of Participles like sensus and caesus, where -sus
arises by phonetic change, -sus for -tus is added to other Verb Stems;
as,--

  lab-i,       Participle  lap-sus.
  fig-ere,         "       fi-xus.

  a. The same consonant changes occur in appending this ending -sus to the
  stem as in the case of the Perfect ending -si (see Sec. 118, 3, a).

3. A few Verbs form the Participle in -itus; as,--

  doma-re,         dom-itus.
  mone-re,         mon-itus.

4. The Future Active Participle is usually identical in its stem with the
Perfect Passive Participle; as, ama-tus, amaturus; moni-tus, moniturus.
But--

  juva-re,  Perf. Partic.  jutus,     has Fut. Act. Partic.  juvaturus.[40]
  lava-re,   "      "      lautus,        "    "      "      lavaturus.
  par-ere,   "      "      partus,        "    "      "      pariturus.
  ru-ere,    "      "      rutus,         "    "      "      ruiturus.
  seca-re,   "      "      sectus,        "    "      "      secaturus.
  fru-i,     "      "      fructus,       "    "      "      fruiturus.
  mor-i,     "      "      mortuus,       "    "      "      moriturus.
  ori-ri,    "      "      ortus,         "    "      "      oriturus.

       *       *       *       *       *

LIST OF THE MOST IMPORTANT VERBS, WITH PRINCIPAL PARTS.

First (_A_-) Conjugation.

120. I. PERFECT IN -VI.

  amo         amare       amavi       amatus           _love_

  All regular verbs of the First Conjugation follow this model.

  poto        potare      potavi      potus (Sec. 114, _drink_
                                      2)

II. PERFECT IN -UI.

  crepo       crepare     crepui      crepiturus       _rattle_
  cubo        cubare      cubui       cubiturus        _lie down_
  domo        domare      domui       domitus          _tame_
  frico       fricare     fricui      frictus _and_    _rub_
                                      fricatus
  mico        micare      micui       ----             _glitter_
    dimico    dimicare    dimicavi    dimicatum        _fight_
                                      (est)[41]
  ex-plico    explicare   explicavi   explicatus       _unfold_
                          (-ui)       (-itus)
  im-plico    implicare   implicavi   implicatus       _entwine_
                          (-ui)       (-itus)
  seco        secare      secui       sectus           _cut_
  sono        sonare      sonui       sonaturus        _sound_
  tono        tonare      tonui       ----             _thunder_
  veto        vetare      vetui       vetitus          _forbid_

III. PERFECT IN -I WITH LENGTHENING OF THE STEM VOWEL.

  juvo        juvare      juvi        jutus            _help_
  lavo        lavare      lavi        lautus           _wash_

IV. PERFECT REDUPLICATED.

  sto         stare       steti       staturus

V. DEPONENTS.

  These are all regular, and follow _miror_, _mirari_, _miratus sum_.

Second (_E_-) Conjugation.

121. I. PERFECT IN -VI.

  deleo       delere      delevi      deletus          _destroy_
  fleo        flere       flevi       fletus           _weep_, _lament_
  com-pleo[42]  complere  complevi    completus        _fill up_
  aboleo      abolere     abolevi     abolitus         _destroy_
  cieo[43]    ciere       civi        citus            _set in motion_

II. PERFECT IN -UI.

a. Type -eo, -ere, -ui, -itus.

  arceo       arcere      arcui                        _keep off_
    coerceo   coercere    coercui     coercitus        _hold in check_
    exerceo   exercere    exercui     exercitus        _practise_
  caleo       calere      calui       caliturus        _be warm_
  careo       carere      carui       cariturus        _be without_
  doleo       dolere      dolui       doliturus        _grieve_
  habeo       habere      habui       habitus          _have_
    debeo     debere      debui       debitus          _owe_
    praebeo   praebere    praebui     praebitus        _offer_
  jaceo       jacere      jacui       jaciturus        _lie_
  mereo       merere      merui       meritus          _earn_, _deserve_
  moneo       monere      monui       monitus          _advise_
  noceo       nocere      nocui       nocitum (est)    _injure_
  pareo       parere      parui       pariturus        _obey_
  placeo      placere     placui      placiturus       _please_
  taceo       tacere      tacui       taciturus        _be silent_
  terreo      terrere     terrui      territus         _frighten_
  valeo       valere      valui       valiturus        _be strong_

             NOTE 1.--The following lack the Participial Stem:--
  egeo        egere       egui        ----             _want_
  emineo      eminere     eminui      ----             _stand forth_
  floreo      florere     florui      ----             _bloom_
  horreo      horrere     horrui      ----             _bristle_
  lateo       latere      latui       ----             _lurk_
  niteo       nitere      nitui       ----             _gleam_
  oleo        olere       olui        ----             _smell_
  palleo      pallere     pallui      ----             _be pale_
  pateo       patere      patui       ----             _lie open_
  rubeo       rubere      rubui       ----             _be red_
  sileo       silere      silui       ----             _be silent_
  splendeo    splendere   splendui    ----             _gleam_
  studeo      studere     studui      ----             _study_
  stupeo      stupere     stupui      ----             _be amazed_
  timeo       timere      timui       ----             _fear_
  torpeo      torpere     torpui      ----             _be dull_
  vigeo       vigere      vigui       ----             _flourish_
  vireo       virere      virui       ----             _be green_
                      and others.

        NOTE 2.--The following are used only in the Present System:--
  aveo        avere       ----        ----             _wish_
  frigeo      frigere     ----        ----             _be cold_
  immineo     imminere    ----        ----             _overhang_
  maereo      maerere     ----        ----             _mourn_
  polleo      pollere     ----        ----             _be strong_
                      and others.

b. Type -eo, -ere, -ui, -tus (-sus).

  censeo      censere     censui      census           _estimate_
  doceo       docere      docui       doctus           _teach_
  misceo      miscere     miscui      mixtus           _mix_
  teneo       tenere      tenui       ----             _hold_
    So _contineo_ and _sustineo_; but--
    retineo   retinere    retinui     retentus         _retain_
    obtineo   obtinere    obtinui     obtentus         _maintain_
  torreo      torrere     torrui      tostus           _bake_

III. PERFECT IN -SI.

  augeo       augere      auxi        auctus           _increase_
  torqueo     torquere    torsi       tortus           _twist_
  indulgeo    indulgere   indulsi     ----             _indulge_
  luceo       lucere      luxi        ----             _be light_
  lugeo       lugere      luxi        ----             _mourn_
  jubeo       jubere      jussi       jussus           _order_
  per-mulceo  permulcere  permulsi    permulsus        _soothe_
  rideo       ridere      risi        risum (est)      _laugh_
  suadeo      suadere     suasi       suasum (est)     _advise_
  abs-tergeo  abstergere  abstersi    abstersus        _wipe off_
  ardeo       ardere      arsi        arsurus          _burn_
  haereo      haerere     haesi       haesurus         _stick_
  maneo       manere      mansi       mansurus         _stay_
  algeo       algere      alsi        ----             _be cold_
  fulgeo      fulgere     fulsi       ----             _gleam_
  urgeo       urgere      ursi        ----             _press_

IV. PERFECT IN -I WITH REDUPLICATION.

  mordeo      mordere     momordi     morsus           _bite_
  spondeo     spondere    spopondi    sponsus          _promise_
  tondeo      tondere     totondi     tonsus           _shear_
  pendeo      pendere     pependi     ----             _hang_

V. PERFECT IN -I WITH LENGTHENING OF STEM VOWEL.

  caveo       cavere      cavi        cauturus         _take care_
  faveo       favere      favi        fauturus         _favor_
  foveo       fovere      fovi        fotus            _cherish_
  moveo       movere      movi        motus            _move_
  paveo       pavere      pavi        ----             _fear_
  sedeo       sedere      sedi        sessurus         _sit_
  video       videre      vidi        visus            _see_
  voveo       vovere      vovi        votus            _vow_

VI. PERFECT IN -I WITHOUT EITHER REDUPLICATION OR LENGTHENING OF STEM
VOWEL.

  ferveo      fervere     (fervi,     ----             _boil_
                          ferbui)
  prandeo     prandere    prandi      pransus (Sec. 114,_lunch_
                                      2)
  strideo     stridere    stridi      ----             _creak_

VII. DEPONENTS.

  liceor      liceri      licitus sum      _bid_
    polliceor  polliceri  pollicitus sum   _promise_
  mereor      mereri      meritus sum      _earn_
  misereor    misereri    miseritus sum    _pity_
  vereor      vereri      veritus sum      _fear_
  fateor      fateri      fassus sum       _confess_
    confiteor  confiteri  confessus sum    _confess_
  reor        reri        ratus sum        _think_
  medeor      mederi      ----             _heal_
  tueor       tueri       ----             _protect_

Third (Consonant) Conjugation.

122. I. VERBS WITH PRESENT STEM ENDING IN A CONSONANT.

1. Perfect in -si.

a. Type -o, -ere, -si, -tus.

  carpo       carpere     carpsi      carptus          _pluck_
  sculpo      sculpere    sculpsi     sculptus         _chisel_
  repo        repere      repsi       ----             _creep_
  serpo       serpere     serpsi      ----             _crawl_
  scribo      scribere    scripsi     scriptus         _write_
  nubo        nubere      nupsi       nupta (woman     _marry_
                                      only)
  rego        regere      rexi        rectus           _govern_
  tego        tegere      texi        tectus           _cover_
  af-fligo    affligere   afflixi     afflictus        _shatter_
  dico        dicere      dixi        dictus           _say_
  duco        ducere      duxi        ductus           _lead_
  coquo       coquere     coxi        coctus           _cook_
  traho       trahere     traxi       tractus          _draw_
  veho        vehere      vexi        vectus           _carry_
  cingo       cingere     cinxi       cinctus          _gird_
  tingo       tingere     tinxi       tinctus          _dip_
  jungo       jungere     junxi       junctus          _join_
  fingo       fingere     finxi       fictus           _would_
  pingo       pingere     pinxi       pictus           _paint_
  stringo     stringere   strinxi     strictus         _bind_
  -stinguo[44]  -stinguere  -stinxi   -stinctus        _blot out_
  unguo       unguere     unxi        unctus           _anoint_
  vivo        vivere      vixi        victum (est)     _live_
  gero        gerere      gessi       gestus           _carry_
  uro         urere       ussi        ustus            _burn_
  temno       temnere     con-tempsi  con-temptus      _despise_

b. Type -o, -ere, -si, -sus.

  figo        figere      fixi        fixus            _fasten_
  mergo       mergere     mersi       mersus           _sink_
  spargo      spargere    sparsi      sparsus          _scatter_
  flecto      flectere    flexi       flexus           _bend_
  necto       nectere     nexui       nexus            _twine_
                          (nexi)
  mitto       mittere     misi        missus           _send_
  rado        radere      rasi        rasus            _shave_
  rodo        rodere      rosi        rosus            _gnaw_
  vado        vadere      -vasi[45]   -vasum           _march_, _walk_
                                      (est)[45]
  ludo        ludere      lusi        lusum (est)      _play_
  trudo       trudere     trusi       trusus           _push_
  laedo       laedere     laesi       laesus           _injure_, _hurt_
  claudo      claudere    clausi      clausus          _close_
  plaudo      plaudere    plausi      plausum (est)    _clap_
    explodo   explodere   explosi     explosus         _hoot off_
  cedo        cedere      cessi       cessum (est)     _withdraw_
  divido      dividere    divisi      divisus          _divide_
  premo       premere     pressi      pressus          _press_

2. Perfect in -i with Reduplication.

  ab-do       abdere      abdidi      abditus          _conceal_
  red-do      red-dere    reddidi     redditus         _return_
     So _addo_, _condo_, _dedo_, _perdo_, _prodo_,
                     _trado_, etc.
  con-sisto   consistere  constiti    ----             _take one's stand_
  resisto     resistere   restiti     ----             _resist_
  circumsisto  circumsistere  circumsteti  ----        _surround_
  cado        cadere      cecidi      casurus          _fall_
  caedo       caedere     cecidi      caesus           _kill_
  pendo       pendere     pependi     pensus           _weigh_, _pay_
  tendo       tendere     tetendi     tentus           _stretch_
  tundo       tundere     tutudi      tusus, tunsus    _beat_
  fallo       fallere     fefelli     (falsus, as      _deceive_
                                      Adj.)
  pello       pellere     pepuli      pulsus           _drive out_
  curro       currere     cucurri     cursum (est)     _run_
  parco       parcere     peperci     parsurus         _spare_
  cano        canere      cecini      ----             _sing_
  tango       tangere     tetigi      tactus           _touch_
  pungo       pungere     pupugi      punctus          _prick_

  NOTE.--In the following verbs the perfects were originally reduplicated,
  but have lost the reduplicating syllable:--
  per-cello   percellere  perculi     perculsus        _strike down_
  findo       findere     fidi        fissus           _split_
  scindo      scindere    scidi       scissus          _tear apart_
  tollo       tollere     sus-tuli    sublatus         _remove_

3. Perfect in -i with Lengthening of Stem Vowel.

  ago         agere       egi         actus            _drive_, _do_
    perago    peragere    peregi      peractus         _finish_
    subigo    subigere    subegi      subactus         _subdue_
    cogo      cogere      coegi       coactus          _force_, _gather_
  frango      frangere    fregi       fractus          _break_
    perfringo  perfringere  perfregi  perfractus       _break down_
  lego        legere      legi        lectus           _gather_, _read_
    perlego   perlegere   perlegi     perlectus        _read through_
    colligo   colligere   collegi     collectus        _collect_
    deligo    deligere    delegi      delectus         _choose_
    diligo    diligere    dilexi      dilectus         _love_
    intellego  intellegere  intellexi  intellectus     _understand_
    neglego   neglegere   neglexi     neglectus        _neglect_
  emo         emere       emi         emptus           _buy_
    coemo     coemere     coemi       coemptus         _buy up_
    redimo    redimere    redemi      redemptus        _buy back_
    dirimo    dirimere    diremi      diremptus        _destroy_
    demo      demere      dempsi      demptus          _take away_
    sumo      sumere      sumpsi      sumptus          _take_
    promo     promere     prompsi     (promptus, as    _take out_
                                      Adj.)
  vinco       vincere     vici        victus           _conquer_
  re-linquo   relinquere  reliqui     relictus         _leave_
  rumpo       rumpere     rupi        ruptus           _break_
  edo         esse (Sec.  edi         esus             _eat_
              128)
  fundo       fundere     fudi        fusus            _four_

4. Perfect in -i without either Reduplication or Lengthening of Stem Vowel.

  excudo      excudere    excudi      excusus          _hammer_
  consido     considere   consedi     ----             _take one's seat_
  possido     possidere   possedi     possessus        _take possession_
  accendo     accendere   accendi     accensus         _kindle_
  a-scendo    ascendere   ascendi     ascensum (est)   _climb_
  de-fendo    defendere   defendi     defensus         _defend_
  pre-hendo   prehendere  prehendi    prehensus        _seize_
  ico         icere       ici         ictus            _strike_
  vello       vellere     velli       vulsus           _pluck_
  verto       vertere     verti       versus           _turn_
  pando       pandere     pandi       passus           _spread_
  solvo       solvere     solvi       solutus          _loose_
  viso        visere      visi        visus            _visit_
  volvo       volvere     volvi       volutus          _roll_
  verro       verrere     verri       versus           _sweep_

5. Perfect in -ui.

  in-cumbo    incumbere   incubui     incubiturus      _lean on_
  gigno       gignere     genui       genitus          _bring forth_
  molo        molere      molui       molitus          _grind_
  vomo        vomere      vomui       vomitus          _vomit_
  fremo       fremere     fremui      ----             _snort_
  gemo        gemere      gemui       ----             _sigh_
  meto        metere      messui      messus           _reap_
  tremo       tremere     tremui      ----             _tremble_
  strepo      strepere    strepui     ----             _rattle_
  alo         alete       alui        altus (alitus)   _nourish_
  colo        colere      colui       cultus           _cultivate_
    incolo    incolere    incolui     ----             _inhabit_
    excolo    excolere    excolui     excultus         _perfect_
  consulo     consulere   consului    consultus        _consult_
  consero     conserere   conserui    consertus        _join_
  desero      deserere    deserui     desertus         _desert_
  dissero     disserere   disserui    ----             _discourse_
  texo        texere      texui       textus           _weave_

6. Perfect in -vi.

  sino        sinere      sivi        situs            _allow_
    desino    desinere    desii       desitus          _cease_
    pono      ponere      posui       positus          _place_
  ob-lino     oblinere    oblevi      oblitus          _smear_
  sero        serere      sevi        satus            _sow_
    consero   conserere   consevi     consitus         _plant_
  cerno       cernere     ----        ----             _separate_
    discerno  discernere  discrevi    discretus        _distinguish_
    decerno   decernere   decrevi     decretus         _decide_
  sperno      spernere    sprevi      spretus          _scorn_
  sterno      sternere    stravi      stratus          _spread_
    pro-sterno  prosternere  prostravi  prostratus     _overthrow_
  peto        petere      petivi      petitus          _seek_
                          (petii)
    appeto    appetere    appetivi    appetitus        _long for_
  tero        terere      trivi       tritus           _rub_
  quaero      quaerere    quaesivi    quaesitus        _seek_
    acquiro   acquirere   acquisivi   acquisitus       _acquire_
  arcesso     arcessere   arcessivi   arcessitus       _summon_
  capesso     capessere   capessivi   capessitus       _seize_
  lacesso     lacessere   lacessivi   lacessitus       _provoke_

7. Used only in Present System.

  ango        angere      ----        ----             _choke_
  lambo       lambere     ----        ----             _lick_
  claudo      claudere    ----        ----             _be lame_
  furo        furere      ----        ----             _rave_
  vergo       vergere     ----        ----             _bend_
                   and a few others.

II. VERBS WITH PRESENT STEM ENDING IN -U.

  induo       induere     indui       indutus          _put on_
  imbuo       imbuere     imbui       imbutus          _moisten_
  luo         luere       lui         ----             _wash_
    polluo    polluere    pollui      pollutus         _defile_
  minuo       minuere     minui       minutus          _lessen_
  statuo      statuere    statui      statutus         _set up_
    constituo  constituere  constitui  constitutus     _determine_
  suo         suere       sui         sutus            _sew_
  tribuo      tribuere    tribui      tributus         _allot_
  ruo         ruere       rui         ruiturus         _fall_
    diruo     diruere     dirui       dirutus          _destroy_
    obruo     obruere     obrui       obrutus          _overwhelm_
  acuo        acuere      acui        ----             _sharpen_
  arguo       arguere     argui       ----             _accuse_
  congruo     congruere   congrui     ----             _agree_
  metuo       metuere     metui       ----             _fear_
  ab-nuo      abnuere     abnui       ----             _decline_
  re-spuo     respuere    respui      ----             _reject_
  struo       struere     struxi      structus         _build_
  fluo        fluere      fluxi       (fluxus, as      _flow_
                                      Adj.)

III. VERBS WITH PRESENT STEM ENDING IN -I.

  capio       cupere      cupivi      cupitus          _wish_
  sapio       sapere      sapivi      ----             _taste_
  rapio       rapere      rapui       raptus           _snatch_
    diripio   diripere    diripui     direptus         _plunder_
  conspicio   conspicere  conspexi    conspectus       _gaze at_
  aspicio     aspicere    aspexi      aspectus         _behold_
  illicio     illicere    illexi      illectus         _allure_
  pellicio    pellicere   pellexi     pellectus        _allure_
  elicio      elicere     elicui      elicitus         _elicit_
  quatio      quatere     ----        quassus          _shake_
    concutio  concutere   concussi    concussus        _shake_
  pario       parere      peperi      partus           _bring forth_
  capio       capere      cepi        captus           _take_
    accipio   accipere    accepi      acceptus         _accept_
    incipio   incipere    incepi      inceptus         _begin_
  facio       facere      feci        factus           _make_
    afficio   afficere    affeci      affectus         _affect_
      _Passive_, afficior, affici, affectus sum.
  So other prepositional compounds, _perficio_, _perficior_; _interficio_,
  _interficior_; etc. But--
  assuefacio  assuefacere  assuefeci  assuefactus      _accustom_
   _Passive_, assuefio, assuefieri, assuefactus sum.
  So also _patefacio_, _patefio_; _calefacio_, _calefio_; and all
  non-prepositional compounds.
  jacio       jacere      jeci        jactus           _hurl_
    abicio    abicere     abjeci      abjectus         _throw away_
  fodio       fodere      fodi        fossus           _dig_
  fugio       fugere      fugi        fugiturus        _flee_
    effugio   effugere    effugi      ----             _escape_

IV. VERBS IN -SCO.

1. Verbs in -sco from Simple Roots.

  posco       poscere     poposci     ----             _demand_
  disco       discere     didici      ----             _learn_
  pasco       pascere     pavi        pastus           _feed_
    pascor    pasci       pastus sum                   _graze_
  cresco      crescere    crevi       cretus           _grow_
  consuesco   consuescere  consuevi   consuetus        _accustom one's
                                                       self_
  quiesco     quiescere   quievi      quieturus        _be still_
  adolesco    adolescere  adolevi     adultus          _grow up_
  obsolesco   obsolescere  obsolevi   ----             _grow old_
  nosco       noscere     novi        ----             _become acquainted
                                                       with_
    ignosco   ignoscere   ignovi      ignoturus        _pardon_
  agnosco     agnoscere   agnovi      agnitus          _recognize_
  cognosco    cognoscere  cognovi     cognitus         _get acquainted
                                                       with_

2. Verbs in -sco formed from other Verbs.

These usually have Inchoative or Inceptive meaning (see Sec. 155, 1). When
they have the Perfect, it is the same as that of the Verbs from which they
are derived.

  floresco    florescere  florui      _begin to        (floreo)
                                      bloom_
  scisco      sciscere    scivi       _enact_          (scio)
  aresco      arescere    arui        _become dry_     (areo)
  calesco     calescere   calui       _become hot_     (caleo)
  consenesco  consenescere  consenui  _grow old_       (seneo)
  extimesco   extimescere  extimui    _fear greatly_   (timeo)
  ingemisco   ingemiscere  ingemui    _sigh_           (gemo)
  adhaeresco  adhaerescere  adhaesi   _stick_          (haereo)

3. Verbs in -sco derived from Adjectives, usually with Inchoative meaning.

  obduresco   obdurescere  obdurui    _grow hard_      (durus)
  evanesco    evanescere  evinui      _disappear_      (vanus)
  percrebresco  percrebrescere  percrebrui  _grow fresh_  (creber)
  maturesco   maturescere  maturui    _grow ripe_      (maturus)
  obmutesco   obmutescere  obmutui    _grow dumb_      (mutus)

V. DEPONENTS.

  fungor      fungi       functus sum      _perform_
  queror      queri       questus sum      _complain_
  loquor      loqui       locutus sum      _speak_
  sequor      sequi       secutus sum      _follow_
  fruor       frui        fruiturus        _enjoy_
    perfruor  perfrui     perfructus sum   _thoroughly enjoy_
  labor       labi        lapsus sum       _glide_
  amplector   amplecti    amplexus sum     _embrace_
  nitor       niti        nisus sum,       _strive_
                          nixus sum
  gradior     gradi       gressus sum      _walk_
  patior      pati        passus sum       _suffer_
    perpetior  perpeti    perpessus sum    _endure_
  utor        uti         usus sum         _use_
  morior      mori        mortuus sum      _die_
  adipiscor   adipisci    adeptus sum      _acquire_
  comminiscor  comminisci  commentus sum   _invent_
  reminiscor  reminisci   ----             _remember_
  nanciscor   nancisci    nanctus          _acquire_
                          (nactus) sum
  nascor      nasci       natus sum        _be born_
  obliviscor  oblivisci   oblitus sum      _forget_
  paciscor    pacisci     pactus sum       _covenant_
  proficiscor  proficisci  profectus sum   _set out_
  ulciscor    ulcisci     ultus sum        _avenge_
  irascor     irasci      (iratus, as      _be angry_
                          Adj.)
  vescor      vesci       ----             _eat_

Fourth Conjugation.

123. I. PERFECT ENDS IN -VI.

  audio       audire      audivi      auditus          _hear_
    So all regular Verbs of the Fourth Conjugation.
  sepelio     sepelire    sepelivi    sepultus         _bury_

II. PERFECT ENDS IN -UI.

  aperio      aperire     aperui      apertus          _open_
  operio      operire     operui      opertus          _cover_
  salio       salire      salui       ----             _leap_

III. PERFECT ENDS IN -SI.

  saepio      saepire     saepsi      saeptus          _hedge in_
  sancio      sancire     sanxi       sanctus          _ratify_
  vincio      vincire     vinxi       vinctus          _bind_
  amicio      amicire     ----        amictus          _envelop_
  fulcio      fulcire     fulsi       fultus           _prop up_
  refercio    refercire   refersi     refertus         _fill_
  sarcio      sarcire     sarsi       sartus           _patch_
  haurio      haurire     hausi       haustus          _draw_
  sentio      sentire     sensi       sensus           _feel_

IV. PERFECT IN -I WITH LENGTHENING OF STEM VOWEL.

  venio       venire      veni        ventum (est)     _come_
    advenio   advenire    adveni      adventum (est)   _arrive_
    invenio   invenire    inveni      inventus         _find_

V. PERFECT WITH LOSS OF REDUPLICATION.

  reperio     reperire    repperi     repertus         _find_
  comperio    comperire   comperi     compertus        _learn_

VI. USED ONLY IN THE PRESENT.

  ferio       ferire      ----        ----             _strike_
  esurio      esurire     ----        ----             _be hungry_

VII. DEPONENTS.

  largior     largiri     largitus sum     _bestow_
     So many others.
  experior    experiri    expertus sum     _try_
  opperior    opperiri    oppertus sum     _await_
  ordior      ordiri      orsus sum        _begin_
  orior       oriri       ortus sum        _arise_
  _Orior_ usually follows the Third Conjugation in its inflection; as
  _oreris_, _oritur_, _orimur_; _orerer_ (Imp. Subj.); _orere_ (Imper.).
  metior      metiri      mensus sum       _measure_
  assentior   assentiri   assensus sum     _assent_

       *       *       *       *       *

IRREGULAR VERBS.

124. A number of Verbs are called Irregular. The most important are sum,
do, edo, fero, volo, nolo, malo, eo, fio. The peculiarity of these Verbs is
that they append the personal endings in many forms directly to the stem,
instead of employing a connecting vowel, as fer-s (2d Sing. of fer-o),
instead of fer-i-s. They are but the relics of what was once in Latin a
large class of Verbs.

125. The Inflection of sum has already been given. Its various compounds
are inflected in the same way. They are--

  absum       abesse      afui             _am absent_
          _Pres. Partic_. absens (absentis), _absent_.
  adsum       adesse      adfui            _am present_
  desum       deesse      defui            _am lacking_
  insum       inesse      infui            _am in_
  intersum    interesse   interfui         _am among_
  praesum     praeesse    praefui          _am in charge of_
        _Pres. Partic_. praesens (praesentis), _present_
  obsum       obesse      obfui            _hinder_
  prosum      prodesse    profui           _am of advantage_
  subsum      subesse     subfui           _am underneath_
  supersum    superesse   superfui         _am left_

NOTE.--Prosum is compounded of prod (earlier form of pro) and sum; the d
disappears before consonants, as prosumus; but prodestis.

126. Possum. In its Present System possum is a compound of pot- (for pote,
able) and sum; potui is from an obsolete potere.

                  PRINCIPAL PARTS.
  possum,     posse,      potui,      _to be
                                      able_.


                               INDICATIVE MOOD.
              SINGULAR.                             PLURAL.
  _Pres._    possum, potes, potest;          possumus, potestis, possunt.
  _Imp._     poteram;                        poteramus.
  _Fut._     potero;                         poterimus.
  _Perf._    potui;                          potuimus.
  _Plup._    potueram;                       potueramus.
  _Fut. P._  potuero;                        potuerimus.

                                 SUBJUNCTIVE.
              SINGULAR.                             PLURAL.
  _Pres._    possim, possis, possit;         possimus, possitis, possint.
  _Imp._     possem;                         possemus.
  _Perf._    potuerim;                       potuerimus.
  _Plup._    potuissem;                      potuissemus.

             INFINITIVE.                          PARTICIPLE.
  _Pres._    posse.                  _Pres._  potens (_as an adjective_).
  _Perf._    potuisse.

127. Do, _I give_.

                  PRINCIPAL PARTS.
  do,         dare,       dedi,       datus.


                                Active Voice.

                               INDICATIVE MOOD.
              SINGULAR.                             PLURAL.
  _Pres._    do, das, dat;                   damus, datis, dant.
  _Imp._     dabam, etc.;                    dabamus.
  _Fut._     dabo, etc.;                     dabimus.
  _Perf._    dedi;                           dedimus.
  _Plup._    dederam;                        dederamus.
  _Fut. P._  dedero;                         dederimus.

                                 SUBJUNCTIVE
  _Pres._    dem;                            demus.
  _Imp._     darem;                          daremus.
  _Perf._    dederim;                        dederimus.
  _Plup._    dedissem;                       dedissemus.

                                 IMPERATIVE.
  _Pres._    da;                             date.
  _Fut._     dato;                           datote.
             dato.                           danto.

             INFINITIVE.                          PARTICIPLE.
  _Pres._    dare.                           dans.
  _Perf._    dedisse.
  _Fut._     daturus esse.                   daturus.

               GERUND.                              SUPINE.
             dandi, etc.                     datum, datu.

1. The passive is inflected regularly with the short vowel. Thus: dari,
datur, daretur, etc.

2. The archaic and poetic Present Subjunctive forms duim, duint, perduit,
perduint, etc., are not from the root da-, but from du-, a collateral root
of similar meaning.

128. Edo, _I eat_.

                  PRINCIPAL PARTS.
  edo,        esse,       edi,        esus.


              Active Voice.

             INDICATIVE MOOD.
  _Pres._     edo,          edimus,
              es,           estis,
              est;          edunt.

               SUBJUNCTIVE.
  _Imp._      essem,        essemus,
              esses,        essetis,
              esset;        essent.

               IMPERATIVE.
  _Pres._     es;           este.
  _Fut._      esto;         estote.
              esto;         edunto.

               INFINITIVE.
              _Pres._ esse.

              Passive Voice.

             INDICATIVE MOOD.
         _Pres. 3d Sing_. estur.

               SUBJUNCTIVE.
         _Imp. 3d Sing_. essetur.

1. Observe the long vowel of the forms in es-, which alone distinguishes
them from the corresponding forms of esse, _to be_.

2. Note comedo, comesse, comedi, comesus or comestus, _consume_.

3. The Present Subjunctive has edim, -is, -it, etc., less often edam, -as,
etc.

129. Fero, _I bear_.

                  PRINCIPAL PARTS.
  fero,       ferre,      tuli,       latus.


                                Active Voice.

                               INDICATIVE MOOD.
                                                    PLURAL.
              SINGULAR.
  _Pres._    fero, fers, fert;               ferimus, fertis, ferunt.[46]
  _Imp._     ferebam;                        ferebamus.
  _Fut._     feram;                          feremus.
  _Perf._    tuli;                           tulimus.
  _Plup._    tuleram;                        tuleramus.
  _Fut. P._  tulero;                         tulerimus.

                                 SUBJUNCTIVE.
  _Pres._    feram;                          feramus.
  _Imp._     ferrem;                         ferremus.
  _Perf._    tulerim;                        tulerimus.
  _Plup._    tulissem;                       tulissemus.

                                  IMPERATIVE
  _Pres._    fer;                            ferte.
  _Fut._     ferto;                          fertote.
             ferto;                          ferunto.

             INFINITIVE.                          PARTICIPLE.
  _Pres._    ferre.                  _Pres._  ferens.
  _Perf._    tulisse.
  _Fut._     laturus esse.           _Fut._  laturus.

               GERUND.                              SUPINE.
  _Gen._     ferendi.
  _Dat._     ferendo.
  _Acc._     ferendum.               _Acc._  latum.
  _Abl._     ferendo.                _Abl._  latu.

                       Passive Voice.
  feror,      ferri,      latus sum,      _to be borne_.


                               INDICATIVE MOOD.
                                                    PLURAL.
              SINGULAR.
  _Pres._    feror, ferris, fertur;          ferimur, ferimini, feruntur.
  _Imp._     ferebar;                        ferebamur.
  _Fut._     ferar;                          feremur.
  _Perf._    latus sum;                      lati sumus.
  _Plup._    latus eram;                     lati eramus.
  _Fut. P._  latus ero;                      lati erimus.

                                 SUBJUNCTIVE.
  _Pres._    ferar;                          feramur.
  _Imp._     ferrer;                         ferremur.
  _Perf._    latus sim;                      lati simus.
  _Plup._    latus essem;                    lati essemus.

                                 IMPERATIVE.
  _Pres._    ferre;                          ferimimi.
  _Fut._     fertor;                         ----
             fertor;                         feruntor.

             INFINITIVE.                          PARTICIPLE.
  _Pres._    ferri.
  _Perf._    latus esse.             _Perf._  latus.
  _Fut._     latum iri.              _Fut._  ferendus.

So also the Compounds--

  affero     afferre    attuli     allatus    _bring toward_
  aufero     auferre    abstuli    ablatus    _take away_
  confero    conferre   contuli    collatus   _compare_
  differo    differre   distuli    dilatus    _put off_
  effero     efferre    extuli     elatus     _carry out_
  infero     inferre    intuli     illatus    _bring against_
  offero     offerre    obtuli     oblatus    _present_
  refero     referre    rettuli    relatus    _bring back_

NOTE.--The forms sustuli and sublatus belong to tollo.

130. volo, nolo, malo.

                        PRINCIPAL PARTS.
  volo,       velle,      volui,      _to wish._
  nolo,       nolle,      nolui,      _to be unwilling._
  malo,       malle,      malui,      _to prefer._


                             INDICATIVE MOOD.
  _Pres._     volo,               nolo,               malo,
              vis,                non vis,            mavis,
              vult;               non vult;           mavult;
              volumus,            nolumus,            malumus,
              vultis,             non vultis,         mavultis,
              volunt.             nolunt.             malunt.
  _Imp._      volebam.            nolebam.            malebam.
  _Fut._      volam.              nolam.              malam.
  _Perf._     volui.              nolui.              malui.
  _Plup._     volueram.           nolueram.           malueram.
  _Fut. P._   voluero.            noluero.            maluero.

                               SUBJUNCTIVE.
  _Pres._     velim, -is, -it,    nolim.              malim.
              etc.
  _Inf._      vellem, -es, -et,   nollem.             mallem.
              etc.
  _Perf._     voluerim.           noluerim.           maluerim.
  _Pluf._     voluissem.          noluissem.          maluissem.

                               IMPERATIVE.

                             _Pres._     noli;       nolite.
                             _Fut._      nolito;     nolitote.
                             nolito;     nolunto.


                               INFINITIVE.
  _Pres._     velle.              nolle.              malle.
  _Perf._     voluisse.           noluisse.           maluisse

                               PARTICIPLE.
  _Pres._     volens              nolens.             ----

131. Fio.

                        PRINCIPAL PARTS.
  fio,        fieri,      factus sum,   _to become_, _be
                                        made_.


                               INDICATIVE MOOD.

              SINGULAR,                             PLURAL.
  _Pres._    fio, fis, fit;                  fimus, fitis, fiunt.
  _Inf._     fiebam;                         fiebamus.
  _Fut._     fiam;                           fiemus.
  _Perf._    factus sum;                     facti sumus.
  _Pluf._    factus eram;                    facti eramus.
  _Fut. P._  factus ero;                     facti erimus.

                                 SUBJUNCTIVE.
  _Pres._    fiam;                           fiamus.
  _Imp._     fierem;                         fieremus.
  _Perf._    factus sim;                     facti simus.
  _Plup._    factus essem;                   facti essemus.

                                 IMPERATIVE.
  _Pres._    fi;                             fite.
                                                  PARTICIPLE.
             INFINITIVE.
  _Pres._    fieri.
  _Perf._    factus esse.            _Perf._  factus.
  _Fut._     factum iri.             _Ger._  faciendus.

NOTE.--A few isolated forms of compounds of fio occur; as, defit _lacks_;
infit, _begins_.

132. Eo.

                  PRINCIPAL PARTS.
  eo,         ire,        ivi,        itum (est),   _to go_.


                               INDICATIVE MOOD.

              SINGULAR.                             PLURAL.
  _Pres._    eo, is, it;                     imus, itis, eunt.
  _Imp._     ibam;                           ibamus.
  _Fut._     ibo;                            ibimus.
  _Perf._    ivi (ii);                       ivimus (iimus).
  _Plup._    iveram (ieram);                 iveramus (ieramus)
  _Fut. P._  ivero (iero);                   iverimus (ierimus).

                                 SUBJUNCTIVE.

              SINGULAR.                             PLURAL.
  _Pres._    eam;                            eamus.
  _Inf._     irem;                           iremus.
  _Perf._    iverim (ierim);                 iverimus (ierimus).
  _Pluf._    ivissem (iissem, issem);        ivissemus (iissemus, issemus).

                                 IMPERATIVE.
  _Pres._    i;                              ite.
  _Fut._     ito;                            itote,
             ito;                            eunto.

             INFINITIVE.                          PARTICIPLE.
  _Pres._    ire.                    _Pres._  iens.
  _Perf._    ivisse (isse).                  (_Gen._ euntis.)
  _Fut._     iturus esse.            _Fut._  iturus.   _Gerundive_, eundum.

               GERUND.                              SUPINE.
             eundi, etc.                     itum, itu.

1. Transitive compounds of eo admit the full Passive inflection; as adeor,
adiris, aditur, etc.

       *       *       *       *       *

DEFECTIVE VERBS.

Defective Verbs lack certain forms. The following are the most important:--

133. USED MAINLY IN THE PERFECT SYSTEM.


              Coepi,          Memini,         Odi,
              _I have         _I remember_.   _I hate_.
              begun._

                       INDICATIVE MOOD.
  _Perf._     coepi.          memini.         odi.
  _Plup._     coeperam.       memineram.      oderam.
  _Fut. P._   coepero.        meminero.       odero.

                         SUBJUNCTIVE.
  _Perf._     coeperim.       meminerim.      oderim.
  _Pluf._     coepissem.      meminissem.     odissem.

                         IMPERATIVE.
             _Sing._ memento; _Plur._ mementote.

                         INFINITIVE.
  _Perf._     coepisse.       meminisse.      odisse.
  _Fut._      coepturus esse.                 osurus esse.

                         PARTICIPLE.
  _Perf._     coeptus, _begun_.               osus.
  _Fut._      coepturus.                      osurus.

1. When coepi governs a Passive Infinitive it usually takes the form
coeptus est; as, amari coeptus est, _he began to be loved_.

2. Note that memini and odi, though Perfect in form, are Present in sense.
Similarly the Pluperfect and Future Perfect have the force of the Imperfect
and Future; as, memineram, _I remembered_; odero, _I shall hate_.

134. Inquam, _I say_ (inserted between words of a direct quotation)

             INDICATIVE MOOD.
          SINGULAR.       PLURAL.
  _Pres._  inquam,        ----
          inquis,         ----
          inquit;         inquiunt.
  _Fut._  ----            ----
          inquies,        ----
          inquiet.        ----
         _Perf. 3d Sing._ inquit.

135. Ajo, _I say_.

             INDICATIVE MOOD.
          SINGULAR.       PLURAL
  _Pres._  ajo,           ----
          ais,            ----
          ait;            ajunt.
  _Imp._  ajebam,         ajebamus,
          ajebas,         ajebatis,
          ajebat;         ajebant.
           _Perf 3d Sing._ ait.

               SUBJUNCTIVE.

          _Pres 3d Sing._ ajat.

NOTE.--For aisne, _do you mean?_ ain is common.

136. Fari, _to speak._

This is inflected regularly in the perfect tenses. In the Present System it
has--

                 INDICATIVE MOOD.
                  SINGULAR.       PLURAL.
  _Pres._         ----            ----
                  ----            ----
                  fatur.          ----
  _Fut._          fabor,          ----
                  ----            ----
                  fabitur.        ----
  _Impv._         fare.
  _Inf._          fari.
  _Pres.          fantis, fanti, etc.
  Partic._
  _Gerund_,       fandi; _D. and Abl._, fando.
  _G._,
  _Gerundive_,    fandus.

NOTE.--Forms of fari are rare. More frequent are its compounds; as,--
affatur, _he addresses_; praefamur, _we say in advance._

137. OTHER DEFECTIVE FORMS.

1. Queo, quire, quivi, _to be able_, and nequeo, nequire, nequivi, _to be
unable_, are inflected like eo, but occur chiefly in the Present Tense, and
there only in special forms.

2. Quaeso, _I entreat_; quaesumus, _we entreat_.

3. Cedo (2d sing. Impv.), cette (2d plu.); _give me_, _tell me_.

4. Salve, salvete, _hail_. Also Infinitive, salvere.

5. Have (ave), havete, _hail_. Also Infinitive, havere.

       *       *       *       *       *

IMPERSONAL VERBS.

138. Impersonal Verbs correspond to the English, _it snows, it seems, etc._
They have no personal subject, but may take an Infinitive, a Clause, or a
Neuter Pronoun; as, me pudet hoc fecisse, lit. _it shames me to have done
this_; hoc decet, _this is fitting_. Here belong--

I. Verbs denoting operations of the weather; as,--

  fulget        fulsit        _it lightens_
  tonat         tonuit        _it thunders_
  grandinat     ----          _it hails_
  ningit        ninxit        _it snows_
  pluit         pluit         _it rains_

II. Special Verbs.

  paenitet      paenitere     paenituit     _it repents_
  piget         pigere        piguit        _it grieves_
  pudet         pudere        puduit        _it causes shame_
  taedet        taedere       taeduit       _it disgusts_
  miseret       miserere      miseruit      _it causes pity_
  libet         libere        libuit        _it pleases_
  licet         licere        licuit        _it is lawful_
  oportet       oportere      oportuit      _it is fitting_
  decet         decere        decuit        _it is becoming_
  dedecet       dedecere      dedecuit      _it is unbecoming_
  refert        referre       retulit       _it concerns_

III. Verbs Impersonal only in Special Senses.

  constat       constare      constitit     _it is evident_
  praestat      praestare     praestitit    _it is better_
  juvat         juvare        juvit         _it delights_
  apparet       apparere      apparuit      _it appears_
  placet        placere       placuit       _it pleases_
                              (placitum
                              est)
  accedit       accedere      accessit      _it is added_
  accidit       accidere      accidit       _it happens_
  contingit     contingere    contigit      _it happens_
  evenit        evenire       evenit        _it turns out_
  interest      interesse     interfuit     _it concerns_

IV. The Passive of Intransitive Verbs; as,--

  itur                lit. _it is gone_         _i.e. some one goes_
  curritur            lit. _it is run_          _i.e. some one runs_
  ventum est          lit. _it has been come_   _i.e. some one has come_
  veniendum est       lit. _it must be come_    _i.e. somebody must
                                                come_
  pugnari potest      lit. _it can be fought_   _i.e. somebody can
                                                fight_

       *       *       *       *       *

PART III.

       *       *       *       *       *

PARTICLES.

       *       *       *       *       *

139. Particles are the four Parts of Speech that do not admit of
inflection; _viz_. Adverbs, Prepositions, Conjunctions, Interjections.

ADVERBS.

140. Adverbs denote manner, place, time, or degree Most adverbs are in
origin case-forms which have become stereotyped by usage. The common
adverbial terminations have already been given above (Sec. 76). The following
TABLE OF CORRELATIVES is important:--

  RELATIVE AND            DEMONSTRATIVE.          INDEFINITE.
  INTERROGATIVE.
  ubi, _where; where_?    hic, _here_.            alicubi, usquam,
                          ibi, illic, istic,      uspiam, _somewhere_.
                          _there_.
  quo, _whither;          huc, _hither_.          aliquo, _to some
  whither_?               eo, istuc, illuc,       place_.
                          _thither_.
  unde, _whence;          hinc, _hence_.          alicunde, _from
  whence_?                inde, istinc, illinc,   somewhere_.
                          _thence_.
  qua, _where; where_?    hac, _by this way_.     aliqua, _by some way_.
                          ea, istac, illac, _by
                          that way_.
  cum, _when_.            nunc, _now_.            aliquando, umquam,
  quando, _when_?         tum, tunc, _then_.      _sometime_, _ever_.
  quotiens, _as often     totiens, _so often_.    aliquotiens, _some
  as_; _how often_?                               number of times_.
  quam, _as much as_;     tam, _so much_.         aliquantum,
  _how much_?                                     _somewhat_.

PREPOSITIONS.

141. Prepositions show relations of words. The following Prepositions
govern the Accusative:--

  ad, _to_.               contra, _against_.      post, _after_.
  adversus,               erga, _toward_.         praeter, _past_.
  _against_.              extra, _outside_.       prope, _near_.
  adversum, _toward_,     infra, _below_.         propter, _on account
  _against_.              inter, _between_.       of_.
  ante, _before_.         intra, _within_.        secundum, _after_.
  apud, _with_,           juxta, _near_.          subter, _beneath_.
  _near_.                 ob, _on account         super, _over_.
  circa, _around_.        of_.                    supra, _above_.
  circiter, _about_.      penes, _in the hands    trans, _across_.
  circum, _around_.       of_.                    ultra, _beyond_.
  cis, _this side         per, _through_.         versus, _toward_.
  of_.                    pone, _behind_.
  citra, _this side of_.

1. Usque is often prefixed to ad, in the sense of _even_; as,--

  usque ad urbem, _even to the city_.

2. Versus always follows its case; as,--

  Romam versus, _toward Rome_.

It may be combined with a preceding Preposition; as,--

  ad urbem versus, _toward the city_.

3. Like prope, the Comparatives propior, propius, and the Superlatives
proximus, proxime, sometimes govern the Accusative; as,--

  Ubii proxime Rhenum incolunt, _the Ubii dwell next to the Rhine_;
  propius castra hostium, _nearer the camp of the enemy_.

142. The following Prepositions govern the Ablative:--

  a, ab, abs, _from_,     cum, _with_.            pro, _in front of_,
  _by_.                   de, _from_,             _for_.
  absque, _without_.      _concerning_.           sine, _without_.
  coram, _in the          e, ex, _from out        tenus, _up to_.
  presence of_.           of_.
                          prae, _before_.

1. A, ab, abs. Before vowels or h, ab must be used; before consonants we
find sometimes a, sometimes ab (the latter usually not before the labials
b, p, f, v, m; nor before c, g, q, or t); abs occurs only before te, and a
is admissible even there.

2. E, ex. Before vowels or h, ex must be used; before consonants we find
sometimes e, sometimes ex.

3. Tenus regularly follows its case, as, pectoribus tenus, _up to the
breast_. It sometimes governs the Genitive, as, labrorum tenus, _as far as
the lips_.

4. Cum is appended to the Pronouns of the First and Second Persons, and to
the Reflexive Pronoun; usually also to the Relative and Interrogative.
Thus:--

  mecum         nobiscum      quocum _or_ cum quo
  tecum         vobiscum      quacum _or_ cum qua
  secum                       quibuscum _or_ cum quibus
            On quicum, see Sec. 89, Footnote 27.

143. Two Prepositions, in, _in_, _into_, and sub, _under_, govern both the
Accusative and the Ablative. With the Accusative they denote motion; with
the Ablative, rest; as,--

  in urbem, _into the city_;
  in urbe, _in the city_.

1. Subter and super are also occasionally construed with the Ablative.

144. RELATION OF ADVERBS AND PREPOSITIONS.

1. Prepositions were originally Adverbs, and many of them still retain
their adverbial meaning; as, post, _afterwards_; ante, _previously_;
contra, _on the other hand_, etc.

2. Conversely several words, usually adverbs, are occasionally employed as
prepositions; as,--

  clam, pridie, with the Accusative.
  procul, simul, palam, with the Ablative.

3. Anastrophe. A Preposition sometimes follows its case. This is called
Anastrophe; as,--

  ei, quos inter erat, _those among whom he was_.

Anastrophe occurs chiefly with dissyllabic prepositions.

CONJUNCTIONS AND INTERJECTIONS.

145. 1. Conjunctions are used to connect ideas. For Cooerdinate
Conjunctions, see Sec. 341 ff. Subordinate Conjunctions are treated in
connection with Subordinate Clauses.

2. Interjections express emotion. Thus:--

  1. Surprise; as, en, ecce, o.
  2. Joy; as, io, euoe.
  3. Sorrow and Pain; as, heu, eheu, vae, pro.
  4. Calling; as, heus, eho.

       *       *       *       *       *

PART IV.

       *       *       *       *       *

WORD-FORMATION.

       *       *       *       *       *

I. DERIVATIVES.

146. Derivatives are formed by appending certain terminations called
Suffixes to stems of verbs, nouns, or adjectives.

A. NOUNS.

1. Nouns derived from Verbs.

147. 1. The suffix -tor (-sor), Fem. -trix, denotes _the agent_; as,--

  victor, victrix, _victor_;        defensor, _defender_.

NOTE.--The suffix -tor is occasionally appended to noun stems; as,--

  gladiator, _gladiator_ (from gladius).

2. The suffix -or (originally -os) denotes _an activity or a condition_;
as,--

  amor, _love_;           timor, _fear_;          dolor, _pain_.

3. The suffixes -tio (-sio), Gen. -onis, and -tus (-sus), Gen. -us, denote
_an action as in process_; as,--

  venatio, _hunting_; obsessio, _blockade_; gemitus, _sighing_; cursus,
  _running_.

NOTE.--Rarer endings with the same force are:--

  a) -tura, -sura; as,--

    sepultura, _burial_; mensura, _measuring_.

  b) -ium; as,--

    gaudium, _rejoicing_.

  c) -ido; as,--

    cupido, _desire_.

4. The suffixes -men, -mentum, -crum, -trum, -bulum, -culum, denote _the
means_ or _place_ of an action; as,--

  lumen (luc-s-men), _light_;       vocabulum, _word_;
  ornamentum, _ornament_;           documentum, _proof_;
  sepulcrum, _grave_;               aratrum, _plough_;
                   vehiculum, _carriage_.

2. Nouns derived from Nouns.

148. 1. Diminutives end in--

  -ulus,    (-ula,    -ulum)
  -olus,    (-ola,    -olum), after a vowel
  -culus,   (-cula,   -culum)
  -ellus,   (-ella,   -ellum)
  -illus,   (-illa,   -illum)

as,--

  nidulus,      _little nest_     (nidus);
  virgula,      _wand_            (virga);
  oppidulum,    _little town_     (oppidum);
  filiolus,     _little son_      (filius);
  opusculum,    _little work_     (opus);
  tabella,      _tablet_          (tabula);
  lapillus,     _pebble_          (lapis).

NOTE 1.--It will be observed that in gender the Diminutives follow the
gender of the words from which they are derived.

NOTE 2.--The endings -ellus, -illus contain the primitive form of the
diminutive suffix, _viz_., -lo-. Thus:--

  agellus,    _field_,    for ager-lus;
  lapillus,   _pebble_,   for lapid-lus.

2. The suffix -ium appended to nouns denoting persons designates either _a
collection_ of such persons or _their function_; as,--

  collegium, _a corporation, body of colleagues_ (collega);
  sacerdotium, _priestly function_ (sacerdos).

3. The suffixes -arium, -etum, -ile designate a place where objects _are
kept_ or _are found in abundance_; as,--

  columbarium,  _dove-cote_       (columba);
  olivetum,     _olive-orchard_   (oliva);
  ovile,        _sheep-fold_      (ovis).

4. The suffix -atus denotes _official position_ or _honor_; as,--

  consulatus, _consulship_ (consul).

5. The suffix -ina appended to nouns denoting persons designates _a
vocation_ or _the place where it is carried on_; as,--

  doctrina, _teaching_ (doctor, _teacher_);
  medicina, _the art of healing_ (medicus, _physician_);
  sutrina, _cobbler's shop_ (sutor, _cobbler_).

6. Patronymics are Greek proper names denoting _son of_ ..., _daughter of_
.... They have the following suffixes:--

  a) Masculines: -ides, -ades, -ides; as, Priamides, _son of Priam_;
  Aeneades, _son of Aeneas_; Pelides, _son of Peleus_.

  b) Feminines: -eis, -is, -ias; as, Nereis, _daughter of Nereus_;
  Atlantis, _daughter of Atlas_; Thaumantias, _daughter of Thaumas_.

3. Nouns derived from Adjectives.

149. The suffixes -tas (-itas), -tudo (-itudo), -ia, -itia are used for the
formation of abstract nouns _denoting qualities_; as,--

  bonitas, _goodness_; celeritas, _swiftness_; magnitudo, _greatness_;
  audacia, _boldness_; amicitia, _friendship_.

       *       *       *       *       *

B. ADJECTIVES.

1. Adjectives derived from Verbs.

150. 1. The suffixes -bundus and -cundus give nearly the force of a present
participle; as,--

  tremebundus, _trembling_;       jucundus (juvo), _pleasing_.

2. The suffixes -ax and -ulus denote _an inclination_ or _tendency_, mostly
a faulty one; as,--

  loquax, _loquacious_;           credulus, _credulous_.

3. The suffix -idus denotes _a state_; as,--

  calidus, _hot_;         timidus, _timid_;       cupidus, _eager_.

4. The suffixes -ilis and -bilis denote _capacity_ or _ability_, usually in
a passive sense; as,--

  fragilis, _fragile_ (_i.e._ capable of being broken);
  docilis, _docile_.

2. Adjectives derived from Nouns.

a) _From Common Nouns._

151. 1. The suffixes -eus and -inus are appended to names of substances or
materials; as,--

  aureus, _of gold_;      ferreus, _of iron_;     faginus, _of beech_.

2. The suffixes -ius, -icus, -ilis, -alis, -aris, -arius, -nus, -anus,
-inus, -ivus, -ensis signify _belonging to_, _connected with_; as,--

  oratorius, _oratorical_;        legionarius, _legionary_;
  bellicus, _pertaining to war_;  paternus, _paternal_;
  civilis, _civil_;               urbanus, _of the city_;
  regalis, _regal_;               marinus, _marine_;
  consularis, _consular_;         aestivus, _pertaining to
                                  summer_;
                  circensis, _belonging to the circus_.

3. The suffixes -osus and -lentus denote _fullness_; as,--

  periculosus, _full of danger_,  gloriosus, _glorious_;
  _dangerous_;                    opulentus, _wealthy_.

4. The suffix -tus has the force of _provided with_; as,--

  barbatus, _bearded_;            stellatus, _set with stars_.

b) _From Proper Names._

152. 1. Names of _persons_ take the suffixes: -anus, -ianus, -inus; as,--

  Catonianus, _belonging to       Plautinus, _belonging to
  Cato_;                          Plautus_.

2. Names of _nations_ take the suffixes -icus, -ius; as,--

  Germanicus, _German_;           Thracius, _Thracian_.

3. Names of _places_ take the suffixes -anus, -inus, -ensis, -aeus, -ius;
as,--

  Romanus, _Roman_;               Atheniensis, _Athenian_;
  Amerinus, _of Ameria_;          Smyrnaeus, _of Smyrna_;
                  Corinthius, _Corinthian_.

NOTE.-- -anus and -ensis, appended to names of countries, designate
something _stationed in_ the country or _connected with_ it, but not
indigenous; as,--

  bellum Africanum, _a war (of Romans with Romans) in Africa_.
  bellum Hispaniense, _a war carried on in Spain_.
  legiones Gallicanae, _(Roman) legions stationed in Gaul_.

3. Adjectives derived from Adjectives.

153. Diminutives in -lus sometimes occur; as,--

  parvolus, _little_;
  misellus (passer), _poor little_ (_sparrow_);
  pauperculus, _needy_.

4. Adjectives derived from Adverbs.

154. These end in -ernus, -ternus, -tinus, -tinus; as,--

  hodiernus,      _of to-day_     (hodie);
  hesternus,      _of yesterday_  (heri);
  intestinus,     _internal_      (intus);
  diutinus,       _long-lasting_  (diu).

       *       *       *       *       *

C. VERBS.

1. Verbs derived from Verbs.

155. 1. INCEPTIVES OR INCHOATIVES. These end in -sco, and are formed from
Present Stems. They denote _the beginning of an action_; as,--

  labasco,        _begin to totter_   (from labo);
  horresco,       _grow rough_        (from horreo);
  tremesco,       _begin to tremble_  (from tremo);
  obdormisco,     _fall asleep_       (from dormio).

2. FREQUENTATIVES OR INTENSIVES. These denote _a repeated or energetic
action_. They are formed from the Participial Stem, and end in -to or -so.
Those derived from verbs of the First Conjugation end in -ito (not -ato, as
we should expect). Examples of Frequentatives are--

  jacto,    _toss about_, _brandish_   (from jacio,
                                       _hurl_);
  curso,    _run hither and thither_   (from curro, _run_);
  volito,   _flit about_               (from volo, _fly_).

  a. Some double Frequentatives occur; as,--

  cantito,    _sing over and over_  (canto);
  cursito,    _keep running about_  (curso);
  ventito,    _keep coming_.

  b. agito, _set in motion_, is formed from the Present Stem.

3. DESIDERATIVES. These denote _a desire to do something_. They are formed
from the Participial Stem, and end in -urio; as,--

  esurio,       _desire to eat_, _am hungry_         (edo);
  parturio,     _want to bring forth_, _am in        (pario).
                labor_

2. Verbs derived from Nouns and Adjectives (Denominatives).

156. Denominatives of the First Conjugation are mostly transitive; those of
the Second exclusively intransitive. Those of the Third and Fourth
Conjugations are partly transitive, partly intransitive. Examples are--

  a) From Nouns:--

  fraudo,   _defraud_     (fraus);
  vestio,   _clothe_      (vestis);
  floreo,   _bloom_       (flos).

  b) From Adjectives:--

  libero,   _free_        (liber);
  saevio,   _be fierce_   (saevus).

       *       *       *       *       *

D. ADVERBS.

157. 1. Adverbs derived from verbs are formed from the Participial Stem by
means of the suffix -im; as,--

  certatim,  _emulously_  (certo);
  cursim,   _in haste_    (curro);
  statim,   _immediately_  (sto).

2. Adverbs derived from nouns and adjectives are formed:--

  a) With the suffixes -tim (-sim), -atim; as,--

    gradatim, _step by step_;

    paulatim, _gradually_;

    viritim, _man by man_.

  b) With the suffix -tus; as,--

    antiquitus, _of old_;

    radicitus, _from the roots_.

  c) With the suffix -ter; as,--

    breviter, _briefly_.

       *       *       *       *       *

II. COMPOUNDS.

158. 1. Compounds are formed by the union of simple words. The second
member usually contains the _essential meaning_ of the compound; the first
member expresses _some modification_ of this.

2. Vowel changes often occur in the process of composition. Thus:--

  a. In the second member of compounds. (See Sec. 7, 1.)

  b. The final vowel of the stem of the first member of the compound often
  appears as i where we should expect o or a; sometimes it is dropped
  altogether, and in case of consonant stems i is often inserted; as,--

    signifer, _standard-bearer_;

    tubicen, _trumpeter_;

    magnanimus, _high-minded_;

    matricida, _matricide_.

159. EXAMPLES OF COMPOUNDS.

1. Nouns:--

  a) Preposition + Noun; as,--

    de-decus, _disgrace_;

    pro-avus, _great-grandfather_.

  b) Noun + Verb Stem; as,--

    agri-cola, _farmer_;

    fratri-cida, _fratricide_.

2. Adjectives:--

  a) Preposition + Adjective (or Noun); as,--

    per-magnus, _very great_;

    sub-obscurus, _rather obscure_;

    a-mens, _frantic_.

  b) Adjective + Noun; as,--

    magn-animus, _great-hearted_;

    celeri-pes, _swift-footed_.

  c) Noun + Verb Stem; as,--

    parti-ceps, _sharing_;

    morti-fer, _death-dealing_.

3. Verbs:--

The second member is always a verb. The first may be--

  a) A Noun; as,--

    aedi-fico, _build_.

  b) An Adjective; as,--

    ampli-fico, _enlarge_.

  c) An Adverb; as,--

    male-dico, _rail at_.

  d) Another Verb; as,--

    cale-facio, _make warm_.

  e) A Preposition; as,--

    ab-jungo, _detach_;

    re-fero, _bring back_;

    dis-cerno, _distinguish_;

    ex-specto, _await_.

NOTE.--Here belong the so-called INSEPARABLE PREPOSITIONS:

    ambi- (amb-), _around_;

    dis- (dir-, di-), _apart_, _asunder_;

    por-, _forward_;

    red- (re-), _back_;

    sed- (se-), _apart from_;

    ve-, _without_.

4. Adverbs:--

These are of various types; as,--

    antea, _before_;

    ilico (in loco), _on the spot_;

    imprimis, _especially_;

    obviam, _in the way_.

       *       *       *       *       *

PART V.

       *       *       *       *       *

SYNTAX.

       *       *       *       *       *

160. Syntax treats of the use of words in sentences

CHAPTER I.--_Sentences._

CLASSIFICATION OF SENTENCES.

161. Sentences may be classified as follows:--

1. DECLARATIVE, which state something; as,--

    puer scribit, _the boy is writing_.

2. INTERROGATIVE, Which ask a question; as,--

    quid puer scribit, _what is the boy writing?_

3. EXCLAMATORY, which are in the form of an exclamation; as,--

    quot libros scribit, _how many books he writes!_

4. IMPERATIVE, which express a command or an admonition; as,--

    scribe, _write!_

FORM OF INTERROGATIVE SENTENCES.

162. Questions may be either Word-Questions or Sentence-Questions.

1. Word-Questions. These are introduced by the various interrogative
pronouns and adverbs, such as--quis, qui, qualis, quantus, quot, quotiens,
quo, qua, etc. Thus:--

    quis venit, _who comes?_ quam diu manebit, _how long will he stay?_

2. Sentence-Questions. These are introduced--

  a) By nonne implying the answer 'yes'; as,--

    nonne videtis, _do you not see?_

  b) By num implying the answer 'no'; as,--

    num exspectas, _do you expect?_ (i.e. _you don't expect, do you?_)

  c) by the enclitic -ne, appended to the emphatic word (which usually
  stands first), and simply asking for information; as,--

    videsne, _do you see?_

  A question introduced by -ne may receive a special implication from the
  context; as,--

    sensistine, _did you not perceive?_

  d) Sometimes by no special word, particularly in expressions of
  _surprise_ or _indignation_; as,--

    tu in judicum conspectum venire audes, _do you dare to come into the
    presence of the judges?_

3. Rhetorical Questions. These are questions merely in form, being employed
to express an emphatic assertion; as, quis dubitat, _who doubts?_ (_= no
one doubts_).

4. Double Questions. Double Questions are introduced by the following
particles:--

    utrum ... an;

    -ne ... an;

    ---- ... an.

If the second member is negative, annon (less often necne) is used.
Examples:--

  utrum honestum est an turpe,    }
  honestumne est an turpe,        } _is it honorable or base?_
  honestum est an turpe,          }
  suntne di annon, _are there gods or not?_

  a. An was not originally confined to double questions, but introduced
  single questions, having the force of -ne, nonne, or num. Traces of this
  use survive in classical Latin; as,--

    A rebus gerendis abstrahit senectus. Quibus? An eis quae juventute
    geruntur et viribus? _Old age (it is alleged) withdraws men from active
    pursuits. From what pursuits? Is it not merely from those which are
    carried on by the strength of youth?_

5. Answers.

  a. The answer YES is expressed by ita, etiam, vero, sane, or by
  repetition of the verb; as,--

    'visne locum mutemus?' 'sane'. _'Shall we change the place?'_
    _'Certainly.'_

    'estisne vos legati?' 'sumus.' _'Are you envoys?'_ _'Yes.'_

  b. The answer NO is expressed by non, minime, minime vero, or by
  repeating the verb with a negative; as,--

    'jam ea praeteriit?' 'non.' _'Has it passed?'_ _'No.'_

    'estne frater intus?' 'non est.' _'Is your brother within?'_ _'No.'_

SUBJECT AND PREDICATE.

163. The two essential parts of a sentence are the SUBJECT and PREDICATE.

The SUBJECT is that _concerning which something is said, asked, etc._ The
PREDICATE is that _which is said, asked, etc., concerning_ the SUBJECT.

SIMPLE AND COMPOUND SENTENCES.

164. Sentences containing but one Subject and one Predicate are called
SIMPLE SENTENCES, those containing more are called COMPOUND SENTENCES. Thus
puer libros legit, _the boy reads books_, is a Simple Sentence; but puer
libros legit et epistulas scribit, _the boy reads books and writes
letters_, is a Compound Sentence. The different members of a Compound
Sentence are called Clauses.

165. COOeRDINATE AND SUBORDINATE CLAUSES. Clauses which stand upon an
equality are called COOeRDINATE; a Clause dependent on another is called
SUBORDINATE. Thus in puer libros legit et epistulas scribit the two clauses
are Cooerdinate; but in puer libros legit quos pater scribit, _the boy reads
the books which his father writes_, the second clause is Subordinate to the
first.

       *       *       *       *       *

CHAPTER II.--_Syntax of Nouns._

SUBJECT.

166. The Subject of a Finite Verb (i.e. any form of the Indicative,
Subjunctive, or Imperative) is in the Nominative Case.

1. The Subject may be--

  a) A Noun or Pronoun; as,--

    puer scribit, _the boy writes_;

    hic scribit, _this man writes_.

  b) An Infinitive; as,--

    decorum est pro patria mori, _to die for one's county is a noble
    thing_.

  c) A Clause; as,--

    opportune accidit quod vidisti, _it happened opportunely that you saw_.

2. A Personal Pronoun as Subject is usually implied in the Verb and is not
separately expressed; as,--

    scribo, _I write_; videt, _he sees._

  a. But for the purpose of emphasis or contrast the Pronoun is expressed;
  as,--

    ego scribo et tu legis, _I write, and you read._

3. The verb is sometimes omitted when it can be easily supplied from the
context, especially the auxiliary sum; as,--

    recte ille (_sc_. facit), _he does rightly_; consul profectus (_sc_.
    est), _the consul set out_.

PREDICATE NOUNS.

167. A PREDICATE NOUN is one connected with the Subject by some form of the
verb Sum or a similar verb.

168. A Predicate Noun agrees with its Subject in Case;[47] as,--

    Cicero orator fuit, _Cicero was an orator_;

    Numa creatus est rex, _Numa was elected king_.

1. when possible, the Predicate Noun usually agrees with its Subect in
Gender also; as,--

    philosophia est vitae magistra, _philosophy is the guide of life_.

2. Besides sum, the verbs most frequently accompanied by a Predicate Noun
are--

  a) fio, evado, exsisto; maneo; videor; as,--

    Croesus non semper mansit rex, _Croesus did not always remain king_.

  b) Passive verbs of _making_, _calling_, _regarding_, etc.; as, creor,
  appellor, habeor; as,--

    Romulus rex appellatus est, _Romulus was called king_;

    habitus est deus, _he was regarded as a god_.

APPOSITIVES.

169. 1. An Appositive is a Noun explaining or defining another Noun
denoting the same person or thing; as,--

    Cicero consul, _Cicero, the Consul_;

    urbs Roma, _the city Rome_.

2. An Appositive agrees with its Subject in Case; as,--

    opera Ciceronis oratoris, _the works of Cicero, the orator_;

    apud Herodotum, patrem historiae, _in the works of Herodotus, the
    father of history_.

3. When possible, the Appositive agrees with its Subject in Gender also;
as,--

    assentatio adjutrix vitiorum, _flattery, the promoter of evils_.

4. A Locative may take in Apposition the Ablative of urbs or oppidum, with
or without a preposition; as,--

    Corinthi, Achaiae urbe, or in Achaiae urbe, _at Corinth, a city of
    Greece_.

5. PARTITIVE APPOSITION. A Noun denoting a whole is frequently followed by
an Appositive denoting a part; as,--

    milites, fortissimus quisque, hostibus restiterunt, _the soldiers, all
    the bravest of them, resisted the enemy_.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE CASES.

THE NOMINATIVE.

170. The Nominative is confined to its use as Subject, Appositive, or
Predicate Noun, as already explained. See Sec. 166-169.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE VOCATIVE.

171. The Vocative is the Case of direct address; as,--

    credite mihi, judices, _believe me, judges_.

1. By a species of attraction, the Nominative is occasionally used for the
Vocative, especially in poetry and formal prose; as, audi tu, populus
Albanus, _hear ye, Alban people!_

2. Similarly the Appositive of a Vocative may, in poetry, stand in the
Nominative; as, nate, mea magna potentia solus, _O son, alone the source of
my great power_.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE ACCUSATIVE.

172. The Accusative is the Case of the Direct Object.

173. The Direct Object may express either of the two following relations:--

A. The PERSON OR THING AFFECTED by the action; as,--

    consulem interfecit, _he slew the consul_;

    lego librum, _I read the book_.

B. The RESULT PRODUCED by the action; as,--

    librum scripsi, _I wrote a book_ (i.e. produced one);

    templum struit, _he constructs a temple_.

174. Verbs that admit a Direct Object of either of these two types are
TRANSITIVE VERBS.

  a. Verbs that regularly take a Direct Object are sometimes used without
  it. They are then said to be employed _absolutely_; as,--

    rumor est meum gnatum amare, _it is rumored that my son is in love_.

Accusative of the Person or Thing Affected.

175. 1. This is the most frequent use of the Accusative; as in--

    parentes amamus, _we love our parents_;

    mare aspicit, _he gazes at the sea_.

2. The following classes of Verbs taking an Accusative of this kind are
worthy of note:--

  a) Many Intransitive Verbs, when compounded with a Preposition, become
  Transitive. Thus:--

    1) Compounds of circum, praeter, trans; as,--

    hostes circumstare, _to surround the enemy;_

    urbem praeterire, _to pass by the city;_

    muros transcendere, _to climb over the walls._

    2) Less frequently, compounds of ad, per, in, sub; as,--

    adire urbem, _to visit the city;_

    peragrare Italiam, _to travel through Italy;_

    inire magistratum, _to take office;_

    subire periculum, _to undergo danger._

  b) Many Verbs expressing emotions, regularly Intransitive, have also a
  Transitive use; as,--

    queror fatum, _I lament my fate;_

    doleo ejus mortem, _I grieve at his death;_

    rideo tuam stultitiam, _I laugh at your folly._

  So also lugeo, maereo, _mourn_; gemo, _bemoan_; horreo, _shudder_, and
  others.

  c) The impersonals decet, _it becomes_; dedecet, _it is unbecoming_;
  juvat, _it pleases_, take the Accusative of the Person Affected; as,--

    me decet haec dicere, _it becomes me to say this._

  d) In poetry many Passive Verbs, in imitation of Greek usage, are
  employed as Middles (Sec. 256, 1; 2), and take the Accusative as Object;
  as,--

    galeam induitur, _he puts on his helmet;_

    cinctus tempora hedera, _having bound his temples with ivy;_

    nodo sinus collecta, _having gathered her dress in a knot._

Accusative of the Result Produced.

176. 1. The ordinary type of this Accusative is seen in such expressions
as--

    librum scribo, _I write a book_;

    domum aedifico, _I build a house_.

2. Many Verbs usually Intransitive take a _Neuter Pronoun_, or _Adjective_,
as an Accusative of Result. Thus:--

  a) A Neuter Pronoun; as,--

    haec gemebat, _he made these moans_;

    idem gloriari, _to make the same boast_;

    eadem peccat, _he makes the same mistakes_.

  b) A Neuter Adjective,--particularly _Adjectives of number_ or
  _amount_,--multum, multa, pauca, etc.; also nihil; as,--

    multa egeo, _I have many needs_;

    pauca studet, _he has few interests_;

    multum valet, _he has great strength_;

    nihil peccat, _he makes no mistake_.

NOTE.--In poetry other Adjectives are freely used in this construction;
as--

    minitantem vana, _making vain threats_;

    acerba tuens, _giving a fierce look_;

    dulce loquentem, _sweetly talking_.

3. The adverbial use of several Neuter Pronouns and Adjectives grows out of
this Accusative; as,--

    multum sunt in venatione, _they are much engaged in hunting_.

  a. So also plurimum, _very greatly_; plerumque, _generally_; aliquid,
  _somewhat_; quid, _why?_ nihil, _not at all_; etc.

4. Sometimes an Intransitive Verb takes an Accusative of Result which is of
kindred etymology with the Verb. This is called a COGNATE ACCUSATIVE, and
is usually modified by an Adjective; as,--

    sempiternam servitutem serviat, _let him serve an everlasting slavery_;

    vitam duram vixi, _I have lived a hard life_.

  a. Sometimes the Cognate Accusative is not of kindred etymology, but
  merely of kindred meaning; as,--

    stadium currit, _he runs a race_;

    Olympia vincit, _he wins an Olympic victory_.

5. The Accusative of Result occurs also after Verbs of _tasting_ and
_smelling_; as,--

    piscis mare sapit, _the fish tastes of the sea_;

    orationes antiquitatem redolent, _the speeches smack of the past_.

Two Accusatives--Direct Object and Predicate Accusative.

177. Many Verbs of _Making_, _Choosing_, _Calling_, _Showing_, and the
like, take two Accusatives, one of the Person or Thing Affected, the other
a Predicate Accusative; as,--

    me heredem fecit, _he made me heir_.

Here me is Direct Object, heredem Predicate Accusative. So also--

    eum judicem cepere, _they took him as judge_;

    urbem Romam vocavit, _he called the city Rome_;

    se virum praestitit, _he showed himself a man_.

2. The Predicate Accusative may be an Adjective as well as a Noun; as,--

    homines caecos reddit cupiditas, _covetousness renders men blind_;

    Apollo Socratem sapientissimum judicavit, _Apollo adjudged Socrates the
    wisest man_.

  a. Some Verbs, as reddo, usually admit only an Adjective as the Predicate
  Accusative.

3. In the Passive the Direct Object becomes the Subject, and the Predicate
Accusative becomes Predicate Nominative (Sec. 168, 2, b): as,--

    urbs Roma vocata est, _the city was called Rome_.

  a. Not all Verbs admit the Passive construction; reddo and efficio, for
  example, never take it.

Two Accusatives--Person and Thing.

178. 1. Some Verbs take two Accusatives, one of the Person Affected, the
other of the Result Produced. Thus:--

  a) Verbs of _requesting_ and _demanding_; as,--

    otium divos rogat, _he asks the gods for rest_;

    me duas orationes postulas, _you demand two speeches of me_.

  So also oro, posco, reposco, exposco, flagito, though some of these
  prefer the Ablative with ab to the Accusative of the Person; as,--

    opem a te posco, _I demand aid of you_.

  b) Verbs of _teaching_ (doceo and its compounds); as,--

    te litteras doceo, _I teach you your letters_.

  c) Verbs of _inquiring_; as,--

    te haec rogo, _I ask you this_;

    te sententiam rogo, _I ask you your opinion_.

  d) Several Special Verbs; _viz_. moneo, admoneo, commoneo, cogo, accuso,
  arguo, and a few others. These admit only a Neuter Pronoun or Adjective
  as Accusative of the Thing; as,--

    hoc te moneo, _I give you this advice_;

    me id accusas, _you bring this accusation against me_;

    id cogit nos natura, _nature compels us (to) this_.

  e) One Verb of _concealing_, celo; as,--

    non te celavi sermonem, _I have not concealed the conversation from
    you_.

2. In the Passive construction the Accusative of the Person becomes the
Subject, and the Accusative of the Thing is retained; as,--

    omnes artes edoctus est, _he was taught all accomplishments_;

    rogatus sum sententiam, _I was asked my opinion_;

    multa admonemur, _we are given many admonitions_.

  a. Only a few Verbs admit the Passive construction.

Two Accusatives with Compounds.

179. 1. Transitive compounds of trans may take two Accusatives, one
dependent upon the Verb, the other upon the Preposition, as,--

    milites flumen transportat, _he leads his soldiers across the river_.

2. With other compounds this construction is rare.

3. In the Passive the Accusative dependent upon the preposition is
retained; as,--

    milites flumen traducebantur, _the soldiers were led across the river_.

Synecdochical (or Greek) Accusative.

180. 1. The Synecdochical (or Greek) Accusative denotes the _part_ to which
an action or quality refers; as,--

    tremit artus, literally, _he trembles as to his limbs_, i.e. his limbs
    tremble;

    nuda genu, lit. _bare as to the knee_, i.e. with knee bare;

    manus revinctus, lit. _tied as to the hands_, i.e. with hands tied.

2. Note that this construction--

  a) Is borrowed from the Greek.
  b) Is chiefly confined to poetry.
  c) Usually refers to a part of the body.
  d) Is used with Adjectives as well as Verbs.

Accusative of Time and Space.

181. 1. _Duration of Time_ and _Extent of Space_ are denoted by the
Accusative; as,--

    quadraginta annos vixit, _he lived forty years_;

    hic locus passus sescentos aberat, _this place was six hundred paces
    away_;

    arbores quinquaginta pedes altae, _trees fifty feet high_;

    abhinc septem annos, _seven years ago_.

2. Emphasis is sometimes added by using the Preposition per; as,

    per biennium laboravi, _I toiled throughout two years_.

Accusative of Limit of Motion.

182. 1. The Accusative of Limit of Motion is used--

  a) With names of _Towns_, _Small Islands_, and _Peninsulas_; as,--

    Romam veni, _I came to Rome_;

    Athenas proficiscitur, _he sets out for Athens_;

    Delum perveni, _I arrived at Delos_.

  b) With domum, domos, rus; as,--

    domum revertitur, _he returns home_;

    rus ibo, _I shall go to the country_.

NOTE.--When domus means _house_ (i.e. building), it takes a preposition;
as,--

    in domum veterem remigrare, _to move back to an old house_.

2. Other designations of place than those above mentioned require a
Preposition to denote Limit of Motion; as,--

    ad Italiam venit, _he came to Italy._

  a. The Preposition is also customary with the Accusatives urbem or
  oppidum when they stand in apposition with the name of a town; as,--

    Thalam, in oppidum magnum, _to Thala, a large town;_

    Genavam ad oppidum, _to the town Geneva_.

  b. The name of a town denoting limit of motion may be combined with the
  name of a country or other word dependent upon a preposition; as,--

    Thurios in Italiam pervectus, _carried to Thurii in Italy;_

    cum Acen ad exercitum venisset, _when he had come to the army at Ace._

3. To denote _toward_, _to the vicinity of_, _in the vicinity of,_ ad is
used; as,--

    ad Tarentum veni, _I came to the vicinity of Tarentum;_

    ad Cannas pugna facta est, _a battle was fought near Cannae._

4. In poetry the Accusative of any noun denoting a place may be used
without a preposition to express the limit of motion; as,--

    Italiam venit, _he came to Italy._

5. The _goal_ notion seems to represent the original function of the
Accusative Case. Traces of this primitive force are recognizable in the
phrase infitias ire, _to deny_ (lit. _to go to a denial_), and a few other
similar expressions.

Accusative in Exclamations.

183. The Accusative, generally modified by an Adjective, is used in
Exclamations; as,--

    me miserum, _ah, wretched me!_

    O fallacem spem, _oh, deceptive hope!_

Accusative as Subject of the Infinitive.

184. The Subject of the Infinitive is put in the Accusative; as,--

    video hominem abire, _I see that the man is going away._

Other Uses of the Accusative.

185. Here belong--

1. Some Accusatives which were originally Appositives; _viz_.--

    id genus, _of that kind_; as, homines id genus, _men of that kind_
    (originally homines, id genus hominum, _men, that kind of men_);

    virile secus, muliebre secus, _of the male sex_, _of the female sex_;

    meam vicem, tuam vicem, etc., _for my part_, etc.;

    bonam partem, magnam partem, _in large part_;

    maximam partem, _for the most part_.

2. Some phrases of doubtful origin; as,--

  id temporis, _at that time_;         quod si, _but if_;
  id aetatis, _at that time_;          cetera, _in other respects_.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE DATIVE.

186. The Dative case, in general, expresses relations which are designated
in English by the prepositions to and for.

Dative of Indirect Object.

187. The commonest use of the Dative is to denote the person _to whom_
something is _given_, _said_, or _done_. Thus:--

I. With transitive verbs in connection with the Accusative; as,--

    hanc pecuniam mihi dat, _he gives me this money_;

    haec nobis dixit, _he said this to us_.

  a. Some verbs which take this construction (particularly dono and
  circumdo) admit also the Accusative of the person along with the Ablative
  of the thing. Thus:--

    Either Themistocli munera donavit, _he presented gifts to
    Themistocles_, or

    Themistoclem muneribus donavit, _he presented Themistocles with gifts_;

    urbi muros circumdat, _he builds walls around the city_, or

    urbem muris circumdat, _he surrounds the city with walls_

II. With many intransitive verbs; as,--

    nulli labori cedit, _he yields to no labor._

  a. Here belong many verbs signifying _favor_,[48] _help_, _injure_,
  _please_, _displease_, _trust_, _distrust_, _command_, _obey_, _serve_,
  _resist_, _indulge_, _spare_, _pardon_, _envy_, _threaten_, _be angry_,
  _believe_, _persuade_, and the like; as,--

    Caesar popularibus favet, _Caesar favors (i.e. is favorable to) the
    popular party_;

    amicis confido, _I trust (to) my friends_;

    Orgetorix Helvetiis persuasit, _Orgetorix persuaded (made it acceptable
    to) the Helvetians_;

    bonis nocet qui malis parcit, _he injures (does harm to) the good, who
    spares the bad_.

NOTE.--It is to be borne in mind that these verbs do not take the Dative by
virtue of their apparent English equivalence, but simply because they are
_intransitive_, and adapted to an indirect object. Some verbs of the same
apparent English equivalence are _transitive_ and govern the Accusative;
as, juvo, laedo, delecto. Thus: audentes deus juvat, _God helps the bold_;
neminem laesit _he injured no one_.

  b. Verbs of this class are used in the passive only impersonally; as,--

    tibi parcitur, _you are spared_;

    mihi persuadetur, _I am being persuaded_;

    ei invidetur, _he is envied_.

  c. Some of the foregoing verbs admit also a Direct Object in connection
  with the Dative; as,--

    mihi mortem minitatur, _he threatens me with death_ (_threatens death
    to me_).

III. With many verbs compounded with the prepositions: ad, ante, circum,
com,[49] in, inter, ob, post, prae, pro, sub, super.

These verbs fall into two main classes,--

1. Many simple verbs which cannot take a Dative of the indirect object
become capable of doing so when compounded with a preposition; as,--

    afflictis succurrit, _he helps the aflicted_;

    exercitui praefuit, _he was in command of the army_;

    intersum consiliis, _I share in the deliberations_.

2. Many transitive verbs which take only a direct object become capable,
when compounded, of taking a dative also as indirect object; as,--

    pecuniae pudorem anteponit, _he puts honor before money_;

    inicere spem amicis, _to inspire hope in one's friends_;

    munitioni Labienum praefecit, _he put Labienus in charge of the
    fortifications_.

Dative of Reference.

188. 1. The Dative of Reference denotes the person _to whom a statement
refers, of whom it is true_, or _to whom it is of interest;_ as,--

    mihi ante oculos versaris, _you hover before my eyes_ (lit. _hover
    before the eyes to me_);

    illi severitas amorem non deminuit, _in his case severity did not
    diminish love_ (lit. _to him severity did not diminish_);

    intercludere inimicis commeatum, _to cut of the supplies of the enemy._

  a. Note the phrase alicui interdicere aqua et igni, _to interdict one
  from fire and water_.

NOTE.--The Dative of Reference, unlike the Dative of Indirect Object, does
not modify the verb, but rather the sentence as a whole. It is often used
where, according to the English idiom, we should expect a Genitive; so in
the first and third of the above examples.

2. Special varieties of the Dative of Reference are--

  a) Dative of the Local Standpoint. This is regularly a participle; as,--

    oppidum primum Thessaliae venientibus ab Epiro, _the first town of
    Thessaly as you come from Epirus_ (lit. _to those coming from Epirus_).

  b) Ethical Dative. This name is given to those Dative constructions of
  the personal pronouns in which the connection of the Dative with the rest
  of the sentence is of the very slightest sort; as,--

    tu mihi istius audaciam defendis? _tell me, do you defend that man's
    audacity?_

    quid mihi Celsus agit? _what is my Celsus doing?_

  c) Dative of Person Judging; as,--

    erit ille mihi semper deus, _he will always be a god to me_ (i.e. in my
    opinion);

    quae ista servitus tam claro homini, _how can that be slavery to so
    illustrious a man_ (i.e. to his mind)!

  d) Dative of Separation. Some verbs of _taking away_, especially
  compounds of ab, de, ex, ad, govern a Dative of the person, less often of
  the thing; as,--

    honorem detraxerunt homini, _they took away the honor from the man_;

    Caesar regi tetrarchiam eripuit, _Caesar took the tetrarchy away from
    the king_;

    silici scintillam excudit, _he struck a spark from the flint_.

Dative of Agency.

189. The Dative is used to denote _agency_--

1. Regularly with the Gerundive; as,--

    haec nobis agenda sunt, _these things must be done by us_;

    mihi eundum est, _I must go_ (lit. _it must be gone by me_).

  a. To avoid ambiguity, a with the Ablative is sometimes used with the
  Gerundive; as,--

    hostibus a nobis parcendum est, _the enemy must be spared by us_.

2. Much less frequently with the compound tenses of the passive voice and
the perfect passive participle; as,--

    disputatio quae mihi nuper habita est, _the discussion which was
    recently conducted by me_.

3. Rarely with the uncompounded tenses of the passive; as,--

    honesta bonis viris quaeruntur, _noble ends are sought by good men_.

Dative of Possession.

190. The Dative of Possession occurs with the verb esse in such expressions
as:--

    mihi est liber, _I have a book_;

    mihi nomen est Marcus, _I have the name Marcus_.

1. But with nomen est the name is more commonly attracted into the Dative;
as, mihi Marco nomen est.

Dative of Purpose or Tendency.

191. The Dative of Purpose or Tendency designates _the end toward which an
action is directed_ or _the direction in which it tends_. It is used--

1. Unaccompanied by another Dative; as,--

    castris locum deligere, _to choose a place for a camp_;

    legiones praesidio relinquere, _to leave the legions as a guard_ (lit.
    _for a guard_);

    receptui canere, _to sound the signal for a retreat_.

2. Much more frequently in connection with another Dative of the person:--

  a) Especially with some form of esse; as,--

    fortunae tuae mihi curae sunt, _your fortunes are a care to me_ (lit.
    _for a care_);

    quibus sunt odio, _to whom they are an object of hatred_;

    cui bono? _to whom is it of advantage_?

  b) With other verbs; as,--

    hos tibi muneri misit, _he has sent these to you for a present_;

    Pausanias Atticis venit auxilio, _Pausanias came to the aid of the
    Athenians_ (lit. _to the Athenians for aid_).

3. In connection with the Gerundive; as,--

    decemviri legibus scribundis, _decemvirs for codifying the laws_;

    me gerendo bello ducem creavere, _me they have made leader for carrying
    on the war_.

NOTE.--This construction with the gerundive is not common till Livy.

Dative with Adjectives.

192. The use of the Dative with Adjectives corresponds very closely to its
use with verbs. Thus:--

1. Corresponding to the Dative of Indirect Object it occurs with adjectives
signifying: _friendly_, _unfriendly_, _similar_, _dissimilar_, _equal_,
_near_, _related to_, etc.; as,--

    mihi inimicus, _hostile to me_;

    sunt proximi Germanis, _they are next to the Germans_;

    noxiae poena par esto, _let the penalty be equal to the damage_.

  a. For propior and proximus with the Accusative, see Sec. 141, 3.

2. Corresponding to the Dative of Purpose, the Dative occurs with
adjectives signifying: _suitable_, _adapted_, _fit_; as,--

    castris idoneus locus, _a place fit for a camp_;

    apta dies sacrificio, _a day suitable for a sacrifice_.

NOTE.--Adjectives of this last class often take the Accusative with ad.

Dative of Direction.

193. In the poets the Dative is occasionally used to denote the _direction
of motion_; as,--

    it clamor caelo, _the shout goes heavenward_;

    cineres rivo fluenti jace, _cast the ashes toward a flowing stream_.

1. By an extension of this construction the poets sometimes use the Dative
to denote the _limit of motion_; as,--

    dum Latio deos inferret, _till he should bring his gods to Latium_.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE GENITIVE.

194. The Genitive is used with Nouns, Adjectives, and Verbs.

GENITIVE WITH NOUNS.

195. With Nouns the Genitive is _the case which defines the meaning of the
limited noun more closely_. This relation is generally indicated in English
by the preposition of. There are the following varieties of the Genitive
with Nouns:--

  Genitive of Origin,        Objective Genitive,
  Genitive of Material,      Genitive of the Whole,
  Genitive of Possession,    Appositional Genitive,
  Subjective Genitive,       Genitive of Quality.

196. Genitive of Origin; as,--

    Marci filius, _the son of Marcus_.

197. Genitive of Material; as,--

    talentum auri, _a talent of gold_;

    acervus frumenti, _a pile of grain_.

198. Genitive of Possession or Ownership; as,--

    domus Ciceronis, _Cicero's house_.

1. Here belongs the Genitive with causa and gratia. The Genitive always
precedes; as,--

    hominum causa, _for the sake of men_;

    meorum amicorum gratia, _for the sake of my friends_.

2. The Possessive Genitive is often used predicatively, especially with
esse and fieri; as,--

    domus est regis, _the house is the king's_;

    stulti est in errore manere, _it is (the part) of a fool to remain in
    error_;

    de bello judicium imperatoris est, non militum, _the decision
    concerning war belongs to the general, not to the soldiers_.

  a. For the difference in force between the Possessive Genitive and the
  Dative of Possession, see Sec. 359, 1.

199. Subjective Genitive. This denotes _the person who makes or produces
something or who has a feeling_; as,--

    dicta Platonis, _the utterances of Plato_;

    timores liberorum, _the fears of the children_.

200. Objective Genitive. This denotes _the object of an action or feeling_;
as,--

    metus deorum, _the fear of the gods_;

    amor libertatis, _love of liberty_;

    consuetudo bonorum hominum, _intercourse with good men_.

1. This relation is often expressed by means of prepositions; as,--

    amor erga parentes, _love toward one's parents_.

201. Genitive of the Whole. This designates the _whole_ of which a part is
taken. It is used--

1. With Nouns, Pronouns, Comparatives, Superlatives, and Ordinal Numerals;
as,--

    magna pars hominum, _a great part of mankind_;

    duo milia peditum, _two thousand foot-soldiers_;

    quis mortalium, _who of mortals?_

    major fratrum, _the elder of the brothers_;

    gens maxima Germanorum, _the largest tribe of the Germans_;

    primus omnium, _the first of all_.

  a. Yet instead of the Genitive of the Whole we often find ex or de with
  the Ablative, regularly so with Cardinal numbers and quidam; as,--

    fidelissimus de servis, _the most trusty of the slaves_;

    quidam ex amicis, _certain of his friends_;

    unus ex militibus, _one of the soldiers_.

  b. In English we often use _of_ where there is no relation of whole to
  part. In such cases the Latin is more exact, and does not use the
  Genitive; as,--

    quot vos estis, _how many of you are there?_

    trecenti conjuravimus, _three hundred of us have conspired_ (i.e. we,
    three hundred in number).

2. The Genitive of the Whole is used also with the Nominative or Accusative
Singular Neuter of Pronouns, or of Adjectives used substantively; also with
the Adverbs parum, satis, and partim when used substantively; as,--

    quid consili, _what purpose?_

    tantum cibi, _so much food_;

    plus auctoritatis, _more authority_;

    minus laboris, _less labor_;

    satis pecuniae, _enough money_;

    parum industriae, _too little industry_.

  a. An Adjective of the second declension used substantively may be
  employed as a Genitive of the Whole; as, nihil boni, _nothing good_.

  b. But Adjectives of the third declension agree directly with the noun
  they limit; as, nihil dulcius, _nothing sweeter_.

3. Occasionally we find the Genitive of the Whole dependent upon Adverbs of
place; as,--

    ubi terrarum? ubi gentium? _where in the world?_

  a. By an extension of this usage the Genitive sometimes occurs in
  dependence upon pridie and postridie, but only in the phrases pridie ejus
  diei, _on the day before that_; postridie ejus diei, _on the day after
  that_.

202. Appositional Genitive. The Genitive sometimes has the force of an
appositive; as,--

    nomen regis, _the name of king_;

    poena mortis, _the penalty of death_;

    ars scribendi, _the art of writing_.

203. Genitive of Quality. The Genitive modified by an Adjective is used to
denote quality. This construction presents several varieties. Thus it is
used--

1. To denote some internal or permanent characteristic of a person or
thing; as,--

    vir magnae virtutis, _a man of great virtue_;

    rationes ejus modi, _considerations of that sort_.

  a. Only a limited number of Adjectives occur in this construction,
  chiefly magnus, maximus, summus, tantus, along with ejus.

2. To denote measure (_breadth_, _length_, etc.); as,--

    fossa quindecim pedum, _a trench fifteen feet wide_ (or _deep_);

    exsilium decem annorum, _an exile of ten years_.

3. Equivalent to the Genitive of Quality (though probably of different
origin) are the Genitives tanti, quanti, parvi, magni, minoris, pluris,
minimi, plurimi, maximi. These are used predicatively to denote _indefinite
value_; as,--

    nulla studia tanti sunt, _no studies are of so much value_;

    magni opera ejus existimata est, _his assistance was highly esteemed_.

4. By an extension of the notion of _value_, quanti, tanti, pluris, and
minoris are also used with verbs of _buying_ and _selling_, to denote
_indefinite price_; as,--

    quanti aedes emisti, _at how high a price did you purchase the house?_

5. Any of the above varieties of the Genitive of Quality may be used
predicatively; as,--

    tantae molis erat Romanam condere gentem, _of so great difficulty was
    it to found the Roman race_.

GENITIVE WITH ADJECTIVES.

204. The Genitive is used with many Adjectives _to limit the extent of
their application_. Thus:--

1. With adjectives signifying _desire_, _knowledge_, _familiarity_,
_memory_, _participation_, _power_, _fullness_, and their opposites; as,--

    studiosus discendi, _desirous of learning_;

    peritus belli, _skilled in war_;

    insuetus laboris, _unused to toil_;

    immemor mandati tui, _unmindful of your commission_;

    plena periculorum est vita, _life is full of dangers_.

  a. Some participles used adjectively also take the Genitive; as,--

    diligens veritatis, _fond of truth_;

    amans patriae, _devoted to one's country_.

2. Sometimes with proprius and communis; as,--

    viri propria est fortitudo, _bravery is characteristic of a man_.

    memoria est communis omnium artium, _memory is common to all
    professions_.

  a. proprius and communis are also construed with the Dative.

3. With similis the Genitive is the commoner construction in Cicero, when
the reference is to living objects; as,--

    filius patris simillimus est, _the son is exactly like his father_;

    mei similis, _like me_; vestri similis, _like you_.

When the reference is to things, both Genitive and Dative occur; as,--

    mors somno (or somni) similis est, _death is like sleep_.

4. In the poets and later prose writers the use of the Genitive with
Adjectives is extended far beyond earlier limits; as, atrox animi, _fierce
of temper_; incertus consili, _undecided in purpose_.

GENITIVE WITH VERBS.

205. The Genitive is used with the following classes of Verbs:--

_Memini_, _Reminiscor_, _Obliviscor_.

206. 1. WHEN REFERRING TO PERSONS--

  a. memini always takes the Genitive of personal or reflexive pronouns;
  as,--

    mei memineris, _remember me_!

    nostri meminit, _he remembers us_.

With other words denoting persons memini takes the Accusative, rarely the
Genitive; as,--

    Sullam memini, _I recall Sulla_;

    vivorum memini, _I remember the living_.

  b. obliviscor regularly takes the Genitive; as,--

    Epicuri non licet oblivisci, _we mustn't forget Epicurus_.

2. WHEN REFERRING TO THINGS, memini, reminiscor, obliviscor take sometimes
the Genitive, sometimes the Accusative, without difference of meaning;
as,--

    animus praeteritorum meminit, _the mind remembers the past_;

    meministine nomina, _do you remember the names?_

    reminiscere veteris incommodi, _remember the former disaster_;

    reminiscens acerbitatem, _remembering the bitterness_.

  a. But neuter pronouns, and adjectives used substantively, regularly
  stand in the Accusative; as,--

    haec memini, _I remember this;_

    multa reminiscor, _I remember many things._

3. The phrase mihi (tibi, etc.) in mentem venit, following the analogy of
memini, takes the Genitive; as,--

    mihi patriae veniebat in mentem, _I remembered my country._

_Admoneo_, _Commoneo_, _Commonefacio._

207. These verbs, in addition to an Accusative of the person, occasionally
take a Genitive of the thing; as,--

    te veteris amicitiae commonefacio, _I remind you of our old
    friendship._

  a. But more frequently (in Cicero almost invariably) these verbs take de
  with the Ablative; as,--

    me admones de sorore, _you remind me of your sister._

  b. A neuter pronoun or adjective used substantively regularly stands in
  the Accusative (Sec. 178, 1, d); as,--

    te hoc admoneo, _I give you this warning._

Verbs of Judicial Action.

208. 1. Verbs of _Accusing_, _Convicting_, _Acquitting_ take the Genitive
of the _charge_; as,--

    me furti accusat, _he accuses me of theft_;

    Verrem avaritiae coarguit, _he convicts Verres of avarice_;

    impietatis absolutus est, _he was acquitted of blasphemy_.

2. Verbs of _Condemning_ take--

  a. The Genitive of the _charge_; as,--

    pecuniae publicae condemnatus, _condemned (on the charge) of
    embezzlement_ (lit. _public money_);

    capitis damnatus, _condemned on a capital charge_ (lit. _on a charge
    involving his head_).

  b. The Ablative of the _penalty;_ as,--

    capite damnatus est, _he was condemned to death_;

    mille nummis damnatus est, _he was condemned (to pay) a thousand
    sesterces_ (lit. _by a thousand sesterces_, Abl. of Means).

3. Note the phrases:--

    voti damnatus, voti reus, _having attained one's prayer_ (lit.
    _condemned on the score of one's vow_);

    de vi, (_accused_, _convicted_, etc.) _of assault_;

    inter sicarios, (_accused_, _convicted_, etc.) _of murder_.

Genitive with Impersonal Verbs.

209. 1. The Impersonals pudet, paenitet, miseret, taedet, piget take the
Accusative of _the person affected_, along with the Genitive _of the person
or thing toward whom the feeling is directed_; as,--

    pudet me tui, _I am ashamed of you_ (lit. _it shames me of you_);

    paenitet me hujus facti, _I repent of this act_;

    eum taedet vitae, _he is weary of life_;

    pauperum te miseret, _you pity the poor_.

  a. Instead of the Genitive of the thing we often find an Infinitive or
  Neuter Pronoun used as subject of the verb. Thus;--

    me paenitet hoc fecisse, _I repent of having done this_;

    me hoc pudet, _I am ashamed of this_.

2. Misereor and miseresco also govern the Genitive; as,--

    miseremini sociorum, _pity the allies_.

_Interest_, _Refert._

210. With interest, _it concerns_, three points enter into consideration;
viz.--

  a) the _person concerned_;
  b) the _thing about which_ he is concerned;
  c) the _extent_ of his concern.

211. 1. The _person concerned_ is regularly denoted by the Genitive; as,--

    patris interest, _it concerns the father_.

  a. But instead of the Genitive of the personal pronouns, mei, tui,
  nostri, vestri, the Latin uses the Ablative Singular Feminine of the
  Possessive, viz.: mea, tua, etc.; as,--

    mea interest, _it concerns me_.

2. The _thing about which_ a person is concerned is denoted--

  a) by a Neuter Pronoun as subject; as,--

    hoc rei publicae interest, _this concerns the state_.

  b) by an Infinitive; as,--

    omnium interest valere, _it concerns all to keep well_.

  c) by an Indirect Question; as,--

    mea interest quando venias, _I am concerned as to when you are coming_.

3. The _degree of concern_ is denoted--

  a) by the Genitive (cf. Sec. 203, 3): magni, parvi, etc.; as,--

    mea magni interest, _it concerns me greatly_.

  b) by the Adverbs, magnopere, magis, maxime, etc.; as,--

    civium minime interest, _it concerns the citizens very little_.

  c) by the Neuters, multum, plus, minus, etc.; as,--

    multum vestra interest, _it concerns you much_.

4. Refert follows interest in its construction, except that it rarely takes
the Genitive of the person. Thus:--

    mea refert, _it concerns me_;

but rarely illius refert, _it concerns him_.

Genitive with Other Verbs.

212. 1. Verbs of _Plenty_ and _Want_ sometimes govern the Genitive; as,--

    pecuniae indiges, _you need money_.

  a. These verbs more commonly take the Ablative (Sec. 214, 1); indigeo is the
  only verb which has a preference for the Genitive.

2. Potior, though usually followed by the Ablative, sometimes takes the
Genitive, almost always so in Sallust; and regularly in the phrase potiri
rerum, _to get control of affairs_.

3. In poetry some verbs take the Genitive in imitation of the Greek; as,--

    desine querellarum, _cease your complaints_;

    operum soluti, _freed from their tasks_.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE ABLATIVE.

213. The Latin Ablative unites in itself three cases which were originally
distinct both in form and in meaning; viz.--

  The Ablative or from-case.
  The Instrumental or with-case.
  The Locative or where-case.

The uses of the Latin Ablative accordingly fall into Genuine Ablative uses,
Instrumental uses, and Locative uses.

GENUINE ABLATIVE USES.

Ablative of Separation.

214. The Ablative of Separation is construed sometimes with, sometimes
without, a preposition.

1. The following words regularly take the Ablative without a preposition:--

  a) The Verbs of _freeing_: libero, solvo, levo;

  b) The Verbs of _depriving_: privo, spolio, exuo, fraudo, nudo;

  c) The Verbs of _lacking_: egeo, careo, vaco;

  d) The corresponding Adjectives, liber, inanis, vacuus, nudus,

  and some others of similar meaning.

  Thus:--

    curis liberatus, _freed from cares_;

    Caesar hostes armis exuit, _Caesar stripped the enemy of their arms_;

    caret sensu communi, _he lacks common sense_;

    auxilio eget, _he needs help_;

    bonorum vita vacua est metu, _the life of the good is free from fear_.

NOTE 1.--Yet Adjectives and libero may take the preposition ab,--regularly
so with the Ablative of persons; as,--

    urbem a tyranno liberarunt, _they freed the city from the tyrant._

NOTE 2.--Indigeo usually takes the Genitive. See Sec. 212, 1, a.

2. Of Verbs signifying _to keep from_, _to remove_, _to withdraw_, some
take the preposition, others omit it. The same Verb often admits both
constructions. Examples:--

    abstinere cibo, _to abstain from food;_

    hostes finibus prohibuerunt, _they kept the enemy from their borders_;

    praedones ab insula prohibuit, _he kept the pirates from the island_.

3. Other Verbs of separation usually take the Ablative with a Prepositon,
particularly compounds of dis- and se-; as,--

    dissentio a te, _I dissent from you_;

    secernantur a nobis, _let them be separated from us_.

4. The Preposition is freely omitted in poetry.

Ablative of Source.

215. The Ablative of Source is used with the participles natus and ortus
(in poetry also with editus, satus, and some others), to designate
_parentage_ or _station_; as,--

    Jove natus, _son of Jupiter_;

    summo loco natus, _high-born_ (lit. _born from a very high place_);

    nobili genere ortus, _born of a noble family_.

1. Pronouns regularly (nouns rarely) take ex; as,

    ex me natus, _sprung from me_.

2. To denote remoter descent, ortus ab, or oriundus (with or without ab),
is used; as,--

    ab Ulixe oriundus, _descended from Ulysses_.

Ablative of Agent.

216. The Ablative accompanied by a (ab) is used with passive verbs to
denote the _personal agent_; as,--

    a Caesare accusatus est, _he was arraigned by Caesar_.

1. Collective nouns referring to persons, and abstract nouns when
personified, may be construed as the personal agent. Thus:--

    hostes a fortuna deserebantur, _the enemy were deserted by Fortune_;

    a multitudine hostium montes tenebantur, _the mountains were held by a
    multitude of the enemy_.

2. Names of animals sometimes admit the same construction. Thus:--

    a canibus laniatus est, _he was torn to pieces by dogs_.

Ablative of Comparison.

217. 1. The Ablative is often used with Comparatives in the sense of
_than_; as,--

    melle dulcior, _sweeter than honey_;

    patria mihi vita carior est, _my country is dearer to me than life_.

2. This construction, as a rule, occurs only as a substitute for quam
(_than_) with the Nominative or Accusative. In other cases quam must be
used; as,--

    tui studiosior sum quam illius, _I am fonder of you than of him_.

    --Studiosior illo would have meant, _I am fonder of you than he is_.

Plus, minus, amplius, longius are often employed as the equivalents of plus
quam, minus quam, etc. Thus:--

    amplius viginti urbes incenduntur, _more than twenty cities are fired_;

    minus quinque milia processit, _he advanced less than five miles_.

3. Note the use of opinione with Comparatives; as,--

    opinione celerius venit, _he comes more quickly than expected_ (lit.
    _than opinion_).

INSTRUMENTAL USES OF THE ABLATIVE.

Ablative of Means.

218. The Ablative is used to denote _means_ or _instrument_; as,--

    Alexander sagitta vulneratus est, _Alexander was wounded by an arrow_.

There are the following special varieties of this Ablative:--

1. Utor, fruor, fungor, potior, vescor, and their compounds take the
Ablative; as,--

    divitiis utitur, _he uses his wealth_ (lit. _he benefits himself by his
    wealth_);

    vita fruitur, _he enjoys life_ (lit. _he enjoys himself by life_);

    munere fungor, _I perform my duty_ (lit. _I busy myself with duty_);

    carne vescuntur, _they eat flesh_ (lit. _feed themselves by means of_);

    castris potitus est, _he got possession of the camp_ (lit. _made
    himself powerful by the camp_).

  a.. Potior sometimes governs the Genitive. See Sec. 212, 2.

2. With opus est (rarely usus est), _there is need_; as,--

    duce nobis opus est, _we need a leader_.

  a. A Neuter Pronoun or Adjective often stands as subject with opus as
  predicate. Thus:--

    hoc mihi opus est, _this is necessary for me_.

  b. An ordinary substantive rarely stands as subject. Thus dux nobis opus
  est is a rare form of expression.

  c. Note the occasional use of a perfect passive participle with opus est;
  as,--

    opus est properato, _there is need of haste_.

3. With nitor, innixus, and fretus; as,--

    nititur hasta, _he rests on a spear_ (lit. _supports himself by a
    spear_);

    fretus virtute, _relying on virtue_ (lit. _supported by virtue_).

4. With contineri, consistere, constare, _consist of_; as,--

    nervis et ossibus continentur, _they consist of sinews and bones_ (lit.
    _they are held together by sinews and bones_);

    mortali consistit corpore mundus, _the world consists of mortal
    substance_ (lit. _holds together by means of_, etc.).

6. In expressions of the following type:--

    quid hoc homine facias, _what can you do with this man?_

    quid mea Tulliola fiet, _what will become of my dear Tullia?_ (lit.
    _what will be done with my dear Tullia?_)

7. In the following special phrases at variance with the ordinary English
idiom:--

    proelio contendere, vincere, _to contend_, _conquer in battle_;

    proelio lacessere, _to provoke to battle_;

    curru vehi, _to ride in a chariot_;

    pedibus ire, _to go on foot_;

    castris se tenere, _to keep in camp_.

8. With Verbs of _filling_ and Adjectives of _plenty_; as,--

    fossas virgultis complerunt, _they filled the trenches with brush_.

  a. But plenus more commonly takes the Genitive. See Sec. 204, 1.

9. Under 'Means' belongs also the Ablative of the Way by Which; as,--

    vinum Tiberi devectum, _wine brought down (by) the Tiber_.

10. The means may be a person as well as a thing. Thus:--

    militibus a lacu Lemanno ad montem Juram murum perducit, _with_ (i.e.
    by means of) _his troops he runs a wall from Lake Geneva to Mt. Jura_.

Ablative of Cause.

219. The Ablative is used to denote cause; as,--

    multa gloriae cupiditate fecit, _he did many things on account of his
    love of glory_.

1. So especially with verbs denoting mental states; as, delector, gaudeo,
laetor, glorior, fido, confido. Also with contentus; as,--

    fortuna amici gaudeo, _I rejoice at the fortune of my friend (i.e. on
    account of it_);

    victoria sua gloriantur, _they exult over their victory_;

    natura loci confidebant, _they trusted in the character of their
    country_ (lit. _were confident on account of the character_).

  a. fido and confido always take the Dative of the person (Sec. 187, II, a);
  sometimes the Dative of the thing.

2. As Ablatives of Cause are to be reckoned also such Ablatives as jussu,
by order of, injussu, _without the order_, rogatu, etc.

Ablative of Manner.

220. The Ablative with cum is used to denote manner; as,--

    cum gravitate loquitur, _he speaks with dignity_.

1. The preposition may be absent when the Ablative is modified by an
adjective; as,--

    magna gravitate loquitur, _he speaks with great dignity_.

2. The preposition is regularly absent in the expressions jure, injuria,
joco, vi, fraude, voluntate, furto, silentio.

3. A special variety of the Ablative of Manner denotes that _in accordance
with which_ or _in pursuance of which_ anything is or is done. It is
generally used without a preposition. Thus:--

    mea sententia, _according to my opinion_;

    suis moribus, _in accordance with their custom_;

    sua sponte, _voluntarily_, _of his (their) own accord_;

    ea condicione, _on these terms_.

Ablative of Attendant Circumstance.

221. The Ablative is often used to denote an _attendant circumstance_ of an
action or an event; as,--

    bonis auspiciis, _under good auspices_;

    nulla est altercatio clamoribus umquam habita majoribus, _no debate was
    ever held under circumstances of greater applause_;

    exstinguitur ingenti luctu provinciae, _he dies under circumstances of
    great grief on the part of the province_;

    longo intervallo sequitur, _he follows at a great distance_.

Ablative of Accompaniment.

222. The Ablative with cum is used with verbs of motion to denote
_accompaniment_; as,--

    cum comitibus profectus est, _he set out with his attendants_;

    cum febri domum rediit, _he returned home with a fever_.

1. In military expressions the Ablative may stand without cum when modified
by any adjective except a numeral; as,--

    omnibus copiis, ingenti exercitu, magna manu; but usually cum exercitu,
    cum duabus legionibus.

Ablative of Association.

222A. The Ablative is often used with verbs of _joining_, _mixing_,
_clinging_, _exchanging_; also with assuesco, consuesco, assuefacio, and
some others to denote _association_; as,--

    improbitas scelere juncta, _badness joined with crime_;

    aer calore admixtus, _air mixed with heat_;

    assuetus labore, _accustomed to_ (lit. _familiarized with) toil_;

    pacem bello permutant, _they change peace for_ (lit. _with) war_.

Ablative of Degree of Difference.

223. The Ablative is used with comparatives and words involving comparison
(as post, ante, infra, supra) to denote the _degree of difference_; as,--

    dimidio minor, _smaller by a half_;

    tribus pedibus altior, _three feet higher_;

    paulo post, _a little afterwards_;

    quo plura habemus, eo cupimus ampliora, _the more we have, the more we
    want_.

Ablative of Quality.

224. The Ablative, modified by an adjective, is used to denote _quality;_
as,--

    puella eximia forma, _a girl of exceptional beauty_;

    vir singulari industria, _a man of singular industry_.

1. The Ablative of Quality may also be used predicatively; as,--

    est magna prudentia, _he is (a man) of great wisdom_;

    bono anima sunt, _they are of good courage_.

2. In place of the Adjective we sometimes find a limiting Genitive; as,--

    sunt specie et colore tauri, _they are of the appearance and color of a
    bull_,

3. In poetry the Ablative of Quality sometimes denotes _material;_ as,--

    scopulis pendentibus antrum, _a cave of arching rocks._

Ablative of Price.

225. With verbs of _buying_ and _selling_, price is designated by the
Ablative; as--

    servum quinque minis emit, _he bought the slave for five minae._

1. The Ablatives magno, plurimo, parvo, minimo (by omission of pretio) are
used to denote _indefinite price_; as,--

    aedes magno vendidit, _he sold the house for a high price._

2. For the Genitive of Indefinite Price, see Sec. 203, 4.

Ablative of Specification.

226. The Ablative of Specification is used to denote that _in respect to
which_ something is or is done; as,--

    Helvetii omnibus Gallis virtute praestabant, _the Helvetians surpassed
    all the Gauls in valor_;

    pede claudus, _lame in his foot_.

1. Note the phrases:--

    major natu, _older_ (lit. _greater as to age_);

    minor natu, _younger._

2. Here belongs the use of the Ablative with dignus, _worthy_, indignus,
_unworthy_, and dignor, _deem worthy of_; as,--

    digni honore, _worthy of honor (i.e. in point of honor_);

    fide indigni, _unworthy of confidence_;

    me dignor honore, _I deem myself worthy of honor_.

Ablative Absolute.

227. The Ablative Absolute is grammatically independent of the rest of the
sentence. In its commonest form it consists of a noun or pronoun limited by
a participle; as,--

    urbe capta, Aeneas fugit, _when the city had been captured, Aeneas
    fled_ (lit. _the city having been captured_).

1. Instead of a participle we often find an adjective or noun; as,--

    vivo Caesare res publica salva erat, _while Caesar was alive the state
    was safe_ (lit. _Caesar being alive_);

    Tarquinio rege, Pythagoras in Italiam venit, _in the reign of Tarquin
    Pythagoras came into Italy_ (lit. _Tarquin being king_);

    Cn. Pompejo, M. Crasso consulibus, _in the consulship of Gnaeus Pompey
    and Marcus Crassus_ (lit. _P. and C. being consuls_).

2. The Ablative Absolute is generally used in Latin where in English we
employ subordinate clauses. Thus the Ablative Absolute may correspond to a
clause denoting--

  a) Time, as in the foregoing examples.

  b) Condition; as,--

    omnes virtutes jacent, voluptate dominante, _all virtues lie prostrate,
    if pleasure is master_.

  c) Opposition; as,--

    perditis omnibus rebus, virtus se sustentare potest, _though everything
    else is lost, yet Virtue can maintain herself_.

  d) Cause; as,--

    nullo adversante regnum obtinuit, _since no one opposed him, he secured
    the throne_.

  e) Attendant circumstance; as,--

    passis palmis pacem petiverunt, _with hands outstretched, they sued for
    peace_.

3. An Infinitive or clause sometimes occurs in the Ablative Absolute
construction, especially in Livy and later writers; as,--

    audito eum fugisse, _when it was heard that he had fled_.

4. A noun or pronoun stands in the Ablative Absolute construction only when
it denotes a different person or thing from any in the clause in which it
stands. Exceptions to this principle are extremely rare.

LOCATIVE USES OF THE ABLATIVE.

Ablative of Place.

_A. Place where._

228. The place where is regularly denoted by the _Ablative with a
preposition_; as,--

    in urbe habitat, _he dwells in the city_.

1. But certain words stand in the Ablative without a preposition; viz.--

  a) Names of towns,--except Singulars of the First and Second Declensions
  (see Sec. 232, 1); as,--

    Carthagini, _at Carthage_;

    Athenis, _at Athens_;

    Vejis, _at Veii_.

  b) The general words loco, locis, parte; also many words modified by
  totus or even by other Adjectives; as,--

    hoc loco, _at this place_;

    totis castris, _in the whole camp_.

  c) The special words: foris, _out of doors_; ruri, _in the country_,
  terra marique, _on land and sea_.

  d) The poets freely omit the preposition with any word denoting place;
  as,--

    stant litore puppes, _the sterns rest on the beach_.

_B. Place from which.[50]_

229. Place from which is regularly denoted by the _Ablative with a
preposition_; as,--

    ab Italia profectus est, _he set out from Italy_;

    ex urbe rediit, _he returned from the city_.

1. But certain words stand in the Ablative without a preposition; viz.--

  a) Names of towns and small islands; as,--

    Roma profectus est, _he set out from Rome_;

    Rhodo revertit, _he returned from Rhodes_.

  b) domo, _from home_; rure, _from the country_.

  c) Freely in poetry; as,--

    Italia decessit, _he withdrew from Italy_.

2. With names of towns, ab is used to mean _from the vicinity of_, or to
denote the point _whence distance is measured;_ as,--

  a Gergovia discessit, _he withdrew from the vicinity of Gergovia_;

  a Roma X milia aberat, _he was ten miles distant from Rome_.

Urbe and oppido, when standing in apposition with a town name, are
accompanied by a preposition; as,--

  Curibus ex oppido Sabinorum, _from Cures, a town of the Sabines_

Ablative of Time.

_A. Time at which._

230. The Ablative is used to denote the time _at which_; as,--

  quarta hora mortuus est, _he died at the fourth hour_;

  anno septuagesimo consul creatus, _elected consul in his seventieth
  year_.

1. Any word denoting a period of time may stand in this construction,
particularly annus, ver, aestas, hiems, dies, nox, hora, comitia (_Election
Day_), ludi (_the Games_), etc.

2. Words not denoting time require the preposition in, unless accompanied
by a modifier. Thus:--

  in pace, _in peace_; in bello, _in war_;

  but secundo bello Punico, _in the second Punic War_.

3. Expressions like in eo tempore, in summa senectute, take the preposition
because they denote _situation_ rather than _time_.

_B. Time within which._

231. Time _within which_ is denoted by the Ablative either _with_ or
_without a preposition_; as,--

    stella Saturni triginta annis cursum conficit, _the planet Saturn
    completes its orbit within thirty years_;

    ter in anno, thrice in the course of the year.

1. Occasionally the Ablative denotes _duration of time_; as,--

    biennio prosperas res habuit, _for two years he had a prosperous
    administration_.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE LOCATIVE.

232. The Locative case occurs chiefly in the following words:--

1. Regularly in the Singular of names of towns and small islands of the
first and second declensions, to denote the place _in which_; as,--

  Romae, _at Rome_;             Corinthi, _at Corinth_;
                 Rhodi, _at Rhodes_.

2. In the following special forms:--

  domi, _at home_;              humi, _on the ground_;
  belli, _in war_;              militiae, _in war_;
  vesperi, _at evening_;        heri, _yesterday_.

3. Note the phrase pendere animi, lit. _to be in suspense in one's mind_.

4. For urbs and oppidum in apposition with a Locative, see Sec. 169, 4.

       *       *       *       *       *

CHAPTER III.--_Syntax of Adjectives._

233. 1. The word with which an Adjective agrees is called its Subject.

2. Attributive and Predicate Adjectives. An Attributive Adjective is one
that limits its subject directly; as,--

    vir sapiens, _a wise man_.

A Predicate Adjective is one that limits its subject through the medium of
a verb (usually esse); as,--

    vir est sapiens, _the man is wise_;

    vir videbatur sapiens, _the man seemed wise_;

    vir judicatus est sapiens, _the man was judged wise_;

    hunc virum sapientem judicavimus, _we adjudged this man wise_.

3. Participles and Adjective Pronouns have the construction of Adjectives.

AGREEMENT OF ADJECTIVES.

234. Agreement with One Noun. When an Adjective limits one noun it agrees
with it in Gender, Number, and Case.

1. Two Adjectives in the Singular may limit a noun in the Plural, as; prima
et vicesima legiones, _the first and twentieth legions_.

2. A Predicate Adjective may stand in the Neuter when its Subject is
Masculine or Feminine and denotes a thing; as,--

    omnium rerum mors est extremum, _death is the end of all things_.

235. Agreement with Two or More Nouns.

A. AGREEMENT AS TO NUMBER.

1. When the Adjective is Attributive, it regularly agrees in number with
the nearest noun; as,--

    pater tuus et mater, _your father and mother_;

    eadem alacritas et studium, _the same eagerness and zeal_.

2. When the Adjective is Predicative, it is regularly Plural; as,--

    pax et concordia sunt pulchrae, _peace and concord are glorious_.

B. AGREEMENT AS TO GENDER.

1. When the Adjective is Attributive, it regularly agrees in gender with
the nearest noun; as,--

    res operae multae ac laboris, _a matter of much effort and labor_.

2. When the Adjective is Predicative--

  a) If the nouns are of the same gender, the Adjective agrees with them in
  gender; as,--

    pater et filius capti sunt, _father and son were captured_.

  Yet with feminine abstract nouns, the Adjective is more frequently
  Neuter; as,--

    stultitia et timiditas fugienda sunt, _folly and cowardice must be
    shunned_.

  b) If the nouns are of different gender; then,--

    a) In case they denote persons, the Adjective is Masculine; as,--

    pater et mater mortui sunt, _the father and mother have died_.

    b) In case they denote things, the Adjective is Neuter; as,--

    honores et victoriae fortuita sunt, _honors and victories are
    accidental._

    c) In case they include both persons and things, the Adjective is,--

      aa) Sometimes Masculine; as,--

    domus, uxor, liberi inventi sunt, _home, wife, and children are
    secured._

      bb) Sometimes Neuter; as,--

    parentes, liberos, domos vilia habere, _to hold parents, children,
    houses cheap._

      cc) Sometimes it agrees with the nearest noun; as,--

    populi provinciaeque liberatae sunt, _nations and provinces were
    liberated._

  c) Construction according to Sense. Sometimes an Adjective does not agree
  with a noun according to strict grammatical form, but according to sense;
  as,--

    pars bestiis objecti sunt, _part (of the men) were thrown to beasts._

ADJECTIVES USED SUBSTANTIVELY.

236. 1. PLURAL ADJECTIVES USED SUBSTANTIVELY. Adjectives are quite freely
used as Substantives in the Plural. The Masculine denotes persons; the
Neuter denotes things; as,--

  docti, _scholars_;          parva, _small things_;
  mali, _the wicked_;         magna, _great things_;
  Graeci, _the Greeks_;       utilia, _useful things_;
                nostri, _our men_.

2. Neuter Plural Adjectives thus used are confined mainly to the Nominative
and Accusative cases. Such forms as magnorum, omnium; magnis, omnibus,
would ordinarily lead to ambiguity; yet where there is no ambiguity, they
sometimes occur; as,--

    parvis componere magna, _to compare great things with small_

Otherwise the Latin says: magnarum rerum, magnis rebus, etc.

237. SINGULAR ADJECTIVES USED SUBSTANTIVELY. Adjectives are less freely
used as Substantives in the Singular than in the Plural.

1. Masculine Adjectives occur only occasionally in this use; as,--

    probus invidet nemini, _the honest man envies nobody_.

  a. Usually vir, homo, or some similar word is employed; as,--

    homo doctus, _a scholar_;

    vir Romanus, _a Roman_.

  b. But when limited by a pronoun any adjective may be so used; as,--

    hic doctus, _this scholar_;

    doctus quidam, _a certain scholar_.

2. Neuters are likewise infrequent; as,--

    verum, _truth_;

    justum, _justice_;

    honestum, _virtue_.

  a. This substantive use of Neuter Singulars is commonest in the
  construction of the Genitive of the Whole, and after Prepositions; as,--

    aliquid veri, _something true_;

    nihil novi, _nothing new_;

    in medio, _in the midst_.

238. From Adjectives which, like the above, occasionally admit the
substantive use, must be carefully distinguished certain others which have
become nouns; as,--

  adversarius, _opponent_;    hiberna, _winter
                              quarters_;
  aequalis, _contemporary_;   propinquus, _relative_;
  amicus, _friend_;           socius, _partner_;
  cognatus, _kinsman_;        sodalis, _comrade_;
                vicinus, _neighbor_; etc.

ADJECTIVES WITH THE FORCE OF ADVERBS.

239. The Latin often uses an Adjective where the English idiom employs an
Adverb or an adverbial phrase; as,--

    senatus frequens convenit, _the senate assembled in great numbers_;

    fuit assiduus mecum, _he was constantly with me_.

COMPARATIVES AND SUPERLATIVES.

240. 1. The Comparative often corresponds to the English Positive with
'_rather_,' '_somewhat_,' '_too_'; as,--

    senectus est loquacior, _old age is rather talkative._

2. So the Superlative often corresponds to the Positive with '_very_';
as,--

    vir fortissimus, _a very brave man._

3. Strengthening Words. Vel and quam are often used with the Superlative as
strengthening particles, vel with the force of '_very_,' and quam with the
force of '_as possible_'; as,--

    vel maximus, _the very greatest_;

    quam maximae copiae, _as great forces as possible_.

4. Phrases of the type '_more rich than brave_' regularly take the
Comparative in both members; as,--

    exercitus erat ditior quam fortior, _the army was more rich than
    brave._

OTHER PECULIARITIES.

241. 1. Certain Adjectives may be used to denote _a part of an object_,
chiefly primus, extremus, summus, medius, infimus, imus; as,--

    summus mons, _the top of the mountain_;

    extrema hieme, _in the last part of the winter_.

2. Prior, primus, ultimus, and postremus are frequently equivalent to a
relative clause; as,--

    primus eam vidi, _I was the first who saw her_;

    ultimus decessit, _he was the last who withdrew_.

3. When multus and another adjective both limit the same noun et is
generally used; as,--

    multae et magnae cogitationes, _many (and) great thoughts_.

       *       *       *       *       *

CHAPTER IV.--_Syntax of Pronouns._

PERSONAL PRONOUNS.

242. 1. The Personal Pronouns as subjects of verbs are, as a rule, not
expressed except for the purpose of _emphasis_, _contrast_, or _clearness_.
Thus ordinarily:--

    video, _I see_; amat, _he loves_.

But ego te video, et tu me vides, _I see you, and you see me_.

2. The Genitives mei, tui, nostri, vestri are used only as Objective
Genitives; nostrum and vestrum as Genitives of the Whole. Thus:--

    memor tui, _mindful of you_;

    desiderium vestri, _longing for you_;

    nemo vestrum, _no one of you_.

  a. But nostrum and vestrum are regularly used in the place of the
  Possessive in the phrases omnium nostrum, omnium vestrum.

3. The First Plural is often used for the First Singular of Pronouns and
Verbs. Compare the Eng. editorial 'we.'

4. When two Verbs govern the same object, the Latin does not use a pronoun
with the second, as is the rule in English. Thus:--

    virtus amicitias conciliat et conservat, _virtue establishes
    friendships and maintains them_ (not eas conservat).

POSSESSIVE PRONOUNS.

243. 1. The Possessive Pronouns, as a rule, are not employed except for the
purpose of _clearness_. Thus:--

    patrem amo, _I love my father_;

    de filii morte flebas, _you wept for the death of your son_.

  But--

    de morte filii mei flebas, _you wept for the death of my son_.

  a. When expressed merely for the sake of clearness, the possessive
  usually stands after its noun; but in order to indicate emphasis or
  contrast, it precedes; as,--

    sua manu liberos occidit, _with his own hand he slew his children_;

    mea quidem sententia, _in my opinion at least_.

2. Sometimes the Possessive Pronouns are used with the force of an
Objective Genitive; as,--

    metus vester, _fear of you_;

    desiderium tuum, _longing for you_.

3. For special emphasis, the Latin employs ipsius or ipsorum, in apposition
with the Genitive idea implied in the Possessive; as,--

    mea ipsius opera, _by my own help_;

    nostra ipsorum opera, _by our own help_.

  a. So sometimes other Genitives; as,--

    mea unius opera, _by the assistance of me alone_.

REFLEXIVE PRONOUNS.

244. 1. The Reflexive Pronoun se and the Possessive Reflexive suus have a
double use:--

I. They may refer to the subject of the clause (either principal or
subordinate) in which they stand,--'Direct Reflexives'; as,--

    se amant, _they love themselves_;

    suos amicos adjuvat, _he helps his own friends_;

    eum oravi, ut se servaret, _I besought him to save himself_.

II. They may stand in a subordinate clause and refer to the subject of the
principal clause,--'Indirect Reflexives'; as,--

    me oravit ut se defenderem, _he besought me to defend him_ (lit. _that
    I defend himself_);

    me oraverunt, ut fortunarum suarum defensionem susciperem, _they
    besought me to undertake the defense of their fortunes_.

  a. The Indirect Reflexive is mainly restricted to those clauses which
  express the thought, not of the author, but of the subject of the
  principal clause.

2. The Genitive sui is regularly employed, like mei and tui, as an
Objective Genitive, _e.g._ oblitus sui, _forgetful of himself_; but it
occasionally occurs--particularly in post-Augustan writers--in place of the
Possessive suus; as, fruitur fama sui, _he enjoys his own fame_.

3. Se and suus are sometimes used in the sense, _one's self_, _one's own_,
where the reference is not to any particular person; as,--

    se amare, _to love one's self_;

    suum genium propitiare, _to propitiate one's own genius_.

4. Suus sometimes occurs in the meaning _his own_, _their own_, etc.,
referring not to the subject but to an oblique case; as,--

    Hannibalem sui cives e civitate ejecerunt, _his own fellow-citizens
    drove out Hannibal._

    a. This usage is particularly frequent in combination with quisque;
    as,--

    suus quemque error vexat, _his own error troubles each_.

5. The Reflexives for the first and second persons are supplied by the
oblique cases of ego and tu (Sec. 85); as,--

    vos defenditis, _you defend yourselves_.

RECIPROCAL PRONOUNS.

245. 1. The Latin has no special reciprocal pronoun ('each other'), but
expresses the reciprocal notion by the phrases: inter nos, inter vos, inter
se; as,--

    Belgae obsides inter se dederunt, _the Belgae gave each other hostages_
    (lit. _among themselves_);

    amamus inter nos, _we love each other_;

    Galli inter se cohortati sunt, _the Gauls exhorted each other_.

  a. Note that the Object is not expressed in sentences of this type.

DEMONSTRATIVE PRONOUNS.

Hic, Ille, Iste.

246. 1. Where hic and ille are used in contrast, hic usually refers to the
latter of two objects, and ille to the former.

2. Hic and ille are often used in the sense of 'the following'; as,--

    Themistocles his verbis epistulam misit, _Themistocles sent a letter
    (couched) in the following words_;

    illud intellego, omnium ora in me conversa esse, _I understand this,
    that the faces of all are turned toward me_.

3. Ille often means _the famous_; as, Solon ille, _the famous Solon_.

4. Iste frequently involves contempt; as, iste homo, _that fellow!_

5. The above pronouns, along with is, are usually attracted to the gender
of a predicate noun; as, hic est honor, meminisse officium suum, _this is
an honor, to be mindful of one's duty._

Is.

247. 1. Is often serves as the antecedent of the relative qui. Thus:--

    Maximum, eum qui Tarentum recepit, dilexi, _I loved Maximus, the man
    who retook Tarentum_.

  a. Closely akin to this usage is is in the sense of _such_ (= talis);
  as,--

    non sum is qui terrear, _I am not such a person as to be frightened_.

  b. Note the phrase id quod, where id stands in apposition with an entire
  clause; as,--

    non suspicabatur (id quod nunc sentiet) satis multos testes nobis
    reliquos esse, _he did not suspect (a thing which he will now perceive)
    that we had witnesses enough left_.

  Yet quod alone, without preceding id, sometimes occurs in this use.

2. Is also in all cases serves as the personal pronoun of the third person,
'_he_,' '_she_,' '_it_,' '_they_,' '_them_.'

3. When the English uses '_that of_,' '_those of_,' to avoid repetition of
the noun, the Latin omits the pronoun: as,--

    in exercitu Sullae et postea in Crassi fuerat, _he had been in the army
    of Sulla and afterward in that of Crassus_;

    nullae me fabulae delectant nisi Plauti, _no plays delight me except
    those of Plautus_.

4. Note the phrases et is, et ea, etc., in the sense: _and that too_; as,--

    vincula, et ea sempiterna, _imprisonment, and that too permanently_.

Idem.

248. 1. Idem in apposition with the subject or object often has the force
of _also_, _likewise_; as,--

    quod idem mihi contigit, _which likewise happened to me_ (lit. _which,
    the same thing_);

    bonus vir, quem eundem sapientem appellamus, _a good man, whom we call
    also wise_.

For idem atque (ac), _the same as_, see Sec. 341, 1. c.

Ipse.

249. 1. Ipse, literally _self_, acquires its special force from the
context; as,--

    eo ipso die, _on that very day_;

    ad ipsam ripam, _close to the bank_;

    ipso terrore, _by mere fright_;

    valvae se ipsae aperuerunt, _the doors opened of their own accord_;

    ipse aderat, _he was present in person_.

2. The reflexive pronouns are often emphasized by the addition of ipse, but
ipse in such cases, instead of standing in apposition with the reflexive,
more commonly agrees with the subject; as,--

    secum ipsi loquuntur, _they talk with themselves_;

    se ipse continere non potest, _he cannot contain himself_

3. Ipse is also used as an Indirect Reflexive for the purpose of _marking a
contrast or avoiding an ambiguity_; as,--

    Persae pertimuerunt ne Alcibiades ab ipsis descisceret et cum suis in
    gratiam rediret, _the Persians feared that Alcibiades would break with
    them and become reconciled with his countrymen_;

    ea molestissime ferre debent homines quae ipsorum culpa contracta sunt,
    _men ought to chafe most over those things which have been brought
    about by their own fault_ (as opposed to the fault of others).

RELATIVE PRONOUNS.

250. Agreement. 1. The Relative Pronoun agrees with its antecedent in
Gender, Number, and Person, but its case is determined by its construction
in the clause in which it stands; as,--

    mulier quam videbamus, _the woman whom we saw_;

    bona quibus fruimur, _the blessings which we enjoy_.

2. Where the antecedent is compound, the same principles for number and
gender prevail as in case of predicate adjectives under similar conditions
(see Sec. 235, B, 2). Thus:--

    pater et filius, qui capti sunt, _the father and son who were
    captured_;

    stultitia et timiditas quae fugienda sunt, _folly and cowardice which
    must be shunned_;

    honores et victoriae quae sunt fortuita, _honors and victories, which
    are accidental_.

3. The Relative regularly agrees with a predicate noun (either Nominative
or Accusative) instead of its antecedent; as,--

    carcer, quae lautumiae vocantur, _the prison, which is called
    Lautumiae_;

    Belgae, quae est tertia pars, _the Belgians, who are the third part_.

4. Sometimes the Relative takes its gender and number from the meaning of
its antecedent; as,--

    pars qui bestiis objecti sunt, _a part (of the men) who were thrown to
    beasts._

5. Occasionally the Relative is attracted into the case of its antecedent;
as,--

    natus eo patre quo dixi, _born of the father that I said_.

251. Antecedent. 1. The antecedent of the Relative is sometimes omitted;
as,--

    qui naturam sequitur sapiens est, _he who follows Nature is wise_.

2. The antecedent may be implied in a possessive pronoun (or rarely an
adjective); as,--

    nostra qui remansimus caedes, _the slaughter of us who remained_;

    servili tumultu, quos usus ac disciplina sublevarunt, _at the uprising
    of the slaves, whom experience and discipline assisted_ (servili =
    servorum).

3. Sometimes the antecedent is repeated with the Relative; as,--

    erant itinera duo, quibus itineribus, _there were two routes, by which
    (routes)._

4. Incorporation of Antecedent in Relative Clause. The antecedent is often
incorporated in the relative clause. Thus:--

  a) When the relative clause stands first; as,--

    quam quisque novit artem, in hac se exerceat, _let each one practice
    the branch which he knows._

  b) When the antecedent is an appositive; as,--

    non longe a Tolosatium finibus absunt, quae civitas est in provincia,
    _they are not far from the borders of the Tolosates, a state which is
    in our province._

  c) When the logical antecedent is a superlative; as,--

    Themistocles de servis suis, quem habuit fidelissimum, misit,
    _Themistocles sent the most trusty slave he had_.

  d) In expressions of the following type--

    qua es prudentia; quae tua est prudentia, _such is your prudence_ (lit.
    _of which prudence you are; which is your prudence_).

5. The Relative is never omitted in Latin as it is in English. Thus _the
boy I saw_ must be puer quem vidi.

6. The Relative is used freely in Latin, particularly at the beginning of a
sentence, where in English we employ a demonstrative; as,--

    quo factum est, _by this it happened_;

    quae cum ita sint, _since this is so_;

    quibus rebus cognitis, _when these things became known_.

7. The Relative introducing a subordinate clause may belong grammatically
to a clause which is subordinate to the one it introduces; as,--

    numquam digne satis laudari philosophia poterit, cui qui pareat, omne
    tempus aetatis sine molestia possit degere, _philosophy can never be
    praised enough, since he who obeys her can pass every period of life
    without annoyance_ (lit. _he who obeys which, etc._).

Here cui introduces the subordinate clause possit and connects it with
philosophia; but cui is governed by pareat, which is subordinate to possit.

INDEFINITE PRONOUNS.

252. 1. Quis, _any one_, is the weakest of the Indefinites, and stands
usually in combination with si, nisi, ne, num; as,--

    si quis putat, _if any one thinks_.

2. Aliquis (adj. aliqui) is more definite than quis, and corresponds
usually to the English _some one_, _somebody_, _some_; as,--

    nunc aliquis dicat mihi, _now let somebody tell me_;

    utinam modo agatur aliquid, _oh that something may be done_.

3. Quidam, _a certain one_, is still more definite than aliquis; as,--

    homo quidam, _a certain man_ (i.e., _one whom I have in mind_).

  a. Quidam (with or without quasi, _as if_) is sometimes used in the
  sense: _a sort of_, _kind of;_ as,--

    cognatio quaedam, _a sort of relationship_;

    mors est quasi quaedam migratio, _death is a kind of transfer as it
    were_.

4. Quisquam, _any one_, _any one whoever_ (more general than quis), and its
corresponding adjective ullus, _any_, occur mostly in negative and
conditional sentences, in interrogative sentences implying a negative, and
in clauses of comparison; as,--

    justitia numquam nocet cuiquam, _justice never harms anybody_;

    si quisquam, Cato sapiens fuit, _if anybody was ever wise, Cato was_;

    potestne quisquam sine perturbatione animi irasci, _can anybody be
    angry without excitement?_

    si ullo modo poterit, _if it can be done in any way_;

    taetrior hic tyrannus fuit quam quisquam superiorum, _he was a viler
    tyrant than any of his predecessors_.

5. Quisque, _each one_, is used especially under the following
circumstances:--

  a) In connection with suus. See Sec. 244, 4, a.

  b) In connection with a Relative or Interrogative Pronoun; as,--

    quod cuique obtigit, id teneat, _what falls to each, that let him
    hold_.

  c) In connection with superlatives; as,--

    optimus quisque, _all the best_ (lit. _each best one_).

  d) With ordinal numerals; as,--

    quinto quoque anno, _every four years_ (lit. _each fifth year_).

6. Nemo, _no one_, in addition to its other uses, stands regularly with
adjectives used substantively; as,--

    nemo mortalis, _no mortal_;

    nemo Romanus, _no Roman_.

PRONOMINAL ADJECTIVES.

253. 1. Alius, _another_, and alter, _the other_, are often used
correlatively; as,--

    aliud loquitur, aliud sentit, _he says one thing, he thinks another_;

    alii resistunt, alii fugiunt, _some resist, others flee_;

    alter exercitum perdidit, alter vendidit, _one ruined the army, the
    other sold it_;

    alteri se in montem receperunt, alteri ad impedimenta se contulerunt,
    _the one party retreated to the mountain, the others betook themselves
    to the baggage_.

2. Where the English says _one does one thing, another another_, the Latin
uses a more condensed form of statement; as,--

    alius aliud amat, _one likes one thing, another another_;

    aliud aliis placet, _one thing pleases some, another others_.

  a. So sometimes with adverbs; as,--

    alii alio fugiunt, _some flee in one direction, others in another_.

3. The Latin also expresses the notion '_each other_' by means of alius
repeated; as,--

    Galli alius alium cohortati sunt, _the Gauls encouraged each other_.

4. Ceteri means _the rest_, _all the others_; as,--

    ceteris praestare, _to be superior to all the others_.

5. Reliqui means _the others_ in the sense of _the rest_, _those
remaining_,--hence is the regular word with numerals; as,--

    reliqui sex, _the six others_.

6. Nescio quis forms a compound indefinite pronoun with the force of _some
one or other_; as,--

    causidicus nescio quis, _some pettifogger or other_;

    misit nescio quem, _he sent some one or other_;

    nescio quo pacto, _somehow or other_.

       *       *       *       *       *

CHAPTER V.--_Syntax of Verbs._

AGREEMENT.

With One Subject.

254. 1. Agreement in Number and Person. A Finite Verb agrees with its
subject in Number and Person; as,--

    vos videtis, _you see_;

    pater filios instituit, _the father trains his sons_.

2. Agreement in Gender. In the compound forms of the verb the participle
regularly agrees with its subject in gender; as,--

    seditio repressa est, _the mutiny was checked_.

3. But when a predicate noun is of different gender or number from its
subject, the verb usually agrees with its nearest substantive; as,--

    Tarquinii materna patria erat, _Tarquinii was his native country on his
    mother's side_;

    non omnis error stultitia est dicenda, _not every error is to be called
    folly_.

  a. Less frequently the verb agrees with an appositive; as,--

    Corioli, oppidum Volscorum, captum est, _Corioli, a town of the Volsci,
    was captured_.

4. Construction according to Sense. Sometimes the verb agrees with its
subject according to sense instead of strict grammatical form. Thus:--

  a) In Number; as,--

    multitudo hominum convenerant, _a crowd of men had gathered_.

  b) In Gender; as,--

    duo milia crucibus adfixi sunt, _two thousand (men) were crucified_.

With Two or More Subjects.

255. 1. Agreement in Number. With two or more subjects the verb is
regularly plural; as,--

    pater et filius mortui sunt, _the father and son died_.

2. But sometimes the verb agrees with the nearest subject; viz.,--

  a) When the verb precedes both subjects or stands between them; as,--

    mortuus est pater et filius;

    pater mortuus est et filius.

  b) When the subjects are connected by aut; aut ... aut; vel ... vel;
  neque ... neque; as,--

    neque pater neque filius mortuus est, _neither father nor son died_.

3. When the different subjects are felt together as constituting a whole,
the singular is used; as,--

    temeritas ignoratioque vitiosa est, _rashness and ignorance are bad_.

  a. This is regularly the case in senatus populusque Romanus.

4. Agreement in Person. With compound subjects of different persons the
verb always takes the _first_ person rather than the _second_, and the
_second_ rather than the _third_; as,--

    si tu et Tullia valetis, ego et Cicero valemus, _if you and Tullia are
    well, Cicero and I are well_.

5. Agreement in Gender. With subjects of different genders the participle
in the compound tenses follows the same principles as laid down for
predicate adjectives. See Sec. 235, B, 2.

VOICES.

256. 1. The Passive Voice sometimes retains traces of its original middle
or reflexive meaning; as,--

    ego non patiar eum defendi, _I shall not allow him to defend himself_.

2. In imitation of Greek usage many perfect passive participles are used by
the poets as indirect middles, i.e. the subject is viewed as acting not
upon itself, but as doing something _in his own interest_; as,--

    velatus tempora, _having veiled his temples_.

  a. Occasionally finite forms of the verb are thus used; as,--

    tunica inducitur artus, _he covers his limbs with a tunic_.

3. Intransitive Verbs may be used impersonally in the passive; as,--

    curritur, _people run_ (lit. _it is run_);

    ventum est, _he_ (_they_, etc.) _came_ (lit. _it was come_).

TENSES.

TENSES OF THE INDICATIVE.

257. 1. The Latin tenses express two distinct notions:--

  a) The _period of time_ to which the action belongs: Present, Past, or
  Future.

  b) The _kind of action_: Undefined, Going on, or Completed.

The Latin with its six tenses is able to express each of the three kinds of
action for each of the three periods of time (making practically nine
tenses). It does this by employing certain tenses in more than one way, as
may be seen by the following table:--

  KIND OF                          PERIOD OF TIME.
  ACTION.
                     PRESENT.             PAST.              FUTURE.
  UNDEFINED     Present:            Historical          Future:
                scribo, _I write_.  Perfect:            scribam, _I shall
                                    scripsi, _I         write_.
                                    wrote_.
  GOING ON.     Present:            Imperfect:          Future:
                scribo, _I am       scribebam, _I was   scribam, _I shall
                writing_.           writing_.           be writing_.
  COMPLETED.    Present             Pluperfect:         Future Perfect:
                Perfect:            scripseram, _I had  scripsero, _I
                scripsi, _I have    written_.           shall have
                written_.                               written_.

2. It will be seen that the Present may express Undefined action or action
Going on; so also the Future. The Perfect likewise has a double use,
according as it denotes action Completed in present time (Present Perfect)
or Undefined action belonging to past time (Historical Perfect).

Principal and Historical Tenses.

258. Tenses which denote Present or Future time are called Principal (or
Primary) Tenses, those which denote Past time are called Historical (or
Secondary).

The Principal Tenses of the Indicative are: Present, Future, Present
Perfect, Future Perfect.

The Historical Tenses are: Imperfect, Historical Perfect, Pluperfect.

Present Indicative.

259. Besides the two uses indicated in the table, the Present Indicative
presents the following peculiarities:--

1. It is used to denote _a general truth_, i.e. something true not merely
in the present but at all times ('Gnomic Present'); as,--

    virtus conciliat amicitias et conservat, _virtue establishes ties of
    friendship and maintains them_ (i.e. always does so).

2. It is used of an attempted action ('Conative Present'); as,--

    dum vitant vitia, in contraria currunt, _while they try to avoid_
    (vitant) _vices, they rush into opposite ones_.

3. In lively narration the Present is often used of a past action
('Historical Present'); as,--

    Caesar imperat magnum numerum obsidum, _Caesar demanded a large number
    of hostages_ (lit. _demands_).

4. In combination with jam, jam diu, jam pridem, and similar words, the
Present is frequently used of an action originating in the past and
continuing in the present; as,--

    jam pridem cupio te visere, _I have long been desiring to visit you_
    (i.e. I desire and have long desired).

Imperfect Indicative.

260. 1. The Imperfect primarily denotes action _going on in past time_;
as,--

    librum legebam, _I was reading a book_.

  a. This force makes the Imperfect especially adapted to serve as the
  tense of _description_ (as opposed to mere _narration_).

2. From the notion of action _going on_, there easily develops the notion
of _repeated_ or _customary_ action; as,--

    legatos interrogabat, _he kept asking the envoys_;

    C. Duilium videbam puer, _as a boy I often used to see Gaius Duilius_.

3. The Imperfect often denotes an attempted action ('Conative Imperfect')
or an action as beginning ('Inceptive Imperfect'); as,--

    hostes nostros intra munitiones progredi prohibebant, _the enemy tried
    to prevent_ (prohibebant) _our men from advancing within the
    fortifications_ ('Conative');

    ad proelium se expediebant, _they were beginning to get ready for
    battle_ ('Inceptive').

4. The Imperfect, with jam, jam diu, jam dudum, etc., is sometimes used of
an action which had been continuing some time; as,--

    domicilium Romae multos jam annos habebat, _he had had his residence at
    Rome for many years_ (i.e. he had it at this time and had long had it).

Future Indicative.

261. 1. The Latin is much more exact in the use of the Future than is the
English. We say: '_If he comes, I shall be glad_,' where we really mean:
'_If he shall come_,' etc. In such cases the Latin rarely admits the
Present, but generally employs the Future.

2. Sometimes the Future has Imperative force; as, dices, _say!_

Perfect Indicative.

262. A. PRESENT PERFECT. Several Present Perfects denote the _state
resulting from a completed act_, and so seem equivalent to the Present;
as,--

    novi, cognovi, _I know_ (lit. _I have become acquainted with_);

    consuevi, _I am wont_ (lit. _I have become accustomed_).

B. HISTORICAL PERFECT. The Historical Perfect is the tense of _narration_
(as opposed to the Imperfect, the tense of _description_); as,--

    Regulus in senatum venit, mandata exposuit, reddi captivos negavit esse
    utile, _Regulus came into the Senate, set forth his commission, said it
    was useless for captives to be returned_.

1. Occasionally the Historical Perfect is used of a general truth ('Gnomic
Perfect').

Pluperfect Indicative.

263. The Latin Pluperfect, like the English Past Perfect, denotes an act
_completed in the past_; as,--

    Caesar Rhenum transire decreverat, sed naves deerant, _Caesar had
    decided to cross the Rhine, but had no boats_.

  a. In those verbs whose Perfect has Present force (Sec. 262, A), the
  Pluperfect has the force of an Imperfect; as,--

    noveram, _I knew_.

Future Perfect Indicative.

264. The Future Perfect denotes an action _completed in future time_.
Thus:--

    scribam epistulam, cum redieris, _I will write the letter when you have
    returned_ (lit. _when you shall have returned_).

  a. The Latin is much more exact in the use of the Future Perfect than the
  English, which commonly employs the Present Perfect instead of the Future
  Perfect.

  b. In those verbs whose Perfect has Present force (Sec. 262, A) the Future
  Perfect has the force of a Future; as,--

    novero, _I shall know_.

Epistolary Tenses.

265. In letters the writer often uses tenses which are not appropriate at
the time of writing, but which will be so at the time when his letter is
received; he thus employs the Imperfect and the Perfect for the Present,
and the Pluperfect for the Present Perfect; as,--

    nihil habebam quod scriberem, neque enim novi quidquam audieram et ad
    tuas omnes epistulas jam rescripseram, _I have nothing to write, for I
    have heard no news and have already answered all your letters_.

TENSES OF THE SUBJUNCTIVE.

266. A. In Independent sentences. See Sec. 272-280.

B. In Dependent Sentences. In dependent sentences the tenses of the
subjunctive usually conform to the so-called

Sequence of Tenses.

267. 1. In the Subjunctive the Present and Perfect are Principal tenses,
the Imperfect and Pluperfect, Historical.

2. By the Sequence of Tenses Principal tenses are followed by Principal,
Historical by Historical. Thus:--

PRINCIPAL SEQUENCE,--

    video quid facias, _I see what you are doing_.

    videbo quid facias, _I shall see what you are doing_.

    videro quid facias, _I shall have seen what you are doing_.

    video quid feceris, _I see what you have done_.

    videbo quid feceris, _I shall see what you have done_.

    videro quid feceris, _I shall have seen what you have done_.

HISTORICAL SEQUENCE,--

    videbam quid faceres, _I saw what you were doing_.

    vidi quid faceres, _I saw what you were doing_.

    videram quid faceres, _I had seen what you were doing_.

    videbam quid fecisses, _I saw what you had done_.

    vidi quid fecisses, _I saw what you had done_.

    videram quid fecisses, _I had seen what you had done_.

3. The Present and Imperfect Subjunctive denote incomplete action, the
Perfect and Pluperfect completed action, exactly as in the Indicative.

Peculiarities of Sequence.

268. 1. The Perfect Indicative is usually an historical tense (even when
translated in English as a Present Perfect), and so is followed by the
Imperfect and Pluperfect Subjunctive; as,--

    demonstravi quare ad causam accederem, _I have shown why I took the
    case_ (lit. _I showed why_, etc.).

2. A dependent Perfect Infinitive is treated as an historical tense
wherever, if resolved into an equivalent Indicative, it would be
historical; as,--

    videor ostendisse quales dei essent, _I seem to have shown of what
    nature the gods are_ (ostendisse here corresponds to an Indicative,
    ostendi, _I showed_).

3. The Historical Present is sometimes regarded as a principal tense,
sometimes as historical. Thus:--

    Sulla suos hortatur ut forti animo sint, _Sulla exhorts his soldiers to
    be stout-hearted_;

    Gallos hortatur ut arma caperent, _he exhorted the Gauls to take arms_.

4. Conditional sentences of the 'contrary-to-fact' type are not affected by
the principles for the Sequence of Tenses; as,--

    honestum tale est ut, vel si ignorarent id homines, sua tamen
    pulchritudine laudabile esset, _virtue is such a thing that even if men
    were ignorant of it, it would still be worthy of praise for its own
    loveliness_.

5. In conditional sentences of the 'contrary-to-fact' type the Imperfect
Subjunctive is usually treated as an Historical tense; as,--

    si solos eos diceres miseros, quibus moriendum esset, neminem tu quidem
    eorum qui viverent exciperes, _if you called only those wretched who
    must die, you would except no one of those who live_.

6. In clauses of Result and some others, the Perfect Subjunctive is
sometimes used as an historical tense. Thus:--

    rex tantum motus est, ut Tissaphernem hostem judicarit, _the king was
    so much moved that he adjudged Tissaphernes an enemy_.

This construction is rare in Cicero, but frequent in Nepos and subsequent
historians. The Perfect Subjunctive in this use represents a result simply
_as a fact without reference to the continuance of the act_, and therefore
corresponds to an Historical Perfect Indicative of direct statement. Thus,
judicarit in the above example corresponds to adjudicavit, _he adjudged_.
To denote a result as _something continuous_, all writers use the Imperfect
Subjunctive after historical tenses.

7. Sometimes perspicuity demands that the ordinary principles of Sequence
be abandoned altogether. Thus:

  a) We may have the Present or Perfect Subjunctive after an historical
  tense; as,--

    Verres Siciliam ita perdidit ut ea restitui non possit, _Verres so
    ruined Sicily that it cannot be restored_ (Direct statement: non potest
    restitui);

    ardebat Hortensius dicendi cupiditate sic, ut in nullo flagrantius
    studium viderim, _Hortensius burned so with eagerness to speak that I
    have seen in no one a greater desire_ (Direct statement: in nullo vidi,
    _I have seen in no one_).

NOTE.--This usage is different from that cited under 6. Here, by neglect of
Sequence, the Perfect is used, though a principal tense; there the Perfect
was used as an historical tense.

  b) We may have a principal tense followed by the Perfect Subjunctive used
  historically; as,--

    nescio quid causae fuerit cur nullas ad me litteras dares, _I do not
    know what reason there was why you did not send me a letter_.

  Here fuerit is historical, as is shown by the following Imperfect
  Subjunctive.

Method of Expressing Future Time in the Subjunctive.

269. The Future and Future Perfect, which are lacking to the Latin
Subjunctive, are supplied in subordinate clauses as follows:--


1. a) The Future is supplied by the Present after principal tenses, by the
  Imperfect after historical tenses.

  b) The Future Perfect is supplied by the Perfect after principal tenses,
  by the Pluperfect after historical tenses.

  This is especially frequent when the context clearly shows, by the
  presence of a future tense in the main clause, that the reference is to
  future time. Thus:--

    Galli pollicentur se facturos, quae Caesar imperet, _the Gauls promise
    they will do what Caesar shall order_;

    Galli pollicebantur se facturos, quae Caesar imperaret, _the Gauls
    promised they would do what Caesar should order_;

    Galli pollicentur se facturos quae Caesar imperaverit, _the Gauls
    promise they will do what Caesar shall have ordered_;

    Galli pollicebantur se facturos quae Caesar imperavisset, _the Gauls
    promised they would do what Caesar should have ordered._

2. Even where the context does not contain a Future tense in the main
clause, Future time is often expressed in the subordinate clauses by the
Present and Imperfect Subjunctive. Thus:--

    timeo ne veniat, _I am afraid he will come_;

    Caesar exspectabat quid consili hostes caperent, _Caesar was waiting to
    see what plan the enemy would adopt_.

3. Where greater definiteness is necessary, the periphrastic forms in -urus
sim and -urus essem are employed, especially in clauses of Result, Indirect
Questions, and after non dubito quin; as,--

    non dubito quin pater venturus sit, _I do not doubt that my father will
    come_;

    non dubitabam quin pater venturus esset, _I did not doubt that my
    father would come_.

4. Where the verb has no Future Active Participle, or where it stands in
the passive voice, its Future character may be indicated by the use of the
particles mox, brevi, statim, etc., in connection with the Present and
Imperfect Subjunctive; as,--

    non dubito quin te mox hujus rei paeniteat, _I do not doubt that you
    will soon repent of this thing;_

    non dubitabam quin haec res brevi conficeretur, _I did not doubt that
    this thing would soon be fnished._

TENSES OF THE INFINITIVE.

270. 1. The tenses of the Infinitive denote time not absolutely, but _with
reference to the verb on which they depend._ Thus:--

  a) The Present Infinitive represents an act as _contemporaneous with_ the
  time of the verb on which it depends; as,--

    videtur honores adsequi, _he seems to be gaining honors_;

    videbatur honores adsequi, _he seemed to be gaining honors_.

  b) The Perfect Infinitive represents an act as _prior to_ the time of the
  verb on which it depends; as,--

    videtur honores adsecutus esse, _he seems to have gained honors_;

    visus est honores adsecutus esse, _he seemed to have gained honors_.

  c) The Future Infinitive represents an act as _subsequent to_ that of the
  verb on which it depends; as,--

    videtur honores adsecuturus esse, _he seems to be about to gain
    honors_;

    visus est honores adsecuturus esse, _he seemed to be about to gain
    honors_.

2. Where the English says '_ought to have done_,' '_might have done_,'
etc., the Latin uses debui, oportuit, potui (debebam, oportebat, poteram),
with the Present Infinitive; as,--

    debuit dicere, _he ought to have said_ (lit. _owed it to say_);

    oportuit venire, _he ought to have come_;

    potuit videre, _he might have seen_.

  a. Oportuit, volo, nolo (and in poetry some other verbs), may take a
  Perfect Infinitive instead of the Present; as,--

    hoc jam pridem factum esse oportuit, _this ought long ago to have been
    done_.

3. PERIPHRASTIC FUTURE INFINITIVE. Verbs that have no Participial Stem,
express the Future Infinitive Active and Passive by fore ut or futurum esse
ut, with the Subjunctive; as,--

    spero fore ut te paeniteat levitatis, _I hope you will repent of your
    fickleness_ (lit. _hope it will happen that you repent_);

    spero futurum esse ut hostes arceantur, _I hope that the enemy will be
    kept off_.

  a. The Periphrastic Future Infinitive is often used, especially in the
  Passive, even in case of verbs which have the Participial Stem; as,--

    spero fore ut hostes vincantur, _I hope the enemy will be conquered_.

4. Passives and Deponents sometimes form a Future Perfect Infinitive with
fore; as,--

    spero epistulam scriptam fore, _I hope the letter will have been
    written_;

    dico me satis adeptum fore, _I say that I shall have gained enough_.

THE MOODS.

MOODS IN INDEPENDENT SENTENCES.

The Indicative in Independent Sentences.

271. The Indicative is used for the _statement of facts_, _the supposition
of facts_, or _inquiry after facts_.

1. Note the following idiomatic uses:--

  a) With possum; as,--

    possum multa dicere, _I might say much_;

    poteram multa dicere, _I might have said much_ (Sec. 270, 2).

  b) In such expressions as longum est, aequum est, melius est, difficile
  est, utilius est, and some others; as,--

    longum est ea dicere, _it would be tedious to tell that_;

    difficile est omnia persequi, _it would be difficult to enumerate
    everything_.

The Subjunctive in Independent Sentences.

272. The Subjunctive is used in Independent Sentences to express
something--

  1. As willed--Volitive Subjunctive;
  2. As desired--Optative Subjunctive;
  3. Conceived of as possible--Potential Subjunctive.

VOLITIVE SUBJUNCTIVE.

273. The Volitive Subjunctive represents the action _as willed_. It always
implies authority on the part of the speaker, and has the following
varieties:--

A. HORTATORY SUBJUNCTIVE.

274. The Hortatory Subjunctive expresses _an exhortation_. This use is
confined to the first person plural of the Present. The negative is ne.
Thus:--

    eamus, _let us go_;

    amemus patriam, _let us love our country_;

    ne desperemus, _let us not despair_.

B. JUSSIVE SUBJUNCTIVE.

275. The Jussive Subjunctive expresses a _command_. The Jussive stands
regularly in the Present Tense, and is used--

1. Most frequently in the third singular and the third plural; as,--

    dicat, _let him tell_;

    dicant, _let them tell_;

    quare secedant improbi, _wherefore let the wicked depart!_

2. Less frequently in the second person, often with indefinite force; as,--

    isto bono utare, _use that advantage_;

    modeste vivas, _live temperately_.

C. PROHIBITIVE SUBJUNCTIVE.

276. The Subjunctive is used in the second and third persons singular and
plural, with ne, to express _a prohibition_. Both Present and Perfect
occur, and without appreciable difference of meaning; as,--

    ne repugnetis, _do not resist!_

    tu vero istam ne reliqueris, _don't leave her!_

    impii ne placare audeant deos, _let not the impious dare to appease the
    gods!_

  a. Neither of these constructions is frequent in classical prose.

  b. A commoner method of expressing a prohibition in the second person is
  by the use of noli (nolite) with a following infinitive, or by cave or
  cave ne with the Subjunctive; as,--

    noli hoc facere, _don't do this_ (lit. _be unwilling to do_)!

    nolite mentiri, _do not lie!_

    cave ignoscas, cave te misereat, _do not forgive, do not pity!_

    cave ne haec facias, _do not do this_ (lit. _take care lest you do_)!

D. DELIBERATIVE SUBJUNCTIVE.

277. The Deliberative Subjunctive is used _in questions and exclamations
implying doubt, indignation, the impossibility of an act, obligation, or
propriety_. The Present is used referring to present time, the Imperfect
referring to past. The negative is non. Thus:--

    quid faciam, _what shall I do?_

    ego redeam, _I go back!_

    huic cedamus! hujus condiciones audiamus! _are we to bow to him! are we
    to listen to his terms!_

    quid facerem, _what was I to do?_

    hunc ego non diligam, _should I not cherish this man?_

  a. These Deliberative Questions are usually purely Rhetorical in
  character, and do not expect an answer.

E. CONCESSIVE SUBJUNCTIVE.

278. The Subjunctive is used to indicate something _as granted or conceded
for the sake of argument_. The Present is used for present time, the
Perfect regularly for past. The negative is ne. Thus:--

    sit hoc verum, _I grant that this is true_ (lit. _let this be true_);

    ne sint in senectute vires, _I grant there is not strength in old age_;

    fuerit malus civis aliis; tibi quando esse coepit, _I grant that he was
    a bad citizen to others; when did he begin to be so toward you?_

OPTATIVE SUBJUNCTIVE.

279. The Optative Subjunctive occurs in expressions of _wishing_. The
negative is regularly ne.

1. The Present Tense, often accompanied by utinam, is used where the wish
is conceived of _as possible_.

    di istaec prohibeant, _may the gods prevent that!_

    falsus utinam vates sim, _oh that I may be a false prophet!_

    ne veniant, _may they not come!_

2. The Imperfect expresses, in the form of a wish, the _regret that
something is not so now_; the Pluperfect that something _was not so in the
past_. The Imperfect and Pluperfect are regularly accompanied by utinam;
as,--

    utinam istud ex animo diceres, _would that you were saying that in
    earnest_ (i.e. I regret that you are not saying it in earnest);

    Pelides utinam vitasset Apollinis arcus, _would that Achilles had
    escaped the bow of Apollo_;

    utinam ne natus essem, _would that I had not been born_.

POTENTIAL SUBJUNCTIVE.

280. The Potential Subjunctive expresses _a possibility_. The negative is
non. The following uses are to be noted:--

1. The 'May' Potential.--The Potential Subjunctive may designate _a mere
possibility_ (English auxiliary _may_). Both Present and Perfect occur, and
without appreciable difference of meaning. Thus:--

    dicat aliquis, _some one may say_;

    dixerit aliquis, _some one may say_.

  a. This construction is by no means frequent, and is confined mainly to a
  few phrases like those given as examples.

2. 'Should'-'Would' Potential.--The Potential Subjunctive may represent
something as _depending upon a condition expressed or understood_ (English
auxiliary _should_, _would_). Both Present and Perfect occur, and without
appreciable difference of meaning. Thus:--

    fortunam citius reperias quam retineas, _one would more quickly find
    Fortune than keep it_ (i.e. if one should make the trial);

    crediderim, _I should believe_.

  a. Here belongs the use of velim, malim, nolim, as softened forms of
  statement for volo, malo, nolo. Thus:--

    velim mihi ignoscas, _I wish you would forgive me_;

    nolim putes me jocari, _I don't want you to think I'm joking_.

  b. When the condition is expressed, we get one of the regular types of
  Conditional Sentences (see Sec. 303); as,--

    dies deficiat, si coner enumerare causas, _time would fail if I should
    attempt to enumerate the reasons._

3. 'Can'-'Could' Potential.--In the Present and Imperfect the Potential
occurs in the second person singular (with _indefinite_ force; Sec. 356, 3) of
a few verbs of _perceiving_, _seeing_, _thinking_, and the like; as,--

    videas, cernas, _one can see_, _one can perceive_;

    crederes, _one could believe_;

    videres, cerneres, _one could see_, _perceive_;

    putares, _one could imagine_.

4. The Imperfect and Pluperfect in the Apodosis of conditional sentences of
the contrary-to-fact type (see Sec. 304) are also Potential in character. By
omission of the Protasis, such an Apodosis sometimes stands alone,
particularly vellem, nollem, mallem; as,--

    vellem id quidem, _I should wish that_ (i.e. were I bold enough).

The Imperative.

281. The Imperative is used in _commands_, _admonitions_ and _entreaties_
(negative ne), as,--

    egredere ex urbe, _depart from the city_;

    mihi ignosce, _pardon me_;

    vale, _farewell_.

1. The Present is the tense of the Imperative most commonly used, but the
Future is employed--

  a) Where there is a distinct reference to future time, especially in the
  apodosis of conditional sentences; as,--

    rem vobis proponam; vos eam penditote, _I will lay the matter before
    you; do you (then) consider it_;

    si bene disputabit, tribuito litteris Graecis, _if he shall speak well,
    attribute it to Greek literature._

  b) In laws, treaties, wills, maxims, etc.; as,--

    consules summum jus habento, _the consuls shall have supreme power_;

    hominem mortuom in urbe ne sepelito, _no one shall bury a dead body in
    the city_;

    amicitia regi Antiocho cum populo Romano his legibus et condicionibus
    esto, _let there be friendship between Antiochus and the Roman people
    on the following terms and conditions_;

    quartae esto partis Marcus heres, _let Marcus be heir to a fourth (of
    the property_);

    ignoscito saepe alteri, numquam tibi, _forgive your neighbor often,
    yourself never_.

2. Except with the Future Imperative the negative is not used in classical
prose. Prohibitions are regularly expressed in other ways. See Sec. 276, b.

3. Questions in the Indicative introduced by quin (_why not?_) are often
equivalent to an Imperative or to the Hortatory Subjunctive; as,--

    quin abis, _go away!_ (lit. _why don't you go away?_);

    quin vocem continetis, _keep still!_ (lit. _why don't you stop your
    voices?_);

    quin equos conscendimus, _let us mount our horses_ (lit. _why do we not
    mount our horses?_)

MOODS IN DEPENDENT CLAUSES.

Clauses of Purpose.

282. 1. Clauses of Purpose are introduced most commonly by ut (uti), quo
(_that_, _in order that_), ne (_in order that not, lest_), and stand in the
Subjunctive, as,--

    edimus ut vivamus, _we eat that we may live;_

    adjuta me quo hoc fiat facilius, _help me, in order that this may be
    done more easily;_

    portas clausit, ne quam oppidani injuriam acciperent, _he closed the
    gates, lest the townspeople should receive any injury._

  a. Quo, as a rule, is employed only when the purpose clause contains a
  comparative or a comparative idea. Occasional exceptions occur; as,--

    haec faciunt quo Chremetem absterreant, _they are doing this in order
    to frighten Chremes._

  b. Ut ne is sometimes found instead of ne. Thus:--

    ut ne quid neglegenter agamus, _in order that we may not do anything
    carelessly_.

  c. Ut non (not ne) is used where the negation belongs to some single
  word, instead of to the purpose clause as a whole. Thus:--

    ut non ejectus ad alienos, sed invitatus ad tuos videare, _that you may
    seem not driven out among strangers, but invited to your own friends._

  d. To say '_and that not_' or '_or that not_,' the Latin regularly uses
  neve (neu); as,--

    ut earum rerum vis minueretur, neu ponti nocerent, _that the violence
    of these things might be lessened, and that they might not harm the
    bridge_;

    profugit, ne caperetur neve interficeretur, _he fled, that he might not
    be captured or killed._

  e. But neque (for neve) is sometimes used in a second Purpose Clause when
  ut stands in the first, and, after the Augustan era, even when the first
  clause is introduced by ne.

  f. Purpose Clauses sometimes stand in apposition with a preceding noun or
  pronoun: as,--

    hac causa, ut pacem haberent, _on this account, that they might have
    peace._

2. A Relative Pronoun (qui) or Adverb (ubi, unde, quo) is frequently used
to introduce a Purpose Clause; as,--

    Helvetii legatos mittunt, qui dicerent, _the Helvetii sent envoys to
    say_ (lit. _who should say_);

    haec habui, de senectute quae dicerem, _I had these things to say about
    old age_;

    non habebant quo se reciperent, _they had no place to which to flee_
    (lit. _whither they might flee_).

  a. Qui in such clauses is equivalent to ut is, ut ego, etc.; ubi to ut
  ibi; unde to ut inde; quo to ut eo.

3. Relative Clauses of purpose follow dignus, indignus, and idoneus; as,--

    idoneus fuit nemo quem imitarere, _there was no one suitable for you to
    imitate_ (_cf_. nemo fuit quem imitarere, _there was no one for you to
    imitate_);

    dignus est qui aliquando imperet, _he is worthy to rule sometime_.

4. Purpose Clauses often depend upon something to be supplied from the
context instead of upon the principal verb of their own sentences; as,--

    ut haec omnia omittam, abiimus, _to pass over all this,_ (_I will say
    that_) _we departed_.

Clauses of Characteristic.

283. 1. A relative clause used _to express a quality or characteristic of a
general or indefinite antecedent_ is called a Clause of Characteristic, and
usually stands in the Subjunctive; as,--

    multa sunt, quae mentem acuant, _there are many things which sharpen
    the wits._

Clauses of Characteristic are opposed to those relative clauses which are
used merely to state some fact about a definite antecedent, and which
therefore take the Indicative; as,--

    Cato, senex jucundus, qui Sapiens appellatus est, _Cato, a delightful
    old man, who was called 'The Wise.'_

The Clause of Characteristic implies '_a person of the sort that does
something_'; the Indicative relative clause implies '_a particular person
who does something_.'

2. Clauses of Characteristic are used especially after such expressions as,
est qui; sunt qui; nemo est qui; nullus est qui; unus est qui; solus est
qui; quis est qui; is qui; etc. Thus:--

    sunt qui dicant, _there are (some) who say_;

    nemo est qui nesciat, _there is nobody who is ignorant_;

    sapientia est una quae maestitiam pellat, _philosophy is the only thing
    that drives away sorrow_;

    quae civitas est quae non everti possit, _what state is there that
    cannot be overthrown?_

    non is sum qui improbos laudem, _I am not the sort of man that praises
    the wicked._

  a. Sometimes (very rarely in Cicero and Caesar) the clause of
  characteristic is used after comparatives; as,--

    non longius hostes aberant quam quo telum adigi posset, _the enemy were
    not too far off for a dart to reach them_ (lit. _further off than [a
    point] to which a dart could be cast_).

3. The Clause of Characteristic often conveys an accessory notion of cause
(_since_) or opposition (_although_). Thus:--

  a) Cause. The relative is then frequently accompanied by ut, quippe,
  utpote; as,--

    o fortunate adulescens, qui tuae virtutis Homerum praeconem inveneris,
    _O fortunate man, since you have found a Homer as the herald of your
    valor_;

    ut qui optimo jure eam provinciam obtinuerit, _since he held that
    province by excellent right_.

  b) Opposition:--

    egomet qui sero Graecas litteras attigissem, tamen complures dies
    Athenis commoratus sum, _I, although I had taken up Greek literature
    late in life, nevertheless tarried several days at Athens_.

4. Clauses of Characteristic may also be introduced by quin = qui (quae,
quod) non; as,--

    nemo est quin saepe audierit, _there is no one who has not often
    heard_;

    nemo fuit militum quin vulneraretur, _there was no one of the soldiers
    who was not wounded_.

5. Related to Clauses of Characteristic are also phrases of the type:

    quod sciam, _so far as I know_; quem (quam, quod), audierim, _so far as
    I have heard_.

Clauses of Result.

284. 1. Clauses of Result are usually introduced by ut (_that_, _so that_),
negative ut non (_so that not_), and take the Subjunctive. The main clause
often contains tantus, talis, tot, is (= talis), tam, ita, sic, adeo, or
some similar word. Thus:--

    quis tam demens est ut sua voluntate maereat, _who is so senseless as
    to mourn of his own volition?_

    Siciliam ita vastavit ut restitui in antiquum statum non possit, _he so
    ravaged Sicily that it cannot be restored to its former condition_;

    mons altissimus impendebat, ut facile perpauci prohibere possent, _a
    very high mountain overhung, so that a very few could easily stop
    them_;

    non is es ut te pudor umquam a turpitudine avocarit, _you are not so
    constituted that shame ever called you back from baseness_.

2. A Result Clause is often introduced by a Relative Pronoun or Adverb, qui
(= ut is), quo (= ut eo), etc.; as,--

    nemo est tam senex qui se annum non putet posse vivere, _nobody is so
    old as not to think he can live a year_;

    habetis eum consulem qui parere vestris decretis non dubitet, _you have
    a consul such as does not hesitate to obey your decrees_.

    a. These Relative Clauses of Result are closely related to the Clause
    of Characteristic, and sometimes it is difficult to distinguish the two
    constructions. It is best to class the relative clause as one of
    Characteristic, unless the result idea is clear and unmistakable.

3. Result clauses may also be introduced by quin = ut non; as,--

    nihil tam difficile est quin quaerendo investigari possit, _nothing is
    so difficult that it cannot be discovered by searching_;

    nemo est tam fortis quin rei novitate perturbetur, _no one is so
    steadfast as not to be thrown into confusion by a strange occurrence_.

4. Note the use of quam ut (sometimes quam alone) to denote Result after
comparatives; as,--

    urbs erat munitior quam ut primo impetu capi posset, _the city was too
    strongly fortified to be taken at the first attack_ (lit. _more
    strongly fortified than [so] that it could be taken, etc._).

Causal Clauses.

285. Causal clauses are introduced chiefly by the following particles:--

  1. Quod, quia, quoniam.
  2. Cum.
  3. Quando.

286. The use of moods is as follows:--

1. Quod, quia, quoniam take the Indicative when the reason is _that of the
writer or speaker;_ they take the Subjunctive when the reason is viewed _as
that of another._ Thus:--

    Parthos timeo quod diffido copiis nostris, _I fear the Parthians,
    because I distrust our troops_.

    Themistocles, quia non tutus erat, Corcyram demigravit, _Themistocles,
    since he was not safe, moved to Corcyra_.

    neque me vixisse paenitet, quoniam bene vixi, _I do not regret having
    lived, since I have lived well_.

    Socrates accusatus est quod corrumperet juventutem, _Socrates was
    arraigned on the ground that he was corrupting the young_. (Here the
    reason is not that of the writer but of the accuser. Hence the
    Subjunctive.)

    Haedui Caesari gratias egerunt quod se periculo liberavisset, _the
    Haedui thanked Caesar because he had delivered them from danger_. (The
    reason of the Haedui.)

    quoniam Miltiades dicere non posset, verba pro eo fecit Tisagoras,
    _since Miltiades could not speak, Tisagoras spoke for him_. (The reason
    of Tisagoras.)

    noctu ambulabat Themistocles, quod somnum capere non posset,
    _Themistocles used to walk at night because (as he said) he couldn't
    sleep_.

  a. Verbs of _thinking_ and _saying_ often stand in the Subjunctive in
  causal clauses as though the act of thinking or saying, and not the
  contents of the thought or language, constituted the reason. Thus:--

    Bellovaci suum numerum non compleverunt quod se suo nomine cum Romanis
    bellum gesturos dicerent, _the Bellovaci did not furnish their
    complement, because they said they were going to wage war with the
    Romans on their own account_.

  b. Non quod, non quo (by attraction for non eo quod), non quia, _not
  that_, _not because_; and non quod non, non quo non, non quin, _not that
  ... not_; _not because ... not_; _not but that_, are usually employed
  merely to introduce a hypothetical reason, and hence take the
  Subjunctive; as,--

    id feci, non quod vos hanc defensionem desiderare arbitrarer, sed ut
    omnes intellegerent, _this I did, not because I thought you needed this
    defense, but that all might perceive_;

    Crasso commendationem non sum pollicitus, non quin eam valituram apud
    te arbitrarer, sed egere mihi commendatione non videbatur, _I did not
    promise a recommendation to Crassus, not that I did not think it would
    have weight with you, but because he did not seem to me to need
    recommendation_.

  c. But clauses introduced by non quod, non quia take the Indicative _if
  they state a fact_, even though that fact is denied to be the reason for
  something; as,--

    hoc ita sentio, non quia sum ipse augur, sed quia sic existimare nos
    est necesse, _this I think, not because I am myself an augur (which I
    really am), but because it is necessary for us to think so_.

2. Cum causal regularly takes the Subjunctive; as,--

    quae cum ita sint, _since this is so_;

    cum sis mortalis, quae mortalia sunt, cura, _since you are mortal, care
    for what is mortal_.

  a. Note the phrase cum praesertim (praesertim cum), _especially since;_
  as,--

    Haeduos accusat, praesertim cum eorum precibus adductus bellum
    susceperit, _he blamed the Haedui, especially since he had undertaken
    the war at their entreaties_.

3. Quando (less frequent than the other causal particles) governs the
Indicative; as,--

    id omitto, quando vobis ita placet, _I pass over that, since you so
    wish_.

Temporal Clauses introduced by
_Postquam_, _Ut_, _Ubi_, _Simul ac_,
etc.

287. 1. Postquam (posteaquam), _after_; ut, ubi, _when_; cum primum, simul,
simul ac (simul atque), _as soon as_, when used to refer _to a single past
act_ regularly take the Perfect Indicative; as,--

    Epaminondas postquam audivit vicisse Boeotios, 'Satis' inquit 'vixi,'
    _Epaminondas, after he heard that the Boeotians had conquered, said, 'I
    have lived enough;'_

    id ut audivit, Corcyram demigravit, _when he heard this, he moved to
    Corcyra_;

    Caesar cum primum potuit, ad exercitum contendit, _Caesar, as soon as
    he could, hurried to the army_;

    ubi de Caesaris adventu certiores facti sunt, legatos ad eum mittunt,
    _when they were informed of Caesar's arrival, they sent envoys to him_.

  a. The Historical Present may take the place of the Perfect in this
  construction.

2. To denote _the repeated occurrence_ of an act, ut, ubi, simul atque, _as
often as_, when following an historical tense, take the Pluperfect
Indicative (compare Sec. 288, 3; 302, 3); as,--

    ut quisque Verris animum offenderat, in lautumias statim coniciebatur,
    _whenever anybody had offended Verres's feelings, he was forthwith put
    in the stone-quarry_;

    hostes, ubi aliquos egredientes conspexerant, adoriebantur, _whenever
    the enemy had seen any men disembarking, they attacked them_.

  a. In Livy and succeeding historians the Imperfect and Pluperfect
  Subjunctive are used to denote this repeated occurrence of an act
  ('Indefinite Frequency'); as,--

    id ubi dixisset hastam mittebat, _whenever he had said that, he hurled
    a spear_.

3. Occasionally the above conjunctions are followed by the Pluperfect
Indicative of a single occurrence. This is regularly the case with postquam
in expressions denoting a definite interval of time (days, months, years,
etc.), such as post tertium annum quam, triennio postquam. Thus:--

    quinque post diebus quam Luca discesserat, ad Sardiniam venit _five
    days after he had departed from Luca he came to Sardinia_;

    postquam occupatae Syracusae erant, profectus est Carthaginem, _after
    Syracuse had been seized, he set out for Carthage_.

4. The Imperfect Indicative also sometimes occurs, to denote _a continued
state;_ as,--

    postquam Romam adventabant, senatus consultus est, _after they were on
    the march toward Rome, the Senate was consulted_;

    postquam structi utrimque stabant, _after they had been drawn up on
    both sides and were in position_.

5. Rarely postquam, posteaquam, following the analogy of cum, take the
Subjunctive, but only in the historical tenses; as,--

    posteaquam sumptuosa fieri funera coepissent, lege sublata sunt, _after
    funerals had begun to be elaborate, they were done away with by law_.

Temporal Clauses introduced by _Cum_.

A. Cum REFERRING TO THE PAST.

288. 1. Cum, when referring to the past, takes,--

A. The Indicative (Imperfect, Historical Perfect, or Pluperfect) to denote
_the point of time at which_ something occurs.

B. The Subjunctive (Imperfect or Pluperfect) to denote _the situation or
circumstances under which_ something occurs.

Examples:--

  INDICATIVE.

    an tum eras consul, cum in Palatio mea domus ardebat, _or were you
    consul at the time when my house burned up on the Palatine?_

    credo tum cum Sicilia florebat opibus et copiis magna artificia fuisse
    in ea insula, _I believe that at the time when Sicily was powerful in
    riches and resources there were great crafts in that island_;

    eo tempore paruit cum parere necesse erat, _he obeyed at the time when
    it was necessary to obey_;

    illo die, cum est lata lex de me, _on that day when the law concerning
    me was passed_.

  SUBJUNCTIVE.

    Lysander cum vellet Lycurgi leges commutare, prohibitus est, _when
    Lysander desired to change the laws of Lycurgus, he was prevented_;

    Pythagoras cum in geometria quiddam novi invenisset, Musis bovem
    immolasse dicitur, _when Pythagoras had discovered something new in
    geometry, he is said to have sacrificed an ox to the Muses_.

  a. Note that the Indicative is much less frequent in such clauses than
  the Subjunctive, and is regularly confined to those cases where the main
  clause has tum, eo die, eo anno, eo tempore or some similar correlative
  of the cum. Sometimes it depends entirely upon the point of view of the
  writer whether he shall employ the Indicative or Subjunctive.

2. Cum Inversum. When the logical order of the clauses is inverted, we find
cum with the Perfect Indicative or Historical Present, in the sense of
_when_, _when suddenly_. The main clause in such cases often has jam, vix,
aegre, nondum; as,--

    jam Galli ex oppido fugere apparabant, cum matres familiae repente
    procurrerunt, _the Gauls were already preparing to flee, when suddenly
    the matrons rushed forth_ (logically, _the matrons rushed forth as the
    Gauls were preparing to flee_);

    Treviri Labienum adoriri parabant, cum duas legiones venisse
    cognoscunt, _the Treviri were preparing to attack, when (suddenly) they
    learned that two legions had arrived_.

3. To denote a _recurring action_ in the past, cum is followed by the
Indicative, particularly of the Pluperfect (compare Sec. 287, 2; 302, 3);
as,--

    cum ad aliquod oppidum venerat, eadem lectica ad cubiculum deferebatur,
    _whenever he had arrived at some town, he was (always) carried in the
    same litter to his room_;

    cum equitatus noster se in agros ejecerat, essedarios ex silvis
    emittebat, _whenever our cavalry had advanced into the fields, he would
    send his charioteers out from the woods_.

  a. Sometimes the Imperfect or Pluperfect Subjunctive is thus used; as,--

    saepe cum aliquem videret minus bene vestitum, suum amiculum dedit,
    _often, wherever he saw some one more poorly clothed, he gave him his
    own mantle_;

    cum procucurrissent, Numidae effugiebant, _as often as they had
    advanced, the Numidians ran away_.

  This construction is frequent in Livy and subsequent historians.

B. Cum REFERRING TO THE PRESENT OR FUTURE.

289. When cum refers to the Present or Future it regularly takes the
Indicative; as,--

    tum tua res agitur, paries cum proximus ardet, _your own interests are
    at stake when your neighbor's house is burning_;

    cum videbis, tum scies, _when you see, then you will know._

  a. The Indicative of the Present or Future may denote also a _recurring
  action;_ as,--

    stabilitas amicitiae confirmari potest, cum homines cupidinibus
    imperabunt, _firm friendship can be established whenever men shall
    control their desires._

C. OTHER USES OF Cum.

290. 1. Cum Explicative. Cum, with the Indicative, is sometimes used to
indicate the identity of one act with another; as,--

    cum tacent clamant, _their silence is a shout_ (lit. _when they are
    silent, they shout_).

2. Cum ... tum. When cum ... tum mean _both ... and_, the cum-clause is in
the Indicative; but when cum has the force of _while_, _though_, it may
take the Subjunctive; as,--

    cum te semper dilexerim, tum tuis factis incensus sum, _while I have
    always loved you, at the same time I am stirred by your conduct_.

Clauses introduced by _Antequam_ and _Priusquam_.

A. WITH THE INDICATIVE.

291. Antequam and priusquam (often written ante ... quam, prius ... quam)
take the Indicative to denote _an actual fact_.

1. Sometimes the Present or Future Perfect; as,--

    prius respondes quam rogo, _you answer before I ask_;

    nihil contra disputabo priusquam dixerit, _I will say nothing in
    opposition, before he speaks_.

2. Sometimes the Perfect, especially after negative clauses; as,--

    non prius jugulandi finis fuit, quam Sulla omnes suos divitiis
    explevit, _there was no end of murder until Sulla satisfied all his
    henchmen with wealth_.

B. WITH THE SUBJUNCTIVE.

292. Antequam and priusquam take the Subjunctive to denote an act as
_anticipated_.

1. Thus the Subjunctive may denote--

  a) An act in preparation for which the main act takes place; as,--

    priusquam dimicarent, foedus ictum est, _i.e. in anticipation of the
    fight, a treaty was struck._

  By an extension of this usage, the Subjunctive is sometimes used of
  _general truths_, where the anticipatory notion has faded out; as,--

    tempestas minatur antequam surgat, _the tempest threatens before it
    rises_.

  b) An act anticipated and forestalled; as,--

    priusquam telum adici posset, omnis acies terga vertit, _before a spear
    could be hurled, the whole army fled._

  c) An act anticipated and deprecated; as,--

    animum omittunt priusquam loco demigrent, _they die rather than quit
    their post._

2. After historical tenses the Imperfect Subjunctive is used, especially by
some writers, where the notion of anticipation has practically vanished;
as,--

    sol antequam se abderet fugientem vidit Antonium, _the sun before it
    set saw Antony fleeing._

Clauses introduced by _Dum_, _Donec_, _Quoad_.

293. 1. Dum, _while_, regularly takes the Indicative of the Historical
Present; as,--

    Alexander, dum inter primores pugnat, sagitta ictus est, _Alexander,
    while he was fighting in the van, was struck by an arrow_;

    dum haec geruntur, in fines Venellorum pervenit, _while these things
    were being done, he arrived in the territory of the Venelli_.

II. Dum, donec, and quoad, _as long as_, take the Indicative; as,--

    dum anima est, spes est, _as long as there is life, there is hope_;

    Lacedaemoniorum gens fortis fuit, dum Lycurgi leges vigebant, _the race
    of the Lacedaemonians was powerful, as long as the laws of Lycurgus
    were in force_;

    Cato, quoad vixit, virtutum laude crevit, _Cato, at long as he lived,
    increased in the fame of his virtues_.

III. Dum, donec, and quoad, _until_, take:--

1. The Indicative, to denote _an actual event_; as,--

    donec rediit, fuit silentium, _there was silence till he came_;

    ferrum in corpore retinuit, quoad renuntiatum est Boeotios vicisse, _he
    kept the iron in his body until word was brought that the Boeotians had
    conquered_.

  a. In Livy and subsequent historians dum and donec in this sense often
  take the Subjunctive instead of the Indicative; as,--

    trepidationis aliquantum edebant donec timor quietem fecisset, _they
    showed some trepidation, until fear produced quiet_.

2. The Subjunctive, to denote _anticipation_ or _expectancy_; as,--

    exspectavit Caesar dum naves convenirent, _Caesar waited for the ships
    to assemble_;

    dum litterae veniant, morabor, _I shall wait for the letter to come_.

Substantive Clauses.

294. A Substantive Clause is one which as a whole serves as the Subject or
Object of a verb, or stands in some other case relation.

A. Substantive Clauses developed from the Volitive.

295. Substantive Clauses Developed from the Volitive are used with the
following classes of verbs:--

1. With verbs signifying _to admonish_, _request_, _command_, _urge_,
_persuade_, _induce_,[51] etc. (conjunctions ut, ne, or ut ne); as,--

    postulo ut fiat, _I demand that it be done_ (dependent form of the
    Jussive fiat, _let it be done!_);

    orat, ne abeas, _he begs that you will not go away_;

    milites cohortatus est ut hostium impetum sustinerent, _he exhorted his
    soldiers to withstand the attack of the enemy_;

    Helvetiis persuasit ut exirent, _he persuaded the Helvetii to march
    forth_.

  a. Jubeo, _command_, _order_, regularly takes the Infinitive.

2. With verbs signifying _to grant_, _concede_, _permit_, _allow_,[52] etc.
(conjunction ut); as,--

    huic concedo ut ea praetereat, _I allow him to pass that by_ (dependent
    form of the Jussive ea praetereat, _let him pass that by!_);

    consuli permissum est ut duas legiones scriberet, _the consul was
    permitted to enroll two legions_.

3. With verbs of _hindering_, _preventing_,[53] etc. (conjunctions ne,
quominus, quin); as,--

    ne lustrum perficeret, mors prohibuit, _death prevented him from
    finishing the lustrum_ (dependent form after past tense of ne lustrum
    perficiat, _let him not finish_, etc.);

    prohibuit quominus in unum coirent, _he prevented them from coming
    together_;

    nec quin erumperet, prohiberi poterat, _nor could he be prevented from
    rushing forth_.

  a. Quin is used only when the verb of _hindering_ is accompanied by a
  negative, or stands in a question implying a negative; it is not
  _necessarily_ used even then.

4. With verbs of _deciding_, _resolving_,[54] etc. (conjunctions ut, ne, or
ut ne); as,--

    constitueram ut pridie Idus Aquini manerem, _I had decided to remain at
    Aquinum on the 12th_;

    decrevit senatus ut Opimius videret, _the Senate decreed that Opimius
    should see to it_;

    convenit ut unis castris miscerentur, _it was agreed that they should
    be united in one camp_.

5. With verbs of _striving_,[55] etc. (conjunctions ut, ne, or ut ne);
as,--

    fac ut eum exores, _see to it that you prevail upon him!_

    cura ut vir sis, _see to it that you are a man!_

    laborabat ut reliquas civitates adjungeret, _he was striving to join
    the remaining states to him_.

  a. Conor, _try_, always takes the Infinitive.

NOTE.--Verbs of all the above classes also admit the Infinitive, especially
in poetry.

6. With a few other expressions, such as necesse est, reliquus est,
sequitur, licet, oportet; as,--

    sequitur ut doceam, _it remains for me to show_;

    licet redeas, _you may return_;

    oportet loquamur, _we must speak_.

On the absence of ut with licet and oportet, see paragraph 8.

7. Here also belong phrases of the type: nulla causa est cur, quin; non est
cur, etc.; nihil est cur, etc.; as,--

    nulla causa est cur timeam, _there is no reason why I should fear_
    (originally Deliberative: _why should I fear? There's no reason_);

    nihil est quin dicam, _there is no reason why I should not say_.

8. Many of the above classes of verbs at times take the simple Subjunctive
without ut. In such cases we must not recognize any omission of ut, but
simply an earlier form of expression which existed before the ut-clause
arose. This is regularly the case with necesse est, licet, and oportet; see
6. Other examples are:--

    eos moneo desinant, _I warn them to stop_;

    huic imperat adeat civitates, _he orders him to visit the states_.

B. Substantive Clauses developed from the Optative.

296. Substantive Clauses Developed from the Optative occur:--

1. With verbs of _wishing_, _desiring_, especially cupio, opto, volo, malo
(conjunctions ut, ne, ut ne); as,--

    opto ut in hoc judicio nemo improbus reperiatur, _I hope that in this
    court no bad man may be found_ (here ut reperiatur represents a simple
    optative of direct statement, viz. reperiatur, _may no bad man be
    found_!);

    cupio ne veniat, _I desire that he may not come_.

  a. The simple Subjunctive (without ut) sometimes occurs with verbs of
  this class. (See Sec. 295, 8.) Examples are: velim scribas, _I wish you
  would write_; vellem scripsisset, _I wish he had written_.

2. With expressions of _fearing_ (timeo, metuo, vereor, etc.). Here ne
means _that_, _lest_, and ut means _that not_; as,--

    timeo ne veniat, _I fear that he will come_ (originally: _may he not
    come! I'm afraid_ [_he will_]);

    timeo ut veniat, _I fear that he will not come_ (originally: _may he
    come! I'm afraid_ [_he won't_]).

  a. Ne non sometimes occurs instead of ut, especially where the verb of
  _fearing_ has a negative, or where the writer desires to emphasize some
  particular word in the dependent clause; as,--

    non vereor ne hoc non fiat, _I am not afraid that this will not
    happen;_

    vereor ne exercitum firmum habere non possit, _I fear that he is
    unable_ (non possit) _to have a strong army._

C. Substantive Clauses of Result.

297. Substantive Clauses of Result (introduced by ut, ut non) are a
development of pure Result clauses, and occur with the following classes of
words:--

1. As object clauses after verbs of _doing_, _accomplishing_ (especially
facio, efficio, conficio). Thus:--

    gravitas morbi facit ut medicina egeamus, _the severity of disease
    makes us need medicine._

2. As the subject of several impersonal verbs, particularly fit, efficitur,
accidit, evenit, contingit, accedit, fieri potest, fore, sequitur,
relinquitur. Thus:--

    ex quo efficitur, ut voluptas non sit summum bonum, _from which it
    follows that pleasure is not the greatest good_;

    ita fit, ut nemo esse possit beatus, _thus it happens that no one can
    be happy_;

    accedebat ut naves deessent, _another thing was the lack of ships_
    (lit. _it was added that ships were lacking_).

3. As predicate or appositive after expressions like jus est, mos est,
consuetudo est; also after neuter pronouns, hoc, illud, etc. Thus:--

    est mos hominum ut nolint eundem pluribus rebus excellere, _it is the
    way of men not to wish the same person to excel in many things._

D. Substantive Clauses introduced by _Quin_.

298. Substantive Clauses introduced by quin (used sometimes as subject,
sometimes as object) occur after negative and interrogative expressions of
_doubt_, _omission,_ and the like, particularly after non dubito, _I do not
doubt_; quis dubitat, _who doubts?_; non (haud) dubium est, _there is no
doubt_. The mood is the Subjunctive. Examples:--

    quis dubitat quin in virtute divitiae sint, _who doubts that in virtue
    there are riches?_

    non dubium erat quin venturus esset, _there was no doubt that he was
    about to come._

  a. In Nepos, Livy, and post-Augustan writers an Infinitive sometimes
  takes the place of the quin-clause after non dubito; as,--

    non dubitamus inventos esse, _we do not doubt that men were found_

  b. Non dubito, _I do not hesitate_, is regularly followed by the
  Infinitive, though sometimes by a quin-clause.

E. Substantive Clauses Introduced by _Quod_.

299. 1. Quod, _the fact that_, _that_, introduces Substantive Clauses in
the Indicative. This construction occurs especially--

  a) In apposition with a preceding demonstrative, as hoc, id, illud, illa,
  ex eo, inde, etc. Thus:--

    illud est admiratione dignum, quod captivos retinendos censuit, _this
    is especially worthy of admiration, that he thought the prisoners ought
    to be kept_;

    hoc uno praestamus vel maxime feris, quod colloquimur inter nos, _in
    this one respect we are especially superior to the beasts, that we talk
    with each other_.

  b) After bene fit, bene accidit, male fit, bene facere, miror, etc.;
  as,--

    bene mihi evenit, quod mittor ad mortem, _it is well for me that I am
    sent to death_;

    bene fecisti quod mansisti, _you did well in remaining._

2. Quod at the beginning of the sentence sometimes has the force of _as
regards the fact that_. Thus:--

    quod multitudinem Germanorum in Galliam traduco, id mei muniendi causa
    facio, _as regards the fact that I am transporting a multitude of
    Germans into Gaul, I am doing it for the sake of strengthening myself;_

    quod me Agamemnona aemulari putas, falleris, _as regards your thinking
    that I emulate Agamemnon, you are mistaken_.

F. Indirect Questions.

300. 1. Indirect Questions are Substantive Clauses used after verbs of
_asking_, _inquiring_, _telling_, and the like. They take their verb in the
Subjunctive[56]. Like Direct Questions (see Sec. 162) they may be introduced--

  a) By Interrogative Pronouns or Adverbs; as,--

    dic mihi ubi fueris, quid feceris, _tell me where you were, what you
    did_;

    oculis judicari non potest in utram partem fluat Arar, _it cannot be
    determined by the eye in which direction the Arar flows_;

    bis bina quot essent, nesciebat, _he did not know how many two times
    two were_.

NOTE.--Care should be taken to distinguish Indirect Questions from Relative
Clauses. The difference between the two appears clearly in the following:--

    effugere nemo id potest quod futurum est, _no one can escape what is
    destined to come to pass;_ but saepe autem ne utile quidem est scire
    quid futurum sit, _but often it is not even useful to know what is
    coming to pass._

  b) By num or -ne, without distinction of meaning; as,--

    Epaminondas quaesivit num salvus esset clipeus, or salvusne esset
    clipeus, _Epaminondas asked whether his shield was safe_;

    disputatur num interire virtus in homine possit, _the question is
    raised whether virtue can die in a man_;

    ex Socrate quaesitum est nonne Archelaum beatum putaret, _the question
    was asked of Socrates whether he did not think Archelaus happy_.

NOTE.--Nonne in Indirect Questions occurs only after quaero, as in the last
example above.

2. Often the Indirect Question represents a Deliberative Subjunctive of the
direct discourse; as,--

    nescio quid faciam, _I do not know what to do._ (Direct: quid faciam,
    _what shall I do!_)

3. After verbs of _expectation_ and _endeavor_ (exspecto, conor, experior,
tempto) we sometimes find an Indirect Question introduced by si; as,--

    conantur si perrumpere possint, _they try whether they can break
    through._

  a. Sometimes the governing verb is omitted; as,--

    pergit ad proximam speluncam si forte eo vestigia ferrent, _he
    proceeded to the nearest cave (to see) if the tracks led thither._

4. Indirect Double Questions are introduced in the main by the same
particles as direct double questions (Sec. 162, 4); viz.;--

  utrum ... an;
  -ne ... an;
  ---- ... an;
  ---- ... ne.

Examples:--

  quaero utrum verum an falsum sit,         }
  quaero verumne an falsum sit,             } _I ask whether it_
  quaero verum an falsum sit,               } _is true or false?_
  quaero verum falsumne sit,                }

  a. _'Or not'_ in the second member of the double question is ordinarily
  expressed by necne, less frequently by an non; as,--

    di utrum sint necne, quaeritur, _it is asked whether there are gods or
    not._

5. Haud scio an, nescio an, by omission of the first member of the double
question, occur with the Subjunctive in the sense: _I am inclined to think,
probably, perhaps;_ as,--

    haud scio an ita sit, _I am inclined to think this is so._

6. In early Latin and in poetry the Indicative is sometimes used in
indirect Questions.

CONDITIONAL SENTENCES.

301. Conditional Sentences are compound sentences (Sec. 164) consisting of two
parts, the Protasis (or _condition_), usually introduced by si, nisi, or
sin, and the Apodosis (or _conclusion_). There are the following types of
Conditional Sentences:--

First Type.--Nothing Implied as to the Reality of the Supposed Case.

302. 1. Here we regularly have the Indicative in both Protasis and
Apodosis. Any tense may be used; as,--

    si hoc credis, erras, _if you believe this, you are mistaken_;

    naturam si sequemur, numquam aberrabimus, _if we follow Nature, we
    shall never go astray_;

    si hoc dixisti, errasti, _if you said this, you were in error_.

2. Sometimes the Protasis takes the Indefinite Second Person Singular (Sec.
356, 3) of the Present or Perfect Subjunctive, with the force of the
Indicative; as,--

    memoria minuitur, nisi eam exerceas, _memory is impaired unless you
    exercise it_.

3. Here belong also those conditional sentences in which the Protasis
denotes a repeated action (compare Sec. 287, 2; 288, 3); as,--

    si quis equitum deciderat, pedites circumsistebant, _if any one of the
    horsemen fell, the foot-soldiers gathered about him_.

  a. Instead of the Indicative, Livy and subsequent writers employ the
  Subjunctive of the Historical tenses in the Protasis to denote repeated
  action; as,--

    si dicendo quis diem eximeret, _if (ever) anybody consumed a day in
    pleading_; si quando adsideret, _if ever he sat by_.

4. Where the sense demands it, the Apodosis in conditional sentences of the
First Type may be an Imperative or one of the Independent Subjunctives
(Hortatory, Deliberative, etc.); as,--

    si hoc creditis, tacete, _if you believe this, be silent_;

    si hoc credimus, taceamus, _if we believe this, let us keep silent_.

Second Type.--'Should'-'Would' Conditions.

303. Here we regularly have the Subjunctive (of the Present or Perfect
tense) in both Protasis and Apodosis; as,--

    si hoc dicas, erres, or si hoc dixeris, erraveris, _if you should say
    this, you would be mistaken_;

    si velim Hannibalis proelia omnia describere, dies me deficiat, _if I
    should wish to describe all the battles of Hannibal, time would fail
    me_;

    mentiar, si negem, _I should lie, if I should deny it_;

    haec si tecum patria loquatur, nonne impetrare debeat, _if your country
    should plead thus with you, would she not deserve to obtain her
    request?_

  a. The Subjunctive in the Apodosis of conditional sentences of this type
  is of the Potential variety.

  b. Sometimes we find the Indicative in the Apodosis of sentences of the
  Second Type, where the writer wishes to assert the accomplishment of a
  result more positively; as,--

    aliter si faciat, nullam habet auctoritatem, _if he should do
    otherwise, he has no authority_.

Third Type.--Supposed Case Represented as Contrary to Fact.

304. 1. Here we regularly have the Subjunctive in both Protasis and
Apodosis, the Imperfect referring _to present time_, and the Pluperfect
referring _to past_; as,--

    si amici mei adessent, opis non indigerem, _if my friends were here, I
    should not lack assistance_;

    si hoc dixisses, errasses, _if you had said this, you would have
    erred_;

    sapientia non expeteretur, si nihil efficeret, _philosophy would not be
    desired, if it accomplished nothing_;

    consilium, ratio, sententia nisi essent in senibus, non summum
    consilium majores nostri appellassent senatum, _unless deliberation,
    reason, and wisdom existed in old men, our ancestors would not have
    called their highest deliberative body a senate_.

2. Sometimes the Imperfect Subjunctive is found referring to the past,
especially to denote _a continued act, or a state of things still
existing_; as,--

    Laelius, Furius, Cato si nihil litteris adjuvarentur, numquam se ad
    earum studium contulissent, _Laelius, Furius, and Cato would never have
    devoted themselves to the study of letters, unless they had been
    (constantly) helped by them_;

    num igitur si ad centesimum annum vixisset, senectutis eum suae
    paeniteret, _if he had lived to his hundredth year, would he have
    regretted (and now be regretting) his old age?_

3. The Apodosis in conditional sentences of this type sometimes stands in
the Indicative (Imperfect, Perfect, or Pluperfect), viz.--

  a) Frequently in expressions of _ability_, _obligation_, or _necessity_;
  as,--

    nisi felicitas in socordiam vertisset, exuere jugum potuerunt, _unless
    their prosperity had turned to folly, they could have thrown off the
    yoke_;

NOTE.--In sentences of this type, however, it is not the _possibility_ that
is represented as-contrary-to-fact, but something to be supplied in thought
from the context. Thus in the foregoing sentence the logical apodosis is
_et exuissent_ understood (_and they would have shaken it off_). When the
_possibility_ itself is conditioned, the Subjunctive is used.

    eum patris loco colere debebas, si ulla in te pietas esset, _you ought
    to revere him as a father, if you had any sense of devotion_.

  b) With both the Periphrastic Conjugations; as,--

    si Sestius occisus esset, fuistisne ad arma ituri, _if Sestius had been
    slain, would you have proceeded to arms?_

    si unum diem morati essetis, moriendum omnibus fuit, _if you had
    delayed one day, you would all have had to die_.

Protasis expressed without _Si_.

305. 1. The Protasis is not always expressed by a clause with si, but may
be implied in a word, a phrase, or merely by the context; as,--

    alioqui haec non scriberentur, _otherwise_ (i.e. if matters were
    otherwise) _these things would not be written_;

    non potestis, voluptate omnia dirigentes, retinere virtutem, _you
    cannot retain virtue, if you direct everything with reference to
    pleasure_.

2. Sometimes an Imperative, or a Jussive Subjunctive, serves as Protasis.
Thus:--

    cras petito, dabitur, _if you ask to-morrow, it shall be given you_
    (lit. _ask to-morrow_, etc.);

    haec reputent, videbunt, _if they consider this, they will see_ (lit.
    _let them consider_, etc.);

    roges Zenonem, respondeat, _if you should ask Zeno, he would answer_.

Use of _Nisi_, _Si Non_, _Sin_.

306. 1. Nisi, _unless_, negatives the entire protasis; si non negatives a
single word; as,--

    ferreus essem, nisi te amarem, _I should be hard-hearted unless I loved
    you_; but--

    ferreus essem, si te non amarem, _I should be hard-hearted if I did
    _NOT_ love you_.

In the first example, it is the notion of _loving you_ that is negatived,
in the second, the notion of _loving_.

2. Si non (si minus) is regularly employed:--

  a) When an apodosis with at, tamen, certe follows; as,--

    dolorem si non potuero frangere, tamen occultabo, _if I cannot crush my
    sorrow, yet I will hide it._

  b) When an affirmative protasis is repeated in negative form; as,--

    si feceris, magnam habebo gratiam; si non feceris, ignoscam, _if you do
    it, I shall be deeply grateful; if you do not do it, I shall pardon
    you_.

  a. But if the verb is omitted in the repetition, only si minus or sin
  minus is admissible; as,--

    hoc si assecutus sum, gaudeo; si minus, me consolor, _if I have
    attained this, I am glad; if not, I console myself_.

3. Sin. Where one protasis is followed by another opposed in meaning, but
affirmative in form, the second is introduced by sin; as,--

    hunc mihi timorem eripe; si verus est, ne opprimar, sin falsus, ut
    timere desinam, _relieve me of this fear; if it is well founded, that I
    may not be destroyed; but if it is groundless, that I may cease to
    fear_.

4. Nisi has a fondness for combining with negatives (non, nemo, nihil);
as,--

    nihil cogitavit nisi caedem, _he had no thought but murder_.

  a. Non and nisi are always separated in the best Latinity.

5. Nisi forte, nisi vero, nisi si, _unless perchance, unless indeed_ (often
with ironical force), take the Indicative; as,--

    nisi vero, quia perfecta res non est, non videtur punienda, _unless
    indeed, because an act is not consummated, it does not seem to merit
    punishment_.

Conditional Clauses of Comparison.

307. 1. Conditional Clauses of Comparison are introduced by the particles,
ac si, ut si, quasi, quam si, tamquam si, velut si, or simply by velut or
tamquam. They stand in the Subjunctive mood and regularly involve an
ellipsis (see Sec. 374, 1), as indicated in the following examples:--

    tantus patres metus cepit, velut si jam ad portas hostis esset, _as
    great fear seized the senators as (would have seized them) if the enemy
    were already at the gates_;

    sed quid ego his testibus utor quasi res dubia aut obscura sit, _but
    why do I use these witnesses, as (I should do) if the matter were
    doubtful or obscure_;

    serviam tibi tam quasi emeris me argento, _I will serve you as though
    you had bought me for money_.

2. Note that in sentences of this kind the Latin observes the regular
principles for the Sequence of Tenses. Thus after principal tenses the
Latin uses the Present and Perfect (as in the second and third examples),
where the English uses the Past and Past Perfect.

Concessive Clauses.

308. The term 'Concessive' is best restricted to those clauses developed
from the Jussive Subjunctive which have the force of _granted that_, etc.;
(see Sec. 278) as,--

    sit fur, sit sacrilegus, at est bonus imperator, _granted that he is a
    thief and a robber, yet he is a good commander_;

    haec sint falsa, _granted that this is false_;

    ne sit summum malum dolor, malum certe est, _granted that pain is not
    the greatest evil, yet it is certainly an evil_.

Adversative Clauses with _Quamvis_, _Quamquam_, etc.

309. Clauses introduced by quamvis, quamquam, etsi, tametsi, cum,
_although_, while often classed as 'Concessive,' are yet essentially
different from genuine Concessive clauses. As a rule, they do not _grant_
or _concede_ anything, but rather state that something is true _in spite of
something else_. They accordingly emphasize the adversative idea, and are
properly Subordinate Adversative Clauses. The different particles used to
introduce these clauses have different meanings and take different
constructions, as follows:--

1. Quamvis, _however much_, _although_, does not introduce a statement of
fact, but represents an act merely as conceived. It is followed by the
Subjunctive, usually of the present tense; as,--

    homines quamvis in turbidis rebus sint, tamen interdum animis
    relaxantur, _in however stirring events men may engage, yet at times
    they relax their energies;_

    non est potestas opitulandi rei publicae quamvis ea prematur periculis,
    _there is no opportunity to succor the state, though it be beset by
    dangers._

2. Quamquam, etsi, tametsi, _although_, introduce a statement of fact, and
are followed by the Indicative (of any tense); as,--

    quamquam omnis virtus nos allicit, tamen justitia id maxime efficit,
    _although all virtue attracts us, yet justice does so especially;_

    Caesar, etsi nondum consilium hostium cognoverat, tamen id quod accidit
    suspicabatur, _Caesar, though he did not yet know the plans of the
    enemy, yet was suspecting what actually occurred_.

  a. Etsi, _although_, must be distinguished from etsi, _even if_. The
  latter is a conditional particle and takes any of the constructions
  admissible for si. (See Sec. 302-304.)

3. Cum, _although_, is followed by the Subjunctive; as,--

    Atticus honores non petiit, cum ei paterent, _Atticus did not seek
    honors, though they were open to him_.

4. Licet sometimes loses its verbal force (see Sec. 295, 6) and sinks to the
level of a conjunction with the force of _although_. It takes the
Subjunctive, Present or Perfect; as,--

    licet omnes terrores impendeant, succurram, _though all terrors hang
    over me, (yet) I will lend aid_.

5. Quamquam, with the force _and yet_, is often used to introduce principal
clauses; as,--

    quamquam quid loquor, _and yet why do I speak?_

6. In post-Augustan writers quamquam is freely construed with the
Subjunctive, while quamvis is often used to introduce statements of fact,
and takes either the Indicative or the Subjunctive. Thus:--

    quamquam moveretur his vocibus, _although he was moved by these words_;

    quamvis multi opinarentur, _though many thought_;

    quamvis infesto animo perveneras, _though you had come with hostile
    intent_.

Clauses with _Dum_, _Modo_, _Dummodo_, denoting a Wish or a Proviso.

310. These particles are followed by the Subjunctive (negative ne) and have
two distinct uses:--

I. They are used to introduce clauses _embodying a wish_ entertained by the
subject of the leading verb; as,--

    multi honesta neglegunt dummodo potentiam consequantur, _many neglect
    honor in their desire to obtain power_ (_if only they may attain_);

    omnia postposui, dum praeceptis patris parerem, _I made everything else
    secondary, in my desire to obey the injunctions of my father_;

    nil obstat tibi, dum ne sit ditior alter, _nothing hinders you in your
    desire that your neighbor may not be richer than you_.

II. They are used to express a _proviso_ ('_provided that_'); as,--

    oderint, dum metuant, _let them hate, provided they fear_;

    manent ingenia senibus, modo permaneat studium et industria, _old men
    retain their faculties, provided only they retain their interest and
    vigor_;

    nubant, dum ne dos fiat comes, _let them marry, provided no dowry goes
    with it_.

Relative Clauses.

311. Relative Clauses are introduced by Relative Pronouns, Adjectives, or
Adverbs.

312. 1. Relative clauses usually stand in the Indicative Mood, especially
clauses introduced by those General Relatives which are doubled or have the
suffix -oumque; as,--

    quidquid id est, timeo Danaos et dona ferentes, _whatever it is, I fear
    the Greeks even when they offer gifts;_

    quidquid oritur, qualecumque est, causam a natura habet, _whatever
    comes into being, of whatever sort it is, has its primal cause in
    Nature._

2. Any simple Relative may introduce a conditional sentence of any of the
three types mentioned in Sec. 302-304; as,--

    qui hoc dicit, errat, _he who says this is mistaken_ (First Type);

    qui hoc dicat, erret, _he would be mistaken who should say this_
    (Second Type);

    qui hoc dixisset, errasset, _the man who had said this would have been
    mistaken._

INDIRECT DISCOURSE (_ORATIO OBLIQUA_).

313. When the language or thought of any person is reproduced without
change, that is called Direct Discourse (_Oratio Recta_); as, _Caesar said,
'The die is cast.'_ When, on the other hand, one's language or thought is
made to depend upon a verb of _saying_, _thinking_, etc., that is called
Indirect Discourse (_Oratio Obliqua_); as, _Caesar said that the die was
cast; Caesar thought that his troops were victorious._

  a. For the verbs most frequently employed to introduce Indirect
  Discourse, see Sec. 331.

MOODS IN INDIRECT DISCOURSE.

Declarative Sentences.

314. 1. Declarative Sentences upon becoming Indirect change their main
clause to the Infinitive with Subject Accusative, while all subordinate
clauses take the Subjunctive; as,--

    Regulus dixit quam diu jure jurando hostium teneretur non esse se
    senatorem, _Regulus said that as long as he was held by his pledge to
    the enemy he was not a senator._ (Direct: quam diu teneor non sum
    senator.)

2. The verb of _saying_, _thinking_, etc., is sometimes to be inferred from
the context; as,--

    tum Romulus legatos circa vicinas gentes misit qui societatem
    conubiumque peterent: urbes quoque, ut cetera, ex infimo nasci, _then
    Romulus sent envoys around among the neighboring tribes, to ask for
    alliance and the right of intermarriage, (saying that) cities, like
    everything else, start from a modest beginning_.

3. Subordinate clauses which contain an explanatory statement of the writer
and so are not properly a part of the Indirect Discourse, or which
emphasize the fact stated, take the Indicative; as,--

    nuntiatum est Ariovistum ad occupandum Vesontionem, quod est oppidum
    maximum Sequanorum contendere, _it was reported that Ariovistus was
    hastening to seize Vesontio, which is the largest town of the Sequani_.

4. Sometimes a subordinate clause is such only in its external form, and in
sense is principal. It then takes the Infinitive with Subject Accusative.
This occurs especially in case of relative clauses, where qui is equivalent
to et hic, nam hic, etc.; as,--

    dixit urbem Atheniensium propugnaculum oppositum esse barbaris, apud
    quam jam bis classes regias fecisse naufragium, _he said the city of
    the Athenians had been set against the barbarians like a bulwark, near
    which (= and near it) the fleets of the King had twice met disaster_.

5. The Subject Accusative of the Infinitive is sometimes omitted when it
refers to the same person as the subject of the leading verb, or can easily
be supplied from the context; as,--

    cum id nescire Mago diceret, _when Mago said he did not know this_ (for
    se nescire).

Interrogative Sentences.

315. 1. Real questions of the Direct Discourse, upon becoming indirect, are
regularly put in the Subjunctive; as,--

    Ariovistus Caesari respondit: se prius in Galliam venisse quam populum
    Romanum. Quid sibi vellet? Cur in suas possessiones veniret,
    _Ariovistus replied to Caesar that he had come into Gaul before the
    Roman people. What did he (Caesar) mean? Why did he come into his
    domain?_ (Direct: quid tibi vis? cur in meas possessiones venis?)

2. Rhetorical questions, on the other hand, being asked merely for effect,
and being equivalent in force to emphatic statements, regularly stand in
the Infinitive in Indirect Discourse. Thus :--

    quid est levius (lit. _what is more trivial_, = nothing is more
    trivial) of the Direct Discourse becomes quid esse levius in the
    Indirect.

3. Deliberative Subjunctives of the Direct Discourse remain unchanged in
mood in the Indirect: as,--

    quid faceret, _what was he to do?_ (Direct: quid faciat?)

Imperative Sentences.

316. All Imperatives or Jussive Subjunctives of the Direct Discourse appear
as Subjunctives in the Indirect; as,--

    milites certiores fecit paulisper intermitterent proelium, _he told the
    soldiers to stop the battle for a little_. (Direct: intermittite.)

  a. The negative in such sentences is ne; as,--

    ne suae virtuti tribueret, _let him not attribute it to his own valor!_

TENSES IN INDIRECT DISCOURSE.

A. Tenses of the Infinitive.

317. These are used in accordance with the regular principles for the use
of the Infinitive as given in Sec. 270.

  a. The Perfect Infinitive may represent any past tense of the Indicative
  of Direct Discourse. Thus:--

    scio te haec egisse may mean--

    _I know you were doing this_.(Direct: haec agebas.)

    _I know you did this_. (Direct: haec egisti.)

    _I know you had done this_. (Direct: haec egeras.)

B. Tenses of the Subjunctive.

318. These follow the regular principle for the Sequence of Tenses, being
Principal if the verb of _saying_ is Principal; Historical if it is
Historical. Yet for the sake of vividness, we often find the Present
Subjunctive used after an historical tense (_Repraesentatio_); as,--

    Caesar respondit, si obsides dentur, sese pacem esse facturum, _Caesar
    replied that, if hostages be given, he would make peace_.

  a. For the sequence after the Perfect Infinitive, see Sec. 268, 2.

CONDITIONAL SENTENCES IN INDIRECT DISCOURSE.

Conditional Sentences of the First Type.

319. A. THE APODOSIS. Any tense of the Indicative is changed to the
corresponding tense of the Infinitive (Sec. 270; 317, a).

B. THE PROTASIS. The protasis takes those tenses of the Subjunctive which
are required by the Sequence of Tenses.

Examples:--

  DIRECT.                         INDIRECT.
  si hoc credis, erras,           dico, si hoc credas, te errare;
                                  dixi, si hoc crederes, te errare.
  si hoc credes, errabis,         dico, si hoc credas, te erraturum
                                  esse;
                                  dixi, si hoc crederes, te erraturum
                                  esse.
  si hoc credideris, errabis,     dico, si hoc crederis, te erraturum
                                  esse;
                                  dixi, si hoc credidisses, te erraturum
                                  esse.
  si hoc credebas, erravisti,     dico, si hoc crederes, te erravisse;
                                  dixi, si hoc crederes, te erravisse.

  a. Note that a Future Perfect Indicative of the Direct Discourse
  regularly appears in the Indirect as a Perfect Subjunctive after a
  principal tense, and as a Pluperfect Subjunctive after an historical
  tense.

Conditional Sentences of the Second Type.

320. A. THE APODOSIS. The Present Subjunctive of the Direct Discourse
regularly becomes the Future Infinitive of the Indirect.

B. THE PROTASIS. The Protasis takes those tenses of the Subjunctive
demanded by the sequence of tenses.

Examples:--

  si hoc credas, erres,           dico, si hoc credas, te erraturum
                                  esse;
                                  dixi, si hoc crederes, te erraturum
                                  esse;

Conditional Sentences of the Third Type.

321. A. THE APODOSIS.

1. The Imperfect Subjunctive of the Direct Discourse becomes the Future
Infinitive.

  a. But this construction is rare, being represented in the classical
  Latinity by a single example (Caesar, V. 29. 2). Some scholars question
  the correctness of this passage.

2. The Pluperfect Subjunctive of the Direct Discourse becomes:--

  a) In the Active Voice the Infinitive in -urus fuisse.

  b) In the Passive Voice it takes the form futurum fuisse ut with the
  Imperfect Subjunctive.

B. THE PROTASIS. The protasis in Conditional Sentences of this type always
remains unchanged.

Examples:--

  si hoc crederes, errares,       dico (dixi), si hoc crederes, te
                                  erraturum esse;
  si hoc credidisses,             dico (dixi), si hoc credidisses, te
  erravisses,                     erraturum fuisse;
  si hoc dixisses, punitus        dico (dixi), si hoc dixisses, futurum
  esses.                          fuisse ut punireris.

322. When an apodosis of a conditional sentence of the Third Type referring
to the past is at the same time a Result clause or a quin-clause (after non
dubito, etc.), it stands in the Perfect Subjunctive in the form -urus
fuerim; as,--

    ita territi sunt, ut arma tradituri fuerint,[57] nisi Caesar subito
    advenisset, _they were so frightened that they would have given up
    their arms, had not Caesar suddenly arrived_;

    non dubito quin, si hoc dixisses, erraturus fueris,[57] _I do not doubt
    that, if you had said this, you would have made a mistake_.

  a. This peculiarity is confined to the Active Voice. In the Passive, such
  sentences, when they become dependent, remain unchanged; as,--

    non dubito quin, si hoc dixisses, vituperatus esses, _I do not doubt
    that, if you had said this, you would have been blamed_.

  b. When an Indirect Question becomes an apodosis in a conditional
  sentence of the Third Type, -urus fuerim (rarely -urus fuissem) is used;
  as,--

    quaero, num, si hoc dixisses, erraturus fueris (or fuisses).

  c. Potui, when it becomes a dependent apodosis in sentences of this Type,
  usually changes to the Perfect Subjunctive; as,--

    concursu totius civitatis defensi sunt, ut frigidissimos quoque
    oratores populi studia excitare potuerint, _they were defended before a
    gathering of all the citizens, so that the interest of the people would
    have been enough to excite even the most apathetic orators_.

IMPLIED INDIRECT DISCOURSE.

323. The Subjunctive is often used in subordinate clauses whose indirect
character is _merely implied by the context_; as,--

    demonstrabantur mihi praeterea, quae Socrates de immortalitate animorum
    disseruisset, _there were explained to me besides, the arguments which
    Socrates had set forth concerning the immortality of the soul_ (i.e.
    the arguments which, it was said, Socrates had set forth);

    Paetus omnes libros quos pater suus reliquisset mihi donavit, _Paetus
    gave me all the books which (as he said) his father had left_.

SUBJUNCTIVE BY ATTRACTION.

324. 1. Subordinate clauses dependent upon the Subjunctive are frequently
attracted into the same mood especially when they do not express a fact,
but constitute _an essential part of one complex idea_; as,--

    nemo avarus adhuc inventus est, cui, quod haberet, esset satis, _no
    miser has yet been found who was satisfed with what he had_;

    cum diversas causas afferrent, dum formam sui quisque et animi et
    ingenii redderent, _as they brought forward different arguments, while
    each mirrored his own individual type of mind and natural bent_;

    quod ego fatear, pudeat? _should I be ashamed of a thing which I
    admit?_

2. Similarly a subordinate clause dependent upon an Infinitive is put in
the Subjunctive when the two form one closely united whole; as,--

    mos est Athenis quotannis in contione laudari eos qui sint in proeliis
    interfecti, _it is the custom at Athens every year for those to be
    publicly eulogized who have been killed in battle_. (Here the notion of
    'praising those who fell in battle' forms an inseparable whole.)

NOUN AND ADJECTIVE FORMS OF THE VERB.

325. These are the Infinitive, Participle, Gerund, and Supine. All of these
partake of the nature of the Verb, on the one hand, and of the Noun or
Adjective, on the other. Thus:--

As Verbs,--

  a) They may be limited by adverbs;
  b) They admit an object;
  c) They have the properties of voice and tense.

As Nouns or Adjectives,--

  a) They are declined;
  b) They take Noun or Adjective constructions.

THE INFINITIVE.

Infinitive without Subject Accusative.

326. This is used chiefly as Subject or Object but also as Predicate or
Appositive.

NOTE.--The Infinitive was originally a Dative, and traces of this are still
to be seen in the poetical use of the Infinitive to express _purpose_; as,
nec dulces occurrent oscula nati praeripere, _and no sweet children will
run to snatch kisses_.

_A. As Subject._

327. 1. The Infinitive without Subject Accusative is used as the Subject of
esse and various impersonal verbs, particularly opus est, necesse est,
oportet, juvat, delectat, placet, libet, licet, praestat, decet, pudet,
interest, etc.; as,--

    dulce et decorum est pro patria mori, _it is sweet and noble to die for
    one's country_;

    virorum est fortium toleranter dolorem pati, _it is the part of brave
    men to endure pain with patience_;

    senatui placuit legatos mittere, _the Senate decided_ (lit. _it pleased
    the Senate_) _to send envoys_.

2. Even though the Infinitive itself appears without Subject, it may take a
Predicate Noun or Adjective in the Accusative; as,--

    aliud est iracundum esse, aliud iratum, _it is one thing to be
    irascible, another to be angry_;

    impune quaelibet facere, id est regem esse, _to do whatever you please
    with impunity, that is to be a king_.

  a. But when licet is followed by a Dative of the person, a Predicate Noun
  or Adjective with esse is attracted into the same case; as, licuit esse
  otioso Themistocli, lit. _it was permitted to Themistocles to be at
  leisure_. So sometimes with other Impersonals.

_B. As Object._

328. 1. The Infinitive without Subject Accusative is used as the Object of
many verbs, to denote another action of the same subject, particularly
after--

  volo, cupio, malo, nolo, debeo,      cogito, meditor, _purpose_,
  _ought_;                             _intend_;
  statuo, constituo, _decide_;         neglego, _neglect_;
  audeo, _dare_;                       vereor, timeo, _fear_;
  studeo, contendo, _strive_;          maturo, festino, propero, contendo,
  paro, _prepare_ (so paratus);        _hasten_;
  incipio, coepi, instituo,            assuesco, consuesco, _accustom
  _begin_;                             myself_ (so assuetus, insuetus,
  pergo, _continue_;                   assuefactus);
  desino, desisto, _cease_;            disco, _learn_;
  possum, _can_;                       scio, _know how_;
  conor, _try_;                        soleo, _am wont_;

as,--

    tu hos intueri audes, _do you dare to look on these men_?

    Demosthenes ad fluctus maris declamare solebat, _Demosthenes used to
    declaim by the waves of the sea_.

2. A Predicate Noun or Adjective with these Infinitives is attracted into
the Nominative; as,--

    beatus esse sine virtute nemo potest, _no one can be happy without
    virtue_;

    Cato esse quam videri bonus malebat, _Cato preferred to be good rather
    than to seem so_.

Infinitive with Subject Accusative.

329. This is used chiefly as Subject or Object but also as Predicate or
Appositive.

_A. As Subject._

330. The Infinitive with Subject Accusative (like the simple Infinitive) is
used as Subject with esse and Impersonal verbs, particularly with aequum
est, utile est, turpe est, fama est, spes est, fas est, nefas est, opus
est, necesse est, oportet, constat, praestat, licet, etc.; as,--

    nihil in bello oportet contemni, _nothing ought to be despised in war_;

    apertum est sibi quemque natura esse carum, _it is manifest that by
    nature everybody is dear to himself_.

_B. As Object._

331. The Infinitive with Subject Accusative is used as Object after the
following classes of verbs:

1. Most frequently after verbs of _saying_, _thinking_, _knowing_,
_perceiving_, and the like (_Verba Sentiendi et Declarandi_). This is the
regular construction of Principal Clauses of Indirect Discourse. Verbs that
take this construction are, among others, the following: sentio, audio,
video, cognosco; puto, judico, spero, confido; scio, memini; dico, affirmo,
nego (_say that ... not_), trado, narro, fateor, respondeo, scribo,
promitto, glorior. Also the phrases: certiorem facio (_inform_), memoria
teneo (_remember_), etc.

Examples:--

    Epicurei putant cum corporibus simul animos interire, _the Epicureans
    think that the soul perishes with the body_;

    Thales dixit aquam esse initium rerum, _Thales said that water was the
    first principle of the universe_;

    Democritus negat quicquid esse sempiternum, _Democritus says nothing is
    everlasting;_

    spero eum venturum esse, _I hope that he will come_.

II. With jubeo, _order_, and veto, _forbid_; as,--

    Caesar milites pontem facere jussit, _Caesar ordered the soldiers to
    make a bridge_.

  a. When the name of the person who is ordered or forbidden to do
  something is omitted, the Infinitive with jubeo and veto is put in the
  Passive; as, Caesar pontem fieri jussit.

III. With patior and sino, _permit_, _allow_; as,--

    nullo se implicari negotio passus est, _he did not permit himself to be
    involved in any difficulty_.

IV. With volo, nolo, malo, cupio, when the Subject of the Infinitive is
different from that of the governing verb; as,--

    nec mihi hunc errorem extorqueri volo, _nor do I wish this error to be
    wrested from me_;

    eas res jactari nolebat, _he was unwilling that these matters should be
    discussed_;

    te tua frui virtute cupimus, _we desire that you enjoy your worth_.

  a. When the Subject of both verbs is the same, the simple Infinitive is
  regularly used in accordance with Sec. 328, 1. But exceptions occur,
  especially in case of esse and Passive Infinitives as,--

    cupio me esse clementem, _I desire to be lenient_;

    Timoleon maluit se diligi quam metui, _Timoleon preferred to be loved
    rather than feared_.

  b. Volo also admits the Subjunctive, with or without ut; nolo the
  Subjunctive alone. (See Sec. 296, 1, a.)

V. With Verbs of _emotion_ (_joy_, _sorrow_, _regret_, etc.), especially
gaudeo, laetor, doleo; aegre fero, moleste fero, graviter fero, _am
annoyed_, _distressed_; miror, queror, indignor; as,--

    gaudeo te salvum advenire, _I rejoice that you arrive safely_;

    non moleste ferunt se libidinum vinculis laxatos esse, _they are not
    troubled at being released from the bonds of passion_;

    miror te ad me nihil scribere, _I wonder that you write me nothing_.

  a. Instead of an Infinitive these verbs also sometimes admit a quod-
  clause as Object. (See Sec. 299.) Thus:--

    miror quod non loqueris, _I wonder that you do not speak_.

VI. Some verbs which take two Accusatives, one of the Person and the other
of the Thing (Sec. 178, 1), may substitute an Infinitive for the second
Accusative; as,--

    cogo te hoc facere, _I compel you to do this_ (_cf._ te hoc cogo);

    docui te contentum esse, _I taught you to be content_ (_cf._ te
    modestiam docui, _I taught you temperance_).

Passive Construction of the Foregoing Verbs.

332. Those verbs which in the Active are followed by the Infinitive with
Subject Accusative, usually admit the personal construction of the Passive.
This is true of the following and of some others:--

  a) jubeor, vetor, sinor; as,--

    milites pontem facere jussi sunt, _the soldiers were ordered to build a
    bridge_;

    pons fieri jussus est, _a bridge was ordered built_;

    milites castris exire vetiti sunt, _the troops were forbidden to go out
    of the camp_;

    Sestius Clodium accusare non est situs, _Sestius was not allowed to
    accuse Clodius_.

  b) videor, _I am seen_, _I seem_; as,--

    videtur comperisse, _he seems to have discovered_.

  c) dicor, putor, existimor, judicor (in all persons); as,--

    dicitur in Italiam venisse, _he is said to have come into Italy_;

    Romulus primus rex Romanorum fuisse putatur, _Romulus is thought to
    have been the first king of the Romans_.

  d) fertur, feruntur, traditur, traduntur (only in the third person);
  as,--

    fertur Homerus caecus fuisse, _Homer is said to have been blind_;

    carmina Archilochi contumeliis referta esse traduntur, _Archilochus's
    poems are reported to have been full of abuse_.

NOTE.--In compound tenses and periphrastic forms, the last two classes of
verbs, c), d), more commonly take the impersonal construction; as--

    traditum est Homerum caecum fuisse, _the story goes that Homer was
    blind_.

Infinitive with Adjectives.

333. The Infinitive with Adjectives (except paratus, assuetus, etc.; see Sec.
328, 1) occurs only in poetry and post-Augustan prose writers; as,--

    contentus demonstrasse, _contented to have proved_;

    audax omnia perpeti, _bold for enduring everything_.

Infinitive in Exclamations.

334. The Infinitive is used in Exclamations implying _scorn_,
_indignation_, or _regret_. An intensive -ne is often attached to some word
in the clause. Examples:--

    huncine solem tam nigrum surrexe mihi, _to think that to-day's sun rose
    with such evil omen for me!_

    sedere totos dies in villa, _to stay whole days at the villa_.

Historical Infinitive.

335. The Infinitive is often used in historical narrative instead of the
Imperfect Indicative. The Subject stands in the Nominative; as,--

    interim cottidie Caesar Haeduos frumentum flagitare, _meanwhile Caesar
    was daily demanding grain of the Haedui_.

PARTICIPLES.

Tenses of the Participle.

336. 1. The tenses of the Participle, like those of the infinitive (see Sec.
270), express time not absolutely, but with reference to the verb upon
which the Participle depends.

2. The Present Participle denotes action _contemporary with_ that of the
verb. Thus:--

    audio te loquentem = _you_ ARE _speaking and I hear you_;

    audiebam te loquentem = _you_ WERE _speaking and I heard you_;

    audiam te loquentem = _you_ WILL BE _speaking and I shall hear you._

  a. The Present Participle is sometimes employed with Conative force;
  as,--

    assurgentem regem resupinat, _as the king was trying to rise, he threw
    him down._

3. The Perfect Passive Participle denotes action _prior to_ that of the
verb. Thus:--

    locutus taceo = _I_ HAVE _spoken and am silent_;

    locutus tacui = _I_ HAD _spoken and then was silent_;

    locutus tacebo = _I_ SHALL _speak and then shall be silent._

4. The absolute time of the action of a participle, therefore, is
determined entirely by the finite verb with which it is connected.

5. Certain Perfect Passive Participles of Deponent and Semi-Deponent Verbs
are used as Presents; viz. arbitratus, ausus, ratus, gavisus, solitus,
usus, confisus, diffisus, secutus, veritus.

Use of Participles.

337. As an Adjective the Participle may be used either as an attributive or
predicate modifier of a Substantive.

1. Attributive Use. This presents no special peculiarities. Examples are:--

    gloria est consentiens laus bonorum, _glory is the unanimous praise of
    the good_;

    Conon muros a Lysandro dirutos reficit, _Conon restored the walls
    destroyed by Lysander._

2. Predicate Use. Here the Participle is often equivalent to a subordinate
clause. Thus the Participle may denote:--

  a) Time; as,--

    omne malum nascens facile opprimitur, _every evil is easily crushed at
    birth._

  b) A Condition; as,--

    mente uti non possumus cibo et potione completi, _if gorged with food
    and drink, we cannot use our intellects_.

  c) Manner; as,--

    Solon senescere se dicebat multa in dies addiscentem, _Solon said he
    grew old learning many new things daily._

  d) Means; as,--

    sol oriens diem conficit, _the sun, by its rising, makes the day._

  e) Opposition ('_though_'); as,--

    mendaci homini ne verum quidem dicenti credimus, _we do not believe a
    liar, though he speaks the truth._

  f) Cause; as,--

    perfidiam veritus ad suos recessit, _since he feared treachery, he
    returned to his own troops._

3. Video and audio, besides the Infinitive, take the Present Participle in
the Predicate use; as,--

    video te fugientem, _I see you fleeing._

  a. So frequently facio, fingo, induco, etc.; as,--

    eis Catonem respondentem facimus, _we represent Cato replying to them_;

    Homerus Laertem colentem agrum facit, _Homer represents Laertes tilling
    the field._

4. The Future Active Participle (except futurus) is regularly confined to
its use in the Periphrastic Conjugation, but in poets and later writers it
is used independently, especially to denote _purpose_; as,--

    venerunt castra oppugnaturi, _they came to assault the camp._

5. The Perfect Passive Participle is often equivalent to a cooerdinate
clause; as,--

    urbem captam diruit, _he captured and destroyed the city_ (lit. _he
    destroyed the city captured_).

6. The Perfect Passive Participle in combination with a noun is sometimes
equivalent to an abstract noun with a dependent Genitive; as,--

    post urbem conditam, _after the founding of the city_;

    Quinctius defensus, _the defense of Quinctius_;

    quibus animus occupatus, _the preoccupation of the mind with which._

7. Habeo sometimes takes a Perfect Passive Participle in the Predicate
construction with a force not far removed from that of the Perfect or
Pluperfect Indicative; as,--

    equitatus quem coactum habebat, _the cavalry which he had collected._

8. The Gerundive denotes _obligation_, _necessity_, etc. Like other
Participles it may be used either as Attributive or Predicate.

  a) Less frequently as Attributive. Thus:--

    liber legendus, _a book worth reading_;

    leges observandae, _laws deserving of observance_.

  b) More frequently as Predicate.

    1) In the Passive Periphrastic Conjugation (amandus est, etc.). In this
    use Intransitive Verbs can be used only impersonally, but admit their
    ordinary case-construction (Gen., Dat., Abl.); as,--

    veniendum est, _it is necessary to come_;

    obliviscendum est offensarum, _one must forget injuries_;

    numquam proditori credendum est, _you must never trust a traitor_;

    suo cuique utendum est judicio, _every man must use his own judgment_.

    2) After curo, _provide for_; do, trado, _give over_; relinquo,
    _leave_; concedo, _hand over_, and some other verbs, instead of an
    object clause, or to denote purpose; as,--

    Caesar pontem in Arari faciendum curavit, _Caesar provided for the
    construction of a bridge over the Arar_;

    imperator urbem militibus diripiendam concessit, _the general handed
    over the city to the soldiers to plunder_.

9. For the Gerundive as the equivalent of the Gerund, see Sec. 339, 1.

THE GERUND.

338. As a verbal noun the Gerund admits noun constructions as follows:--

1. Genitive. The Genitive of the Gerund is used--

  a) With Nouns, as objective or Appositional Genitive (see Sec. 200, 202);
  as,--

    cupiditas dominandi, _desire of ruling_;

    ars scribendi, _the art of writing_.

  b) With Adjectives; as,--

    cupidus audiendi, _desirous of hearing_.

  c) With causa, gratia; as,--

    discendi causa, _for the sake of learning_.

2. Dative. The Dative of the Gerund is used--

  a) With Adjectives; as,--

    aqua utilis est bibendo, _water is useful for drinking_.

  b) With Verbs (rarely); as,--

    adfui scribendo, _I was present at the writing_.

3. Accusative. The Accusative of the Gerund is used only with Prepositions,
chiefly ad and in to denote purpose; as,--

    homo ad agendum natus est, _man is born for action_.

4. Ablative. The Ablative of the Gerund is used--

  a) Without a Preposition, as an Ablative of Means, Cause, etc. (see Sec.
  218, 219); as,--

    mens discendo alitur et cogitando, _the mind is nourished by learning
    and reflection_.

    Themistocles maritimos praedones consectando mare tutum reddidit,
    _Themistocles made the sea safe by following up the pirates_.

  b) After the prepositions a, de, ex, in; as,--

    summa voluptas ex discendo capitur, _the keenest pleasure is derived
    from learning_;

    multa de bene beateque vivendo a Platone disputata sunt, _there was
    much discussion by Plato on the subject of living well and happily_.

5. As a rule, only the Genitive of the Gerund and the Ablative (without a
preposition) admit a Direct Object.

Gerundive Construction instead of the Gerund.

339. 1. Instead of the Genitive or Ablative of the Gerund with a Direct
Object, another construction _may be, and very often is, used_. This
consists in putting the Direct Object in the case of the Gerund (Gen. or
Abl.) and using the Gerundive in agreement with it. This is called the
Gerundive Construction. Thus:--

         GERUND CONSTRUCTION.                GERUNDIVE CONSTRUCTION.
  cupidus urbem videndi, _desirous of  cupidus urbis videndae;
  seeing the city_.
  delector oratores legendo, _I am     delector oratoribus legendis
  charmed with reading the orators_.

2. The Gerundive Construction _must be used_ to avoid a Direct Object with
the Dative of the Gerund, or with a case dependent upon a Preposition;
as,--

    locus castris muniendis aptus, _a place adapted to fortifying a camp_;

    ad pacem petendam venerunt, _they came to ask peace_;

    multum temporis consumo in legendis poetis, _I spend much time in
    reading the poets_.

3. In order to avoid ambiguity (see Sec. 236, 2), the Gerundive Construction
must not be employed in case of Neuter Adjectives used substantively. Thus
regularly--

    philosophi cupidi sunt verum investigandi, _philosophers are eager for
    discovering truth_ (rarely veri investigandi);

    studium plura cognoscendi, _a desire of knowing more_ (not plurium
    cognoscendorum).

4. From the nature of the case only Transitive Verbs can be used in the
Gerundive construction; but utor, fruor, fungor, potior (originally
transitive) regularly admit it; as,--

    hostes in spem potiundorum castrorum venerant, _the enemy had conceived
    the hope of gaining possession of the camp_.

5. The Genitives mei, tui, sui, nostri, vestri, when used in the Gerundive
Construction, are regularly employed without reference to Gender or Number,
since they were originally Neuter Singular Adjectives used substantively.
Thus:--

    mulier sui servandi causa aufugit, _the woman fled for the sake of
    saving herself_;

    legati in castra venerunt sui purgandi causa, _the envoys came into
    camp for the purpose of clearing themselves_.

So nostri servandi causa, _for the sake of saving ourselves_.

6. Occasionally the Genitive of the Gerundive Construction is used to
denote _purpose_; as,--

    quae ille cepit legum ac libertatis subvertundae, _which he undertook
    for the purpose of overthrowing the laws and liberty_.

7. The Dative of the Gerundive Construction occurs in some expressions
which have the character of formulas; as,--

    decemviri legibus scribundis, _decemvirs for codifying the laws_;

    quindecimviri sacris faciundis, _quindecimvirs for performing the
    sacrifices_.

THE SUPINE.

340. 1. The Supine in -um is used after Verbs of motion to express
_purpose_; as,--

    legati ad Caesarem gratulatum convenerunt, _envoys came to Caesar to
    congratulate him_.

  a. The Supine in -um may take an Object; as,--

    pacem petitum oratores Romam mittunt, _they send envoys to Rome to ask
    for peace_.

  b. Note the phrase:--

    do (colloco) filiam nuptum, _I give my daughter in marriage_.

2. The Supine in -u is used as an Ablative of Specification with facilis,
difficilis, incredibilis, jucundus, optimus, etc.; also with fas est, nefas
est, opus est; as,--

    haec res est facilis cognitu, _this thing is easy to learn_;

    hoc est optimum factu, _this is best to do_.

  a. Only a few Supines in -u are in common use, chiefly auditu, cognitu,
  dictu, factu, visu.

  b. The Supine in -u never takes an Object.

       *       *       *       *       *

CHAPTER VI.--_Particles._

COOeRDINATE CONJUNCTIONS.

341. Copulative Conjunctions. These _join_ one word, phrase, or clause to
another.


1. a) et simply connects.

  b) -que joins more closely than et, and is used especially where the two
  members have an internal connection with each other; as,--

    parentes liberique, _parents and children_;

    cum homines aestu febrique jactantur, _when people are tossed about
    with heat and fever_.

  c) atque (ac) usually emphasizes the second of the two things
  connected,--_and also, and indeed, and in fact_. After words of
  _likeness_ and _difference_, atque (ac) has the force of _as_, _than_.
  Thus:--

    ego idem sentio ac tu, _I think the same as you_;

    haud aliter ac, _not otherwise than_.

  d) neque (nec) means _and not_, _neither_, _nor_.


2. a) -que is an enclitic, and is appended always to the second of two
  words connected. Where it connects phrases or clauses, it is appended to
  the first word of the second clause; but when the first word of the
  second clause is a Preposition, -que is regularly appended to the next
  following word; as,--

    ob eamque rem, _and on account of that thing_.

  b) atque is used before vowels and consonants; ac never before vowels,
  and seldom before c, g, qu.

  c) et non is used for neque when the emphasis of the negative rests upon
  a special word; as,--

    vetus et non ignobilis orator, _an old and not ignoble orator_.

  d) For _and nowhere_, _and never_, _and none_, the Latin regularly said
  nec usquam, nec umquam, nec ullus, etc.

3. Correlatives. Copulative Conjunctions are frequently used correlatively;
as,--

    et ... et, _both ... and_;

    neque (nec) ... neque (nec), _neither ... nor_;

    cum ... tum, _while ... at the same time_;

    tum ... tum, _not only ... but also_.

  Less frequently:--

    et ... neque; neque ... et.

  a. Note that the Latin, with its tendency to emphasize antithetical
  relations, often uses correlatives, especially et ... et, et ... neque,
  neque ... et, where the English employs but a single connective.

4. In enumerations--

  a) The different members of a series may follow one another without
  connectives (Asyndeton; see Sec. 346). Thus:--

    ex cupiditatibus odia, discidia, discordiae, seditiones, bella
    nascuntur, _from covetous desires spring up hatred, dissension,
    discord, sedition, wars_.

  b) The different members may severally be connected by et (Polysyndeton).
  Thus:--

    horae cedunt et dies et menses et anni, _hours and days and months and
    years pass away_.

  c) The connective may be omitted between the former members, while the
  last two are connected by -que (rarely et); as,--

    Caesar in Carnutes, Andes Turonesque legiones deducit, _Caesar leads
    his legions into the territory of the Carnutes, Andes, and Turones_.

342. Disjunctive Conjunctions indicate an _alternative_.


1. a) aut must be used when the alternatives are mutually exclusive; as,--

    cita mors venit aut victoria laeta, _(either) swift death or glad
    victory comes_.

  b) vel, -ve (enclitic) imply a choice between the alternatives; as,--

    qui aether vel caelum nominatur, _which is called aether or heaven_.

2. Correlatives. Disjunctive Conjunctions are often used correlatively;
as,--

    aut ... aut, _either ... or_;

    vel ... vel, _either ... or_;

    sive ... sive, _if ... or if_.

343. Adversative Conjunctions. These denote _opposition_.


1. a) sed, _but_, merely denotes opposition.

  b) verum, _but_, is stronger than sed, but is less frequently used.

  c) autem, _but on the other hand_, _however_, marks a transition. It is
  always post-positive.

DEFINITION. A post-positive word is one that cannot begin a sentence, but
is placed after one or more words.

  d) at, _but_, is used especially in disputation, to introduce an opposing
  argument.

  e) atqui means _but yet_.

  f) tamen, _yet_, usually stands after the emphatic word, but not always.

  g) vero, _however_, _indeed_, _in truth_, is always post-positive.

2. Note the correlative expressions:--

    non solum (non modo) ... sed etiam, _not only ... but also_;

    non modo non ... sed ne ... quidem, _not only not, but not even_; as,--

    non modo tibi non irascor, sed ne reprehendo quidem factum tuum, _I not
    only am not angry with you, but I do not even blame your action_.

  a. But when the sentence has but one verb, and this stands with the
  second member, non modo may be used for non modo non; as,--

    adsentatio non modo amico, sed ne libero quidem digne est, _flattery is
    not only not worthy of a friend, but not even of a free man._

344. Illative Conjunctions. These represent the statement which they
introduce as _following from_ or as _in conformity with_ what has preceded.


1. a) itaque = _and so_, _accordingly_.

  b) ergo = _therefore_, _accordingly_.

  c) igitur (regularly post-positive[58]) = _therefore_, _accordingly_.

2. Igitur is never combined with et, atque, -que, or neque.

345. Causal Conjunctions. These denote _cause_, or _give an explanation_.
They are nam, namque, enim (post-positive), etenim, _for_.

346. Asyndeton. The conjunction is sometimes omitted between cooerdinate
members, particularly in lively or impassioned narration. Thus:--

  a) A copulative Conjunction is omitted; as,--

    avaritia infinita, insatiabilis est, _avarice is boundless (and)
    insatiable_;

    Cn. Pompejo, M. Crasso consulibus, _in the consulship of Gnaeus Pompey
    (and) Marcus Crassus_.

    The conjunction is regularly omitted between the names of consuls when
    the praenomen (_Marcus_, _Gaius_, etc.) is expressed.

  b) An Adversative Conjunction may be omitted; as,--

    rationes defuerunt, ubertas orationis non defuit, _arguments were
    lacking, (but) abundance of words was not_.

ADVERBS.

347. 1. The following particles, sometimes classed as Conjunctions, are
more properly Adverbs:--

  etiam, _also_, _even_.

  quoque (always post-positive), _also_.

  quidem (always post-positive) lays stress upon the preceding word. It is
  sometimes equivalent to the English _indeed_, _in fact_, but more
  frequently cannot be rendered, except by vocal emphasis.

  ne ... quidem means _not even_; the emphatic word or phrase always stands
  between; as, ne ille quidem, _not even he_.

  tamen and vero, in addition to their use as Conjunctions, are often
  employed as Adverbs.

2. Negatives. Two negatives are regularly equivalent to an affirmative as
in English, as non nulli, _some_; but when non, nemo, nihil, numquam, etc.,
are accompanied by neque ... neque, non ... non, non modo, or ne ...
quidem, the latter particles simply take up the negation and emphasize it;
as,--

    habeo hic neminem neque amicum neque cognatum, _I have here no one,
    neither friend nor relative_.

    non enim praetereundum est ne id quidem, _for not even that must be
    passed by._

  a. Haud in Cicero and Caesar occurs almost exclusively as a modifier of
  Adjectives and Adverbs, and in the phrase haud scio an. Later writers use
  it freely with verbs.

       *       *       *       *       *

CHAPTER VII.--_Word-order and Sentence-Structure._

A. WORD-ORDER.

348. In the normal arrangement of the Latin sentence the Subject stands at
the beginning of the sentence, the Predicate at the end; as,--

    Darius classem quingentarum navium comparavit, _Darius got ready a
    fleet of five hundred ships_.

349. But for the sake of emphasis the normal arrangement is often
abandoned, and the emphatic word is put at the beginning, less frequently
at the end of the sentence; as,--

    magnus in hoc bello Themistocles fuit, GREAT _was Themistocles in this
    war_;

    aliud iter habemus nullum, _other course we have_ NONE.

SPECIAL PRINCIPLES.

350. 1. Nouns. A Genitive or other oblique case regularly follows the word
upon which it depends. Thus:--

  a) Depending upon a Noun:--

    tribunus plebis, _tribune of the plebs_;

    filius regis, _son of the king_;

    vir magni animi, _a man of noble spirit_.

  Yet always senatus consultum, plebis scitum.

  b) Depending upon an Adjective:--

    ignarus rerum, _ignorant of affairs_;

    digni amicitia, _worthy of friendship_;

    plus aequo, _more than (what is) fair_.

2. Appositives. An Appositive regularly follows its Subject; as,--

    Philippus, rex Macedonum, _Philip, king of the Macedonians_;

    adsentatio, vitiorum adjutrix, _flattery, promoter of evils_.

Yet flumen Rhenus, _the River Rhine_; and always in good prose urbs Roma,
_the city Rome_.

3. The Vocative usually follows one or more words; as,--

    audi, Caesar, _hear, Caesar!_

4. Adjectives. No general law can be laid down for the position of
Adjectives. On the whole they precede the noun oftener than they follow it.

  a. Adjectives of _quantity_ (including _numerals_) regularly precede
  their noun; as,--

    omnes homines, _all men_;

    septingentae naves, _seven hundred vessels_.

  b. Note the force of position in the following:--

    media urbs, _the middle of the city_;

    urbs media, _the middle city_,

    extremum bellum, _the end of the war_;

     bellum extremum, _the last war_.

  c. Romanus and Latinus regularly follow; as,--

    senatus populusque Romanus, _the Roman Senate and People_;

    ludi Romani, _the Roman games_;

    feriae Latinae, _the Latin holidays_.

  d. When a Noun is modified both by an Adjective and by a Genitive, a
  favorite order is: Adjective, Genitive, Noun; as,--

    summa omnium rerum abundantia, _the greatest abundance of all things_.

5. Pronouns.

  a. The Demonstrative, Relative, and Interrogative Pronouns regularly
  precede the Noun; as,--

    hic homo, _this man_;

    ille homo, _that man_;

    erant duo itinera, quibus itineribus, etc., _there were two routes, by
    which_, etc.

    qui homo? _what sort of man_?

  b. But ille in the sense of '_that well known_,' '_that famous_,' usually
  stands after its Noun; as,--

    testula illa, _that well-known custom of ostracism_;

    Medea illa, _that famous Medea_.

  c. Possessive and Indefinite Pronouns usually follow their Noun; as,--

    pater meus, _my father_;

    homo quidam, _a certain man_;

    mulier aliqua, _some woman_.

  But for purposes of contrast the Possessive often precedes its Noun;
  as,--

    meus pater, MY _father_ (i.e. as opposed to _yours_, _his_, etc.).

  d. Where two or more Pronouns occur in the same sentence, the Latin is
  fond of putting them in close proximity; as,--

    nisi forte ego vobis cessare videor, _unless perchance I seem to you to
    be doing nothing_.

6. Adverbs and Adverbial phrases regularly precede the word they modify;
as,--

    valde diligens, _extremely diligent_;

    saepe dixi, _I have often said_;

    te jam diu hortamur, _we have long been urging you_;

    paulo post, _a little after_.

7. Prepositions regularly precede the words they govern.

  a. But limiting words often intervene between the Preposition and its
  case; as,--

    de communi hominum memoria, _concerning the common memory of men_;

    ad beate vivendum, _for living happily_.

  b. When a noun is modified by an Adjective, the Adjective is often placed
  before the preposition; as,--

    magno in dolore, _in great grief_;

    summa cum laude, _with the highest credit_;

    qua de causa, _for which cause_;

    hanc ob rem, _on account of this thing_.

  c. For Anastrophe, by which a Preposition is put after its case, see Sec.
  144, 3.

8. Conjunctions. Autem, enim, and igitur regularly stand in the second
place in the sentence, but when combined with est or sunt they often stand
third; as,--

    ita est enim, _for so it is_.

9. Words or Phrases referring to the preceding sentence or to some part of
it, regularly stand first; as,--

    id ut audivit, Corcyram demigravit, _when he heard that_ (referring to
    the contents of the preceding sentence), _he moved to Corcyra_;

    eo cum Caesar venisset, timentes confirmat, _when Caesar had come
    thither_ (i.e. to the place just mentioned), _he encouraged the timid_.

10. The Latin has a fondness for putting side by side words which are
etymologically related; as,--

    ut ad senem senex de senectute, sic hoc libro ad amicum amicissimus de
    amicitia scripsi, _as I, an old man, wrote to an old man, on old age,
    so in this book, as a fond friend, I have written to a friend,
    concerning friendship_.

11. Special rhetorical devices for indicating emphasis are the following:--

  a) Hyperbaton, which consists in the separation of words that regularly
  stand together; as,--

    septimus mihi Originum liber est in manibus, _the seventh book of my
    'Origines' is under way_;

    recepto Caesar Orico proficiscitur, _having recovered Oricus, Caesar
    set out_.

  b) Anaphora, which consists in the repetition of the same word or the
  same word-order in successive phrases; as,--

    sed pleni omnes sunt libri, plenae sapientium voces, plena exemplorum
    vetustas, _but all books are full of it, the voices of sages are full
    of it, antiquity is full of examples of it_.

  c) Chiasmus,[59] which consists in changing the relative order of words
  in two antithetical phrases; as,--

    multos defendi, laesi neminem, _many have I defended, I have injured no
    one_;

    horribilem illum diem aliis, nobis faustum, _that day dreadful to
    others, for us fortunate_.

  d) Synchysis, or the interlocked arrangement. This is mostly confined to
  poetry, yet occurs in rhetorical prose, especially that of the Imperial
  Period; as,--

    simulatam Pompejanarum gratiam partium, _pretended interest in the
    Pompeian party_.

12. Metrical Close. At the end of a sentence certain cadences were avoided;
others were much employed. Thus:--

  a) Cadences avoided.

    _ v v _ v or _ ; as, esse videtur (close of hexameter).

    _ v v v or _ ; as, esse potest (close of pentameter).

  b) Cadences frequently employed.

    _ v _ ; as, auxerant.

    _ v _ v ; as, comprobavit.

    _ v v v _ v ; as, esse videatur.

    v _ _ v _ ; as, rogatu tuo.

B. SENTENCE-STRUCTURE.

351. 1. Unity of Subject.--In complex sentences the Latin regularly holds
to unity of Subject in the different members; as,--

    Caesar primum suo, deinde omnium ex conspectu remotis equis, ut aequato
    periculo spem fugae tolleret, cohortatus suos proelium commisit,
    _Caesar having first removed his own horse from sight, then the horses
    of all, in order, by making the danger equal, to take away hope of
    flight, encouraged his men and joined battle_.

2. A word serving as the common Subject or Object of the main clause and a
subordinate one, stands before both; as,--

    Haedui cum se defendere non possent, legatos ad Caesarem mittunt,
    _since the Haedui could not defend themselves, they sent envoys to
    Caesar_;

    ille etsi flagrabat bellandi cupiditate, tamen paci serviendum putavit,
    _although he was burning with a desire to fight, yet he thought he
    ought to aim at peace_.

  a. The same is true also

    1) When the Subject of the main clause is Object (Direct or Indirect)
    of a subordinate clause; as,--

    Caesar, cum hoc ei nuntiatum esset, maturat ab urbe proficisci, _when
    this had been reported to Caesar he hastened to set out from the city_.

    2) When the Subject of a subordinate clause is at the same time the
    Object (Direct or Indirect) of the main clause; as,--

    L. Manlio, cum dictator fuisset, M. Pomponius tribunus plebis diem
    dixit, _M. Pomponius, tribune of the people, instituted proceedings
    against Lucius Manlius, though he had been dictator_.

3. Of subordinate clauses, temporal, conditional, and adversative clauses
more commonly precede the main clause; indirect questions and clauses of
purpose or result more commonly follow; as,--

    postquam haec dixit, profectus est, _after he said this, he set out_;

    si quis ita agat, imprudens sit, _if any one should act so, he would be
    devoid of foresight_;

    accidit ut una nocte omnes Hermae deicerentur, _it happened that in a
    single night all the Hermae were thrown down_.

4. Sometimes in Latin the main verb is placed within the subordinate
clause; as,--

    si quid est in me ingeni, quod sentio quam sit exiguum, _if there is
    any talent in me, and I know how little it is_.

5. The Latin Period. The term Period, when strictly used, designates a
compound sentence in which the subordinate clauses are inserted within the
main clause; as,--

    Caesar etsi intellegebat qua de causa ea dicerentur, tamen, ne aestatem
    in Treveris consumere cogeretur, Indutiomarum ad se venire jussit,
    _though Caesar perceived why this was said, yet, lest he should be
    forced to spend the summer among the Treveri, he ordered Indutiomarus
    to come to him_.

In the Periodic structure the thought is suspended until the end of the
sentence is reached. Many Roman writers were extremely fond of this
sentence-structure, and it was well adapted to the inflectional character
of their language; in English we generally avoid it.

6. When there are several subordinate clauses in one Period, the Latin so
arranges them as to avoid a succession of verbs. Thus:--

    At hostes cum misissent, qui, quae in castris gererentur, cognoscerent,
    ubi se deceptos intellexerunt, omnibus copiis subsecuti ad flumen
    contendunt, _but the enemy when they had sent men to learn what was
    going on in camp, after discovering that they had been outwitted,
    followed with all their forces and hurried to the river_.

       *       *       *       *       *

CHAPTER VIII.-_Hints on Latin Style._

352. In this chapter brief consideration is given to a few features of
Latin diction which belong rather to style than to formal grammar.

NOUNS.

353. 1. Where a distinct reference to several persons or things is
involved, the Latin is frequently _much more exact in the use of the
Plural_ than is the English; as,--

    domos eunt, _they go home (i.e. to their homes_);

    Germani corpora curant, _the Germans care for the body_;

    animos militum recreat, _he renews the courage of the soldiers_;

    dies noctesque timere, _to be in a state of fear day and night_.

2. In case of Neuter Pronouns and Adjectives used substantively, the Latin
often employs the Plural where the English uses the Singular; as,--

    omnia sunt perdita, _everything is lost_;

    quae cum ita sint, _since this is so_;

    haec omnibus pervulgata sunt, _this is very well known to all_.

3. The Latin is usually _more concrete_ than the English, and especially
_less bold in the personification_ of abstract qualities. Thus:--

    a puero, a pueris, _from boyhood_;

    Sulla dictatore, _in Sulla's dictatorship_;

    me duce, _under my leadership_;

    Romani cum Carthaginiensibus pacem fecerunt = _Rome made peace with
    Carthage_;

    liber doctrinae plenus = _a learned book_;

    prudentia Themistoclis Graecia servata est = _Themistocles's foresight
    saved Greece_.

4. The Nouns of Agency in -tor and -sor (see Sec. 147, 1) denote a _permanent_
or _characteristic activity_; as,--

    accusatores, _(professional) accusers_;

    oratores, _pleaders_;

    cantores, _singers_;

    Arminius, Germaniae liberator, _Arminius, liberator of Germany_.

  a. To denote single instances of an action, other expressions are
  commonly employed; as,--

    Numa, qui Romulo successit, _Numa, successor of Romulus_;

    qui mea legunt, _my readers_;

    qui me audiunt, _my auditors_.

5. The Latin avoids the use of prepositional phrases as modifiers of a
Noun. In English we say: '_The war against Carthage_'; '_a journey through
Gaul_'; '_cities on the sea_'; '_the book in my hands_'; '_the fight at
Salamis_'; etc. The Latin in such cases usually employs another mode of
expression. Thus:--

  a) A Genitive; as,--

    dolor injuriarum, _resentment at injuries_.

  b) An Adjective; as,--

    urbes maritimae, _cities on the sea_;

    pugna Salaminia, _the fight at Salamis_.

  c) A Participle; as,--

    pugna ad Cannas facta, _the battle at Cannae_.

  d) A Relative clause; as,--

    liber qui in meis manibus est, _the book in my hands_.

NOTE.--Yet within certain limits the Latin does employ Prepositional
phrases as Noun modifiers. This is particularly frequent when the governing
noun is derived from a verb. The following are typical examples:--

    transitus in Britanniam, _the passage to Britain_;

    excessus e vita, _departure from life_;

    odium erga Romanos, _hatred of the Romans_;

    liber de senectute, _the book on old age_;

    amor in patriam, _love for one's country_.

ADJECTIVES.

354. 1. Special Latin Equivalents for English Adjectives are--

  a) A Genitive; as,--

    virtutes animi = _moral virtues_;

    dolores corporis = _bodily ills_.

  b) An Abstract Noun; as,--

    novitas rei = _the strange circumstance_;

    asperitas viarum = _rough roads_.

  c) Hendiadys (see Sec. 374, 4); as,--

    ratio et ordo = _systematic order_;

    ardor et impetus = _eager onset_.

  d) Sometimes an Adverb; as,--

    omnes circa populi, _all the surrounding tribes_;

    suos semper hostes, _their perpetual foes_.

2. Often a Latin Noun is equivalent to an English Noun modified by an
Adjective; as,--

    doctrina, _theoretical knowledge_;

    prudentia, _practical knowledge_;

    oppidum, _walled town_;

    libellus, _little book_.

3. Adjectives are not used in immediate agreement with proper names; but an
Adjective may limit vir, homo, ille, or some other word used as an
Appositive of a proper name; as,--

    Socrates, homo sapiens = _the wise Socrates_;

    Scipio, vir fortissimus = _the doughty Scipio_;

    Syracusae, urbs praeclarissima = _famous Syracuse_.

4. An Adjective _may be_ equivalent to a Possessive or Subjective Genitive;
as,--

    pastor regius, _the shepherd of the king_;

    tumultus servilis, _the uprising of the slaves_.

PRONOUNS.

355. 1. In Compound Sentences the Relative Pronoun has a fondness for
connecting itself with the subordinate clause rather than the main one;
as,--

    a quo cum quaereretur, quid maxime expediret, respondit, _when it was
    asked of him what was best, he replied_. (Less commonly, qui, cum ab eo
    quaereretur, respondit.)

2. Uterque, ambo. Uterque means _each of two_; ambo means _both_; as,--

    uterque frater abiit, _each of the two brothers departed_ (i.e.
    separately);

    ambo fratres abierunt, i.e. the two brothers departed together.

  a. The Plural of uterque occurs--

    1) With Nouns used only in the Plural (see Sec. 56); as,--

    in utrisque castris, _in each camp_.

    2) Where there is a distinct reference to two groups of persons or
    things; as,--

    utrique duces clari fuerunt, _the generals on each side_ (several in
    number) _were famous_.

VERBS.

356. 1. In case of Defective and Deponent Verbs, a Passive is supplied:--

  a) By the corresponding verbal Nouns in combination with esse, etc.;
  as,--

    in odio sumus, _we are hated_;

    in invidia sum, _I am envied_;

    admirationi est, _he is admired_;

    oblivione obruitur, _he is forgotten_ (lit. _is overwhelmed by
    oblivion_);

    in usu esse, _to be used_.

  b) By the Passive of Verbs of related meaning. Thus:--

    agitari as Passive of persequi;

    temptari as Passive of adoriri.

2. The lack of the Perfect Active Participle in Latin is supplied--

  a) Sometimes by the Perfect Passive Participle of the Deponent; as,--

    adhortatus, _having exhorted_;

    veritus, _having feared_.

  b) By the Ablative Absolute; as,--

    hostium agris vastatis Caesar exercitum reduxit, _having ravaged the
    country of the enemy, Caesar led back his army_.

  c) By subordinate clauses; as,--

    eo cum advenisset, castra posuit, _having arrived there, he pitched a
    camp_;

    hostes qui in urbem irruperant, _the enemy having burst into the city_.

3. The Latin agrees with English in the stylistic employment of the Second
Person Singular in an indefinite sense (= '_one_'). _Cf._ the English '_You
can drive a horse to water, but you can't make him drink._' But in Latin
this use is mainly confined to certain varieties of the Subjunctive,
especially the Potential (Sec. 280), Jussive (Sec. 275), Deliberative (Sec. 277),
and the Subjunctive in conditional sentences of the sort included under Sec.
302, 2, and 303. Examples:--

    videres, _you could see_;

    utare viribus, _use your strength_,

    quid hoc homine facias, _what are you to do with this man_?

    mens quoque et animus, nisi tamquam lumini oleum instilles,
    exstinguuntur senectute, _the intellect and mind too are extinguished
    by old age, unless, so to speak, you keep pouring oil into the lamp_;

    tanto amore possessiones suas amplexi tenebant, ut ab eis membra
    divelli citius posse diceres, _they clung to their possessions with
    such an affectionate embrace, that you would have said their limbs
    could sooner be torn from their bodies_.

PECULIARITIES IN THE USE OF THE ACCUSATIVE.

357. 1. To denote '_so many years, etc., afterwards or before_' the Latin
employs not merely the Ablative of Degree of Difference with post and ante
(see Sec. 223), but has other forms of expression. Thus:--

    post quinque annos, _five years afterward_;

    paucos ante dies, _a few days before_;

    ante quadriennium, _four years before_;

    post diem quartum quam ab urbe discesseramus, _four days after we had
    left the city_;

    ante tertium annum quam decesserat, _three years before he had died_.

2. The Latin seldom combines both Subject and Object with the same
Infinitive; as,--

    Romanos Hannibalem vicisse constat.

Such a sentence would be ambiguous, and might mean either that the Romans
had conquered Hannibal, or that Hannibal had conquered the Romans.
Perspicuity was gained by the use of the Passive Infinitive; as,--

    Romanos ab Hannibale victos esse constat, _it is well established that
    the Romans were defeated by Hannibal_.

PECULIARITIES IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OF THE DATIVE.

358. 1. The English _for_ does not always correspond to a Dative notion in
Latin, but is often the equivalent of pro with the Ablative, viz. in the
senses--

  a) _In defense of_; as,--

    pro patria mori, _to die for one's country_.

  b) _Instead of_, _in behalf of_; as,--

    unus pro omnibus dixit, _one spoke for all_;

    haec pro lege dicta sunt, _these things were said for the law_.

  c) _In proportion to_; as,--

    pro multitudine hominum eorum fines erant angusti, _for the population,
    their territory was small_.

2. Similarly, English _to_ when it indicates motion is rendered in Latin by
ad.

    a. Note, however, that the Latin may say either scribere ad aliquem, or
    scribere alicui, according as the idea of motion is or is not
    predominant. So in several similar expressions.

3. In the poets, verbs of _mingling with_, _contending with_, _joining_,
_clinging to_, etc., sometimes take the Dative. This construction is a
Grecism. Thus:--

    se miscet viris, _he mingles with the men_;

    contendis Homero, _you contend with Homer_;

    dextrae dextram jungere, _to clasp hand with hand_.

PECULIARITIES IN THE USE OF THE GENITIVE.

359. 1. The Possessive Genitive gives emphasis to the _possessor_, the
Dative of Possessor emphasizes _the fact of possession_; as,--

    hortus patris est, _the garden is my father's_;

    mihi hortus est, _I possess a garden_.

2. The Latin can say either stulti or stultum est dicere, _it is foolish to
say_; but Adjectives of one ending permit only the Genitive; as,--

    sapientis est haec secum reputare, _it is the part of a wise man to
    consider this_.

       *       *       *       *       *

PART VI.

PROSODY.

360. Prosody treats of metres and versification.

361. Latin Verse. Latin Poetry was essentially different in character from
English. In our own language, poetry is based upon _accent_, and poetical
form consists essentially in a certain succession of _accented_ and
_unaccented_ syllables. Latin poetry, on the other hand, was based not upon
accent, but upon _quantity_, so that with the Romans poetical form
consisted in a certain succession of _long and short syllables_, i.e. of
long and short intervals of time.

This fundamental difference in the character of English and Latin poetry is
a natural result of the difference in character of the two languages.
English is a strongly accented language, in which quantity is relatively
subordinate. Latin, on the other hand, was a quantitative language, in
which accent was relatively subordinate.

QUANTITY OF VOWELS AND SYLLABLES

GENERAL PRINCIPLES.

362. The general principles for the quantity of vowels and syllables have
been given above in Sec. 5. The following peculiarities are to be noted
here:--

1. A vowel is usually short when followed by another vowel (Sec. 5, A, 2), but
the following exceptions occur:--

  a) In the Genitive termination -ius (except alterius); as, illius,
  totius. Yet the i may be short in poetry; as, illius, totius.

  b) In the Genitive and Dative Singular of the Fifth Declension; as, diei,
  aciei. But fidei, rei, spei (Sec. 52, 1).

  c) In fio, excepting fit and forms where i is followed by er. Thus:
  fiebam, fiat, fiunt; but fieri, fierem.

  d) In a few other words, especially words derived from the Greek; as,
  dius, Aeneas, Darius, heroes, etc.

2. A diphthong is usually long (Sec. 5, B, 2), but the preposition prae in
composition is often shortened before a vowel; as, praeacutus.

3. A syllable containing a short vowel followed by two consonants (Sec. 5, B,
2) is long, even when one of the consonants is in the following word; as,
terret populum. Occasionally the syllable is long when both consonants are
in the following word; as, pro segete spicas.

4. Compounds of jacio, though written inicit, adicit, etc., have the first
syllable long, as though written inj-, adj-.

5. Before j, a and e made a long syllable, e.g. in major, pejor, ejus,
ejusdem, Pompejus, rejecit, etc. These were pronounced, mai-jor, pei-jor,
ei-jus, Pompei-jus, rei-jecit, etc. So also sometimes before i, e.g.
Pompe-i, pronounced Pompei-i; re-icio, pronounced rei-icio.

Quantity of Final Syllables.

_A. Final Syllables ending in a Vowel._

363. 1. Final a is mostly short, but is long:--

  a) In the Ablative Singular of the First Declension; as, porta.

  b) In the Imperative; as, lauda.

  c) In indeclinable words (except ita, quia); as, triginta, contra,
  postea, interea, etc.

2. Final e is usually short, but is long:--

  a) In the Ablative Singular of the Fifth Declension; as, die, re; hence
  hodie, quare. Here belongs also fame (Sec. 59, 2, b).

  b) In the Imperative of the Second Conjugation; as, mone, habe, etc.; yet
  occasionally cave, vale.

  c) In Adverbs derived from Adjectives of the Second Declension, along
  with fere and ferme. Bene, male, temere, saepe have e.

  d) In e, de, me, te, se, ne (_not_, _lest_), ne (_verily_).

3. Final i is usually long, but is short in nisi and quasi. Mihi, tibi,
sibi, ibi, ubi, have regularly i, but sometimes i; yet always ibidem,
ibique, ubique.

4. Final o is regularly long, but is short:--

  a) In ego, duo, modo (_only_), cito.

  b) Rarely in the First Person Singular of the Verb, and in Nominatives of
  the Third Declension; as, amo, leo.

  c) In a few compounds beginning with the Preposition pro, especially
  before f; as profundere, proficisci, profugere.

5. Final u is always long.

_B. Final Syllables ending in a Consonant._

364. 1. Final syllables ending in any other consonant than s are short. The
following words, however, have a long vowel: sal, sol, Lar, par, ver, fur,
dic, duc, en, non, quin, sin, sic, cur. Also the adverbs hic, illic,
istic.[60]

2. Final syllables in -as are long; as, terras, amas.

3. Final syllables in -es are regularly long, but are short:--

  a) In the Nominative and Vocative Singular of dental stems (Sec. 33) of the
  Third Declension which have a short penult in the Genitive; as, seges
  (segetis), obses (obsidis), miles, dives. But a few have -es; viz. pes,
  aries, abies, paries.

  b) In es (_thou art_), penes.

4. Final -os is usually long, but short in os (ossis), compos, impos.

5. Final -is is usually short, but is long:--

  a) In Plurals; as, portis, hortis, nobis, vobis, nubis (Acc.).

  b) In the Second Person Singular Perfect Subjunctive Active; as,
  amaveris, monueris, audiveris, etc. Yet occasional exceptions occur.

  c) In the Second Person Singular Present Indicative Active of the Fourth
  Conjugation; as, audis.

  d) In vis, _force_; is, _thou goest_; fis; sis; velis; nolis; vis, _thou
  wilt_ (mavis, quamvis, quivis, etc.).

6. Final -us is usually short, but is long:--

  a) In the Genitive Singular and in the Nominative, Accusative, and
  Vocative Plural of the Fourth Declension; as, fructus.

  _b_) In the Nominative and Vocative Singular of those nouns of the Third
  Declension in which the u belongs to the stem; as, palus (-udis),
  servitus (-utis), tellus (-uris).

365. Greek Nouns retain in Latin their original quantity; as, Aenea,
epitome, Delos, Pallas, Simois, Salamis, Didus, Paridi, aer, aether,
crater, heroas. Yet Greek nouns in -_omega-rho_ (-or) regularly shorten
the vowel of the final syllable; as, rhetor, Hector.

VERSE-STRUCTURE.

GENERAL PRINCIPLES.

366. 1. The metrical unit in versification is a short syllable, technically
called a mora ( v ). A long syllable ( _ ) is regarded as equivalent to two
morae.

2. A Foot is a group of syllables. The following are the most important
kinds of fundamental feet:--

  FEET OF THREE MORAE.    FEET OF FOUR MORAE.
  _ v Trochee.            _ v v Dactyl.
  v _ Iambus.             v v _ Anapaest.

3. A Verse is a succession of feet.

4. The different kinds of verses are named Trochaic, Iambic, Dactylic,
Anapaestic, according to the foot which forms the basis of their structure.

5. Ictus. In every fundamental foot the long syllable naturally receives
the greater prominence. This prominence is called ictus.[61] It is denoted
thus: _/ v v ; _/ v .

6. Thesis and Arsis. The syllable which receives the ictus is called the
thesis; the rest of the foot is called the arsis.

7. Elision. Final syllables ending in a vowel, a diphthong, or -m are
regularly elided before a word beginning with a vowel or h. In reading, we
omit the elided syllable entirely. This may be indicated as follows:
corpor^e in uno; mult^um ill^e et; monstr^um horrendum; caus^ae irarum.

  a. Omission of elision is called Hiatus. It occurs especially before and
  after monosyllabic interjections; as, O et praesidium.

8. The ending of a word within a foot is called a Caesura (_cutting_) Every
verse usually has one prominent caesura. The ending of a word and foot
together within the verse is called a diaeresis.

9. Verses are distinguished as Catalectic or Acatalectic. A Catalectic
verse is one in which the last foot is not complete, but lacks one or more
syllables; an Acatalectic verse has its last foot complete.

10. At the end of a verse a slight pause occurred. Hence the final syllable
may be either long or short (syllaba anceps), and may terminate in a vowel
or m, even though the next verse begins with a vowel.

11. Iambic, Trochaic, and Anapaestic verses are further designated as
dimeter, trimeter, tetrameter, according to _the number of dipodies_ (pairs
of feet) which they contain. Dactylic verses are measured _by single feet_,
and are designated as tetrameter, pentameter, hexameter, accordingly.

SPECIAL PECULIARITIES.

367. 1. Synizesis (synaeresis). Two successive vowels in the interior of a
word are often united into a long syllable; as,--

    aur{ei}s, d{ei}nde, ant{ei}re, d{ee}sse.

2. Diastole. A syllable usually short is sometimes long; as,--

    videt, audit.

3. Systole. A syllable usually long is sometimes short; as,--

    steterunt.

  a. Diastole and Systole are not mere arbitrary processes. They usually
  represent an earlier pronunciation which had passed out of vogue in the
  ordinary speech.

4. After a consonant, i and u sometimes become j and v. The preceding
syllable then becomes long; as,--

    abjete for abiete; genva for genua.

5. Sometimes v becomes u; as,--

    silua for silva; dissoluo for dissolvo.

6. Sometimes a verse has an extra syllable. Such a verse is called an
Hypermeter. The extra syllable ends in a vowel or -m, and is united with
the initial vowel or h of the next verse by Synapheia. Thus:--

  ... ignar^i hominumque locorum^que
  erramus.

7. Tmesis (cutting). Compound words are occasionally separated into their
elements; as,--

    quo me cumque rapit tempestas, for quocumque, etc.

8. Syncope. A short vowel is sometimes dropped between two consonants;
as,--

    repostus for repositus

THE DACTYLIC HEXAMETER.

368. 1. The Dactylic Hexameter, or Heroic Verse, consists theoretically of
six dactyls. But in all the feet except the fifth, a spondee ( _ _ ) may
take the place of the dactyl. The sixth foot may be either a spondee or a
trochee, since the final syllable of a verse may be either long or short
(syllaba anceps). The following represents the scheme of the verse:--

_/ vv (or _) ; _/ vv (or _) ; _/ vv (or _) ; _/ vv (or _) ; _/ vv ; _/ v
(or _).

2. Sometimes we find a spondee in the fifth foot. Such verses are called
Spondaic. A dactyl usually stands in the fourth place, and the fifth and
sixth feet are generally made up of a quadrisyllable; as,--

    armatum^que auro circumspicit Oriona.

    cara deum suboles, magnum Jovis incrementum.

3. Caesura.

  a) The favorite position of the caesura in the Dactylic Hexameter is
  after the thesis of the third foot; as,--

    arma virumque cano || Trojae qui primus ab oris.

  b) Less frequently the caesura occurs after the thesis of the fourth
  foot, usually accompanied by another in the second foot; as,--

    inde toro || pater Aeneas || sic orsus ab alt^o est.

  c) Sometimes the caesura occurs between the two short syllables of the
  third foot; as,--

    O passi graviora || dabit deus his quoque finem.

  This caesura is called Feminine, as opposed to the caesura after a long
  syllable, which is called Masculine (as under a and b)

  d) A pause sometimes occurs at the end of the fourth foot. This is called
  the Bucolic Diaeresis, as it was borrowed by the Romans from the Bucolic
  poetry of the Greeks. Thus:--

    solstitium pecori defendite; || jam venit aestas.

DACTYLIC PENTAMETER.

369. 1. The Dactylic Pentameter consists of two parts, each of which
contains two dactyls, followed by a long syllable. Spondees may take the
place of the dactyls in the first part, but not in the second. The long
syllable at the close of the first half of the verse always ends a word.
The scheme is the following:--

_/ vv (or _) _/ vv (or _) _/ || _/ vv _/ vv v (or _).

2. The Pentameter is never used alone, but only in connection with the
Hexameter. The two arranged alternately form the so-called Elegiac Distich.
Thus:--

  Vergilium vidi tantum, neo amara Tibullo
    Tempus amicitiae fata dedere meae.

IAMBIC MEASURES.

370. 1. The most important Iambic verse is the Iambic Trimeter (Sec. 366, 11),
called also Senarius. This is an acatalectic verse. It consists of six
Iambi. Its pure form is:--

v _ v _ v _ v _ v _ v _
Beatus ille qui procul negotiis.

The Caesura usually occurs in the third foot; less frequently in the
fourth.

2. In place of the Iambus, a Tribrach ( v v v ) may stand in any foot but
the last. In the odd feet (first, third, and fifth) may stand a Spondee,
Dactyl, or Anapaest, though the last two are less frequent. Sometimes a
Proceleusmatic ( v v v v ) occurs.

3. In the Latin comic writers, Plautus and Terence, great freedom is
permitted, and the various equivalents of the Iambus, viz. the Dactyl,
Anapaest, Spondee, Tribrach, Proceleusmatic, are freely admitted in any
foot except the last.

       *       *       *       *       *

SUPPLEMENTS TO THE GRAMMAR.

I. JULIAN CALENDAR.

371. 1. The names of the Roman months are: Januarius, Februarius, Martius,
Aprilis, Majus, Junius, Julius (Quintilis[62] prior to 46 B.C.), Augustus
(Sextilis[62] before the Empire), September, October, November, December.
These words are properly Adjectives in agreement with mensis understood.

2. Dates were reckoned from three points in the month:--

  a) The Calends, the first of the month.

  b) The Nones, usually the fifth of the month, but the seventh in March,
  May, July, and October.

  c) The Ides, usually the thirteenth of the month, but the fifteenth in
  March, May, July, and October.

3. From these points dates were reckoned backward; consequently all days
after the Ides of any month were reckoned as so many days before the
Calends of the month next following.

4. The day before the Calends, Nones, or Ides of any month is designated as
pridie Kalendas, Nonas, Idus. The second day before was designated as die
tertio ante Kalendas, Nonas, etc. Similarly the third day before was
designated as die quarto, and so on. These designations are arithmetically
inaccurate, but the Romans reckoned both ends of the series. The Roman
numeral indicating the date is therefore always larger by one than the
actual number of days before Nones, Ides, or Calends.

5. In indicating dates, the name of the month is added in the form of an
Adjective agreeing with Kalendas, Nonas, Idus. Various forms of expression
occur, of which that given under d) is most common:--

=====================================================================
Days  |March,May,July|January, August|   April,June, |
of the|   October.   |   December    |   September,  |  February
month.|              |               |    November   |
------+--------------+---------------+---------------+---------------
   1  |KALENDIS      |KALENDIS       |KALENDIS       |KALENDIS
   2  |VI Nonas      |IV  Nonas      |IV Nonas       |IV Nonas
   3  |V    "        |III   "        |III  "         |III  "
   4  |IV   "        |Pridie Nonas   |Pridie Nonas   |Pridie Nonas
   5  |III  "        |NONIS          |NONIS          |NONIS
   6  |Pridie Nonas  |VIII Idus      |VIII Idus      |VIII Idus
   7  |NONIS         |VII   "        |VII   "        |VII   "
   8  |VIII Idus     |VI    "        |VI    "        |VI    "
   9  |VII   "       |V     "        |V     "        |V     "
  10  |VI    "       |IV    "        |IV    "        |IV    "
  11  |V     "       |III   "        |III   "        |III   "
  12  |IV    "       |Pr. Idus       |Pr. Idus       |Pr. Idus
  13  |III   "       |IDIBUS         |IDIBUS         |IDIBUS
  14  |Pr. Idus      |XIX    Kalend. |XVIII   Kalend.|XVI    Kalend.
  15  |IDIBUS        |XVIII    "     |XVII      "    |XV        "
  16  |XVII  Kalend. |XVII     "     |XVI       "    |XIV       "
  17  |XVI     "     |XVI      "     |XV        "    |XIII      "
  18  |XV      "     |XV       "     |XIV       "    |XII       "
  19  |XIV     "     |XIV      "     |XIII      "    |XI        "
  20  |XIII    "     |XIII     "     |XII       "    |X         "
  21  |XII     "     |XII      "     |XI        "    |IX        "
  22  |XI      "     |XI       "     |X         "    |VIII      "
  23  |X       "     |X        "     |IX        "    |VII       "
  24  |IX      "     |IX       "     |VIII      "    |VI        "
  25  |VIII    "     |VIII     "     |VII       "    |V (bis VI)"
  26  |VII     "     |VII      "     |VI        "    |IV (V)    "
  27  |VI      "     |VI       "     |V         "    |III (IV)  "
  28  |V       "     |V        "     |IV        "    |Pr.Kal.(III K.)
  29  |IV      "     |IV       "     |III       "    |(Prid. Kal.)
  30  |III     "     |III      "     |Pr. Kalend.    |(Enclosed forms are
  31  |Pr. Kalend.   |Pr. Kalend.    |               |for leap-year.)
=====================================================================
       *       *       *       *       *

II. PROPER NAMES.

373. 1. The name of a Roman citizen regularly consisted of three parts: the
praenomen (or given name), the nomen (name of the _gens_ or clan), and the
cognomen (family name). Such a typical name is exemplied by Marcus Tullius
Cicero, in which Marcus is the praenomen, Tullius the nomen, and Cicero the
cognomen. Sometimes a second cognomen (in later Latin called an agnomen) is
added--expecially in honor of military achievements; as,--

    Gaius Cornelius Scipio Africanus.

2. ABBREVIATIONS OF PROPER NAMES.

    A.  = Aulus.              Mam.  = Mamercus.
  App.  = Appius.               N.  = Numerius.
    C.  = Gaius.                P.  = Publius.
   Cn.  = Gnaeus.               Q.  = Quintus.
    D.  = Decimus.            Sex.  = Sextus.
    K.  = Kaeso.              Ser.  = Servius.
    L.  = Lucius.              Sp.  = Spurius.
    M.  = Marcus.               T.  = Titus.
   M'.  = Manius.              Ti.  = Tiberius.

       *       *       *       *       *

III. FIGURES OF SYNTAX AND RHETORIC.

_A._ Figures of Syntax.

374. 1. Ellipsis is the omission of one or more words; as,--

    quid multa, _why (should I say) much?_

2. Brachylogy is a brief or condensed form of expression; as,--

    ut ager sine cultura fructuosus esse non potest, sic sine doctrina
    animus, _as a field cannot be productive without cultivation, so the
    mind (cannot be productive) without learning._

Special varieties of Brachylogy are--

  a) Zeugma, in which one verb is made to stand for two; as,--

    minis aut blandimentis corrupta = _(terrifed) by threats or corrupted
    by flattery._

  b) Compendiary Comparison, by which a modifier of an object is mentioned
  instead of the object itself; as,--

    dissimilis erat Chares eorum et factis et moribus, lit. _Chares was
    different from their conduct and character_ i.e. Chares's conduct and
    character were different, etc.

3. Pleonasm is an unnecessary fullness of expression; as,--

    prius praedicam, lit. _I will first say in advance_.

4. Hendiadys , (_one through two_) is the use of two nouns joined by
a conjunction, in the sense of a noun modified by a Genitive or
an Adjective; as,--

    febris et aestus, _the heat of fever_;

    celeritate cursuque, _by swift running_.

5. Prolepsis, or Anticipation, is the introduction of an epithet in advance
of the action which makes it appropriate; as,--

    submersas obrue puppes, lit. _overwhelm their submerged ships_, i.e.
    overwhelm and sink their ships.

  a. The name Prolepsis is also applied to the introduction of a noun or
  pronoun as object of the main clause where we should expect it to stand
  as subject of a subordinate clause. Thus:--

    nosti Marcellum quam tardus sit, _you know how slow Marcellus is_ (lit.
    _you know Marcellus, how slow he is_).

  Both varieties of Prolepsis are chiefly confined to poetry.

6. Anacoluthon is a lack of grammatical consistency in the construction of
the sentence; as,--

    tum Anci filii ... impensius eis indignitas crescere, _then the sons of
    Ancus ... their indignation increased all the more_.

7. Hysteron Proteron consists in the inversion of the natural order of two
words or phrases; as,--

    moriamur et in media arma ruamus = _let us rush into the midst of arms
    and die_.

B. Figures of Rhetoric.

375. 1. Litotes (literally _softening_) is the expression of an idea by the
denial of its opposite; as,--

    haud parum laboris, _no little toil_ (i.e. much toil);

    non ignoro, _I am not ignorant_ (_i.e._ I am well aware).

2. Oxymoron is the combination of contradictory conceptions; as,--

    sapiens insania, _wise folly_.

3. Alliteration is the employment of a succession of words presenting
frequent repetition of the same letter (mostly initial); as,--

    sensim sine sensu aetas senescit.

4. Onomatopoeia is the suiting of sound to sense; as,--

    quadrupedante putrem sonitu quatit ungula campum, '_And shake with
    horny hoofs the solid ground_.'

       *       *       *       *       *

INDEX OF THE SOURCES OF THE ILLUSTRATIVE EXAMPLES CITED IN THE SYNTAX.[63]

Sec. 162. nonne videtis, _Sest._ 47. num exspectas, _Phil._ ii, 86. videsne,
_Vatin._ 30. sensistine, _Cat._ 1, 8. a rebus, _de Sen._ 15. visne locum,
_Leg._ ii, 1. estisne, _Liv._ i, 38, 2. jam ea, _Ter. Phor._ 525. estne
frater, _Ter. Ad._ 569.

Sec. 166. decorum est, _Hor. Od._ iii, 2, 13. opportune accidit _Att._ i, 17,
2.

Sec. 168. Numa, _Eut._ i, 3. philosophia, _Tusc. Disp._ ii, 16.

Sec. 169. assentatio, _Lael._ 89. Corinthi, _Tac. H._ ii, 1.

Sec. 171. audi tu, _Livy_, i, 24. nate, mea, _Aen._ i, 664.

Sec. 174. rumor est, _Ter. And._ 185.

Sec. 175. galeam, _Aen._ ii, 392. cinctus, _Ov. Am._ iii, 9, 61 nodo sinus,
_Aen._ i, 320.

Sec. 176. idem gloriari, _de Sen._ 32. eadem peccat, _N.D._ i, 31. multa egeo,
_Gell._ xiii, 24. multum valet, _Hor. Epp._ i, 6, 52. nihil peccat, _Stat._
161. minitantem vana, _Sil._ i, 306 acerba tuens, _Lucr._ v, 33. dulce
loquentem, _Hor. Od._ i, 22, 24. multum sunt, _B.G._ iv, 1, 8. servitutem,
_Pl. Pers._ 34 a. vitam, _Ter. Ad._ 859. stadium _Off._ iii, 10, 42.
Olympia, _de Sen._ 14. piscis, _Sen. N.Q._ iii, 18, 2. orationes, _Brut._
82.

Sec. 177. homines, _Rosc. Am._ 101.

Sec. 178. otium, _Hor. Od._ ii, 16, 1. me duas, _Att._ ii, 7, 1. te litteras,
_Pis._ 73. hoc te, _Ter. Hec._ 766. me id, _Pl. Tr._ 96. non te, _Fam._ ii,
16, 3. omnes artes, _Liv._ 25, 37. rogatus, _de Dom._ 16. multa, _N.D._ ii,
166.

Sec. 179. milites, _B.C._ i, 54.

Sec. 180. tremit, _Lucr._ iii, 489. nuda, _Aen._ i, 320. manus, _Aen._ ii, 57.

Sec. 181. hic locus, _B.G._ i, 49.

Sec. 182. Thalam, _Sall. Jug._ 75, 1. Thurios in, _Nep. Alc._ 4. cum Acen,
_Nep. Dat._ 5. Italiam venit, _Aen._ i, 2.

Sec. 187. amicis, _Sall. C._ 16, 4. Orgetorix, _B.G._ i, 2. munitioni, _B.G._
i, 10.

Sec. 188. mihi ante, _Verr._ v, 123. illi, _Tac. Ag._ 9. intercludere, _Pl.
M.G._ 223. oppidum, _B.C._ iii, 80 tu mihi, _Verr._ 3, 213. quid mihi,
_Hor. Epp._ i, 3, 15. erit ille, _Ecl._ i, 7. quae ista, _Par._ 41.
honorem, _Verr._ iv, 25. Caesar, _Div._ ii, 79. scintillam, _Aen._ i, 174.

Sec. 189. disputatio, _Tusc. Disp._ ii, 2. honesta, _Off._ iii, 38.

Sec. 191. castris, _B.G._ vii, 16. legiones, _B.C._ ii, 22. receptui, _B.G._
vii, 47. fortunae, _Fam._ vi, 5, 1. quibus, _Flac._ 19. hos tibi, _Nep.
Paus._ 2. me gerendo, _Liv._ i, 23. noxiae, _Leg._ iii, 11.

Sec. 192. it clamor, _Aen._ v, 451.

Sec. 193. dum Latio, _Aen._ i, 6.

Sec. 203. magni, _Nep. Cat._ 1, 2. tantae molis, _Aen._ i, 33.

Sec. 204. viri, _Tusc. Disp._ ii, 43. memoria, _Or._ 54.

Sec. 206. Epicuri, F. v, 3. praeteritorum, _Div._ i, 63. nomina, _Pl. Poen._
1062. reminiscere, _B.G._ i, 13. reminiscens, _Nep. Alc._ 6. mihi patriae,
_Sull._ 19.

Sec. 207. te veteris, _ad Her._ iv, 24, 33. me admones, _ad Att._ v, 1, 3.

Sec. 208. pecuniae, _Flacc._ 43.

Sec. 209. miseremini, _Verr._ 1, 72.

Sec. 212. desine, _Hor. Od._ ii, 9, 17. operum, _Hor. Od._ iii, 17, 16.

Sec. 214. p. 142, curis, _Marc._ 34. Caesar, _B.G._ 5, 51. caret, _Hor. Sat._
i, 3, 66. urbem, _Nep. Thras._ 1. abstinere, _Plin. Epp._ i, 12, 9. hostes,
_B.G._ i, 1, 4. praedones, _Verr._ iv, 144. dissentio, _Planc._ 9.
secernantur, _Cat._ i, 32.

Sec. 215. ab Ulixe, _Liv._ i, 49, 9.

Sec. 216. a fortuna, _B.G._ v, 34, 2. a multitudine, _B.G._ iii, 2, 1.

Sec. 217. melle dulcior, _de Sen._ 31. patria, _Cat._ i, 27. amplius, _B.G._
vii, 15, 1. opinione, _B.G._ ii, 3, 1.

Sec. 218. munere, _Aen._ vi, 885. carne, _Sall. Jug._ 89. castris, _B.G._ ii,
26, 4. opus est properato, _Mil._ 49. nititur, _Aen._ vi, 760 nervis,
_N.D._ ii, 59 mortali, _Lucr._ v, 65. quid hoc, _Sest._ 29. quid mea,
_Fam._ xiv, 4, 3. fossas, _B.G._ iii, 18. vinum, _Juv._ vii, 121.
militibus, _B.G._ i, 8, 1.

Sec. 219. victoria, _B.G._ i, 14, 4. natura loci, _B.G._ iii, 9, 3.

Sec. 221. nulla est, _Brut._ 164. exstinguitur, _Tac. A._ ii, 72. longo,
_Aen._ v, 320.

Sec. 222A. cum febri, _de. Or._ iii, 6. improbitas, _de Or._ ii, 237. aer
calore, _N.D._ ii, 27. assuetus, _de Or._ iii, 58.

Sec. 224. puella, _Pl. Merc._ 13. vir singulari, _Pl. Vid._ 41. sunt specie,
_B.G._ vi, 28, 1. scopulis, _Aen._ i, 166.

Sec. 226. Helvetii, _B.G._ i, 2, 2. me dignor, _Aen._ i, 335.

Sec. 227. Cn. Pompeio, _B.G._ iv, 1. omnes virtutes, _Fin._ ii, 117. perditis,
_Fam._ vi, 1, 4. nullo adversante, _Tac. A._ i, 2. passis palmis, _B.C._
iii, 98. audito eum, _Liv._ xxviii, 7.

Sec. 228. stant litore, _Aen._ vi, 901.

Sec. 229. a Gergovia, _B.G._ vii, 59, 1.

Sec. 231. stella, _N.D._ ii, 52. biennio, _Tac. Agr._ 14.

Sec. 234. prima et, _Tac. A._ i, 37. omnium rerum, _Fam._ vi, 21, 1.

Sec. 235. eadem alacritas, _B.G._ iv, 24, 4. res operae, _B.G._ v, 11, 5.
stultitia, F. iii, 39. domus, uxor, _Ter. And._ 891. pars, _Sall. Jug._ 14,
15.

Sec. 240. senectus, _de Sen._ 55. exercitus, _Livy_, xxxix, 1.

Sec. 242. virtus, _Lael._ 100.

Sec. 244. me oravit, _Phil._ ii, 45. me oraverunt, _Div. Caec._ 2. suum
genium, _Tac. Dial._ 9. Hannibalem, _Sest._ 142. suus quemque, _Rosc. Am._
67.

Sec. 245. Belgae, _B.G._ ii, 1, 1. Galli, _B.G._ vi, 8, 1.

Sec. 246. Themistocles, _Nep. Them._ 9. illud intellego, _Sall. Jug._ 85, 5.
hic est, _Pl. Tr._ 697.

Sec. 247. Maximum, _de Sen._ 10. non is sum, _B.G._ v, 30, 2. non
suspicabatur, _Verr._ i, 36. vincula, _Cat._ iv, 7.

Sec. 248. quod idem, _Ac._ ii, 52. bonus vir, _Lael._ 65.

Sec. 249. ipso terrore, _B.G._ iv, 33, 1. valvae se, _Div._ i, 74. Persae,
_Nep. Alc._ 5. ea molestissime, _Q. Fr._ i, 1, 2.

Sec. 250. carcer quae, _Verr._ v, 143. Belgae, _B.G._ ii, 1, 1. nostra qui,
_Cat._ i, 7. servili, _B.G._ i, 40. erant, _B.G._ i, 6. quam quisque,
_Tusc. Disp._ i, 41. non longe, _B.G._ i, 10, 1. Themistocles, _Nep. Them._
4. 3. numquam digne, _de Sen._ 2.

Sec. 252. cognatio, _Arch._ 2. mors est, _Tusc. Disp._ i, 27. justitia, F. i,
50. si quisquam, _Lael._ 9. potestne, _Tusc. Disp._ iv, 54. si ullo, _Att._
xii, 23, 1. taetrior, _Verr._ iv, 123. quod cuique, _Off._ i, 21. quinto
quoque, _Verr._ ii, 139. nemo Romanus, _Liv._ viii, 30, 3.

Sec. 253. alter exercitum, _Planc._ 86. alteri se, _B.G._ i, 26, 1.
causidicus, _de Or._ i, 202.

Sec. 254. Tarquinii, _Liv._ i, 34, 7. non omnis, _Div._ ii, 90. Corioli,
_Liv._ ii, 33, 8. duo milia, _Curt._ iii, 2, 5.

Sec. 255. temeritas, F. iii, 72. si tu, _Fam._ xiv, 5, 1.

Sec. 256. velatus, _Ov. Met._ v, 110. tunica, _Aen._ viii, 457.

Sec. 259. virtus, _Lael._ 100. dum vitant, _Hor. Sat._ i, 2, 24. Caesar,
_B.G._ vii, 90, 2. jam pridem, _Att._ ii, 5, 1.

Sec. 260. Duilium, _de Sen._ 44. hostes, _B.G._ v. 9, 6. domicilium, _Arch._
7.

Sec. 262. Regulus, _Off._ iii, 100.

Sec. 263. Caesar, _B.G._ iv, 17, 1.

Sec. 265. nihil habebam, _Att._ ix, 10, 1.

Sec. 268. videor, _N.D._ ii, 72. Gallos, _B.G._ vii, 4, 4. honestum, F. ii,
49. si solos, _Tusc. Disp._ i, 9. rex tantum, _Nep. Con._ 4. Verres, _Verr.
Act. Pr._ 12. ardebat, _Brut._ 302.

Sec. 269. Caesar, _B.G._ iii, 24, 1.

Sec. 270. hoc jam, _Cat._ i, 5. dico me, _Sull._ 27.

Sec. 275. quare, _Cat._ 1, 32. isto bono, _de Sen._ 33.

Sec. 276. ne repugnetis, _Cluent._ 6 tu vero, _Tusc. Disp._ i, 112. impii ne,
_Leg._ ii, 41. cave ignoscas, _Lig._ 14.

Sec. 277. quid faciam, _Pl. Curc._ 589. ego redeam, _Ter. Eun._ 49. huic
cedamus! _Phil._ xiii, 16. quid facerem, _Ter. Eun._ 831. hunc ego, _Arch._
18.

Sec. 278. ne sint, _de Sen._ 34. fuerit, _Verr._ i, 37.

Sec. 279. di istaec, _Ter. H.T._ 1038. falsus utinam, _Liv._ xxi, 10, 10.

Sec. 280. dicat aliquis, _Ter. And._ 640. fortunam, _Pub. Syr._ 193. velim
mihi, _Fam._ xiii, 75, 1. nolim putes, _Fam._ ix, 15, 4. dies deficat,
_N.D._ iii, 81.

Sec. 281. egredere, _Cat._ i, 20. rem vobis, _Verr._ iv, 1. si bene, _de Sen._
3. consules, _Leg._ iii, 8. hominem, _Twelve Tables._ amicitia, _Liv._ 38,
38, 1. quin equos, _Liv._ i, 57, 7.

Sec. 282. adjuta, _Ter. Eun._ 150. portas, _B.G._ ii, 33 haec, _And._ 472. ut
ne, _Off._ i, 103. ut non, _Cat._ i, 23. ut earum, _B.G._ iv, 17, 10.
Helvetii, _B.G._ i, 7, 3. haec habui, _de Sen._ 85. non habebant, _B.G._
iv, 38, 2. idoneus, _Verr._ iii, 41. dignus, _Leg._ iii, 5.

Sec. 283. multa, _Tusc. Disp._ i, 80. sunt qui, _Inv._ ii, 144. nemo, _Fam._
i, 4, 2. sapientia, _Fin._ i, 43. quae, _Lael._ 23. non is sum, _B.G._ v,
30, 2. non longius, _B.G._ ii, 21, 3. o fortunate, _Arch._ 24. ut qui,
_Phil._ xi, 30. egomet, _de Or._ i, 82. nemo est, _Verr._ iv, 115. nemo
fuit, _B.C._ iii, 53, 3. quem audierim, _Nep. Ar._ 1, 2.

Sec. 284. quis tam, _Tusc. Disp._ iii, 71. Siciliam, _Verr. Act. Pr._ 12.
mons, _B.G._ i, 6, 1. non is, _Cat._ i, 22. nemo est, _de Sen._ 24.
habetis, _Cat._ iv, 24. nihil, _Ter. H.T._ 675. nemo est, _B.G._ vi, 39, 3.

Sec. 286. Themistocles, _Nep. Them._ 8, 3. neque, _de Sen._ 84. quoniam, _Nep.
Milt._ 7, 5. noctu, _Tusc. Disp._ iv, 44. Bellovaci, _B.G._ vii, 75. id
feci, _Caec._ 101. Crasso, _Fam._ xiii, 16, 3. hoc ita, _Leg._ iii, 31.
Haeduos, _B.G._ i, 16, 6. id omitto, _Sall. Jug._ 110, 7.

Sec. 287. Epaminondas, _Nep. Ep._ 9, 4. id ut, _Nep. Them._ 8, 3. Caesar,
_B.G._ iii, 9, 2. ubi de, _B.G._ i, 7, 3. ut quisque, _Verr._ v, 143.
hostes, _B.G._ iv, 26, 2. id ubi, _Liv._ i, 32, 13. postquam occupatae,
_Liv._ xxiv, 35, 4. postquam Romam, _Sall. Jug._ 28, 2. postquam structi,
_Liv._ i, 23, 6. posteaquam, _Leg._ ii, 64.

Sec. 288. an tum, _Pis._ 26. credo tum, _Verr._ iv, 46. eo tempore, _Lig._ 20.
illo die, _Mil._ 38. Lysander, _Div._ i, 96. Pythagoras, _N.D._ iii, 88.
jam Galli, _B.G._ vii, 26, 3. Treveri, _B.G._ vi, 7, 1. cum ad, _Verr._ v,
27. cum equitatus, _B.G._ v, 19, 2. saepe cum, _Nep. Cim._ 4, 2. cum
procucurrissent, _B.C._ ii, 41, 6.

Sec. 289. tum tua, _Hor. Epp._ i, 18, 84. cum videbis, _Pl. Bacch._ 145.
stabilitas, _Lael._ 82.

Sec. 290. cum tacent, _Cat._ i, 21. cum te, _Att._ xiv, 17 A, 4.

Sec. 291. prius, _Pl. Merc._ 456. nihil contra, _Flacc._ 51. non prius, _Sall.
C._ 51.

Sec. 291. priusquam, _Liv._ i, 24, 3. tempestas, _Sen. Ep._ 103, 2. priusquam
telum, _B.C._ ii, 34, 6. animum, _Pl. Amph._ 240. sol antequam, _Phil._
xiv, 27.

Sec. 293. Alexander, _Quint. Curt._ iv, 6, 17. dum haec, _B.G._ iii, 17, 1.
dum anima, _Att._ ix, 10, 3. Lacedaemoniorum, _Tusc. Disp._ i, 101. Cato,
_Nep. Cat._ 2, 4. donec, _Liv._ xxiii, 31, 9. ferrum, _Nep. Ep._ 9, 3.
trepidationis, _Liv._ xxi, 28, 11. exspectavit, _B.G._ iv, 23, 4. dum
litterae, _Fam._ xi, 23, 2.

Sec. 295. postulo, _Ter. And._ 550. orat, _Ter. Ad._ 882. milites, _B.G._ ii,
21, 2. Helvetiis, _B.G._ i, 2, 1. huic, _Rosc. Am._ 54. consuli, _Liv._
xxxv, 20, 4. ne lustrum, _Liv._ xxiv, 43, 4. prohibuit, _Liv._ xxv, 35, 6.
nec quin, _Liv._ xxvi, 40, 4. constitueram, _Att._ xvi, 10, 1. decrevit,
_Cat._ i, 4. convenit, _Liv._ x, 27, 2. fac ut, _Pl. Rud._ 1218. cura ut,
_Cat._ iii, 12. laborabat, _B.G._ vii, 31, 1. sequitur, _N.D._ ii, 81. eos
moneo, _Cat._ ii, 20. huic imperat, _B.G._ iv, 21, 8.

Sec. 296. opto, _Verr. Act. Pr._ 50. vereor ne, _Att._ vii, 12, 2.

Sec. 297. ex quo, F. ii, 24. ita fit, _Tusc. Disp._ ii, 16. est mos, _Brut._
84.

Sec. 298. quis, _Par._ 48.

Sec. 299. illud, _Off._ iii, 111. hoc uno, _de Or._ i, 32. bene mihi, _Tusc.
Disp._ i, 97. quod, _B.G._ i, 44, 6. quod me, _Nep. Ep._ 5, 6.

Sec. 300. oculis, _B.G._ i, 12, 1. bis bina, _N.D._ ii, 49. effugere, _N.D._
iii, 14. saepe autem, _N.D._ iii, 14. Epaminondas, F. ii, 97. ex Socrate,
_Tusc. Disp._ v, 34. nescio, _Pl. Amph._ 1056. conantur, _B.G._ i, 8, 4.
pergit, _Liv._ i, 7, 6, quaeritur, _N.D._ i, 61. haud scio, _Tusc. Disp._
ii, 41.

Sec. 302. naturam, _Off._ i, 100. memoria, _de Sen._ 21. si quis, _B.G._ i,
48, 6. si dicendo, _Tac. Dial._ 19.

Sec. 303. mentiar, _Lael._ 10. haec si, _Cat._ i, 19.

Sec. 304. sapientia, F. i, 42. consilium, _de Sen._ 19. Laelius, _Arch._ 16.
num igitur, _de Sen._ 19. nisi felicitas, _Tac. Agr._ 31. eum patris,
_Phil._ ii, 99. si Sestius, _Sest._ 81. si unum, _Liv._ ii, 38, 5.

Sec. 305. non potestis, F. ii, 71. cras, _Pl. Merc._ 770. haec reputent,
_Tusc. Disp._ i, 51. roges, F. iv, 69.

Sec. 306. ferreus, _Fam._ xv, 21, 3. dolorem, _Phil._ 12, 21. si feceris,
_Fam._ v, 19, 2. hoc si, _Fam._ vii, 1, 6. hunc mihi, _Cat._ i, 18. nihil,
_Cat._ ii, 10. nisi, _Mil._ 19.

Sec. 307. sed quid, _Div. Caec._ 14. serviam, _Pl. Men._ 1101.

Sec. 308. sit fur, _Verr._ v, 4. haec sint, _Ac._ ii, 105. ne sit, _Tusc.
Disp._ ii, 14.

Sec. 309. homines, _Phil._ ii, 39. non est, _Rep._ i, 10. quamquam, _Off._ i,
56. Caesar, _B.G._ iv, 31, 1. Atticus, _Nep. Att._ 6, 2. licet, _Rosc. Am._
31. quamquam quid, _Cat._ i, 22. quamquam, _Liv._ xxxvi, 34, 6. quamvis,
multi, _Tac. Dial._ 2. quamvis infesto, _Liv._ ii, 40, 7.

Sec. 310. multi, _Off._ iii, 82. omnia postposui, _Fam._ xvi, 21, 6. nil
obstat, _Hor. Sat._ i, 1, 40. oderint, _Acc._ 204. manent, _de Sen._ 22.
nubant, _Pl. Aul._ 491.

Sec. 312. quidquid, _Aen._ ii, 49. quidquid oritur, _Div._ ii, 60.

Sec. 314. Regulus, _Off._ iii, 100. tum Romulus, _Liv._ i, 9, 2. nuntiatum,
_B.G._ i, 38, 1. dixit, _Nep. Them._ 7, 5.

Sec. 315. Ariovistus, _B.G._ i, 44, 7.

Sec. 316. milites, _B.G._ iii, 5, 3.

Sec. 318. Caesar, _B.G._ i, 14, 6.

Sec. 322. concursu, _Tac. Dial._ 39.

Sec. 323. demonstrabantur, _de Sen._ 78. Paetus, _Att._ ii, 1, 12.

Sec. 324. nemo, _Par._ 52. cum diversas, _Tac. Dial._ 1, 4. mos est, _Orat._
151. quod ego, _Pl. Capt._ 961.

Sec. 327. dulce, _Hor. Od._ iii, 2, 13. virorum, _Tusc. Disp._ ii, 43. aliud
est, _Tusc. Disp._ iv, 27. impune, _Sall. Jug._ 31, 26. licuit, _Tusc.
Disp._ i, 33.

Sec. 328. Demosthenes, F. v, 5. beatus, _N.D._ i, 48. Cato, _Sall. Cat._ 54,
5.

Sec. 330. apertum est, F. v, 34.

Sec. 331. Epicurei, _Lael._ 13. Thales, _N.D._ i, 25. Democritus, _N.D._ i,
20. nullo se, _Lig._ 3. nec mihi, _de Sen._ 85. eas res, _B.G._ i, 18. te
tua, _Brut._ 331. cupio, _Cat._ i, 4. Timoleon, _Nep. Tim._ 3, 4. gaudeo,
_Pl. Bacch._ 456. non moleste, _de Sen._ 7.

Sec. 332. Sestius, _Sest._ 95. traditum, _Tusc. Disp._ v, 114.

Sec. 333. audax, _Hor. Od._ i, 3, 25.

Sec. 334. huncine, _Hor. Sat._ i, 9, 72.

Sec. 335. interim, _B.G._ i, 16, 1.

Sec. 336. assurgentem, _Liv._ iv, 19.

Sec. 337. gloria, _Tusc. Disp._ iii, 3. Conon, _Nep. Con._ 4, 5. omne, _Phil._
v, 31. mente, _Tusc. Disp._ v, 100. Solon, _de Sen._ 26. sol, _N.D._ ii,
102. mendaci, _Div._ ii, 146. perfidiam, _B.G._ vii, 5, 5. eis Catonem, _de
Sen._ 3. Homerus, _de Sen._ 54. urbem, _Liv._ xxii, 20. equitatum, _B.G._
i, 15, 1. obliviscendum, _Tac. Hist._ ii, 1. numquam, _Verr._ i, 38. suo
cuique, _N.D._ iii, 1. Caesar, _B.G._ i, 13, 1.

Sec. 338. scribendo, _Fam._ xv, 6, 2. mens, _Off._ i, 105. Themistocles, _Nep.
Them._ 2, 3. multa, F. i, 5.

Sec. 339. ad pacem, _Liv._ xxi, 13. hostes, _B.G._ iii, 6, 2. legati, _B.G._
iv, 13, 5. quae ille, _Sall. Fr._ i, 77, 11.

Sec. 340. legati, _B.G._ i, 30, 1. do (colloco), _Pl. Tr._ 735. hoc est,
_Att._ vii, 22, 2.

Sec. 341. cum homines, _Cat._ i, 31. discidia, F. i, 44. horae, _de Sen._ 69.
Caesar, _B.G._ ii, 35, 3.

Sec. 342. cita, _Hor. Sat._ i, 1, 8. qui aether, _N.D._ ii, 41.

Sec. 343. adsentatio, _Lael._ 89.

Sec. 346. Cn. Pompeio, _B.G._ iv, 1, 1.

Sec. 348. Darius, _Nep. Milt._ 4, 1.

Sec. 349. magnus, _Nep. Them._ 6, 1.

Sec. 350. erant duo, _B.G._ i, 6, 1. nisi forte, _de Sen._ 18. id ut, _Nep.
Them._ 8, 3. eo cum, _B.G._ vii, 7, 4. ut ad, _Lael._ 5. septimus, _de
Sen._ 38. recepto, _B.C._ iii, 12, 1. sed pleni, _Arch._ 14. horribilem,
_Tusc. Disp._ i, 118. simulatam, _Tac. A._ i, 10.

Sec. 351. Caesar, _B.G._ i, 25, 1. Haedui, _B.G._ i, 11, 2. Caesar cum, _B.G._
i, 7, 1. accidit, _Nep. Alc._ 3, 2. si quid, _Arch._ 1. Caesar, _B.G._ v,
4, 1.

Sec. 356. hostium, _B.G._ iii, 29, 3. mens quoque, _de Sen._ 36. tanto,
_Sull._ 59.

Sec. 358. pro multitudine, _B.G._ i, 2, 5.

Sec. 374. ut ager, _Tusc. Disp._ ii, 13. minis, _Tusc. Disp._ v, 87.
dissimilis, _Nep. Chab._ 3, 4. febris, _Cat._ i, 31. submersas, _Aen._ i,
69. nosti, _Fam._ viii, 10, 3. tum Anci, _Liv._ i, 40, 2. moriamur, _Aen._
ii, 353.

Sec. 375. quadrupedante, _Aen._ viii, 506.

ABBREVIATIONS USED IN INDEX TO THE ILLUSTRATIVE EXAMPLES

  Ac., Cicero, _Academica_.
  Acc., Accius.
  ad Her., ad Herennium.
  Aen., Virgil, _Aeneid_.
  Arch., Cicero, _pro Archia_.
  Att., Cicero, _Epistulae ad Atticus_.
  B.C., Caesar, _de Bello Civili_.
  B.G., Caesar, _de Bello Gallico_.
  Brut., Cicero, _Brutus_.
  Caec., Cicero, _pro Caecina_.
  Cat., Cicero, _in Catilinam_.
  Cluent., Cicero, _pro Cluentio_.
  Curt., Quintus Curtius
  de Dom., Cicero, _de Domo Sua_.
  de Or., Cicero, _de Oratore_.
  de Sen., Cicero, _de Senectute_.
  D., Cicero, _de Divinatione_.
  Div. Caec., Cicero, _Divinatio in Caecilium_.
  Ecl., Virgil, _Eclogues_.
  Eut., Eutropius.
  F., Cicero, _de Finibus_.
  Fam., Cicero, _Epistulae ad Familiares_.
  Flac., Cicero, _pro Flacco_.
  Gell, Aulus Gellius.
  Hor., Horace.
  ---- Epp., _Epistles_.
  ---- Od., _Odes_.
  ---- Sat., _Satires_.
  Inv., Cicero, _de Inventione_.
  Juv., Juvenal.
  Lael., Cicero, _Laelius, de Amicitia_.
  Leg., Cicero, _de Legibus_.
  Lig., Cicero, _pro Ligario_.
  Liv., Livy.
  Lucr., Lucretius.
  Marc., Cicero, _pro Marcello_.
  Mil., Cicero, _pro Milone_.
  N.D., Cicero, _de Natura Deorum_.
  Nep., Nepos.
  ---- Alc., _Alcibiades_.
  ---- Ar., _Aristides_.
  ---- Att., _Atticus_.
  ---- Cat., _Cato_.
  ---- Chab. _Chabrias_.
  ---- Cim., _Cimon_.
  ---- Con., _Conon_.
  ---- Dat., _Datames_.
  ---- Ep., _Epaminondas_.
  ---- Milt., _Miltiades_.
  ---- Paus., _Pausanias_.
  ---- Them., _Themistocles_.
  ---- Thras., _Thrasybulus_.
  ---- Tim., _Timoleon_.
  Off., Cicero, _de Officiis_.
  Or., Cicero, _Orator_.
  Ov., Ovid.
  ---- Am., _Amores_,
  ---- Met., _Metamorphoses_.
  Par., Cicero, _Paradoxa_.
  Phil., Cicero, _Philippics_.
  Pis., Cicero, _in Pisonem_.
  Planc., Cicero, _pro Plancio_.
  Pl., Plautus.
  ---- Amph., _Amphitruo_.
  ---- Aul., _Aulularia_.
  ---- Bacch., _Bacchides_.
  ---- Capt., _Captivi_.
  ---- Curc., _Curculio_.
  ---- Men., _Menaechmi_.
  ---- Merc., _Mercator_.
  ---- M.G., _Miles Gloriosus_.
  ---- Pers., _Persa_.
  ---- Poen., _Poenulus_.
  ---- Rud., _Rudens_.
  ---- Tr., _Trinummus_.
  ---- Vid., _Vidularia_.
  Plin. Epp., Pliny the Younger, _Letters_.
  Pub. Syr., Publilius Syrus.
  Q.F., Cicero, _ad Quintum Fratrem_.
  Rosc. Am., Cicero, _pro Roscio Amerino_.
  Sall., Sallust.
  ---- C., _Catiline_.
  ---- Fr., _Fragments_.
  ---- Jug., _Jugurtha_.
  Sen., Seneca.
  ---- Ep., _Epistles_.
  ---- N.Q., _Naturales Quaestiones_.
  Sest., Cicero, _pro Sestio_.
  Sex. Rosc., Cicero, _pro Sexto Roscio_.
  Sil., Silius Italicus.
  Stat., Caecilius Statius.
  Sull., Cicero, _pro Sulla_.
  Tac., Tacitus.
  ---- A., _Annals_.
  ---- Agr., _Agricola_.
  ---- Dial., _Dialogus de Oratoribus_.
  ---- Ger., _Germania_.
  ---- H., _Histories_.
  Ter., Terence.
  ---- Ad., _Adelphoi_.
  ---- And., _Andria_.
  ---- Eun., _Eunuchus_.
  ---- Hec., _Hecyra_.
  ---- H.T., _Hautontimoroumenos_.
  ---- Phor., _Phormio_.
  Tusc. Disp., Cicero, _Tusculan Disputations_.
  Twelve Tables, Laws of the Twelve Tables.
  Vatin., Cicero, _in Vatinium_.
  Verr., Cicero, _in Verrem_.
  Verr. Act. Pr., Cicero, _Actio Prima in C. Verrem_.

       *       *       *       *       *

INDEX TO THE PRINCIPAL PARTS OF THE MOST IMPORTANT VERBS

NOTE.--Compounds are not given unless they present some special
irregularity. The references are to sections.

A.

abdo, 122, I, 4. abicio, 122, III. abnuo, 122, II. aboleo, 121, I.
abstergeo, 121, III absum, 125. accendo, 122, I, 4. accidit, 138, III.
accio, 121, I, N. accipio, 122, III. acquiro, 122, I, 6. acuo, 122, II.
addo, 122, I, 2. adhaeresco, 122, IV, 2. adipiscor, 122, V. adolesco, 122,
IV, 1. adsum, 125. advenio, 123, IV. affero, 129. afficio, 122, III.
affligo, 122, I, 1, a. agnosco, 122, IV, 1. ago, 122, I, 3. algeo, 121,
III. alo, 122, I, 5. amicio, 123, III. amo, 120, I. amplector, 122, V.
ango, 122, I, 7. aperio, 123, II. appeto, 122, I, 6. arceo, 121, II, a.
arcesso, 122, I, 6. ardeo, 121, III. aresco, 122, IV, 2. arguo, 122, II.
ascendo, 122, I, 4. aspicio, 122, III. assentior, 123, VII. assuefacio,
122, III. assuefio, 122, III. audio, 123, I. aufero, 129. augeo, 121, III.
aveo, 121, II, a, N. 2.

C.

cado, 122, I, 2. caedo, 122, I, 2. calefacio, 122, III. calefio, 122, III.
caleo, 121, II, a. calesco, 122, IV, 2. cano, 122, I, 2. capesso, 122, I,
6. capio, 122, III. careo, 121, II, a. carpo, 121, I, 1, a. caveo, 121, V.
cedo, 122, I, 1, b. censeo, 121, II, b. cerno, 122, I, 6. cieo, 121, I.
cingo, 122, I, 1, a. circumsisto, 122, I, 2. claudo, 122, I, 1, b. claudo,
122, I, 7. coemo, 122, I, 3. coepi, 133. coerceo, 121, II, a. cognosco,
122, IV, 1. cogo, 122, I, 3. colligo, 122, I, 3. colo, 122, I, 5.
comminiscor, 122, V. comperio, 123, V. compleo, 121, I. concutio, 122, III.
condo, 122, I, 2. confero, 129. confiteor, 121, VII. congruo, 122, II.
consenesco, 122, IV, 2. consero, 122, I, 5. consero, 122, I, 6 (_plant_).
consido, 122, I, 4. consisto, 122, I, 2. conspicio, 122, III. constat, 138,
III. constituo, 122, II. consuesco, 122, IV, 1. consulo, 122, I, 5.
contineo, 121, II, b. contingit, 138, III. coquo, 122, I, 1, a. crepo, 120,
II. cresco, 122, IV, 1. cubo, 120, II. cupio, 122, III. curro, 122, I, 2.

D.

debeo, 121, II, a. decerno, 122, I, 6. decet, 138, II. dedecet, 138, II.
dedo, 122, I, 2. defendo, 122, I, 4. deleo, 121, I deligo, 122, I, 3. demo,
122, I, 3. desero, 122, I, 5 desino, 122, I, 6. desum, 125. dico, 122, I,
1, a. differo, 129. diligo, 122, I, 3. dimico, 120, II. dirimo, 122, I, 3.
diripio, 122, III. diruo, 122, II. discerno, 122, I, 6. disco, 122, IV, 1.
dissero, 122, I, 5. distinguo, 122, I, 1, a., footnote 44. divido, 122, I,
1, b. do, 127. doceo, 121, II, b. doleo, 121, II, a. domo, 120, II. duco,
122, I, 1, a.

E.

edo, 122, I, 2. edo, 122, I, 3. effero, 129. effugio, 122, III. egeo, 121,
II, a, N. 1. elicio, 122, III. emineo, 121, II, a, N. 1. emo, 122, I, 3.
eo, 132. esurio, 123, VI. evado, 122, I, 1, b., footnote 45. evanesco, 122,
IV, 3. excolo, 122, I, 5. excudo, 122, I, 4. exerceo, 121, II, a. experior,
123, VII. expleo, 121, I, N. explico, 120, II. exstinguo, 122, I, 1, a.,
footnote 44. extimesco, 122, IV, 2.

F.

facio, 122, III. fallo, 122, I, 2. fateor, 121, VII. faveo, 121, V. ferio,
123, VI. fero, 129. ferveo, 121, VI figo, 122, I, 1, b. findo,122, I, 2, N.
fingo, 122, I, 1, a. fio, 131. flecto, 122, I, 1, b. fleo, 121, I. floreo,
121, II, a, N. 1. floresco, 122, IV, 2. fluo, 122, II. fodio, 122, III.
foveo, 121, V. frango, 122, I, 3. fremo, 122, I, 5. frico, 120, II. frigeo,
121, II, a, N. 2. fruor, 122, V. fugio, 122, III. fulcio, 123, III. fulgeo,
121, III. fulget, 138, I. fundo, 122, I, 3. fungor, 122, V. furo, 122, I,
7.

G.

gemo, 122, I, 5. gero, 122, I, 1, a. gigno, 122, I, 5. gradior, 122, V.

H.

habeo, 121, II, a. haereo, 121, III. haurio, 123, III. horreo, 121, II, a,
N. 1.

I.

ignosco, 121, IV, 2. illicio, 122, III. imbuo, 122, II. immineo, 121, II,
a, N. 2. impleo, 121, I, N. implico, 120, II. incipio, 122, III. incolo,
122, I, 5. incumbo, 122, I, 5. indulgeo, 121, III. induo, 122, II. infero,
129. ingemisco, 122, IV, 2. insum, 125. intellego, 122, I, 3. interficio,
122, III. intersum, 125. invado, 122, I, 1, b., footnote 45. invenio, 123,
IV. irascor, 122, V.

J.

jaceo, 121, II, a. jacio, 122, III. jubeo, 121, III. jungo, 122, I, 1, a.
juvo, 120, III.

L.

labor, 122, V. lacesso, 122, I, 6. laedo, 122, I, 1, b. lambo, 122, I, 7.
largior, 123, VII. lateo, 121, II, a, N. 1. lavo, 120, III. lego, 122, I,
3. libet, 138, II. liceor, 121, VII. licet, 138, II. loquor, 122, V. luceo,
121, III. ludo, 122, I, 1, b. lugeo, 121, III. luo, 122, II.

M.

maereo, 121, II, a, N. 2. malo, 130. maneo, 121, III. maturesco, 122, IV,
3. medeor, 121, VII. memini, 133. mereo, 121, II, a. mereor, 121, VII.
mergo, 122, I, 1, b. metior, 123, VII. metuo, 122, II. mico, 120, II.
minuo, 122, II. misceo, 121, II, b. miseret, 138, II. misereor, 121, VII.
mitto, 122, I, 1, b. molo, 122, I, 5. moneo, 121, II, a. mordeo, 121, IV.
morior, 122, V. moveo, 121, V.

N.

nanciscor, 122, V. nascor, 122, V. necto, 122, I, 1, b. neglego, 122, I, 3.
ningit, 138, . niteo, 121, II, a, N. 1. nitor, 122, V. noceo, 121, II, a.
nolo, 130. nosco, 122, IV, 1. nubo, 122, I, 1, a.

O.

obduresco, 122, IV, 3. oblino, 122, I, 6. obliviscor, 122, V. obmutesco,
122, IV, 3. obruo, 122, II. obsolesco, 122, IV, 1. obsum, 125. obtineo,
121, II, b. odi, 133. offero, 129. oleo, 121, II, a, N. 1. operio, 123, II.
oportet, 138, II. opperior, 123, VII. ordior, 123, VII. orior, 123, VII.

P.

paenitet, 138, II. palleo, 121, II, a, N. 1. pando, 122, I, 4. parco, 122,
I, 2. pareo, 121, II, a. pario, 122, III. pasco, 122, IV, 1. pascor, 122,
IV, 1. patefacio, 122, III. patefio, 122, III. pateo, 121, II, a, N. 1.
patior, 122, V. paveo, 121, V. pellicio, 122, III. pello, 122, I, 2.
pendeo, 121, IV. pendo, 122, I, 2. perago, 122, I, 3. percello, 122, I, 2,
N. percrebresco, 122, IV, 3. perdo, 122, I, 2. perficio, 122, III.
perfringo, 122, I, 3. perfruor, 122, V. perlego, 122, I, 3. permulceo, 121,
III. perpetior, 122, V. pervado, 122, I, 1, b., footnote 45. peto, 122, I,
6. piget, 138, II. pingo, 122, I, 1, a. placeo, 121, II, a. plaudo, 122, I,
1, b. pluit, 138, I. polleo, 121, II, a, N. 2. polliceor, 121, VII. polluo,
122, II. pono, 122, I, 6. posco, 122, IV, 1. possido, 122, I, 4. possum,
126. poto, 120, I. praebeo, 121, II, a. praestat, 138, III. praesum, 125.
prandeo, 121, VI. prehendo, 122, I, 4. premo, 122, I, 1, b. prodo, 122, I,
2. promo, 122, I, 3. prosum, 125. prosterno, 122, I, 6. pudet, 138, II.
pungo, 122, I, 2.

Q.

quaero, 122, I, 6. quatio, 122, III. queror, 122, V. quiesco, 122, IV, 1.

R.

rado, 122, I, 1, b. rapio, 122, III. reddo, 122, I, 2. redimo, 122, I, 3.
refercio, 123, III. refero, 129. refert, 138, II. rego, 122, I, 1, a.
relinquo, 122, I, 3. reminiscor, 122, V. reor, 121, VII. reperio, 123, V.
repo, 122, I, 1, a. resisto, 122, I, 2. respuo, 122, II. restinguo, 122, I,
1, a., footnote 44. retineo, 121, II, b. rideo, 121, III. rodo, 122, I, 1,
b. rubeo, 121, II, a, N. 1. rumpo, 122, I, 3. ruo, 122, II.

S.

saepio, 123, III. salio, 123, II. sancio, 123, III. sapio, 122, III.
sarcio, 123, III. scindo, 122, I, 2, N. scisco, 122, IV, 2. scribo, 122, I,
1, a. sculpo, 122, I, 1, a. seco, 120, II. sedeo, 121, V. sentio, 123, III.
sepelio, 123, I. sequor, 122, V. sero, 122, I, 6. serpo, 122, I, 1, a.
sileo, 121, II, a, N. sino, 122, I, 6. solvo, 122, I, 4. sono, 120, II.
spargo, 122, I, 1, b. sperno, 122, I, 6. splendeo, 121, II, a, N. 1.
spondeo, 121, IV. statuo, 122, II. sterno, 122, I, 6. -stinguo, 122, I, 1,
a. sto, 120, IV. strepo, 122, I, 5. strideo, 121, VI. stringo, 122, I, 1,
a. struo, 122, II. studeo, 121, II, a, N. 1. suadeo, 121, III. subigo, 122,
I, 3. subsum, 125. sum, 100. sumo, 122, I, 3. suo, 122, II. supersum, 125.
sustineo, 121, II, b.

T.

taceo, 121, II, a. taedet, 138, II. tango, 122, I, 2. tego, 122, I, 1, a.
temno, 122, I, 1, a. tendo, 122, I, 2. teneo, 121, II, b. tero, 122, I, 6.
terreo, 121, II, a. texo, 122, I, 5. timeo, 121, II, a, N. 1. tingo, 122,
I, 1, a. tollo, 122, I, 2, N. tonat, 138, I. tondeo, 121, IV. tono, 120,
II. torpeo, 121, II, a, N. 1. torqueo, 121, III. torreo, 121, II, b. trado,
122, I, 2. traho, 122, I, 1, a. tremo, 122, I, 5. tribuo, 122, II. trudo,
122, I, 1, b. tueor, 121, VII. tundo, 122, I, 2.

U.

ulciscor, 122, V. unguo, 122, I, 1, a. urgeo, 121, III. uro, 122, I, 1, a.
utor, 122, V.

V.

vado, 122, I, 1, b. valeo, 121, II, a. veho, 122, I, 1, a. vello, 122, I,
4. venio, 123, IV. vereor, 121, VII. vergo, 122, I, 7. verro, 122, I, 4.
verto, 122, I, 4. vescor, 122, V. veto, 120, II. video, 121, V. vigeo, 121,
II, a, N. 1. vincio, 123, III. vinco, 122, I, 3. vireo, 121, II, a, N. 1.
viso, 122, I, 4. vivo, 122, I, 1, a. volo, 130. volvo, 122, I, 4. vomo,
122, I, 5. voveo, 121, V.

       *       *       *       *       *

GENERAL INDEX.

       *       *       *       *       *

The references are to sections and paragraphs.

       *       *       *       *       *

ABBREVIATIONS.--Abl., ablative; acc., accusative; adj., adjective; adv.,
adverb, adverbial, or adverbially; cf., compare; comp., comparison or
comparative; conj., conjunction or conjugation; const., constr.,
construction; dat., dative; decl., declension; gen., genitive; ind.,
indicative; indir. disc., indirect discourse; loc., locative; N., note;
nom., nominative; plu., plural; prep., preposition; pron., pronoun or
pronunciation; sing., singular; subj., subject; subjv., subjunctive; voc.,
vocative; w., with.

                  A.

  a, vowel, 2, 1;
  ---- pronunciation, 3, 1;
  ---- development of a, before a single consonant, 7, 1, a;
  ---- before two consonants, 7, 1, b;
  ---- a as ending of nom. sing. of 1st decl., 20;
  ---- in voc. sing. of Greek nouns in -es of 1st decl., 22;
  ---- in nom. sing. of Greek nouns in -e of 1st decl., 22, 3;
  ---- termination of nom. and acc. plu. of neuters, 23; 35; 48;
  ---- termination of nom. sing. of nouns of 3d decl., 28;
  ---- gender of nouns in -a of 3d decl., 43, 3;
  ---- ending of acc. sing. of Greek nouns of 3d decl., 47, 1;
  ---- regular quantity of final a, 363, 1;
  ---- exceptions to quantity of final a, 363, 1, a-c.
  a, pronunciation, 3, 1;
  ---- arising by contraction, 7, 2;
  ---- as ending of stem in 1st decl., 18;
  ---- a-stems inflected, 20;
  ---- in voc. sing. of Greek nouns of 1st decl., 22;
  ---- in voc. sing. of Greek nouns in -as of 3d decl., 47, 4;
  ---- distinguishing vowel of 1st conjugation, 98;
  ---- ending of imperative act. of 1st conj., 101;
  ---- final a long by exception, 363, 1, a-c.
  a, ab, abs, use, 142, 1;
  ---- with town names, 229, 2.
  a to denote agency, 216.
  ---- to denote separation, 214.
  ---- place from which, 229.
  ---- with town names, 229, 2.
  ---- with abl. of gerund, 338, 4, b.
  a-stems, 20; 98; 101.
  Abbreviations of proper names, 373.
  Ablative case, 17; 213 f.
  ---- in -abus, 21, 2, e.
  ---- in -d in prons., 84, 3; 85, 3.
  ---- formation of sing. of adjs. of 3d decl., 67, a; 70, 1-5.
  ---- of i-stems, 37; 38.
  ---- genuine abl. uses, 214 f.
  ---- absolute, 227.
  ---- of agent, 216.
  ---- of accompaniment, 222.
  ---- of accordance, 220, 3.
  ---- of association, 222A.
  ---- of attendant circumstance, 221; 227, 2, e).
  ---- of cause, 219.
  ---- of comparison, 217.
  ---- of degree of difference, 223.
  ---- of fine or penalty, 208, 2, b.
  ---- of manner, 220.
  ---- of material, 224, 3.
  ---- of means, 218.
  ---- of penalty, 208, 2, b.
  ---- of place where, 228.
  ---- of place whence, 229.
  ---- of price, 225.
  ---- of quality, 224.
  ---- of separation, 214;
  ---- ---- with compounds of dis- and se-, 214, 3.
  ---- of source, 215.
  ---- of specification, 226.
  ---- of time at which, 230.
  ---- of time during which, 231, 1.
  ---- of time within which, 231.
  ---- of way by which, 213, 9.
  ---- with contineri, consistere, constare, 218, 4.
  ---- with special phrases, 218, 7.
  ---- with jungere, miscere, mutare, etc., 222A.
  ---- with facio, fio, 218, 6
  ---- with prepositions, 142; 213 f.
  ---- with verbs of filling, 218, 8.
  ---- with verbs and adjs. of freeing, 214, I, a, and N. 1.
  ---- with adjs. of plenty, 218, 8.
  ---- with utor, fruor, fungor, potior, vescor, 218, 1.
  ---- with opus and usus, 218, 2
  ---- with nitor, innixus, and fretus, 218, 3.
  abs, 142, 1.
  absens, 125.
  Absolute, ablative, 227.
  ---- time, of participles, 336, 4.
  ---- use of verbs, 174, a.
  Abstract nouns, 12, 2, b);
  ---- plural of, 55, 4, c).
  -abus, 21, 2, e).
  ac, 341, 2, b);
  ---- = as, than, 341, 1, c).
  Acatalectic verses, 366, 9.
  accedit ut, 297, 2.
  Accent, 6;
  ---- in gen. of nouns in -ius and -ium, 25, 1 and 2.
  accidit ut, 297, 2.
  accidit quod, 299, 1, b.
  Accompaniment, abl. of, 222.
  Accordance, abl. of, 220, 3.
  Accusative case, 17;
  ---- in -an and -en of Greek nouns, 22;
  ---- in -om in 2d decl., 24;
  ---- in -on and -on in Greek nouns, 27;
  ---- in -a in sing. of Greek nouns, 47, 1;
  ---- in -as in plu., 47, 3;
  ---- in -im and -is in i-stems, 37; 38;
  ---- acc. sing. neut. as adv., 77, 3; 176, 3; 172 f.
  ---- of duration of time, 181.
  ---- of result produced, 173, B; 176.
  ---- of extent of space, 181.
  ---- of limit of motion, 182 f.
  ---- of neut. prons. or adjs., 176, 2.
  ---- of person or thing affected, 173, A; 175.
  ---- in exclamations, 183.
  ---- as subj. of inf., 184.
  ---- with admoneo, commoneo, etc., 207.
  ---- with adv. force, 176, 3.
  ---- with compounds, 175, 2.
  ---- with impersonal verbs, 175, 2, c.
  ---- with intransitive verbs, 175, 2, a.
  ---- with passive used as middle, 175, 2, d).
  ---- with verbs of remembering and forgetting (memini, obliviscor,
      reminiscor), 206, 1; 2.
  ---- with verbs expressing emotion, 175, 2, b.
  ---- with verbs of tasting and smelling, 176, 5.
  ---- with verbs of making, choosing, calling, regarding, etc., 177.
  ---- with verbs of asking, requesting, demanding, teaching, concealing,
      178, 1-5.
  ---- with adjs. (propior, proximus), 141, 3.
  ---- with adverbs (propius, proxime), 141, 3;
  ---- ---- clam, pridie, 144, 2.
  ---- Genavam ad oppidum, 182, 2, a.
  ---- cognate acc., 176, 4.
  ---- Greek acc., 180.
  ---- synecdochical acc., 180.
  ---- two accs., direct obj. and pred. acc., 177;
  ---- ---- person affected and result produced, 178;
  ---- ---- with compounds of trans, 179;
  ---- ---- with other compounds, 179, 2.
  ---- with prepositions, 141; 179 f.
  ---- retained in pass., 178, 2.
  Accusing, verbs of, constr., 208 f.
  accuso, constr., 178, 1, d).
  acer, decl., 68;
  ---- compared, 71, 3.
  Acquitting, verbs of, constr., 208 f.
  ac si with subjv., 307, 1.
  ad, 'toward,' 'in vicinity of,' 182, 3;
  ---- with acc. alternating with dat., 358, 2.
  ---- compounds of ad governing dat., 187, III; 188, 2, d.
  ---- with gerund denoting purpose, 338, 3.
  -ades, patronymic ending, 148, 6, a.
  adg- = agg-, 9, 2.
  Adjectives, 62 f; 354;
  ---- derivation of, 150 f.
  ---- of 1st and 2d decl., 63 ff.
  ---- in -ius, gen. sing., 63, a.
  ---- of 3d decl., 67, ff;
  ---- ---- in abl., 70, 5.
  ---- comparison of adjs., 71 f.;
  ---- ---- in -er, 71, 3;
  ---- ---- in -ilis, 71, 4;
  ---- ---- comparative lacking, 73, 3;
  ---- ---- defective comparison, 73;
  ---- ---- not admitting comparison, 75;
  ---- ---- comparison by magis and maxime, 74.
  ---- numerals, 78 f.
  ---- syntax, 233 ff.;
  ---- ---- attributive and predicate adjs., 233, 2.
  ---- agreement, 234, f.
  ---- used substantively, 236 f.
  ---- denoting part of an object, 241, 1.
  ---- with force of adverbs, 239.
  ---- force of comp. and superl., 240, 1.
  ---- not followed by infinitive, 333.
  ---- not used with proper names, 354, 3.
  ---- equivalent to a poss. gen., 354, 4.
  ---- special Latin equivalents of Eng. adjs., 354, 1.
  ---- equiv. to rel. clause, 241, 2.
  ---- as pred. acc., 177, 2.
  ---- position of adj., 350, 4.
  ---- pronominal adjs., 92.
  ---- governing gen., 204.
  ---- governing dat., 192.
  ---- governing acc., 141, 3.
  ---- construed with abl., 214, 1, d; 217, 1; 218, 8; 223; 226, 2; 227, 1.
  ---- with supine in -u, 340, 2.
  adl- = all-, 9, 2.
  admoneo, constr., 207.
  Admonishing, const. of verbs of, 207.
  adr- = arr-, 9, 2.
  ads- = ass-, 9, 2.
  ad sensum, constr., 235, B, 2, c; 254, 4.
  adulescens, spelling, 9, 2.
  adulter, decl., 23, 2.
  adultus, force, 114, 2.
  Adverbs, defined, 140;
  ---- formation and comparison, 76 f.; 140; 157.
  ---- in -iter from adjs. in -us, 77, 4.
  ---- in -tus and -tim, 77, 5.
  ---- in o and -o, 77, 2.
  ---- numeral, 79.
  ---- as preps., 144, 2.
  ---- derivation of, 157.
  ---- with gen., 201, 2; 3; and a.
  ---- special meanings, 347.
  ---- position, 350, 6.
  Adversative clauses, 309.
  ---- conjunctions, 343.
  adversus, prep. with acc., 141.
  ae, how pronounced, 3, 2;
  ---- phonetic changes, 7, 1, d.
  aedes, plu., 61.
  aequalis, abl. sing. of, 70, 5, a;
  ---- as subst., 238.
  aequor, decl., 34.
  aequum est = aequum sit, 271, 1, b).
  aes, in plu., 55, 4, b;
  ---- lacks gen. plu., 57, 7.
  aetas, decl., 40, 1, e);
  ---- id aetatis, 185, 2.
  -aeus, suffix, 152, 3.
  aevom, decl., 24.
  Affected, acc. of person or thing, 175.
  Agency, dat. of, 189;
  ---- abl., 216.
  Agent, abl., 216;
  ---- with names of animals, 216, 2.
  ager, decl., 23.
  Agreement, nouns, 166; 168; 169, 2; 3; 4.
  ---- adjs., 234;
  ---- ---- in gender, 235, B;
  ---- ---- in number, 235, A;
  ---- prons., 250;
  ---- verbs, with one subj., 254, 1;
  ---- ---- with two or more subjs., 255, 1.
  -ai, case-ending, gen. sing., 1st decl., poet., 21, 2, b).
  ain, 135, N.
  ajo, 135;
  ---- quantity of first syllable, 362, 5.
  -al, declension of nouns in, 39.
  alacer, decl., 68, 1;
  ---- comp., 73, 4.
  aliqua, 91, 2.
  aliqui, 91; 91, 2.
  aliquis, 91; 252, 2;
  ---- aliquis dicat, dixerit, 280, 1.
  -alis, suffix, 151, 2.
  aliter ac, 341, 1, c.
  alius, 66; 92, 1;
  ---- used correlatively, 253, 1.
  alius ac, 'other than,' 341, 1, c).
  Allia, gender of, 15, 3, N.
  allicio, conj., 109, 2, b).
  Alliteration, 375, 3.
  Alphabet, 1.
  alter, decl., 66; 92, 1;
  ---- used correlatively, 253, 1.
  Alternative questions, 162, 4;
  ---- indirect, 300, 4.
  alteruter, decl., 92, 2.
  alvus, gender of, 26, 1, b.
  amandus sum, conj., 115.
  amaturus sum, conj., 115.
  amb- (ambi-), 159, 3, N.
  ambo, 80, 2, a;
  ---- usage, 355, 2.
  amo, conj., 101.
  amplius = amplius quam, 217, 3.
  amussis, -im, 38, 1.
  an, 162, 4, and a); 300, 4;
  ---- haud scio an, nescio an, 300, 5.
  Anacoluthon, 374, 6.
  Anapaest, 366, 2.
  Anaphora, 350, 11, b).
  Anastrophe of prep., 141, 2; 142, 3; 144, 3.
  anceps (syllaba anceps), defined, 366, 10.
  Androgeos, decl., 27.
  animal, decl., 39.
  Animals, as agents, 216, 2.
  animi, locative, 232, 3.
  annon, in double questions, 162, 4.
  Answers, 162, 5.
  ante, prep. w. acc., 141;
  ---- as adv., 144, 1;
  ---- dat. w. verbs compounded w. ante, 187, III;
  ---- in expressions of time, 357, 1; 371, 5;
  ---- ante diem, 371, 5; 6.
  Antecedent of rel., 251.
  ---- attraction of, 251, 4.
  ---- incorporated with rel., 251, 4.
  Antecedent omitted, 251, 1.
  ---- repeated with rel., 251, 3.
  Antepenult, 6, 2.
  antepono, with dat., 187, III, 2.
  antequam, with ind., 291;
  ---- with subjv., 292.
  Anticipation, denoted by subjv., w. antequam and priusquam, 292;
  ---- by subjv. with dum, donec, quoad, 293, III, 2; 374, 5.
  -anus, suffix, 151, 2; 152, 1; 3.
  Aorist tense, see Historical perfect.
  Apodosis, 301 ff.
  ---- in conditional sent. of 1st type, 302, 4;
  ---- result clauses as apodoses, 322;
  ---- quin- clauses as apodoses, 322;
  ---- ind. questions as apodoses, 322, b;
  ---- potuerim in apodosis, 322, c;
  ---- apodosis in indir. disc., 319-321;
  ---- in expressions of obligation, ability, etc., 304, 3, a;
  ---- with periphrastic conjugations, 304, 3, b.
  Apposition, 169;
  ---- agreement, 169, 2;
  ---- partitive, 169, 5;
  ---- with voc. in nom., 171, 2;
  ---- genitive w. force of appositive, 202;
  ---- id as appositive of clause, 247, 1, b;
  ---- inf. as appositive, 326; 329;
  ---- subst. clauses as appositives, 282, 1, f; 294; 297, 3.
  Appositive of locative, 169, 4;
  ---- with acc. of limit of motion, 182, 2, a;
  ---- with town names, in abl. of place whence, 229, 2.
  ---- position of, 350, 2.
  aptus, w. dat., 192, 2.
  apud, prep. w. acc., 141.
  Archias, declension of, 22.
  -ar, declension of nouns in, 39.
  arguo, constr., 178, 1, d).
  -aris, suffix, 151, 2.
  -arium, suffix, 148, 3.
  -arius, suffix, 151, 2.
  armiger, decl., 23, 2.
  Arrangement of words, 348-350;
  ---- of clauses, 351.
  Arsis, defined, 366, 6.
  artus, dat. and abl. plu. of, 49, 3.
  arx, decl., 40.
  -as, acc. plu. in Greek nouns, 47, 3.
  -as, old gen. sing., 1st decl., case-ending, 21, 2, a).
  ---- ending of Greek nouns, nom. sing. in, 22.
  ---- gender of nouns in -as, 43, 2; 45, 1.
  ---- voc. of Greek nouns in -as, antis, 47, 4.
  ---- -atis, abl. of patrials in, 70, 5, c).
  Asking, case const, with verbs of, 178, 1, c;
  ---- subst. clauses w., 295, 1;
  ---- ind. questions, 300, 1.
  Aspirates, 2, 3, c.
  Assimilation of consonants, 8, 4 f.; 9, 2.
  Association, abl. of, 222A.
  Asyndeton, 341, 4, a); 346.
  at, 343, 1, d).
  -atim, suffix, 157, 2.
  Atlas, decl., 47, 4.
  atomus, gender of, 26, 1, c).
  atque, 341, 2, b);
  ---- = as, 341, 1, c).
  atqui, 343, 1, e).
  Attendant circumstance, abl. of, 221: 227, 2, e).
  Attraction of demonstratives, 246, 5;
  ---- of relatives, 250, 5;
  ---- subjunctive by attraction, 324;
  ---- of adjectives, 327, 2, a; 328, 2.
  Attributive adjs., 233, 2.
  -atus, its force as suffix, 151, 4.
  audacter, formation and comparison, 76, 2.
  audeo, conj., 114, 1.
  audio, conj., 107;
  ---- with pres. partic., 337, 3.
  aulai, archaic gen., 21, 2, b.
  ausus, force as participle, 336, 5.
  aut, 342, 1, a).
  autem, 343, 1, c); 350, 8.
  Auxiliary omitted in infin., 116, 5:
  ---- ---- in finite forms, 166, 3.
  auxilium, auxilia, 61.
  -ax, suffix, 150, 2.

                  B.

  balneum, balneae, 60, 2.
  barbitos, decl., 27.
  Believing, verbs of, with dat., 187, II.
  belli, locative, 232, 2.
  bellum, decl., 23.
  bene, comparison, 77, 1.
  Benefiting, verbs of, w. dat., 187, II.
  benevolus, comparison, 71, 5, a).
  -ber, declension of month names in, 68, 1.
  -bilis, suffix, 150, 4.
  bonus, decl., 63; comparison, 72.
  bos, decl., 41.
  Brachylogy, 374, 2.
  Bucolic diaeresis, 368, 3, d
  -bulum, suffix, 147, 4.
  -bundus, suffix, 150, 1.
  buris, decl., 38, 1

                  C.

  C., for G. as abbreviation of Gaius, 373.
  caedes, decl., 40.
  Caesura, 366, 8:
  ---- in dactylic hexameter 368, 3.
  calcar, decl., 39.
  Calendar, 371; 372.
  Calends, 371, 2, a).
  campester, decl., 68, 1
  canis, decl., 38, 2.
  capio, conj., 110
  carbasus, gender of, 26, 1 b).
  carcer, carceres, 61.
  Cardinals, defined. 78, 1;
  ---- list of, 79;
  ---- decl., 80;
  ---- with and without et, 81, 1; 3;
  ---- expressed by subtraction, 81, 2;
  ---- replaced by attributives in poetry, 81, 4, d.
  care, comparison, 76, 2.
  caro, decl., 42.
  carrus, carrum, 60, 1.
  Cases, 17;
  ---- alike in form, 19; 170 ff.
  Case-endings, 17, 3.
  castrum, castra, 61.
  Catalectic verses, 366, 9.
  causa, with gen., 198, 1;
  ---- nulla causa est cur, with subjv., 295, 7.
  Causal clauses, 285; 286;
  ---- clause of characteristic with accessory notion of cause, 283, 3.
  ---- conjunctions, 345.
  Cause, abl. of, 219; 227, 2, d)
  cave, cave ne in prohibitions, 276, b.
  -ce, 6, 3 f.; 87, footnote 23.
  cedo, cette, 137, 3.
  cedo, with dat. 187, II.
  celeber, decl., 68, 1.
  celer, decl., 68, 2.
  celo, constr., 178, 1, e).
  cenatus, force, 114, 2.
  cetera, adverbial acc., 185, 2.
  ceteri, use, 253, 4.
  Characterstic, clauses of, 283;
  ---- denoting cause or opposition ('although'), 283, 3;
  ---- gen. of, 208, 1;
  ---- abl., 224.
  Charge, gen. of, 208, 1; 2.
  Chiasmus, 350, 11, c).
  Choosing, const. w. verbs of, 177, 1-3.
  circa, circiter, circum, preps. w. acc., 141.
  circum, compounds of, w. dat., 187, III.
  circumdo, const., 187, 1, a.
  Circumstance, abl. of attendant, 221.
  cis, prep. w. acc., 141.
  citerior, comparison, 73, 1.
  cito, 77, 2, a.
  citra, prep. w. acc., 141.
  civitas decl., 40, 1, e.
  clam, with acc., 144, 2.
  Clauses, cooerd. and subord., 164, 165.
  Clauses of characteristic, 283;
  ---- purpose, 282;
  ---- result, 284;
  ---- causal, 285;
  ---- temporal with postquam, ut, ubi, simul ac, etc., 287;
  ---- with cum, 288;
  ---- substantive clauses, 294 f.;
  ---- condition, 301 f.;
  ---- conditional comparison, 307;
  ---- concessive, 308;
  ---- adversative, 309;
  ---- wish or proviso, 310;
  ---- relative, 311 f.; 283 f.
  clavis, decl., 38, 1.
  Clinging, construction of verbs of, 258, 3.
  clipeus, clipeum, 60, 1.
  Close of sentences, cadences used, 350, 12.
  coepi, conj., 133;
  ---- coeptus est, 133, 1.
  Cognate acc., 176, 4.
  cognomen, 373.
  cogo, w. acc., 178, 1, d);
  ---- w. infin., 331, VI.
  Collective nouns, 12, 2, a);
  ---- w. plu. verb, 254, 4.
  colus, gender of, 26, 1, b).
  com-, compounds of, w. dat., 187, III.
  comedo, conj., 128, 2.
  cometes, decl., 22.
  comitia, as time expression, 230, 1.
  Commanding, dat. w. verbs of, 187, II;
  ---- subst. clause w. verbs of, 295, 1;
  ---- commands expressed by jussive subjv., 275;
  ---- ---- by imperative, 281.
  Common gender, 15, B, N. 1.
  ---- nouns, 12, 1.
  ---- syllables, 5, B, 3.
  commonefacio, w. gen, and acc., 207.
  commoneo, w. gen. and acc., 207.
  communis, w. gen., 204, 2;
  ---- with dat., 204, 2, a.
  commuto, w. abl., 222A.
  Comparatives, decl., 69;
  ---- w. abl., 217;
  ---- w. quam, 217, 2;
  ---- occasional meaning, 240.
  ---- two required in Latin, 240, 4.
  Comparison of adjs., 71 f.;
  ---- of adverbs, 76; 77.
  ---- participles as adjs., 71, 2.
  ---- adjs. in -dicus, -ficus, -volus, 71, 5.
  ---- defective, 73.
  ---- abl. of, 217.
  Comparison, conditional, 307.
  Compendiary comparison, 374, 2, b);
  ---- w. result clauses, 284, 4;
  ---- w. clauses of characteristic, 283, 2, a.
  Completed action, tenses expressing, 262-4; 267, 3.
  Compounds, 158 f.;
  ---- spelling of, 9, 2.
  Compound sentences, 164.
  ---- verbs governing acc., 175, 2, a;
  ---- governing dat., 187, III; 188, 2, d.
  Conative uses of pres., 259, 2;
  ---- of imperf., 260, 3;
  ---- of pres. partic., 336, 2, a.
  Concessive clauses, 308;
  ---- 'although' as accessory idea to clause of characteristic, 283, 3.
  ---- subjunctive, 278.
  Conclusion, see Apodosis.
  Concrete nouns, 12, 2, a).
  Condemning, verbs of, constr., 208, f.
  Conditional clauses of comparison, 307.
  ---- sentences, 1st type (nothing implied), 302;
  ---- ---- in indir. disc., 319;
  ---- ---- 2d type ('should'-'would'), 303;
  ---- ---- in indir. disc., 320;
  ---- ---- 3d type (contrary to fact), 304;
  ---- ---- in indir. disc., 321;
  ---- ---- abl. abs. equivalent to, 227, 2, b);
  ---- ---- introduced by relative pronouns, 312;
  ---- ---- general conditions, 302, 2; 3;
  ---- ---- indicative in contrary-to-fact apodoses, 304, 3;
  ---- ---- protasis omitted or implied, 305, 1;
  ---- ---- protasis   contained in imperative, or jussive subjv., 305, 2;
  ---- ---- employment of nisi, si non, sin, si minus, 306;
  ---- ---- conditional relative sentences, 312, 2.
  confido, w. abl., 219, 1, a.
  Conjugation, 11; 93 f.;
  ---- the four conjugations, 98;
  ---- periphrastic, 115;
  ---- peculiarities of conj., 116.
  Conjunctions, 145, 1; 341 f.
  conor, with inf., 295, 5, a.
  Consecutive clauses, see Result clauses.
  consistere, with abl., 218, 4.
  Consonant stems, nouns, 29 f.;
  ---- adjs., 70, 1.
  ---- partially adapted to i-stems, 40.
  Consonants, 2, 2 f.;
  ---- pronunciation, 3, 3.
  ---- double, 2, 9.
  ---- combinations of, in division into syllables, 4, 2 f.
  Consonant changes, 8;
  ---- omission of finals 8, 3;
  ---- assimilation of, 8, 4 f.
  ---- stems, 29;
  ---- ---- following analogy of i-stems, 40.
  conspicio, conj., 109, 2, b).
  constare, w. abl., 218, 4.
  Construction acc. to sense, 254, 4; 235, B, 2, c).
  consuetudo est, with subjv. substantive clause, 297, 3.
  consuevi = pres., 262, A.
  consularis, abl. sing. of, 70, 5, a.
  Contending, verbs of, with dat., 358, 3.
  contentus, w. abl., 219, 1.
  contineri, with abl., 218, 4.
  contingit ut, 297, 2.
  Continued action, tenses for, 257, 1, b.
  contra, prep. w. acc., 141;
  ---- as adv., 144, 1.
  Contraction, 7, 2.
  ---- length of vowel as result of, 5, A, 1, b).
  Contrary-to-fact conditions, 304.
  Convicting, verbs of, constr., 208 f.
  Cooerdinate clauses, 165.
  ---- conjunctions, 341 f.
  copia, copiae, 61.
  Copulative conjunctions, 341.
  cor, lacks gen. plu., 57, 7.
  cornu, decl., 48.
  Correlative conjunctions, 341, 3; 342, 2.
  ---- adverbs, 140.
  cottidie, spelling, 9, 2.
  Countries, gender of, 26, 1, a.
  Crime, gen. of, 208, 1; 2.
  -crum, suffix, 147, 4.
  -culum, suffix, 147, 4.
  -culus (a, um), suffix, 148, 1.
  cum, appended, 142, 4.
  cum (conj.), 'when,' 288-290;
  ---- 'whenever,' 288, 3.
  ---- adversative, 309, 3.
  ---- causal, 286, 2.
  ---- explicative, 290.
  ---- to denote a recurring action, 288, 3; 289, a.
  ---- inversum, 288, 2.
  com ... tum, 290, 2.
  cum primum, 287, 1.
  cum, spelling of, 9, 1.
  cum (prep.), with abl. of manner, 220;
  ---- with abl. of accompaniment, 222;
  ---- appended to prons., 142, 4.
  -cundus, suffix, 150, 1.
  cupio, conj, 109, 2, a);
  ---- with subst. clause developed from optative, 296;
  ---- w. inf., 331, IV, and a.
  cur, nulla causa est cur, w. subjv., 295, 7.
  curo, with gerundive const as obj., 337, 8, b, 2.
  Customary action, 259, 1; 260, 2.

                  D.

  D, changed to s, 8, 2;
  ---- d final omitted, 8, 3;
  ---- assimilated, 8, 4.
  Dactyl, 366, 2.
  Dactylic hexameter, 368.
  ---- pentameter, 369.
  dapis, defective, 57, 6.
  Daring, verbs of, with obj. inf., 328, 1.
  Dates 371, 2-5;
  ---- as indeclinable nouns, 371, 6;
  ---- in leap year, 371, 7.
  Dative 17;
  ---- irregular, 1st decl., 21, 2, c);
  ---- 3d decl., 47, 5;
  ---- 4th decl., 49, 2; 3;
  ---- 5th decl., 52, 1 and 3; 186 ff.
  ---- in the gerundive const., 339, 7.
  ---- of agency, 189.
  ---- of direction and limit of motion, 193.
  ---- of indir. obj., 187.
  ---- of advantage or disadvantage, so called, 188, 1.
  ---- of local standpoint, 188, 2, a).
  ---- of person judging, 188, 2, c).
  ---- of possession, 190; 359, 1.
  ---- of purpose or tendency, 191; 339, 7.
  ---- of reference, 188.
  ---- of separation, 188, 2, d).
  ---- of the gerund, 338, 2.
  ---- with adjs., 192;
  ---- with proprius, communis, 204, 2;
  ---- with similis, 204, 3.
  ---- with compound verbs, 187, III.
  ---- with intrans. verbs, 187, II.
  ---- with nomen est, 190, 1.
  ---- with impersonal pass. verbs, 187, II, b.
  ---- with trans. verbs, 187, I.
  ---- with verbs of mingling, 358, 3.
  ---- ethical dat., 188, 2, b).
  de, prep. w. abl., 142;
  ---- with abl. instead of gen. of whole, 201, 1, a;
  ---- with verbs of reminding, 207, a;
  ---- compounds of de governing dat., 188, 2, d;
  ---- de vi, with verbs of accusing and convicting, 208, 3;
  ---- with gerund and gerundive, 338, 4, b.
  dea, deabus, 21, 2, e).
  debebam, debui in apodosis, 304, 3, a).
  debeo, governing obj. inf., 328, 1.
  debui, with pres inf., 270, 2.
  decemvir, gen. plu. of, 25, 6, b).
  decerne, w. subst. clause developed from volitive, 295, 4.
  decet, w. acc., 175, 2, c).
  Declarative sentences, defined, 161, 1;
  ---- in indir. disc., 314.
  Declension, 11;
  ---- heteroclites, 59.
  ---- stems and gen. terminations, 18.
  ---- 1st decl., 20-22;
  ---- 2d decl., 23-27;
  ---- 3d decl., 28-47;
  ---- 4th decl., 48-50;
  ---- 5th decl., 51-53;
  ---- of Greek nouns, 22; 27; 47;
  ---- of adjs., 62-69;
  ---- of prons., 84-90.
  Decreeing, verbs of, w. subjv., 295, 4.
  dedecet, 175, 2, c).
  Defective verbs, 133 f.;
  ---- nouns, 54 f.; 52, 4; 57;
  ---- comparison, 73.
  Definite perfect, see Present perfect.
  Degree of difference, abl. of, 223.
  Degrees of comparison, 71 ff.
  delectat, w. inf. as subj., 327, 1.
  delector, w. abl. of cause, 219.
  Deliberative subjv., 277;
  ---- in indir. questions, 300, 2;
  ---- in indir. disc., 315, 3.
  Demanding, verbs of, w. two accs., 178, 1;
  ---- w. subst. clause, 295, 1.
  Demonstrative pronouns, 87; 246;
  ---- of 1st, 2d, and 3d persons, 87;
  ---- position of demonstratives, 350, 5, a.
  Denominative verbs, 156.
  Dental mutes, 2, 4;
  ---- stems, 33.
  Dependent clauses, 282 ff.
  Deponent verbs, 112;
  ---- forms with passive meanings, 112, b);
  ---- semi-deponents, 114.
  Depriving, verbs of, w. abl, 214, 1, b.
  Derivatives, 147 f.
  -des, patronymics in, 148, 6.
  Description, imperf. as tense of, 260, 1, a.
  Desideratives, 155, 3.
  Desire, adjs. of, w. gen., 204, 1;
  ---- verbs of, w. subst. clauses, 296, 1.
  deterior, 73, 1.
  deus, decl., 25, 4.
  devertor, 114, 3.
  dexter, decl, 65, 1.
  di-, 159, 3, N.
  Diaeresis, 366, 8;
  ---- bucolic d., 368, 3, d).
  Diastole, 367, 2.
  dic, 116, 3.
  dicitur, dictum est, w. inf., 332, note.
  dico, accent of compounds of, in imperative, 116, 3.
  -dicus, comparison of adjs. in, 71, 5.
  Dido, decl, 47, 8.
  dies, decl., 51;
  ---- gender, 53.
  Difference, abl of degree of, 223.
  difficile est = Eng. potential, 271, 1, b).
  difficilis, comp., 71, 4.
  dignor, with abl., 226, 2.
  dignus, 226, 2;
  ---- in rel. clauses of purpose, 282, 3.
  Dimeter, verses, 366, 11.
  Diminutives, 148, 1.
  Diphthongs, 2, 1; 3, 2;
  ---- diphthong stems, 41;
  ---- diphthongs shortened, 362, 2.
  diphthongus, gender of, 26, 1. c).
  Dipodies, 366, 11.
  Direct reflexives, 244, 1.
  ---- object, 172.
  ---- quotation, 313.
  ---- discourse, 313.
  ---- questions, 162.
  dis-, in compounds, 159, 3, N.
  Disjunctive conjunctions, 342.
  dissimilis, comp., 71, 4.
  Distributives, 63, 2; 78, 1; 79; 81, 4.
  diu, compared, 77, 1.
  dives, decl., 70, 1;
  ---- compared, 71, 6.
  dixti, 116, 4, c.
  do, conj., 127.
  doceo, with acc., 178, 1, b);
  ---- with inf., 331, VI.
  domi, locative, 232, 2.
  domo, 229, 1, b).
  domos, 182, 1, b.
  domum, 182, 1, b);
  ---- 'house,' in acc., 182, N.
  domus, decl., 49, 4;
  ---- gender, 50.
  donec, with ind., 293;
  ---- with subjv., 293, III, 2.
  dono, constr., 187, 1, a.
  dos, gender, 44, 3.
  Double consonants, 2, 9.
  ---- questions, 162, 4;
  ---- ---- indirect, 300, 4.
  Doubting, verbs of, w. quin, 298.
  Dubitative subjunctive, see Deliberative.
  dubito, dubium est, non dubito, non dubium est, with quin, 298;
  ---- non dubito w. inf., 298, a.
  duc, 116, 3.
  duco, accent of compounds of, in imper., 116, 3.
  duim, duint, 127, 2.
  -dum, 6, 3.
  dum, temporal with ind., 293;
  ---- with subjv., 293, III, 2;
  ---- in wishes and provisos, 310.
  dummodo, 310.
  duo, decl, 80, 2.
  Duration of time, 181, 2.
  Duty, expressed by gerundive,  189, 337, 8;
  ---- verbs of duty in conclusion of cond. sentences contrary-to-fact,
      304, 3, a;
  ---- subst. clauses dependent on verbs of, 295, 6;
  ---- inf. w. verbs of duty, 327, 1; 328, 1; 330;
  ---- 'it is the duty of,' 198, 3;
  ---- 'I perform a duty, 218, 1.
  duumvir, gen. plu. of, 25, 6, b).
  dux, decl, 32.

                  E.

  e, as vowel, 2, 1;
  ---- as second member of diphthongs, 2, 1;
  ---- sound of, 3, 1;
  ---- change, to i, 7, 1, a;
  ---- for a, 7, 1, c;
  ---- in voc. sing, of 2d decl., 23;
  ---- in abl. sing, of 3d decl., 31;
  ---- dropped in nom. of neuters of 3d decl., 39;
  ---- -e for -i in abl. of mare, 39;
  ---- alternating w. i in abl. sing. of i-stems, 37, 38;
  ---- for e in gen. sing. of 5th decl., 52, 1;
  ---- in abl. sing. of adjs. of 3d decl., 70, 1;
  ---- in bene and male, 77, 1;
  ---- distinguishing vowel of 3d conj., 98;
  ---- before j, 362, 5;
  ---- for -e in imperatives, 363, 2, b;
  ---- in temere and saepe, 363, 2, c.
  e, pronunciation, 3, 1;
  ---- by contraction, 7, 2;
  ---- as ending of Greek nouns, 22;
  ---- e-stems, 51;
  ---- ending of dat. of 5th decl., 52, 3;
  ---- distinguishing vowel of 2d conj., 98;
  ---- -e in fame 363, 2, a;
  ---- ---- in adverbs, 363, 2, c
  e, ex, use, 142; see ex.
  ecquis, 91, 6.
  edic, 116, 3.
  Editorial 'we,' 242, 3.
  edo, 128.
  educ, 116, 3.
  efficio ut, 297, 1.
  efficitur ut, 297, 2.
  Effort, subjv. w. verbs of, 295, 5.
  egeo, w. abl., 214, 1, c.
  ego, 84.
  egomet, 84, 2.
  ei, diphthong, 2, 1; 3, 2.
  -ei, gen. of 5th decl., 52, 1.
  -eis, 148, 6, b).
  ejus, as poss., 86, 1;
  ---- quantity, 362, 5.
  Elegiac distich, 369, 2.
  Elision, 266, 7.
  Ellipsis, 374, 1.
  -ellus (a, um), 148, 1.
  Emphasis, 349.
  Enclitics, accent of preceding syllable, 6, 3.
  ---- -met, 84, 2;
  ---- -pte, 86, 3;
  ---- cum as enclitic, 142, 4
  End of motion, see Limit.
  Endings, case endings, 17, 3;
  ---- personal, of verb, 96;
  ---- in formation of words, 147 f.
  enim, 345.
  -ensimus (-ensumus), 79, N.
  -ensis, 151, 2; 152, 3.
  Envy, verbs of, with dat., 187, II
  eo, 132;
  ---- cpds., 132, 1.
  Epexegetical genitive, 202.
  Epistolary tenses, 265.
  epistula, spelling, 9, 2.
  epitome, decl., 22.
  epulum, epulae, 60, 2.
  equabus, 21, 2, e).
  equester, decl., 68, 1.
  equos, decl., 24.
  -er, decl., of nouns in, 23;
  ---- adjs., 63; 64; 65;
  ---- adjs. in -er compared, 71, 3.
  erga, prep. w. acc., 141.
  ergo, 344, 1, b).
  -ernus, suffix, 154.
  -es, gender of nouns in, 43, 1;
  ---- ---- exception, 44, 5;
  ---- in nom. plu. of Greek nouns of 3d decl., 47, 2.
  -es, ending of Greek nouns, nom. sing. in, 22.
  ---- gen. -is, decl. of nouns in, 40, 1, a).
  esse, conjugation of, 100;
  ---- compounds of, 125; 126;
  ---- esse omitted, 116, 5.
  est qui, with subj., 283, 2.
  et, 341, 1, a;
  ---- in enumerations, 341, 4, c).
  et is, 247, 4.
  et ... neque, 341, 3.
  Ethical dative, 188, 2, b).
  etiam, in answers, 162, 5.
  et non, 341, 2, c).
  etsi, 'although,' 309, 2;
  ---- etsi, 'even if,' 309, 2, a.
  -etum, suffix, 148, 3.
  -eus, inflection of Greek nouns in, 47, 6;
  ---- adj. suffix, 151, 1.
  evenit ut, 297, 2.
  ex, 142, 2;
  ---- with abl., instead of gen. of whole, 201, 1, a;
  ---- compounds of, with dat., 188, 2, d;
  ---- with abl. of source, 215, 1.
  Exchanging, verbs of, with abl. of association, 222A.
  Exclamation, acc. of, 183.
  Exclamatory sentences, 161, 3.
  Expectancy, clauses denoting, in subjv., 292, 1; 293, III, 2.
  exposco, constr., 178, 1, a).
  exsisto, spelling, 9, 2.
  exspecto, spelling, 9, 2.
  exteri, xterior, 73, 2.
  extremus, use, 241, 1.
  exuo, w. abl., 214, 1, b.

                  F.

  f, pronunciation, 3, 3;
  ---- nf, quantity of vowel before, 5, 1, a.
  fac, 116, 3;
  ---- with subjv., 295, 5.
  facile, 77, 3.
  facilis, comp., 71, 4.
  facio, 109, 2, a);
  ---- pass. of, 131.
  ---- in imper., 116, 3.
  falsus, comparison, 73, 3.
  fame, 59, 2, b).
  Familiarity, adjs. of, w. gen., 204. 1.
  familias, 21, 2, a.
  fari, 136.
  fas, indeclinable, 58.
  fauces, decl., 40, 1, d.
  Favor, verbs signifying, with dat., 187, II.
  Fearing, verbs of, constr. 296, 2.
  febris, decl. 38, 1.
  felix, 70.
  Feminine, see Gender.
  Feminine caesura, 368, 3, c.
  femur, decl. 42, 4.
  -fer, decl. of nouns in; adjs., 23, 2;
  ---- adjs. 65, 1.
  fero, and its compounds, 129.
  -ficus, comparison of adjs. in, 71, 5.
  fidei, 52, 1.
  fido, 114, 1;
  ---- with abl., 219, 1, a.
  fidus, compared, 73, 3.
  fierem, fieri 362, 1, c;
  ---- fieri potest ut, 298, 2.
  Fifth decl., 51 f.
  Figures of rhetoric, 375.
  ---- of syntax, 374.
  fili, 25, 3.
  filia, filiabus, 21, 2, e
  Filling, verbs of, w. abl., 218, 8.
  Final clauses, see Purpose clauses.
  Final consonant omitted, 8, 3.
  Final syllables, quantity, 363, 364.
  finis, fines, 61.
  Finite verb, 95.
  fio, conj., 131.
  fio, with abl., 218, 6.
  First conj., 101;
  ---- principal parts of verbs of, 120;
  ---- deponents of 1st conj., 113.
  First decl., 20 f.;
  ---- peculiarities, 21;
  ---- Greek nouns of 1st decl., 22.
  fit ut, 297, 2.
  flagito, constr., 178, 1, a.
  fodio, conj., 109, 2, a.
  Foot, in verse, 366, 2.
  'For,' its Latin equivalents, 358, 1.
  fore, 100, footnote 32.
  fore ut, 270, 3;
  ---- 297, 2.
  forem, fores, etc., 100, footnote 31.
  foris, 228, 1, c.
  Formation of words, 146 f.
  fors, forte, 57, 2, a.
  fortior, decl., 69.
  fortis, 69.
  fortuna, fortunae, 61.
  Fourth conj., 107.
  Fourth decl., 48;
  ---- dat. in -u, 49, 2;
  ---- gen. in -i, 49, 1;
  ---- dat. abl. plu. in -ubus, 49, 3.
  fraude, abl. of manner, 220, 2.
  Free, abl. w. adjs. signifying, 214, 1, d.
  Freeing, abl. w. verbs of, 214, 1, a.
  frenum, plu. of, 60, 2.
  Frequentatives, 155, 2.
  fretus w. abl., 218, 3.
  Fricatives, 2, 7.
  Friendly, dat. w. adjs. signifying, 192, 1.
  fructus, decl., 48.
  frugi, compared, 72; 70, 6.
  frugis, 57, 6.
  fruor, with abl., 218, 1;
  ---- in gerundive constr., 339, 4.
  fugio, conj., 109, 2, a).
  fui, fuisti, etc., for sum, es, etc., in compound tenses, 102, footnotes
      36, 37.
  Fullness, adjs. of, w. abl., 218, 8;
  ---- w. gen., 204, 1.
  fungor, w. abl., 218, 1;
  ---- in gerundive constr., 339, 4.
  fur, decl., 40, 1, d.
  furto, abl. of manner, 220, 2.
  Future tense, 161;
  ---- w. imperative force, 261, 3.
  ---- time in the subjv., 269.
  ---- perfect, 264;
  ---- ---- with future meaning, 133, 2;
  ---- ---- inf., 270, 4.
  ---- imperative, 281, 1.
  ---- infinitive, 270;
  ---- ---- periphrastic fut. inf., 270, 3, and a.
  ---- participle, 337, 4.
  futurum esse ut, with subjv., 270, 3.

                  G.

  gaudeo, semi-deponent, 114, 1.
  gemo, w. acc., 175, 2, b.
  Gender 13-15;
  ---- in 1st decl., 20; 21;
  ---- in 2d decl., 23;
  ---- exceptions, 26;
  ---- in 3d decl., 43 f.;
  ---- in 4th decl., 50;
  ---- in 5th decl., 53;
  ---- determined by endings, 14;
  ---- ---- by signification, 15, A;
  ---- heterogeneous nouns, 60.
  gener, decl, 23, 2.
  General relatives, 312, 1;
  ---- general truths, 259, 1; 262, B, 1;
  ---- 'general' conditions, 302, 2; 3.
  Genitive, 17;
  ---- in -i for -ii, 25, 1 and 2;
  ---- of 4th decl., in -i, 49, 1;
  ---- of 5th decl. in -i, 52, 2;
  ---- of 5th decl. in -ei, 52, 1;
  ---- ---- in -e, 52, 3;
  ---- of 1st decl. in -ai, 21, 2, b;
  ---- of 1st decl. in -as, 21, 2, a;
  ---- gen. plu. -um for -arum, 21, 2 d);
  ---- ---- -um for orum, 25, 6; 63, 2;
  ---- ---- -um for -ium, 70, 7;
  ---- gen. plu. lacking, 57, 7;
  ---- syntax of, 194 f.
  ---- of characteristic, 203, 1.
  ---- of charge with judicial verbs, 208.
  ---- of indefinite price, 203, 4.
  ---- of indefinite value, 203, 3.
  ---- of material, 197.
  ---- of measure, 203, 2.
  ---- of origin, 196.
  ---- of possession, 198.
  ---- of quality, 203.
  ---- of the whole, 201.
  ---- appositional, 202.
  ---- objective, 200.
  ---- of separation, 212, 3.
  ---- subjective, 199.
  ---- with adjs., 204;
  ---- ---- with participles, 204, 1, a.
  ---- with causa, gratia, 198, 1.
  ---- with verbs, 205 f.;
  ---- ---- of plenty and want, 212;
  ---- ---- with impers. verbs, 209.
  ---- position of gen., 350, 1.
  genus, decl. 36;
  ---- id genus, 185, 1.
  -ger, decl. of nouns in, 23, 2;
  ---- adjs., 65, 1.
  Gerund, 95, 1;
  ---- 1st conj., 101;
  ---- 2d conj., 103;
  ---- 3d conj., 105;
  ---- 4th conj., 107;
  ---- syntax, 338;
  ---- with object, 338, 5.
  Gerundive, 95, 1;
  ---- 1st conj., 102;
  ---- 2d conj., 104;
  ---- 3d conj., 106;
  ---- 4th conj., 108;
  ---- in periphrastic conj., 115; 337, 8.
  Gerundive, const., 339, 1-6;
  ---- in passive periphrastic conj., 337, 8 f.;
  ---- gen. denoting purpose, 339, 6;
  ---- with dat. of purpose, 191, 3; 339, 7.
  gnarus, not compared, 75, 2.
  Gnomic present, 259, 1;
  ---- perfect, 262, 1.
  gradior, conj., 109, 2, c.
  Grammatical gender, 15.
  gratia, with gen., 198, 1;
  ---- gratia, gratiae, 61.
  Greek nouns, 1st decl., 22;
  ---- 2d decl., 27;
  ---- ---- exceptions in gender, 26, 1, c);
  ---- 3d decl., 47;
  ---- Greek acc., 180;
  ---- Greek nouns in verse, 365.
  grus, decl., 41, 2.
  gu = gv, 3, 3.
  Guttural mutes, 2, 4.
  ---- stems, 32.

                  H.

  h, pron., 3, 3;
  ---- ph, ch, th, 2, 4; 3, 3.
  habeo, with perf. pass. partic., 337, 6.
  Hadria, gender, 21, 1.
  Happening, verbs of, w. ind., 299, 1, 2;
  ---- w. subjv., 297, 2.
  Hard consonants, 2, 3, a), footnote 4.
  Hardening, 367, 4.
  haud, use, 347, 2, a;
  ---- haud scio an, 300, 5.
  have, 137, 5.
  Help, verbs signifying, w. dat. 187, II.
  Hendiadys, 374, 4.
  heri, locative, 232, 2.
  Heteroclites, 59.
  Heterogeneous nouns, 60.
  Hexameter, dactylic, 368.
  Hiatus, 366, 7, a.
  hic, 87; 246, 1; 246, 2;
  ---- hic, 364, footnote 60.
  hiems, 35, footnote 13.
  Hindering, verbs of, with subjv., 295, 3.
  Historical tenses, 258;
  ---- historical present, 259, 3; 268, 3;
  ---- historical perfect, 262, B;
  ---- historical infinitive, 335.
  honor, decl., 36.
  Hoping, verbs of, w. inf., 331, I.
  Hortatory subjv., 274.
  hortus, decl., 23.
  hoscine, 87, footnote 23
  hostis, decl., 38.
  hujusce, 87, footnote 23
  humi, locative, 232, 2.
  humilis, comp., 71, 4.
  humus, gender of, 26, 1, b.
  huncine, 87, footnote 23
  Hyperbaton, 350, 11, a.
  Hypermeter, 367, 6.
  Hysteron proteron, 374, 7.

                  I.

  i, 1, 1;
  ---- in diphthongs, 2, 1;
  ---- pron., 3, 1;
  ---- from e, 7, 1, a;
  ---- from a, 7, 1, b;
  ---- dropped by syncope, 7, 4;
  ---- for u in some words, 9, 1;
  ---- changes to e, 39;
  ---- dropped, 39;
  ---- final i short, 363, 3;
  ---- becomes j, 367, 4.
  i-stems, 37; 39;
  ---- not always ending in -is, 38, 3.
  -i, gen. and voc. of 2d decl. nouns in -ius and -ium in, 25, 1 and 2.
  ---- gen. of 4th decl. nouns in -us, 49, 1.
  ---- gen. of 5th decl. nouns, 52, 2.
  i-stem, vis, 41.
  i, in abl., 3d decl., 38, 1; 39;
  ---- in adjs., 67, 3, a; 70, 5;
  ---- participles, 70, 3;
  ---- patrials, 70, 5, c);
  ---- nom. plu., of is, 87;
  ---- as characteristic of 4th conj., 98.
  -ia, 149.
  Iambus, 366, 2.
  Iambic measures, 370.
  ---- trimeter, 370.
  -ianus, suffix, 152, 1.
  -ias, suffix, 148, 6, b).
  -ibam, in imperf., 116, 4, b).
  -ibo, in future, 116, 4, b).
  Ictus, 366, 5.
  -icus, suffix, 151, 2; 152, 2.
  id aetatis, 185, 2.
  id genus, 185, 1.
  id quod 247, 1, b.
  id temporis, 185, 2.
  Ideal 'you'; see Indefinite second person.
  idem, 87; 248.
  idem ac, 248, 2.
  Ides, 371, 2, c).
  -ides, suffix, 148, 6, a).
  -ides, suffix, 148, 6, a).
  -ido, suffix, 147, 3, c).
  idoneus, not compared, 74, 2;
  ---- w. dat., 192, 2.;
  ---- w. ad and acc., 192, 2 and N.;
  ---- with rel. clause of purpose, 282, 3.
  -idus, suffix, 150, 3.
  Idus, fem. by exception, 50.
  -ie, in voc. sing. of adjs. in -ius, 63, 1.
  iens, pres. partic. from eo, 132.
  -iens, as ending of numeral adverbs, 97 and N.
  -ier, inf. ending, 116, 4, a.
  -ies, nouns in, 51.
  igitur, 344, 1, c).
  ignis, decl., 38.
  -ii, in gen, sing. of io-stems, 25, 2.
  iis, in dat. and abl. plu. of is, 87.
  -ile, suffix, 148, 3.
  Ilion, decl., 27.
  -ilis, suffix, 151, 2.
  -ilis, suffix, 150, 4.
  Illative conjunctions, 344.
  ille, 87;
  ---- 'the following,' 246, 2;
  ---- 'the former,' 246, 1;
  ---- 'the well-known,' 246, 3;
  ---- position, 350, 5, b.
  illuc, 87, footnote 25.
  -illus (a, um), diminutive suffix, 148, 1.
  -im, in acc., 3d decl., 38, 1.
  -im, -is in subjv., 116, 4, d.
  impedimentum, impedimenta, 61.
  Imperative, 281;
  ---- tenses in, 94, 3; 281, 1;
  ---- future indic. with force of, 261, 3.
  ---- as protasis of a conditional sent., 305, 2;
  ---- ---- as apodosis, 302, 4.
  ---- sent. in indir disc., 316.
  Imperfect tense, 260;
  ---- conative, 260, 3;
  ---- inceptive, 260, 3;
  ---- with jam, etc., 260, 4;
  ---- epistolary imp., 265.
  Imperfect subjv. in conditional sent. referring to the past, 304, 2.
  Impersonal verbs, 138;
  ---- gen. with, 209;
  ---- dat. with, 187, II, b;
  ---- in passive, 256, 3;
  ---- with substantive clauses developed from volitive, 295, 6;
  ---- of result, 297, 2;
  ---- with infin., 327, 1; 330.
  impetus, defective, 57, 4.
  Implied indir. disc., 323.
  imus, 'bottom of,' 241, 1.
  in, prep., 143;
  ---- verbs compounded w. in governing acc., 175, 2, a, 2;
  ---- verbs compounded w. in governing dat., 187, III.
  in with abl. of place, 228;
  ---- with abl. of time, 230, 2; 231.
  -ina, suffix, 148, 5.
  Inceptives, 155, 1.
  Inchoatives, 155, 1.
  Incomplete action, 257, 1, b; 267, 3.
  Indeclinable adjs., 70, 6; 80, 6.
  ---- nouns, 58;
  ---- ---- gender of, 15, 3.
  Indefinite price, 225, 1; 203, 4.
  Indefinite pronouns, 91, 252;
  ---- in conditions, 302, 3.
  Indefinite second person, 280, 3; 356, 3; 302, 2.
  Indefinite value, 203, 3.
  Indicative, equivalent to Eng. subjv., 271.
  ---- in apodosis of conditional sent. of 3d type, 304, 3, a) and b).
  indigeo, constr., 214, 1, N. 2.
  indignus, with abl., 226, 2;
  ---- with rel. clause of purpose, 282, 3.
  Indirect discourse, defined, 313 f.;
  ---- ---- mood in, 313 ff.;
  ---- ---- tenses in 317-18;
  ---- ---- declarative sentences in, 314;
  ---- ---- interrog. sentences in, 315;
  ---- ---- imperative sentences in, 316;
  ---- ---- conditional sentences in, 319-22;
  ---- ---- verbs introducing, 331, 1;
  ---- ---- verb of saying, etc., implied, 314, 2;
  ---- ---- ind. in subord. clauses of indir. disc., 314, 3;
  ---- ---- inf. for subjv. in indir. disc., 314, 4;
  ---- ---- subj. acc. omitted, 314, 5;
  ---- ---- implied indir. disc., 323.
  ---- questions, 300;
  ---- ---- particles introducing, 300, 1, a;
  ---- ---- deliberative subjv. in indir. quest., 300, 2;
  ---- ---- indir. quest. w. si, 300, 3;
  ---- ---- double indir. questions, 300, 4;
  ---- ---- in indir. quest., 300, 6;
  ---- ---- in conditional sents. of 3d type, 322, b.
  ---- reflexives, 244, 2.
  ---- object, 187.
  inferum, inferior, 73, 2.
  infimus, 241, 1.
  Infinitive, gender of, 15, A 3;
  ---- in -ier, 116, 4, a;
  ---- force of tenses in, 270; 326 ff.
  ---- fut. perf. inf., 270, 4;
  ---- ---- periphrastic future, 270, 3.
  ---- without subj. acc., 326-328; 314, 5.
  ---- with subj. acc., 329-331.
  ----  as obj., 328; 331,
  ---- as subj., 327; 330.
  ---- with adjs., 333.
  ---- denoting purpose, 326, N.
  ---- in abl. abs., 227, 3.
  ---- in exclamations, 334.
  ---- historical inf., 335.
  infitias, constr., 182, 5.
  Inflection, 11.
  Inflections, 11 ff.
  infra, prep. w. acc., 141.
  ingens, comp., 73, 4.
  injuria, abl. of manner, 220, 2.
  injussu, defective, 57, 1;
  ---- the abl., 219, 2.
  inl- = ill-, 9, 2.
  innixus, w. abl., 218, 3.
  inops, decl., 70, 2.
  inquam, conj., 134.
  Inseparable prepositions, 159, 3, N.
  insidiae, plu. only, 56, 3.
  instar, 58.
  Instrumental uses of abl., 213; 218 ff.
  Intensive pron., 88.
  Intensives (verbs), 155, 2.
  inter, prep. w. acc., 141;
  ---- compounded w. verbs, governing dat. 187, III;
  ---- to express reciprocal relation, 245.
  interdico, const., 188, 1, a.
  interest, constr., 210; 211.
  interior, comp., 73, 1.
  Interjections, 145.
  Interlocked order, 350, 11, d.
  Interrogative pronouns, 90.
  ---- sentences, 162;
  ---- particles, 162, 2;
  ---- ---- omitted, 162, 2, d);
  ---- in indir. disc., 315.
  intra, prep. w. acc., 141.
  Intransitive verbs, with cognate acc., 176, 4;
  ---- in passive, 256, 3; 187, II, b;
  ---- impersonal intransitives, 138, IV.
  -inus, suffix, 151, 2; 152, 1; 152, 3.
  -io, verbs of 3d conj., 109.
  -ior, ius, comparative ending, 71.
  ipse, 88; 249;
  ---- as indir. reflexive, 249, 3.
  ipsius and ipsorum, with possessive pronouns, 243, 3.
  -ir, decl. of nouns in, 23.
  Irregular comparison, 72 ff.;
  ---- nouns, 42;
  ---- verbs, 124 f.
  is, 87; 247;
  ---- as personal pron., 247, 2.
  -is, as patronymic ending, 148, 6, b);
  ---- nouns in -is of 3d decl., 37 f.;
  ---- adjs. in -is, 69.
  -is, acc. plu., 3d decl., 37; 40.
  ---- -itis, abl. of patrials in, 70, 5, c).
  istaec, 87, footnote 24.
  iste, 87; 246, 4.
  istic, 6, 4.
  istuc, 6, 4; 87, footnote 24.
  ita, in answers, 162, 5.
  itaque, 344, 1, a).
  iter, 42, 1.
  -itia, 149.
  -ito, frequentatives in, 155, 2, a.
  -ium, gen. of nouns in, 25, 2;
  ---- ending of gen. plu., 3d decl., 37 f.; 39; 40; 147, 3, b); 148, 2.
  -ius, gen. and voc. sing. of nouns in, 25, 1 and 2;
  ---- of adjs., 63, a; 151, 2; 152, 2; 152, 3;
  ---- -ius for -ius, 362, 1, a).
  -ivus, suffix, 151, 2.

                  J.

  j, 1, 2.
  jacio, conj., 109, 2, a);
  ---- compounds of, 9, 3; 362, 5.
  jam, etc., with present tense, 259, 4;
  ---- with imperfect, 260, 4.
  jecur, decl., 42, 3.
  joco, abl. of manner, 220, 2.
  jocus, plu. of, 60, 2.
  Joining, verbs of, construction, 358, 3.
  jubeo, constr., 295, 1, a: 331, II.
  judicor, w. inf., 332, c.
  jugerum, 59, 1.
  Julian calendar, 371.
  jungo, w. abl., 222A.
  Juppiter, decl., 41.
  juratus, 114, 2.
  jure, abl. of manner, 220, 2.
  jus est, with substantive clause, 297, 3.
  jussu, 57, 1;
  ---- the abl., 219, 2.
  Jussive subjv., 275;
  ---- equiv. to a protasis, 305, 2.
  juvat, w. acc., 172, 2, c);
  ---- with inf., 327, 1.
  Juvenale, abl., 70, 5, b.
  juvenis, a cons. stem, 38, 2;
  ---- comparison, 73, 4.
  juvo, with acc., 187, II, N.
  juxta, prep. w. acc., 141.

                  K.

  k, 1, 1.
  Knowing, verbs of, w. inf., 331, I.
  Knowledge, adjs. of, w. gen., 204.

                  L.

  l, pron., 3, 3.
  Labial mutes, 2, 4.
  ---- stems, 31;
  ---- ---- gender of, 43, 3; 46, 1.
  lacer, decl., 65, 1.
  lacus, decl., 49, 3.
  laedo, w. acc., 187, II, N.
  laetus, w. adverbial force, 239.
  lapis, decl., 33.
  largior, 113.
  Latin period, 351, 5.
  Length of syllables, 5, B.
  Length of vowels, 5, A.
  -lentus, suffix, 151, 3.
  leo, decl., 35.
  Liber, decl, 23, 2.
  liber, adj., decl., 65, 1.
  libero, constr., 214, 1, N. 1.
  liberta, libertabus, 21, 2, e).
  liberum, gen. plu., 25, 6, c).
  licet, with subjv., 295, 6 and 8; 308, a;
  ---- with inf., 327, 1; 330.
  licet, adversative, 309, 4.
  Likeness, adjs. of, w. dat., 192, 1.
  Limit of motion, acc. of., 182.
  Lingual mutes, 2, 4.
  linter, decl., 40.
  Liquids, 2, 5.
  ---- stems, 34.
  lis, decl., 40, 1, d).
  Litotes, 375, 1.
  littera, litterae, 61.
  Locative, 17, 1;
  ---- in -ae, 21, 2, c);
  ---- in -i, 25, 5;
  ---- syntax, 232;
  ---- apposition with, 169, 4;
  ---- loc. uses of abl., 213; 228 f.
  loco, locis, the abl., 228, 1, b.
  locus, plurals of, 60, 2.
  Long syllables, 5, B, 1.
  ---- vowels, 5, A, 1.
  longius = longius quam, 271, 3.
  longum est = Eng. potential, 217, 1, b.
  lubet, lubido, spelling, 9, 1.
  ludis, the abl., 230, 1.
  -lus, -la, -lum, diminutives in, 148, 1.
  lux, 57, 7.

                  M.

  m, pron., 3, 3;
  ---- changed to n before d, c, 8, 5, c;
  ---- m-stem, 35, footnote 13;
  ---- m-final in poetry, 366, 10.
  maereo, w. acc., 175, 2, b.
  magis, comparison, 77, 1;
  ---- comparison with, 74.
  magni, gen. of value, 203, 3.
  magnopere, compared, 77, 1.
  magnus, compared, 72.
  Making, verbs of, w. two accusatives, 177.
  male, comparison, 77, 1.
  maledicens, comparison, 71, 5, a).
  malim, potential subjv., 280, 2, a.
  mallem, potential subjv., 280, 4.
  malo, 130;
  ---- with inf., 331, IV, and a;
  ---- with subjv., 296, 1, a.
  malus, comparison, 72.
  mane, indeclinable, 58.
  Manner, abl. of, 200.
  mare, decl., 39, 2;
  ---- mari, 228, 1, c).
  mas, decl., 40, 1, d).
  Masculine, see Gender.
  Masculine caesura, 368, 3, c.
  Material, abl. of, 224, 3.
  materies, materia, 59, 2, a).
  mature, compared, 77, 1.
  maturus, compared, 71, 3.
  maxime, adjs. compared with, 74.
  maximi, as gen. of value, 203, 3.
  maxumus, 9, 1.
  Means, abl. of, 218;
  ---- abl. abs. denoting, 227, 2;
  ---- denoted by partic., 337, 2, d.
  med, for me, 84, 3.
  Mediae (consonants), 2, 3, b), footnote 5.
  medius, 'middle of', 241, 1.
  mei, as objective gen., 242, 2.
  melior, comparison, 72.
  melius est = Eng. potential, 271, 1, b).
  memini, 133;
  ---- constr., 206, 1, a; 2, a.
  memor, decl., 70, 2.
  -men, -mentum, suffixes, 147, 4.
  mensis, 38, 2, footnote 14.
  mentem (in mentem venire), 206, 3.
  -met, enclitic, 6, 3; 84, 2.
  Metrical close of sent., 350, 12.
  metuo, w. subjv., 296, 2.
  mi, dat., 84, 1.
  mi, voc. of meus, 86, 2.
  Middle voice, verbs in, 175, 2, d).
  miles, decl., 33.
  militiae, locative, 232, 2.
  mille, milia, decl., 80, 5.
  minime, comparison, 77, 1;
  ---- in answers, 162, 5, b).
  minimus, comparison, 72.
  minor, comparison, 72.
  minoris, gen. of value, 203, 3;
  ---- of price, 203, 4.
  minus, comparison 77, 1;
  ---- = minus quam, 217, 3;
  ---- quo minus, 295, 3;
  ---- si minus, 306, 2 and a.
  miror, conj., 113.
  mirus, comparison, 75, 2.
  miscere, with abl., 222A;
  ---- with dat., 358, 3.
  misereor, with gen., 209, 2.
  miseresco, with gen., 209, 2.
  miseret, constr., 209.
  Mixed stems, 40.
  modium, gen. plu., 25, 6, a).
  modo, in wishes and provisos, 310.
  moneo, 103;
  ---- constr., 178, 1, d).
  months, gender of names of, 15, 1;
  ---- decl. 68, 1;
  ---- abl., of month names, 70, 5, a);
  ---- names, 371, 1.
  Moods, 94, 2.
  ---- in independent sentences, 271 f.
  ---- in dependent clauses, 282 f.
  Mora, 366, 1.
  morior, conj. 109, 2, c);
  mos, decl., 36;
  ---- mores, 61.
  mos est, with subjv. clause, 297, 3.
  muliebre secus, constr., 185, 1.
  Multiplication, distributives used to indicate, 81, 4, c.
  multum, 77, 3;
  ---- compared, 77, 1.
  multus, compared, 72;
  ---- with another adj., 241, 3.
  mus decl., 40, 1, d).
  mutare, with abl., 222A.
  Mutes, 2, 3.
  Mute stems, 30.

                  N.

  n, pronunciation, 3, 3;
  ---- n-stems, 35.
  n adulterinum, 2, 6.
  -nam, appended to quis, 90, 2, d.
  Names, Roman, 373.
  Naming, verbs of, w. two accusatives, 117, 1.
  Nasals, 2, 6.
  Nasal stems, 35.
  natu, 57, 1;
  ---- maximus natu, minimus natu, 73, 4, footnotes 20, 21; 226, 1.
  Natural gender, 14.
  natus, constr., 215.
  navis, decl., 41, 4.
  nd, vowel short before, 5, 2, a.
  -ne, 6, 3 f; 162, 2, c); 300, 1, b);
  ---- -ne ... an, 162, 4;
  ---- ---- in indir. double questions, 300, 4.
  ne, in prohibitions, 276;
  ---- with hortatory subjv., 274;
  ---- with concessive, 278;
  ---- with optative, 279;
  ---- in purpose clauses, 282;
  ---- in substantive clauses, 295 f., 296;
  ---- in provisos, 310.
  ne, 'lest,' 282, 1; 296, 2.
  ne non for ut after verbs of fearing, 296, 2, a.
  ne ... quidem, 347, 1; 2.
  Nearness, adjs. of, w. dat., 192, 1.
  nec, 341, 1, d);
  ---- nec usquam, 341, 2, d).
  necesse est, w. subjv., 295, 8.
  necne, in double questions, 162, 4.
  nefas, indeclinable, 58.
  Negatives, 347, 2;
  ---- two negatives strengthening the negation, 347, 2.
  nemo, defective, 57, 3;
  ---- use, 252, 6.
  nequam, indeclinable, 70, 6;
  ---- compared, 72.
  neque, 341, 1, d);
  ---- neque in purpose clauses, 282, 1, e.
  nequeo, conj., 137, 1.
  ne quis, use, 91, 5.
  nequiter, compared, 77, 1.
  nescio an, 300, 5.
  nescio quis, as indef. pron., 253, 6.
  Neuter, see Gender.
  neuter, decl., 66;
  ---- use, 92, 1.
  neve (neu), in purpose clauses, 282, 1, d.
  nf, quantity of vowel before, 5, 1, a.
  nihil, indeclinable, 58.
  nihil est cur, quin, 295, 7.
  ningit, 'it snows,' 138, 1.
  nisi, 306, 1 and 4.
  nisi forte, 306, 5.
  nisi si, 306, 5.
  nisi vero, 306, 5.
  nitor, constr., 218, 3.
  nix, decl., 40, 1, d).
  No, in answers, 162, 5, b.
  -no, class of verbs, 117, 4.
  noli, with inf., in prohibitions, 276, b.
  nolim, potential subjv., 280, 2, a.
  nollem, potential subjv., 280, 4.
  nolo, 130;
  ---- with inf., 331, IV and a; 276, 2, a;
  ---- with subjv., 296, 1, a.
  nomen, decl., 35;
  ---- nomen est, constr., 190, 1;
  ---- nomen, as part of Roman name, 373.
  Nominative, 17; 170;
  ---- used for voc., 171, 1;
  ---- nom. sing. lacking, 57, 6;
  ---- pred. nom., 168.
  Nones, 371, 2, b).
  non, in answers, 162, 5, b);
  ---- with poten. subjv., 280;
  ---- with deliberative, 277.
  non dubito quin, with subjv., 298;
  ---- non dubito, w. inf., 298, a; b.
  non modo for non modo non, 343, 2, a.
  nonne, 162, 2, a); 300, 1, b), N.
  non quia, with ind., 286, 1, c;
  ---- with subjv., 286, 1, b.
  non quin, with sujbv., 286, 1, b.
  non quod, with ind., 286, 1, c;
  ---- with subjv., 286, 1, b.
  nos = ego, 242, 3.
  nostri, as objective gen., 242, 2.
  nostrum, as gen. of whole, 242, 2;
  ---- as possessive gen., 242, 2, a.
  Nouns, 12 ff.; 353;
  ---- derivation of, 147 f.
  ---- in -is not always i-stems, 38, 1.
  ---- of agency, force, 353, 4.
  ---- used in plu. only, 56.
  ---- used in sing. only, 55.
  ---- used only in certain cases, 57.
  ---- indeclinable, 58.
  ---- with change of meaning in plural, 61.
  ---- syntax, 166 f.
  ---- predicate, agreement of, etc., 167 f.
  ---- appositives, agreement of, etc., 169 f.
  Noun and adj. forms of the verb, 95, 2.
  novi, as pres., 262, A.
  novus, compared, 73, 3.
  ns, quantity of vowel before, 5, 1, a.
  -ns, decl. of nouns in, 40, 1, c).
  nt, quantity of vowel before, 5, 2, a.
  nubes, decl., 40, 1, a
  nulla causa est cur, quin, 295, 7.
  nullus, decl., 66; 57, 3;
  ---- use, 92, 1.
  num, 162, 2, b); 300, 1, b).
  Number, 16; 94, 4.
  Numerals, 78 f.;
  ---- peculiarities in use of, 81.
  numquis, decl., 91, 5.
  nuper, compared, 77, 1.
  -nus, suffix, 151, 2.

                  O.

  o, vowel, 2, 1;
  ---- as element in dipthong oe, 2, 1;
  ---- pron., 3, 1;
  ---- alternating w. u in certain classes of words, 9, 1; 2; 4;
  ---- o-stems, 23; 24;
  ---- in cito, 77, 2, a;
  ---- in duo, 80, 2;
  ---- in ego, 84; 363, 4, a;
  ---- in modo, 363, 4, a;
  ---- in compounds of pro-, 363, 4, c;
  ---- in amo, leo, etc., 363, 4, b.
  o, pron. 3, 1;
  ---- for au, 7, 1, e;
  ---- by contraction, 7, 2;
  ---- in abl. sing. of 2d decl., 23;
  ---- in nom. sing. of 3d decl., 35;
  ---- in Greek nouns, 47, 8;
  ---- in adverbs, 77, 2;
  ---- in ambo, 80, 2, a;
  ---- in personal endings, 96.
  ob, prep. w. acc., 141;
  ---- verbs compounded w. governing dat., 187, III.
  Obeying, verbs of, w. dat., 187, II.
  Object, direct, 172 f.;
  ---- two objects w. same verb, 177; 178;
  ---- indirect, 187 f.;
  ---- inf. as obj., 326; 328; 329; 331.
  Objective gen., 200.
  Obligation, verb in expression of, 304, 3, a;
  ---- see also Duty.
  Oblique cases, 71, 2.
  obliviscor, constr., 206, 1, b; 2.
  octodecim (for duodeviginti), 81, 2.
  odi, 133.
  oe, 2, 1;
  ---- pron., 3, 2.
  Old forms, familias, 21, 2, a;
  ---- aulai, 21, 2, b;
  ---- servos, aevom, equos, etc., 24;
  ---- med, ted, 84, 3;
  ---- sed, 85, 3.
  olle, archaic for ille, 87.
  -olus (a, um), 148, 1.
  -om, later -um in 2d decl., 23.
  -on, Greek nouns, 2d decl. in, 27.
  Onomatopoeia, 375, 4.
  opera, operae, 61.
  Operations of nature, impersonal verbs expressing, 138, 1.
  opinione with comparatives, 217, 4.
  opis, 57, 6;
  ---- opes, 61.
  oportet, 138;
  ---- w. subjv., 295, 6; 8;
  ---- w. inf., 327, 330.
  oportuit, with pres. inf. 'ought to have', 270, 2;
  ---- with perf. inf., 270, 2, a.
  oppidum (Genavam ad oppidum), 182, 2, a.
  Optative subjv., 272; 279;
  ---- substantive clauses developed from, 296.
  optimates, decl., 40, 1, d.
  optimus, comp., 72.
  opto, w. subst. cl. developed from optative, 296, 1.
  optumus, spelling, 9, 1.
  opus est, w. abl., 218, 2;
  ---- w. partic., 218, 2, c.
  -or, nouns in, 34;
  ---- -or for -os, 36;
  ---- gender of nouns in, 43, 1;
  ---- exceptions in gender, 44, 2;
  ---- as suffix, 147, 2.
  Oratio Obliqua, 313 f.
  Order of words, 348 f.
  Ordinals, 78, 1; 79.
  orior, conjugation, 123, VII.
  oriundus, constr., 215, 2.
  oro, with acc., 178, 1, a
  Orpheus, decl., 47, 6.
  Orthography, peculiarities, 9.
  ortus, constr., 215.
  os, decl., 57, 7.
  os, decl., 42.
  -os, later -us in 2d decl., 23.
  -os, later -or in 3d decl., 36, 1.
  ---- -os, Greek nouns, 2d decl. in, 27.
  -osus, form of suffix, 151, 3.
  ovis, decl., 38, 1.
  Oxymoron, 375, 2.

                  P.

  p, pron., 3, 3;
  ---- by assimilation, 8, 4;
  ---- by partial assimilation, 8, 5.
  paenitet, 138, II;
  ---- with gen., 209
  palam, as prep. w. abl., 144, 2.
  Palatal mutes, 2, 4.
  paluster, decl., 68, 1.
  Parasitic vowels, 7, 3.
  paratus, with infin., 333.
  Pardon, verbs signifying, w. dat., 187, II.
  pario, 109, 2, a).
  pars, partes, 61.
  parte, abl. of place, 228, 1, b.
  partem, adverbially used, 185, 1.
  Participation, adjs. of, w. gen., 204, 1.
  Participial stem, 97, III;
  ---- formation, 119.
  Participles, in -ans and -ens, 70, 3;
  ---- gen. plu. of in -um, 70, 7;
  ---- pres. act. partic., 97, I, 5; 101; 103; 105; 107; 110; 113;
  ---- fut. act. partic., 97, III;
  ---- as one of the principal parts of the verb, 99, footnote 28; 100;
      101; 103; 105; 107; 110; 113;
  ---- perf. pass. partic., 97, III; 102; 104; 106; 108; 111; 113;;
  ---- gerundive, see Gerundive;
  ---- fut. act., peculiar formation of, 119, 4;
  ---- perf. pass., w. act. or neuter meaning, 114, 2;
  ---- of deponents, 112, b;
  ---- syntax, 336 ff.
  Participles, fut. act., 119, 4;
  ---- ---- denoting purpose, 337, 4.
  ---- perf. act., how supplied, 356, 2.
  ---- perf. pass. 336, 3;
  ---- ---- as pres., 336, 5.
  ---- pres. partic., 336, 2;
  ---- ---- with conative force, 336, 2, a.
  ---- perf. pass., with active meaning, 114, 2;
  ---- pred. use of partic., 337, 2;
  ---- participles equivalent to subordinate clauses, 337, 2;
  ---- ---- to cooerdinate clauses, 337, 5;
  ---- w. opus est, 218, 2, c;
  ---- with noun, equivalent to abstract noun, 337, 6;
  ---- with habeo, 337, 7.
  ---- with video, audio, facio, etc., 337, 3.
  Particles, 139 f.; 341 f.
  Partitive apposition, 169, 5.
  Partitive gen., so called, 201.
  Parts of speech, 10.
  parum, comparison, 77, 1.
  parvi, gen. of value, 203, 3.
  parvus, comparison, 72.
  Passive, verbs in, with middle meaning, 175, 2, d; 256;
  ---- verbs governing dat. used in pass. only impersonally, 187, II, b;
  ---- constr. of passive verbs of saying, etc., 332 and note;
  ---- how supplied when missing, 356, 1.
  patior, conj., 109, 2, c; 113;
  ---- with inf., 331, III.
  Patrial adjs., 70, 5, c.
  Patronymics, 148, 6.
  paulum, formation, 77, 3.
  paulus, spelling, 9, 2.
  pauper, decl.,, 70, 1.
  pedester, decl., 68, 1.
  pejor, quantity of first syllable, 362, 5.
  pelagus, gender of, 26, 2.
  Penalty, abl. of, 208, 2, b.
  penates, decl., 40, 1, d).
  penes, prep. w. acc., 141.
  Pentameter, dactylic, 369.
  Penult, 6, 2.
  per, prep. w. acc., 141;
  ---- with acc. of time and space, 181, 2.
  Perceiving, verbs of, w. inf., 331, I.
  Perfect active ptc., how supplied in Latin, 356, 2.
  Perfect pass. partic., force of w. deponent verbs, 112, b;
  ---- dat. of agency sometimes used w., 189, 2;
  ---- opus, 218, 2, c.
  Perfect stem, 97, II;
  ---- ---- formation, 118.
  ---- in -avi, -evi, -ivi contracted, 116, 1.
  ---- historical perf., 262.
  ---- with force of pres. 262; 133, 2;
  ---- pres. perf. and hist. perf. distinguished, 237, 1 and 2;
  ---- gnomic perf., 262, 1;
  ---- perf. subjv. as historical tense, 268, 6 and 7, b;
  ---- perf. inf. w. oportuit, 270, 2;
  ---- perf. prohibitive, 279, a;
  ---- perf. potential, 280, 1 and 2;
  ---- perf. concessive, 278;
  ---- sequence of tenses after perf. inf., 268, 2.
  Periodic structure, 351, 5.
  Periphrastic conj., 115; 269, 3;
  ---- in conditional sentences of the 3d type, 304, 3, b);
  ---- in indir. disc., 322;
  ---- in passive, 337, 8, b, 1.
  ---- fut. inf., 270, 3.
  Persons, 95, 4;
  ---- 2d sing, of indefinite subject, 356, 3.
  Personal pronouns 84; 242;
  ---- ---- as subject, omission of, 166, 2;
  ---- ---- as objective genitives, 242, 2.
  ---- endings, 96.
  persuadeo, with dat., 187, II, a;
  ---- with subjv., 295, 1.
  Persuading, verbs of, w. dat., 187, II.
  ph, 2, 3, c; 2, 4; 3, 3.
  piget, with gen., 209.
  Pity, verbs of, w. gen., 209, 1 and 2.
  Place to which, 182;
  ---- whence, 229;
  ---- place where, 228.
  placitus, force, 114, 2.
  Pleasing, verbs of, w. dat., 187, II, a;
  ---- w. acc., 187, II, a, N.
  plebes, heteroclite, 59, 2, d).
  plebi, gen., 52, 2.
  Plenty and Want, verbs of, constr., 212; cf. 218, 8.
  plenus, w. gen., 218, 8, a.
  Pleonasm, 374, 3.
  pleraque, 6, 5.
  pluit, 138, I.
  Pluperfect tense, formation, 100;
  ---- syntax, 263; 265; 287, 2; 288, 3;
  ---- with imperfect meaning, 133, 2.
  Plural, 16;
  ---- in 5th decl., 52, 4;
  ---- of proper names, 55, 4, a);
  ---- of abstract nouns, 5, 4, c);
  ---- nouns used in, only, 56;
  ---- with change of meaning, 61;
  ---- stylistic use, 353, 1, 2.
  Pluralia tantum, 56; 81, 4, b).
  pluris, gen. of value, 203, 3;
  ---- of price, 203, 4.
  plus, decl., 70; 70, 4;
  ---- = plus quam, 217, 3.
  poema, decl., 47, 5.
  Polysyndeton, 341, 4, b).
  por-, inseparable prep., 159, 3, e.
  porticus, gender, 50.
  portus, decl., 49, 3.
  posco, constr., 178, 1, a).
  Position of clauses, 351, 3.
  ---- of words, 348; 350; 351.
  Possessive dat., 190;
  ---- gen., 198;
  ---- ---- contrasted with dat. of poss., 359, 1.
  Possessive pronouns, 86, 243;
  ---- = objective gen., 243, 2;
  ---- position of, 243, 1, a.
  Possibility, verbs of, put in indic. in cond. sentences, 304, 3, a.
  possum, 126;
  ---- with present infin., 'I might,' 271, 1, a;
  ---- in cond. sentences, 304, 3, a.
  post, prep. w. acc., 144, 1;
  ---- in expressions of time, 357, 1.
  Post-positive words, 343, 1, c).
  posteaquam, 287;
  ---- separated, 287, 3;
  ---- with imperf. ind., 287, 4;
  ---- w. pluperf. ind., 287, 3;
  ---- with subjv., 287, 5.
  posterus, posterior, comp., 73, 2.
  postremus, use, 241, 2.
  postridie, with gen., 201, 3, a.
  postulo, constr., 178, 1, a.
  Potential subjv., 272; 280.
  potior, with gen., 212, 2;
  ---- with abl., 218, 1;
  ---- in gerundive constr., 339, 4.
  ---- adj., 73, 1.
  potius, compared, 77, 1.
  potui, poteram, in apodosis of conditional sent. of 3d type, 304, 3, a);
  ---- in indir. disc., 322, c.
  potui, with pres. inf. = 'could have,' 270, 2.
  potuerim, in dependent apodosis, 322, c.
  potus, force, 114, 2.
  prae, prep, w. abl., 142;
  ---- verbs compounded with governing dat., 187, III;
  ---- short in praeacutus, etc., 362, 2.
  Praenomen, 373.
  praesens, 125.
  praesum, w. dat., 187, III.
  pransus, force, 114, 2.
  preci, -em, -e, 57, 5, a.
  Predicate, 163.
  ---- gen., 198, 3; 203, 5.
  Predicate nouns, 167; 168;
  ---- in acc., 177;
  ---- predicate nouns or adjs. attracted to dat., 327, 2, a;
  ---- ---- to nom., 328, 2.
  ---- adjectives, 232, 2; 177, 2.
  Prepositions, assimilation of, in compounds, 8, 4; 9, 2;
  ---- with acc., 141;
  ---- with  abl., 142;
  ---- as adverbs, 144;
  ---- inseparable prepositions, 159, 3, N.;
  ---- position, 350, 7;
  ---- prepositional phrases as attributive modifiers, 353, 5;
  ---- anastrophe of, 144, 3; 141, 2; 142, 3;
  ---- usage with abl. of sep., 214 f;
  ---- with abl. of source, 215.
  Present tense, 259;
  ---- gnomic, 259, 1;
  ---- conative, 259, 2;
  ---- historical, 259, 3;
  ---- with jam pridem, jam diu, etc., 259, 4;
  ---- with dum, 'while,' 293, I;
  ---- in Repraesentatio, 318;
  ---- pres. subjv., in -im, 127, 2;
  ---- pres. partic., see Participle.
  ---- stem, 97, I;
  ---- ---- formation, 117.
  ---- perf., 257, 1 and 2.
  Preventing, verbs of, w. subjv. clause, 295, 3.
  Price, indefinite, special words in gen. 203, 4; also 225, 1.
  ---- abl. of, 225.
  pridie, with gen., 201, 3, a;
  ---- with acc., 144, 2.
  Primary tenses, see Principal tenses.
  primus, 'first who,' 241, 2.
  princeps, decl., 31.
  Principal parts, 99;
  ---- list, p. 251.
  ---- tenses, 258 f.
  prior, compared, 73, 1.
  prius, compared, 77, 1.
  priusquam, with ind., 291;
  ---- with subjv., 292;
  ---- separated, 292.
  Privation, verbs of, w. abl., 214, 1, b and c.
  pro, prep. w. abl., 142.
  procul, as prep. w. abl., 144, 2.
  prohibeo, w. abl., 214, 2;
  ---- w. subjv. clause, 295, 3.
  Prohibitions, method of expressing, 276.
  Prohibitive subjv., 276.
  Prolepsis, 374, 5.
  Pronominal adjs., 253.
  Pronouns, defined, 82;
  ---- classes, 83;
  ---- personal, 84;
  ---- reflexive, 85;
  ---- possessive, 86;
  ---- demonstrative, 87;
  ---- intensive, 88;
  ---- relative, 89;
  ---- interrogative, 90;
  ---- indefinite, 91;
  ---- pronominal adjs., 92;
  ---- personal, omission of, as subject, 166, 2;
  ---- syntax, 242 f.;
  ---- ---- personal, 242 f.;
  ---- ---- possess., 243 f.;
  ---- ---- reflex., 244 f.;
  ---- ---- reciprocal, 245 f.;
  ---- ---- demonstrative, 246 f.;
  ---- ---- relative, 250 f.;
  ---- ---- indef., 252 f.;
  ---- position, 350, 5; 355.
  Pronunciation, Roman, 3.
  prope, compared, 77, 1.
  Proper names, abbreviated, 373.
  ---- nouns, 12, 1.
  propior, compared, 73, 1;
  ---- with acc., 141, 3.
  proprius, with dat., 204, 2, a;
  ---- with gen., 204, 2.
  propter, prep. w. acc., 141.
  Prosody, 360 f.
  prosper, decl., 65, 1.
  prosum, conj., 125, N.
  Protasis, 301;
  ---- denoting repeated action, 302, 3;
  ---- without si, 305;
  ---- of indef. 2d sing., 302, 2;
  ---- see Conditions.
  Provisos, 310.
  proxime, -us, comp., 73, 1; 77, 1;
  ---- with acc., 141, 3.
  prudens, decl., 70.
  -pte, 86, 3.
  pudet, with gen, 209;
  ---- w. inf., 327, 1.
  puer, decl., 23.
  pulcher, comp., 71, 3.
  puppis, decl., 38, 1.
  Purpose, dat. of purpose, 191;
  ---- with dat. and gerundive, 191, 3;
  ---- w. ad and acc., 192, 2;
  ---- subjv. of purp., 282, 1;
  ---- ---- w. quo, 282, 1, a;
  ---- ---- w. ut ne, 282, 1, b;
  ---- ---- with non in purpose clause, 282, 1, c;
  ---- ---- neve (neu) in purpose clauses, 292, 1, d;
  ---- ---- neque, 282, 1, e;
  ---- rel. clauses of purpose, 282, 2;
  ---- ---- w. dignus, indignus, idoneus, 282, 3;
  ---- independent of principal verb, 282, 4;
  ---- inf., denoting purpose, 326, N.;
  ---- fut. partic., denoting purpose, 337, 4;
  ---- gerund, w. ad, 338, 3;
  ---- gerundive, 339, 2;
  ---- supine, 340.

                  Q.

  qu, pron., 3, 3;
  ---- both letters consonants, 74, a.
  quaero, w. indir. questions, 300, 1, b), N.
  quaeso, 137, 2.
  Quality, gen., 203;
  ---- abl., 224.
  quam, in comparisons, 217, 2;
  ---- with superl., 240, 3;
  ---- ante ... quam, post ... quam, prius ... quam, see antequam,
      postquam, priusquam; quam qui, 283, 2, a.
  quam si, 307, 1.
  quam ut, with subjv., 284, 4.
  quamquam, with ind., 309, 2;
  ---- with subjv., 309, 6;
  ---- = 'and yet,' 309, 5.
  quamvis, with subjv., 309, 1; 6;
  ---- denoting a fact, 309, 6.
  quando, 286, 3, b.
  quanti, as gen. of price, 203, 4;
  ---- of value, 203, 3.
  Quantity, 5.
  ---- of syllables, 5, B; 363 f.
  ---- of vowels, 5, A; 362;
  ---- ---- in Greek words, 365.
  quasi, 307, 1.
  quatio, conj., 109, 2, a).
  -que, accent of word preceding, 6, 3; 6, 5; 341, 1, b); 2, a); 4, c).
  queo, 137, 1.
  Questions, word, sentence, 162 f.;
  ---- rhetorical, 162, 3;
  ---- double (alternative), 162, 4;
  ---- indirect, 300;
  ---- questions in indir. disc., 315.
  qui, rel., 89;
  ---- interr., 90;
  ---- indef., 91;
  ---- for quis in indir. questions, 90, 2, b;
  ---- with ne, si, nisi, num, 91, 5;
  ---- in purpose clauses, 282, 2;
  ---- abl., 90, 2, a.
  quia, in causal clauses, 286, 1.
  quicum, 89.
  quicumque, decl., 91, 8.
  quidam, decl, 91; syntax, 252, 3.
  quidem, post-positive, 347, 1.
  quilibet, decl., 91,
  quin, in result clauses, 284, 3;
  ---- in substantive clauses, 295, 3; 298;
  ---- = qui non in clauses of characteristic, 283, 4;
  ---- with ind., 281, 3;
  ---- in indir. disc, 322 and a;
  ---- nulla causa est quin, 295, 7.
  quinam, 90, 2, d.
  Quintilis (= Julius), 371.
  quippe qui, in clauses of characteristic, 283, 3.
  Quirites, decl., 40, 1, d.
  quis, indef., 91;
  ---- interr., 90; 90, 2, c.; 252, 1;
  ---- nescio quis, 253, 6;
  ---- with ne, si, nisi, num, 91, 5.
  quis est qui, 283, 2.
  quis = quibus, 89.
  quisnam, inflection, 90, 2, d.
  quispiam, inflection, 91.
  quisquam, inflection, 91;
  ---- usage, 252, 4.
  quisque, inflection, 91;
  ---- usage, 252, 5.
  quisquis, inflection, 91, 8.
  quivis, inflection, 91
  quo, in purpose clauses, 282, 1, a..
  quoad, with ind., 293;
  ---- with subjv. 293, III, 2.
  quod, in causal clauses, 286, 1;
  ---- in substantive clauses, 299; 331, V, a;
  ---- 'as regards the fact,' 299, 2.
  quod audierim, 283, 5;
  ---- quod sciam, 283, 5.
  quod (si), adverbial acc., 185, 2.
  quom, early form of cum, 9, 1.
  quo minus, after verbs of hindering, 295, 3.
  quoniam, in causal clauses, 286, 1.
  quoque, post-positive, 347.
  -quus, decl. of nouns in, 24.

                  R.

  r, pron., 3, 3;
  ---- for s between vowels ('Rhotacism'), 8, 1.
  rapio, conj., 100, 2 a).
  rastrum, plurals of, 60, 2.
  ratus, 'thinking,' 336, 5.
  Reciprocal pronouns, 85, 2; 245; cf. 253, 3.
  Reduplication in perf., 118, 4, a);
  ---- in pres., 117, 7.
  Reference, dat. of, 188.
  refert, constr., 210; 211, 4.
  Reflexive pronouns, 85; 244; 249, 3.
  rego, conj., 105.
  Regular verbs, 101-113.
  rei, 362, 1, b).
  reicio, quantity, 362, 5.
  Relative adverbs, in rel. clauses of purp., 282, 2.
  ---- clauses, of purp., 282, 2;
  ---- ---- w. dignus, indignus, idoneus, 282, 3;
  ---- ---- of characteristic, 283;
  ---- ---- denoting cause or opposition, 283, 3;
  ---- ---- restrictive, 283, 5;
  ---- ---- introduced by quin, 283, 4; 284, 3;
  ---- ---- conditional rel. clauses, 311; 312, 1 and 2;
  ---- ---- relative as subj. of inf., 314, 4;
  ---- ---- rel. clause standing first, 251, 4, a.
  ---- pronouns, inflection, 89;
  ---- ---- use, 250, ff.;
  ---- ---- = Eng. demonstrative, 251, 6;
  ---- ---- agreement, 250;
  ---- ---- not omitted as in Eng., 251, 5;
  ---- ---- fondness for subordinate clauses, 355.
  relinquitur ut, 297, 2.
  reliqui, use, 253, 5.
  reliquum est, with subjv., 295, 6.
  remex, decl., 32.
  Remembering, verbs of, cases used w., 206.
  Reminding, verbs of, const., 207.
  reminiscor, constr., 206, 2.
  Removing, verbs of, w. abl., 214, 2.
  reposco, constr., 178, 1, a).
  Repraesentatio, 318.
  requies, requiem, requietem, 59, 2, c).
  res, decl., 51.
  Resisting, verbs of, w. dat., 187, II.
  Restrictive clauses, 283, 5.
  Result, acc. of, 173, B; 176;
  ---- clauses of, 284; 297;
  ---- ---- in dependent apodosis, 322, and a;
  ---- ---- sequence of tense in, 268, 6.
  revertor, semi-deponent, 114, 3.
  Rhetorical questions, 162, 3; 277, a;
  ---- in indir. disc., 315, 2.
  Rhotacism, 8, 1; 36, 1.
  Rivers, gender of names of, 15, A, 1.
  rogatu, abl. of cause, 219, 2.
  rogo, constr., 178, 1, c); 178, 1, a).
  Roman pronunciation, 3.
  Root, 17, 3, footnote 12.
  -rs, decl. of nouns in, 40, 1, c).
  rure, abl., place from which, 229, 1, b.
  ruri, abl., place in which, 228, 1, c.
  rus, 57, 7;
  ---- acc., limit of motion, 182, 1, b.

                  S.

  s, pron., 3, 3;
  ---- changed to r between vowels, 8, 1:
  ---- s, ss from dt, tt, ts, 8, 2.
  -s, decl. of monosyllables in, preceded by one or more consonants, 40, 1,
      b).
  s-stems, 36.
  sacer, decl., 65;
  ---- comparison, 73, 3.
  saepe, compared, 77, 1.
  sal, 57, 7;
  ---- sales, 61.
  salubris, decl., 68, 3.
  salutaris, comp., 73, 4.
  salve, salvete, 137, 4.
  Samnites, 40, 1, d).
  sane, in answers, 162, 5.
  sapio, conj., 109, 2, a).
  satur, decl., 65, 2.
  Saying, verbs of, w. inf. of ind. disc., 331, I.
  scio, quod sciam, 283, 5.
  -sco-class of verbs, 117, 6; 155.
  scribere ad aliquem, 358, 2.
  se, use, 244.
  se-, compounds of, 159, 3, e.
  Second conj., 103;
  ---- decl., 23;
  ---- peculiarities, 25;
  ---- second person indefinite, 280, 3; 356, 3; 302, 2.
  Secondary tenses, see Historical tenses.
  secundum, prep. w. acc., 141.
  securis, decl., 38, 1.
  secus, compared, 77, 1.
  secus (virile secus), 185, 1; 58.
  secutus, 'following', 336, 5.
  sed, se, 85, 3.
  sed-, compounds of, 159, 3, e.
  sed, 343, 1, a).
  sedile, decl., 39.
  sementis, decl., 38, 1.
  Semi-deponent verbs, 114.
  Semivowels, 2, 8.
  senex, decl., 42;
  ---- compared, 73, 4.
  Sentences, classification, 160, f.;
  ---- simple and compound, 164;
  ---- sentence-structure, 351;
  ---- sentence questions, 162, 2.
  sententia, abl. of accordance, 220, 3.
  Separation, dat. of, 188, 2, d);
  ---- gen., 212, 3;
  ---- abl., 214.
  Sequence of tenses, 267; 268.
  sequester, decl., 68, 1.
  sequitur ut, 297, 2.
  sequor, conj., 113.
  Serving, verbs of, w. dat., 187, II.
  servos, decl., 24.
  sese, decl., 85.
  Sextilis (= Augustus), 371.
  Sharing, adjs. of, w. gen., 204, 1.
  Short syllables, 5, B, 2;
  ---- vowels, 5, A, 2.
  Showing, verbs of, w. two accs., 177.
  si, with indir. questions, 300, 3;
  ---- in protasis, 301;
  ---- omitted, 305.
  signifer, decl., 23, 2.
  silentio, abl of manner, 220, 2.
  silvester, decl., 68, 3.
  similis, with dat., 204, 3;
  ---- with gen., 204, 3;
  ---- comp., 71, 4.
  si minus, use, 306, 2.
  Simple sentences, 164.
  simul, as prep., w. abl., 144, 2.
  simul ac, w. ind., 287, 1; 2.
  si non, usage, 306, 1 and 2.
  sin, usage, 306, 3.
  sin minus, 306, 2, a.
  Singular, second person indefinite, 280, 3; 356, 3; 302, 2.
  sino with inf., 331, III.
  sitis, decl., 38, 1.
  Smelling, verbs of, constr., 176, 5.
  Soft consonants, 2, 3, b), footnote 5.
  -so, verbs in, 155, 2.
  socer, decl., 23, 2.
  socium, gen, plu., 25, 6, c).
  sol, decl., 57, 7.
  soleo, semi-dep., 114, 1.
  solitus, used as present partic., 336, 5.
  solus, 66;
  ---- solus est qui with subjv., 283, 2.
  Sonant consonants, 2, 3, b), footnote 5.
  Soracte, decl., 39, 2.
  Sounds, classification, 2.
  ---- of the letters, 3.
  Source, abl., 215.
  Space, extent of, 181.
  Sparing, verbs of, w. dat., 187, II.
  Specification, abl. of, 226.
  spei, quantity, 362, 1, b.
  Spelling, see Orthography.
  Spirants, 2, 7.
  Spondaic verses, 368, 2.
  Spondee, 368, 1.
  sponte sua, abl. accordance, 220, 3.
  spontis, -e, defective, 57, 2, b.
  Statutes, fut. imperative used in, 281, 1, b.
  Stem, 17, 3.
  ---- verb, 97; 117.
  Structure of sentences, see Sentences.
  Style, hints on, 352 f.
  su = sv, 3, 3.
  sub, prep. with acc. and abl., 143;
  ---- compounds of, w. dat., 187, III.
  Subject, 163;
  ---- nom., 166;
  ---- acc., 184;
  ---- subject acc. of inf., 184;
  ---- omitted, 314, 5;
  ---- clauses as subject, 294; 295, 6;
  ---- inf. as subj., 327; 330.
  Subjective gen., 199.
  Subjunctive, tenses in, 95, 3.
  ---- in independent sentences, 272;
  ---- by attraction, 324;
  ---- tenses of, 266 f.;
  ---- method of expressing future time in, 269;
  ---- volitive (hortatory, jussive, probibitive, deliberative,
      concessive), 273 f.;
  ---- optative (wishes), 279;
  ---- potential, 280;
  ---- in clauses of purpose, 282;
  ---- of characteristic, 283;
  ---- of result, 284;
  ---- of cause, 286;
  ---- temporal clauses with postquam, posteaquam, 287, 5;
  ---- temporal clauses with cum, 288-290;
  ---- with antequam and priusquam, 292;
  ---- with dum, donec, quoad, 293, III, 2;
  ---- substantive clauses, 294 f.;
  ---- indir. questions, 300;
  ---- in apodosis of first type conditions, 302, 4;
  ---- jussive subjunctive as protasis of condition, 305, 2;
  ---- with velut, tamquam, etc., 307;
  ---- with necesse est, opportet, etc., 295, 6 and 8;
  ---- with licet, 309, 4;
  ---- with quamvis, quamquam, etsi, cum 'although,' 309 f.
  sublatus, 129, N.
  subm- = summ-, 9, 2.
  Subordinate clauses, 165.
  Substantive clauses, 294 f.;
  ---- ---- developed from the volitive, 295, 1-8;
  ---- ---- developed from the optative, 296;
  ---- ---- with non dubito, 298;
  ---- ---- indir. questions, 300;
  ---- ---- without ut, 295, 8;
  ---- ---- of result, 297;
  ---- ---- introduced by quod, 299.
  ---- use of adjs., 236-238.
  subter, prep, w. acc., 143, 1.
  Suffixes, 17, 3, footnote 12; 147 f.
  sui, 85;
  ---- as objective gen., 244, 2;
  ---- = possessive gen., 244, 2.
  sum, conj., 100;
  ---- omitted when auxiliary, 166, 3.
  summus, 'top of,' 241, 1.
  sunt qui, with subjv., 283, 2.
  suopte, suapte, 86, 3.
  supellex, decl., 42, 2.
  super, prep. w. acc., 143, 1.
  Superlative degree;
  ---- of adjs., 71, 1;
  ---- ---- in -rimus, 91, 3;
  ---- ---- in -limus, 71, 4;
  ---- ---- irregular superl., 72; 73;
  ---- ---- lacking, 73, 4;
  ---- ---- formed w. maxime, 74;
  ---- of adverbs, 76, 2;
  ---- ---- irregular, 77, 1;
  ---- force of, 240, 2.
  superus, compared, 73, 2.
  Supine, 340.
  supra, prep. w. acc., 141.
  -sura, suffix, 147, 3, a.
  Surd consonants, 2, 3, a), footnote 4.
  sus, decl., 41.
  sustuli, 129, N.
  suus, decl., 86, 1; 244;
  ---- suus quisque, 244, 4, a.
  Syllaba anceps, 366, 10.
  Syllables, division, 4;
  ---- quantity of, 5, B.
  Synapheia, 367, 6.
  Synaeresis, 367, 1.
  Synchysis, 350, 11, d.
  Syncope, 7, 4; 367, 8.
  Synecdochical acc., 180.
  Synizesis, 367, 1.
  Syntax, 160 f.
  Systole, 367, 3.

                  T.

  t, pron., 3, 3;
  ---- th, 2, 3, c; 3, 3;
  ---- changes, 8, 2;
  ---- dropped, 8, 3.
  taedet, 138, II;
  ---- w. gen., 209.
  Taking away, verbs of, w. dat., 188, 2, d.
  talentum, gen. plu., 25, 5, a.
  tamen, 343, 1, f.
  tametsi, 309, 2.
  tamquam, tamquam si, w. subjv., 307.
  tanton, 6, 4.
  -tas, 149;
  ---- gen. -tatis, decl. of nouns in, 40, 1, e).
  Tasting, verbs of, constr., 176, 5.
  Teaching, verbs of, constr., 178, 1, b.
  ted = te, 84, 3.
  Temporal clauses, w. postquam, ut, ubi, simul ac, 287;
  ---- w. cum, 288; 289;
  ---- w. antequam and priusquam, 291; 292;
  ---- with dum, donec, quoad, 293.
  temporis (id temporis), 185, 2.
  Tendency, dat. of, 191.
  tener, decl., 64.
  Tenses, 94, 3; 257 ff.;
  ---- of inf., 270;
  ---- of inf. in indir. disc., 317;
  ---- of participles, 336;
  ---- of subjv., 266;
  ---- sequence of, 266-268;
  ---- in indir. disc., 317; 318.
  Tenues (consonants), 2, 3, a), footnote 4.
  tenus, position, 142, 3.
  Terminations, 17, 3.
  terni, how used, 81, 4, b.
  -ternus, 154.
  terra marique, 228, 1, c.
  terrester, 68, 3.
  Tetrameter verses, 366, 11.
  Thematic verbs, 101-113.
  ---- vowels, 117, footnote 39.
  Thesis, 366, 6.
  Third conj., 105; 109 f.;
  ---- decl., 28 f.;
  ---- gender in, 43 f.
  Threatening, verbs of, 187, II.
  -tim, adverbs in, 157, 2.
  Time, at which, 230;
  ---- during which, 181; 231, 1;
  ---- within which, 231.
  timeo ne and ut, 296, 2.
  -tinus, suffix, 154.
  -tio, suffix, 147, 3.
  Tmesis, 367, 7.
  -to as suffix of verbs, 155, 2.
  -tor, use of nouns in, 353, 4.
  totus, 66;
  ---- preposition absent w., in expression  of place relations, 228, 1,
      b).
  Towns, gender of names of, 15, 2;
  ---- names of, denoting limit of motion, 182, 1, a;
  ---- denoting place where, 228, 1, a;
  ---- place from which, 229, 1, a;
  ---- appositives of town names, 169, 4; 229, 2.
  traditur, traditum est, w. inf., 332, N.
  trans, prep, w. acc., 141;
  ---- constr. of verbs compounded with, 179.
  Transitive verbs, 174.
  Trees, gender of names of, 15, 2.
  tres, decl., 80, 3.
  Tribrach, 370, 2.
  tribus, decl., 49, 3;
  ---- gender, 50.
  Trimeter verses, 366, 11.
  trini, use, 81, 4, b).
  triumvir, gen. plu. of, 25, 6, b).
  -trix, suffix, 147, 1.
  Trochee, 366, 2.
  -trum, suffix, 147, 4.
  Trusting, verbs of, w. dat., 187, II.
  tu, decl., 84.
  -tudo, suffix, 84.
  tui, as objective gen., 242, 2.
  -tura, suffix, 147, 3, a).
  tus, decl., 57, 7.
  -tus, suffix, 147, 3; 151, 4.
  tussis, decl., 38.
  tute, tutemet, tutimet, 84, 2.
  Two accusatives, 177; 178.
  Two datives, 191, 2.

                  U.

  u, instead of i in some words, 9, 1;
  ---- instead of a, 9, 1; 9, 4.
  u, becomes v 367, 4.
  u-stems, 48.
  u-stems, 41.
  -u, dat. sing., 4th decl, 49, 2.
  uber, decl., 70, 1.
  ubi, with ind., 287, 1; 2;
  ---- with gen., 201, 3.
  -ubus, dat., plu., 4th decl., 49, 3.
  ullus, decl., 66.
  ulterior, compared, 73, 1.
  ultimus, use, 241, 2.
  ultra, prep. w. acc., 141.
  -ulus, diminutive ending, 150, 2;
  ---- (a, um), 148, 1.
  -um, 1st decl., gen. plu. in, 21, 2, d);
  ---- 2d decl., 25, 6;
  ---- for -ium, 70, 7.
  -undus, -undi, in gerund and gerundive, 116, 2.
  unus, decl., 66; 92, 1;
  ---- unus est qui, with subjv., 283, 2.
  -urio, ending of desiderative verbs, 155, 3.
  -urus, ending of fut. act. partic., 101; 103 ff.;
  ---- -urus fuisse in apodosis of conditional sentences contrary-to-fact,
      in indir. disc., 321, 2;
  ---- -urus fuerim in indir. questions serving as apodoses, 322, b.
  -us, neuter nouns of 2d decl. in, 26, 2;
  ---- nom. in 3d decl., in -us, 36;
  ---- gender of nouns in -us of 3d decl., 43, 3;
  ---- exceptions in gender, 46, 4.
  -us, nouns of 3d decl. in, 43, 2.
  usque ad, w. acc., 141, 1.
  usus est, with abl., 218, 2.
  ut, temporal, 287, 1; 2;
  ---- ut, uti, in purpose clauses, 282;
  ---- in result clauses, 284;
  ---- in substantive clauses, 295 f.;
  ---- substantive clauses without, 295, 8;
  ---- with verbs of fearing, 296, 2.
  ut ne = ne, 282, 1, b; 295, 1, 4, 5.
  ut non instead of ne, 282, 1, c;
  ---- in clauses of result, 284, 297.
  ut qui, introducing clauses of characteristic, 283, 3.
  ut si, w. subjv., 307, 1.
  uter, decl., 66; 92, 1.
  uter, decl., 40, 1, d).
  utercumque, decl., 92, 2.
  uterlibet, decl., 92, 2.
  uterque, decl., 92, 2;
  ---- use, 355, 2.
  utervis, decl., 92, 2.
  utilius est = Eng. potential, 271, 1, b).
  utinam, with optative subjv., 279, 1 and 2.
  utor, with abl., 218, 1;
  ---- in gerundive constr., 339, 4
  utpote qui, introducing clauses of characteristic, 283, 3.
  utraque, 6, 5.
  utrum ... an, 162, 4; 300, 4.

                  V.

  v, 1, 1;
  ---- pron., 3, 3:
  ---- developing from u, 367, 4.
  v, becomes u, 367, 5.
  valde, by syncope, for valide, 7, 4.
  vale, 363, 2, b).
  Value, indefinite, in gen., 203, 3.
  vannus, gender of, 26, 1, b).
  Variations in spelling, 9.
  vas, decl., 59, 1.
  -ve, 6, 3; 342, 1, b).
  vel, 342, 1, b);
  ---- with superl., 240, 3.
  velim, potential subjv., 280, 2, a.
  vellem, potential subjv., 280, 4.
  velut, velut si, w. subjv., 307, 1.
  venter, decl., 40, 1, d).
  Verba sentiendi et declarandi, w. inf. of indir. disc., 331, I;
  ---- passive use of these, 332.
  Verbal adjs., 150, 1-4.
  Verbs, 94 f.;
  ---- personal endings, 96;
  ---- deponent, 112;
  ---- archaic and poetic forms, 116, 4;
  ---- irregular, 124;
  ---- defective, 133;
  ---- impersonal, 138;
  ---- with substantive clauses of result, 297, 2;
  ---- omission of, 166, 3;
  ---- transitive, 174;
  ---- ---- used absolutely, 174, a;
  ---- passives used as middles, 175, 2, d);
  ---- of smelling and tasting, constr., 176, 5;
  ---- not used in passive, 177, 3, a;
  ---- intransitives impersonal in passive, 187, II, b; 256, 3;
  ---- compounded with preps., constr., 187, III;
  ---- of judicial action, constr., 208;
  ---- derivation of, 155 f.;
  ---- inceptive or inchoative, 155, 1;
  ---- frequentative or intensive, 155, 2;
  ---- desiderative, 155, 3;
  ---- denominative, 156;
  ---- agreement of, 254 f.
  Verb stems, 97;
  ---- formation of, 117 f.
  vereor, conj., 113;
  ---- with subst. clause in subjv., 296, 2.
  Vergilius, gen. of, 25, 1.
  veritus, with present force; 336, 5.
  vero, 343, 1, g);
  ---- in answers, 162, 5.
  Verse, 366, 3.
  Verse-structure, 366 f.
  Versification, 361.
  versus, prep. w. acc., 141;
  ---- follows its case, 141, 2.
  verum, 343, 1, b).
  vescor, with abl., 218, 1.
  vesper, decl., 23, 2.
  vesperi, locative, 232, 2.
  vestri, as obj. gen., 242, 2.
  vestrum, as gen. of whole, 242, 2;
  ---- as possessive gen., 242, 2, a.
  veto, with inf. 331, II.
  vetus, decl., 70;
  ---- compared, 73, 3.
  vi, 220, 2.
  vicem, used adverbially, 185, 1;
  ---- vicis, vice, 57, 5, b.
  victor, decl., 34.
  video, with pres. partic., 337, 3.
  vigil, decl., 34.
  violenter, formation, 77, 4, a.
  vir, decl., 23.
  ---- gen. plu. of nouns compounded with, 25, 6, b).
  virile seces, constr., 185, 1.
  virus, gender of, 26, 2.
  vis, decl., 41.
  viscera, used in plu. only, 56, 3.
  Vocative case, 17; 19, 1;
  ---- of Greek proper names in -as, 47, 4;
  ---- of adjs. in -ius, 63, 1; 171;
  ---- in -i for -ie, 25, 1;
  ---- position of, 350, 3.
  Voiced sounds, 2, 3, a).
  Voiced consonants, 2, 3, b).
  Voiceless consonants, 2, 3, a).
  Voices, 94; 256;
  ---- middle voice, 256, 1.
  Volitive subjunctive, 272 f.
  volnus, spelling, 9, 1.
  volo, 130;
  ---- with inf., 331, IV and a; 270, 2, a;
  ---- with subjv., 296, 1, a.
  volt, spelling, 9, 1.
  voltus, spelling, 8, 1.
  volucer, decl., 68, 1.
  voluntate, 220, 2.
  -volus, comparison of adjs. in, 71, 5
  Vowels, 2, 1;
  ---- sounds of the, 3, 1;
  ---- quantity of, 5, A;
  ---- contraction of, 7, 2;
  ---- parasitic, 7, 3.
  Vowel changes, 7.
  vulgus, gender of, 26, 2.
  -vum, -vus, decl. of nouns in, 24.

                  W.

  Want, verbs and adjs. of, w. abl., 214, 1, c; d.
  Way by which, abl. of, 218, 9.
  We, editorial, 242, 3.
  Whole, gen. of, 201.
  Wills, use of fut. imperative in, 281, 1, b.
  Winds, gender of names of, 15, 1.
  Wish, clauses with dum, etc., expressing a, 310.
  Wishes, subjunctive in, 279;
  ---- see Optative subjunctive.
  Wishing, verbs of, with subst. clause 296, 1;
  ---- with obj. inf., 331, IV.
  Word-formation, 146 f.
  Word-order, 348 f.
  Word questions, 162, 1.

                  X.

  x, 2, 9;
  ---- = cs and gs, 32.
  -x, decl. of monosyllables in, preceded by one or more cons., 40, 1, b);
  ---- gender of nouns in -x of 3d decl., 43, 2;
  ---- exceptions, 45, 4.

                  Y.

  y, 1, 1.
  Yes, how expressed, 162, 5.
  'You,' indefinite, 356, 3; 280, 3; 302, 2.

                  Z.

  z, 1, 1; 2, 9.
  Zeugma, 374, 2, a).

       *       *       *       *       *

FOOTNOTES

[1] Sometimes also called _Aryan_ or _Indo-Germanic_.

[2] Cuneiform means "wedge-shaped." The name applies to the form of the
strokes of which the characters consist.

[3] The name Zend is often given to this.

[4] For 'voiceless,' 'surd,' 'hard,' or 'tenuis' are sometimes used.

[5] For 'voiced,' 'sonant,' 'soft,' or 'media' are sometimes used.

[6] In this book, long vowels are indicated by a horizontal line above
them; as, a, i, o, etc. Vowels not thus marked are short. Occasionally a
curve is set above short vowels; as, e, u.

[7] To avoid confusion, the quantity of _syllables_ is not indicated by any
sign.

[8] But if the l or r introduces the second part of a compound, the
preceding syllable is always long; as, abrumpo.

[9] Only the simplest and most obvious of these are here treated.

[10] Only the simplest and most obvious of these are here treated.

[11] The great majority of all Latin nouns come under this category. The
principles for determining their gender are given under the separate
declensions.

[12] The Stem is often derived from a more primitive form called the Root.
Thus, the stem porta- goes back to the root per-, por-. Roots are usually
monosyllabic. The addition made to a root to form a stem is called a
Suffix. Thus in porta- the suffix is -ta.

[13] There is only one stem ending in -m:--hiems, hiemis, _winter_.

[14] Mensis, _month_, originally a consonant stem (mens-), has in the
Genitive Plural both mensium and mensum. The Accusative Plural is menses.

[15] This is practically always used instead of alius in the Genitive.

[16] A Dative Singular Feminine alterae also occurs.

[17] Supplied by vetustior, from vetustus.

[18] Supplied by recentior.

[19] For _newest_, recentissimus is used.

[20] Supplied by minimus natu.

[21] Supplied by maximus natu.

[22] The final i is sometimes long in poetry.

[23] Forms of hic ending in -s sometimes append -ce for emphasis; as,
hujusce, _this ... here_; hosce, hisce. When -ne is added, -c and -ce
become -ci; as huncine, hoscine.

[24] For istud, istuc sometimes occurs; for ista, istaec.

[25] For illud, illuc sometimes occurs.

[26] Sometimes quis.

[27] An ablative qui occurs in quicum, _with whom_.

[28] Where the Perfect Participle is not in use, the Future Active
Participle, if it occurs, is given as one of the Principal Parts.

[29] The Perfect Participle is wanting in sum.

[30] The meanings of the different tenses of the Subjunctive are so many
and so varied, particularly in subordinate clauses, that no attempt can be
made to give them here. For fuller information the pupil is referred to the
Syntax.

[31] For essem, esses, esset, essent, the forms forem, fores, foret, forent
are sometimes used.

[32] For futurus esse, the form fore is often used.

[33] Declined like bonus, -a, -um.

[34] The Imperfect also means _I loved_.

[35] For declension of amans, see Sec. 70, 3.

[36] Fui, fuisti, etc., are sometimes used for sum, es, etc. So fueram,
fueras, etc., for eram, etc.; fuero, etc., for ero, etc.

[37] Fuerim, etc., are sometimes used for sim; so fuissem, etc., for essem.

[38] In actual usage passive imperatives occur only in deponents (Sec. 112).

[39] Strictly speaking, the Present Stem always ends in a Thematic Vowel (e
or o); as, dic-e-, dic-o-; ama-e-, ama-o-. But the multitude of phonetic
changes involved prevents a scientific treatment of the subject here. See
the author's _Latin Language_.

[40] But the compounds of juvo sometimes have _-juturus_; as, _adjuturus_.

[41] Used only impersonally.

[42] So _impleo_, _expleo_.

[43] Compounds follow the Fourth Conjugation: _accio_, _accire_, etc.

[44] Fully conjugated only in the compounds: _exstinguo_, _restinguo_,
_distinguo_.

[45] Only in the compounds: _evado_, _invado_, _pervado_.

[46] It will be observed that not all the forms of fero lack the connecting
vowel. Some of them, as ferimus, ferunt, follow the regular inflection of
verbs of the Third Conjugation.

[47] For the Predicate Genitive, see Sec. 198, 3; 203, 5.

[48] Many such verbs were originally intransitive in English also, and once
governed the Dative.

[49] This was the original form of the preposition cum.

[50] Place from which, though strictly a Genuine Ablative use, is treated
here for sake of convenience.

[51] Especially: moneo, admoneo; rogo, oro, peto, postulo, precor, flagito;
mando, impero, praecipio; suadeo, hortor, cohortor; persuadeo, impello.

[52] Especially: permitto, concedo, non patior.

[53] Especially: prohibeo, impedio, deterreo.

[54] Especially: constituo, decerno, censeo, placuit, convenit, paciscor.

[55] Especially: laboro, do operam, id ago, contendo, impetro.

[56] Exclamations, also, upon becoming indirect, take the Subjunctive, as
considera quam variae sint hominum cupidines, _consider how varied are the
desires of men._ (Direct: quam variae sunt hominum cupidines!)

[57] Tradituri fuerint and erraturus fueris are to be regarded as
representing tradituri fuerunt and erraturus fuisti of Direct Discourse.
(See Sec. 304, 3, b.)

[58] Except in Sallust and Silver Latin.

[59] So named from a fancied analogy to the strokes of the Greek letter
(_chi_). Thus:--

  multos        laesi
          _chi_
  defendi       neminem

[60] The pronouns hic, hoc, and the adverb huc, probably had a short
_vowel_. The syllable was made long by pronouncing hicc, hocc, etc.

[61] Ictus was not accent,--neither stress accent not musical accent,--but
was simply the quantitative prominence inherent in the long syllables of
_fundamental feet_.

[62] For explanation of the abbreviations, see p. 257.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of New Latin Grammar, by Charles E. Bennett

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NEW LATIN GRAMMAR ***

***** This file should be named 15665.txt or 15665.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/5/6/6/15665/

Produced by Nathan Gibson, Keith Edkins and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team.


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

*** END: FULL LICENSE ***

