The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Great Round World and What Is Going On
In It, Vol. 1, No. 25, April 29, 1897, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Great Round World and What Is Going On In It, Vol. 1, No. 25, April 29, 1897
       A Weekly Magazine for Boys and Girls

Author: Various

Release Date: April 26, 2005 [EBook #15716]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GREAT ROUND WORLD AND ***




Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Emmy and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team.(www.pgdp.net)





[Illustration: THE GREAT ROUND
WORLD
AND WHAT IS GOING ON IN IT.]

    VOL. 1   APRIL 29, 1897.   NO. 25


The troubles between Greece and Turkey are still unsettled, and though the
war clouds look lower and more threatening, the storm has not as yet
broken.

Several matters have, however, been made clearer to us.

The first and most important is that there is no such thing as a Concert
of the Powers.

It has been hinted for some time past that the Powers were not agreed as
to the course they should take with Greece, but it is now openly known
that there is no prospect of their agreeing at all.

This was found out when Greece refused to obey the Ultimatum of the Powers
and withdraw her troops from Crete. The Powers threatened to blockade the
Piraeus and the ports of Greece. The reply of Greece was to charter every
possible ship, and send men and arms to the frontier, and to tell the
Powers that she would declare war on Turkey the moment her ports were
blockaded.

Then the world waited to see what the Powers would do. But the Powers
did nothing. There was no blockade of Greece, and according to the
latest accounts there is no chance of one for the present.

It gradually came out that the Powers had had a serious
disagreement--England, France, and Italy standing out against the
proposed forcing of obedience from Greece.

It was even said that the Admiral of the Italian Fleet had asked to be
exchanged from duty in Crete, because by reason of his having served
longer in the navy than any other officer of the various fleets, he had
been made Admiral of the Allied Fleets, and it was his duty to give the
orders for any action that was taken against the Cretans or Greeks. He
liked his work so little that he asked his Government to recall him, and
send some one else in his place.

It would seem that the trouble with the Powers is that they cannot all
be brought to see that the Turkish Empire is really in such a state of
decay that nothing can keep it from falling to pieces.

Germany, Russia, and Austria believe that the Empire is still strong,
and can be held together by the powerful arm of Europe. To do this they
are willing to crush and sacrifice noble little Greece.

England, France, and Italy, on the other hand, do not believe in the
saving of Turkey. They refuse to allow a brave Christian people to be
martyred for the sole purpose of shoring up an Empire that is a disgrace
to civilization, and had much better be pulled down, so that a new and
more creditable sovereignty may be built upon its ruins.

       *       *       *       *       *

The work of the Powers has failed in every direction.

The Admirals of the Allied Fleets which are blockading Crete, received
orders from their governments to spread the news through the island that
the Powers offered Crete home rule under a European Prince, and to
assure the Cretans that the blockade would be removed the moment the
Greek troops were withdrawn from the island.

The Cretans would not listen to this. They sent replies, signed by
nearly forty thousand men, representing the entire Cretan population,
declaring that they wanted no such arrangement.

Not one of the signers approved of the idea of home rule. The Cretans
are determined to be reunited to Greece, their own mother-country, and
they intend to fight until they gain their point.

This action on the part of the Cretans turned every one's attention back
to the frontier of Greece and Turkey. It seems that the question of
Cretan liberty must be settled there.

The war fever is running very high in Greece, and King George is being
urged to declare war, and let the Greeks show the Powers they are able
to settle their own affairs for themselves.

The 6th of April was the anniversary of the first national rising in
Greece, when, in 1821, they determined to throw off the rule of Turkey,
under which they had suffered for so many long years.

This day is always celebrated in Greece as a holiday and fete day.
Coming as it did this year in the midst of such angry feelings against
the Turks, it was feared that the soldiers on the frontier would lose
control of themselves, and that their officers would not be able to
prevent them from crossing the frontier and attacking the Turks.

The Crown Prince issued a General Order to the soldiers, commanding them
to preserve order, and, possibly in consequence of this, the day passed
without disturbance of any sort.

But it was not likely that the Greeks and Turks could remain long on the
frontier facing each other, without trouble of some sort arising.

Both countries have been massing their armies on their side of the border,
in readiness for the declaration of war, and in some places the opposing
forces are so near together that the block-houses are only thirty yards
apart.

It was only a question of time when the first blow would be struck.

On the 9th of April, three days after the great fete had passed over, and
just as Europe was praising Greece for the behavior of her men, the
fighting broke out.

Great excitement prevailed when it was learned that a body of Greeks, one
thousand strong, had invaded Turkey, and was holding the Turkish army at
bay.

War had not been declared, so the news of the fighting surprised everybody
very much. But it was soon learned that the Greeks engaged in the fight
were not soldiers of the regular army, but were described as "brigands."

They were, however, a body of men who were armed by a powerful Greek
secret society, which is at the root of that enthusiastic demand for war
which is echoing from every quarter of Greece.

This society has been gathering men into its service for years, and making
them swear, on joining, that they will do all in their power to restore
to Greece her old possessions in Macedonia, Epirus, and Thrace, and that
they will bring these Greek peoples once more under the rule of Greece.

For years the Greeks have been in the habit of putting all the money they
could spare aside, for the use of this great League which was to free
them. Even the little children have devoted their banks and money-boxes to
the cause of liberty. In this way a large sum of money has been gathered
together, and this society, which is called Ethnike Hetairia, has been
able to arm men, and send them to the frontier to fight for their country.

King George was well aware of the existence of this society, and probably
that its members were on the frontier waiting for their chance to overrun
Macedonia and reconquer it from the hands of the Turks.

He therefore sent a message to the Turks, warning them that bands of armed
men, who did not belong to the regular army, were on the frontier, and
that he would not be responsible for any of their acts.

On March 8th, fifteen hundred of the members of this League crossed the
frontier, and were met by some Turkish soldiers, who fought them and drove
them back again.

But this band was not the only one. Another column of Leaguers made a raid
into Macedonia, took possession of two towns, and established themselves
in a strongly fortified spot.

Yet another attack was made on the Turks at Mount Olympus, and after a
struggle the Greeks succeeded in planting their flag on the sacred
mountain.

Mount Olympus was supposed by the ancient Greeks to be the dwelling-place
of the gods whom they worshipped.

You have all of you heard of Jupiter, Juno, Cupid, Venus, Diana, Minerva,
Apollo, and Neptune. These were all Greek gods, and there were many, many
more gods and goddesses besides, whom the Greeks worshipped, and whose
deeds have been sung for us by every poet since the great Homer. The faces
of these fabled personages are even familiar to us, through the beautiful
Greek sculpture and through the art of famous painters, until the names
and stories of these gods and goddesses have become household words to us.

Mount Olympus, as we have said, was supposed to be the dwelling-place of
the gods. It was there that the great Jupiter was supposed to hold his
court and rule the destinies of men.

To every one who has studied mythology, as the history of the heathen gods
and goddesses is called, Mount Olympus is an object of the greatest
interest; and if this is the case with foreigners, how much more must this
mountain be venerated by the people whose whole history is connected with
its rocky masses.

The Greeks love Mount Olympus. They feel that it is their very own
property, and much of their discontent against the Turks is that it is no
longer on Greek soil, no longer a part of Greece, but belongs to the hated
Turk.

It is curious that the two mountains most sacred to the Greeks should be
on Turkish soil. Mount Ida, the birthplace of Jupiter, is in Crete.

It must have been a proud moment for the Greeks when they saw their
beloved flag waving over Mount Olympus.

The Turks are, of course, extremely indignant over these various raids,
and insist that they were made by regular soldiers of the Greek army.

This King George denies, and be reminds the Turks of the warning he has
given them.

The Turks refuse to believe him. They insist that the invaders were led by
Greek soldiers, and declare very positively that they know for a fact that
the "brigands" were trying to arouse the people of Macedonia, and that if
they succeeded, the Greek army would join in and help; and that if, on the
other hand, the "brigands" were defeated and obliged to flee, the Greek
army was to support them and save them from being put to flight.

They say also that this is really declaring war on them.

The Powers, highly indignant at this new state of affairs, are once more
threatening a blockade of Greece, and have said that they will not allow
either to keep any lands gained by the sword. This announcement has been a
check to both countries, for they can see no use in fighting, and losing
men and money, if they are to gain nothing by it in the end.

In the mean while, the fighting continues on the frontier between the
Turks and the "brigands," and every moment it is expected that war will be
declared, and all its horrors will overshadow Europe.

The Greek Ambassador has taken formal leave of the Turkish officials, and
is waiting orders to return to his own country. The Sultan, on his side,
has sent the necessary orders to the various ministers and consuls in
Greece to return to Turkey.

This, as we have before explained, means the end of the diplomatic
relations between the two countries.

       *       *       *       *       *

The situation in Cuba is not very much changed.

There have been two important Cuban victories in Pinar del Rio, the
province Weyler declared to be entirely pacified.

In the first the Cubans routed the Spanish forces, and captured some
ammunition, of which they were badly in need.

In the second they conquered the town of Bahia Honda, a seaport about
sixty miles from Havana, and after taking possession of all that was
valuable in it, set it on fire and completely destroyed it.

Two important filibustering parties have been landed, and the Cubans are
stronger than ever in numbers and arms, and more hopeful of success.

But the war still lingers on. What advantages are gained are of very small
importance, and the rest of the world is looking on while lives are being
thrown away in a struggle that seems as if it would linger on until the
once beautiful island of Cuba becomes a desolate waste of ruined towns and
barren fields.

It seems as if some friend ought to step between the two warring
countries, and try to bring about an understanding between them.

There seems to be a chance that the United States may be that friend.

It has been felt that our rulers were too friendly to Spain, and that in
preventing the filibustering expeditions from leaving our shores, they
were in truth doing police duty for Spain, and helping her, contrary to
the wishes of the country, which is in sympathy with Cuba.

In the case of General Rivera this can no longer be said.

When it was learned that the General was not to be treated as an honorable
soldier and held as a prisoner of war, but was to be tried by a drumhead
court-martial and shot as a rebel, the Senate immediately took action in
his behalf.

A drumhead court-martial is a hurried trial held in camp. It is used in
the case of spies or deserters, or for soldiers who have committed some
disgraceful act which is best disposed of at once.

Senator Allen, of Nebraska, offered a resolution, declaring it the duty of
the President to protest to the Spanish Government against such a
violation of the rules of civilized warfare.

The resolution was passed, and much to every one's satisfaction,
twenty-four hours after, Senator Sherman, the Secretary of State, had the
pleasure of announcing that the Spaniards had decided not to hold any
drumhead court-martial, but to keep General Rivera as a prisoner of war.

This means that he will not be shot, but will be held by the Spaniards
until the end of the war, or until they want to exchange him for a
Spaniard of equal rank, who may happen to fall into the hands of the
Cubans.

This prompt deference to the wishes of the Senate looks as if the
Spaniards were ready to look at Cuban matters more fairly and calmly.

An offer from President McKinley to bring about an understanding between
the two countries has been courteously received by the Spaniards, and
though it has not been accepted as yet, it is a great step in the right
direction that Spain is willing to receive the offer amicably.

In the mean while, there is a joint resolution before the Senate, offered
by Senator Morgan, of Alabama. It is "that a state of war exists in Cuba,
and that the United States shall accord belligerent rights in its ports
and lands to both parties engaged in the struggle."

Senator Morgan has laid a great mass of evidence before the House, which
shows that the Cubans have a government which is in thorough working
order, making laws, administering justice, carrying on a postal service,
and maintaining a fine and well-organized army.

Under these circumstances, he claims that Cuba is not engaged in mere
rioting and disturbance, but in an earnest warfare, a struggle for
liberty, in which she should have the sympathy of other free nations, and
be given by them the privileges of a nation at war.

If this resolution is passed, Cuba will be free to fit out a navy to help
her in the struggle, and to buy in this country and ship all the arms she
needs to carry on the war.

As we have said before, the Cubans believe that the passage of such a
resolution would almost put an end to the war, for they could then land
arms and men enough to crush the Spaniards without any difficulty.

There was a good deal of excitement over the report that Gen. Julio
Sanguily was preparing to return to Cuba. This is the General who, as
stated in No. 20 of THE GREAT ROUND WORLD, was released from a
Cuban prison early in March.

When he was released by the Spaniards, General Sanguily was made to
promise that he would not again take up arms against Spain, and therefore
every one was much shocked to learn that he was preparing to join a
filibustering expedition and return to Cuba, to place himself at the head
of one branch of the army.

It was learned that the General had gone to Jacksonville, Fla., and
sensational stories were spread about that there were two parties of
Cubans staying in different hotels in that city, in each of which was a
man who looked like Sanguily. It was said that this was done to prevent
the Spanish spies from finding out the movements of the true Sanguily.

Finally, the Spanish consul got so excited about it, that he swore out a
warrant for the arrest of the General, on the charge of fitting out a
filibustering expedition. The General was accordingly arrested.

When the case came up, there was no evidence of any kind against him, and
he was immediately discharged.

He stated to the court that he had had nothing whatever to do with fitting
out an expedition for Cuba. He had given his word not to return to the
island, and he meant to keep it. He had gone South to escape the damp
atmosphere in New York City, which made his rheumatism worse, and it was
in search of health and a warmer climate that he had gone to
Jacksonville.

The Cubans were very indignant over the arrest of Sanguily, and the
Spanish consul was apparently somewhat ashamed of the part he had taken in
the matter, for when the case came up he refused to give any evidence.

       *       *       *       *       *

Spain has more troubles on hand.

There has been a revolt in Porto Rico, another of the West Indian Islands
which belong to Spain.

This revolt was of no very great importance, and was very quickly put
down. It would have been hardly worth mentioning, but that it followed so
closely on the news of an outbreak in the Spanish provinces on the African
coast of the Mediterranean Sea, that it became noteworthy as a sign of the
breaking up of Spain's vast colonial system.

Spain has now five different quarters to fear, five different revolts in
various portions of her domains. Her enemies are within her own borders.

She has the Cuban war, the war in the Philippines, the revolt in Porto
Rico, the Carlist riots, and the revolt in her African colonies.

She certainly seems to have her hands full.

She has done her best to keep the African troubles to herself, but the
news has at last come out, and with it the fact that Spain cannot spare a
single soldier to go and subdue it.

       *       *       *       *       *

The waters of the Mississippi are still rising, and as yet there is no
hope of the floods subsiding.

Every day news is sent of fresh crevasses formed and of more levees
broken.

While the city of New Orleans has not yet suffered, there is hourly fear
that it will be flooded. The levees are breaking in all directions, and in
the near neighborhood of New Orleans fresh breaks are feared, which will
send a vast volume of water flowing toward the city.

A government report from Tennessee says that nearly eight hundred square
miles of territory is covered with water, from three to seven feet deep.
What cabins are still standing are filled with people and cattle, crowding
the upper floors or huddled together on rafts moored to the houses.

In Missouri the levees protecting Davis Island, the home of Jefferson
Davis, have given way, and the island is submerged.

Davis Island was densely populated, as about twenty-five hundred people
lived on it. Help had to be sent for, and steamers and barges came down
and rescued the people and the cattle.

Telephone and telegraph messages are being hourly received from points
along the river, asking for boats to come and save the unfortunate people,
who in many cases are clinging to trees and housetops till help comes.

Many stories are being told of the way the people are rescued.

In some instances the relief steamers will find a whole family perched on
the cottage roof, the women and children, half-dead with fright, clinging
panic-stricken to the roof, and crying aloud for help. In others the
people will not realize the danger they are in, and refuse to be taken off
their housetops, insisting that the floods will subside in a short while,
and that they need no help.

One party of negroes was found seated on the roof of a cottage. The water
had risen to the eaves, and the house was in danger of collapsing under
the pressure of the angry waters.

The negroes, however, were busily engaged in playing cards, and were
annoyed at being rescued from their perilous position before their game
was finished.

The present flood is the worst ever known in the history of the river.

In 1862, during the war, there was a great rise of the Mississippi, which
destroyed most of the levees along the banks, and from Vicksburg down the
whole country was flooded.

Since that year the river has never risen as high until the present time,
when the high-water mark of 1862 has been reached and passed in both New
Orleans and Vicksburg.

For twenty-five years after, the people of the Mississippi Valley felt the
effects of that great flood, and the worst fears are entertained for the
ruin and desolation that the present one will leave in its path.

Thousands of people have been brought to want, through the sweeping away
of their homes by the waters, and so much misery and poverty have been
reported, that President McKinley sent a message to the Senate, telling
them of the distress caused by the floods, and asking them to take
legislative action for the relief of the sufferers. He stated that he had
been informed that $150,000 to $200,000 would be required to assist the
people.

On receipt of the President's message a joint resolution was offered,
giving $150,000 of the public money for the use of the people in the
flooded districts.

This resolution was passed by a unanimous vote of the Senate, and would
have been sent to the President, but that word came from the House of
Representatives that that body had passed a resolution voting $200,000.

The Senate immediately recalled its resolution, altered it to agree with
that from the House, and passing it promptly, sent it to the President,
who signed it without delay.

The Secretary of War, General Alger, has made all arrangements for giving
the fund to the suffering people. Six officers are now in the flooded
districts, finding out what the wants of the people are, and another
detail of officers is to follow them, distributing food and relief
according to instructions.

That every section may be reached, the flooded country has been divided
into six districts, with one officer to go over each.

The Citizens' Relief Committee of Memphis, Tenn., had arranged to help the
sufferers in its district before Congress was heard from. This one society
fed and cared for nearly seven thousand people who had sought refuge from
the waters.

This society has also sent large quantities of food and supplies to
various points in Arkansas and Mississippi, but the help of the Government
was very badly needed. The Citizens' Relief Committee could only reach a
very small portion of the people who are suffering from the angry rise of
the Father of Waters, as the Mississippi is called.

       *       *       *       *       *

Matters are very unsettled in the Transvaal.

They are still inquiring as to who gave Dr. Jameson the authority to make
his raid, but nothing of any consequence has been brought to light.

In the Transvaal itself, war with England seems to be threatening. There
is much angry discussion over the late news that England has leased
Delagoa Bay for thirty years, at a rental of $2,500,000 a year.

Delagoa Bay belongs to Portugal, and is the only seaport which the Boers
can reach. The Transvaal, as you will see by the map, lies inland, and has
not any sea-coast of its own.

The English deny this report, but, all the same, British war-ships are
being sent to Delagoa Bay.

A new High Commissioner has been appointed to South Africa, and a great
deal of surprise was felt when it was learned that he was to take a strong
body of marines and sailors with him.

The Government says these fighting men have only been sent with the
Commissioner to guarantee the carrying out of his commands, but it is very
openly reported that they are being sent out to strengthen the force which
England already has in South Africa, and that war will soon break out in
that quarter of the globe.

The English people are very angry with President Krueger, because, at a
recent banquet, his grandson, a lieutenant in the Transvaal army, made
some rude remarks about the Queen of England.

But it would seem that they have little cause for anger, because Oom Paul
rebuked his grandson and suspended him from duty. It is probable that the
young man, whose name is Lieutenant Eloff, will have to leave the army in
consequence.

It is said that the President is extremely annoyed that these remarks
were made, and has ordered Lieutenant Eloff never to mention the Queen's
name in public again.

       *       *       *       *       *

New York City came very near having to build up a new charter.

After the work was finished by the Committee, it was handed to the Mayor,
who for several days had his office open for people to go in and discuss
the Charter before him.

It was believed that the Mayor approved of the Charter. Just imagine how
surprised people were, when, the hearings in his office being over, he
sent the Charter up to the Assembly in Albany, with the information that
he disapproved of it and would not sign it; or, in other words, that he
vetoed it.

The Assembly has, however, passed the Charter over the Mayor's veto.

A number of New Yorkers who do not approve of the Charter are going to
fight it in the Legislature, and try to get the State Senate to throw it
out. If this fails and the bill passes both Houses, they will try and
influence the Governor to veto it.

There is a good deal of trouble ahead for the Charter.

Some ambitious people want to make a State of Greater New York, and call
it Manhattan. They think that it will be of great benefit to the city to
be a State, and that if this is done the taxes will be much lower and the
city will acquire many valuable rights.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Tariff Bill has passed the House of Representatives, and is now before
the Senate. The friends of this measure think that it is sure to pass.

But the bill seems to have as many enemies as friends, for the outcries
against it are loud and long from every section of the country.

It is difficult for us to guess whether the bill is going to be useful or
harmful to us.

On one hand, the people who are in favor of it are praising it to the
skies, and speaking of the immense industries that are going to arise as
soon as the bill is made law. The duty on raw sugar, according to these
people, is going to encourage people to try and make the raw sugar over
here, and the American farmers to grow beets to make beet sugar from. They
claim that a wonderful new business is to grow out of this new industry,
that is to make all farms pay and everybody happy.

The importers and people who do not approve of the bill are crying aloud
that clothes and woollen goods are going to be so much dearer.

A picture was published of a lady and gentleman seated in a pretty room,
talking the tariff over, their little girl playing beside them.

Every article of furniture in the room, every garment they wore, and the
basket of marketing which the lady had apparently brought in with her, had
a ticket on it, showing how much more expensive each article would be if
the Tariff Bill became a law.

This picture, however, far from having the effect intended, of making
people dislike and fear the Tariff Bill, makes thinking people approve it.

When we remember that this tax is only to be laid on foreign goods that
are imported, we are bound to think that if it is really true that so many
necessary articles are imported which we could just as well make in this
country, it is high time our industries were protected, and that the vast
and wonderful resources of our own country were developed to supply our
needs.

So great a blow will the tariff bill be to the importing trade, that some
of the foreign ministers have ventured to protest against the bill,
because it will damage their country's commerce so much.

Italy, Germany, and the Netherlands have been the first to protest.
Germany has sent a decided hint, through her Ambassador, that she will
make such a heavy duty on American goods, if the bill is passed, that she
will ruin our trade in Germany as surely as we shall ruin hers in America.

The most serious complaint against the bill comes from the business men.
They say that business was just beginning to pick up again, and that the
introduction of so disturbing a question as the Tariff, at this time, is
killing business, and making it as bad as it was before election.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Ceremonies for the dedication of the Grant Monument will be very
grand.

A fine naval parade has been arranged to go side by side with the land
parade, and the President has promised to be present and review both
parades.

Boys from the public schools are to march in line.

       *       *       *       *       *

During the last few days there have been most marvellous reports about an
air-ship that is declared to have been seen in the sky.

The stories come from the West.

People in Omaha, Nebraska, Kansas City, and finally in Chicago have all
stated positively that they have seen a strange light in the sky, which
was as great as that of twenty stars, which they said could be nothing
else but a searchlight on an air-ship.

Astronomers, after carefully looking at the light, declared it to be a
star, one of the Orion group.

People, however, persisted in thinking it a searchlight on an air-ship,
because three lights were seen--a red, a green, as well as this great
white light.

The astronomers said that the particular star referred to did seem to
shine, with red and green lights at times.

Still, people were not satisfied, and soon a report came that the object
had been seen more closely, and a cigar-shaped outline had been observed
behind the light.

From all over that section of the country people have declared that they
have seen the thing, and that it is really an air-ship; but whether there
is any truth in these reports or not, it is impossible as yet to tell.

One thing is certain, however, that a great many persons are experimenting
with air-ships, for from five or six different towns word has come that
so-and-so has been experimenting with an air-ship for a long time, and
perhaps the object in the sky is his perfected ship.

We may live to travel by air-ship yet.

       *       *       *       *       *

The New York Elevated Roads have put on bicycle trains.

Between certain hours of the morning and afternoon on Sundays, the trains
will run bicycle cars.

These cars are made with a line of bicycle racks running down one side,
and a row of seats facing them on the other.

The fare is fifteen cents, and none but persons with wheels are allowed to
ride on these trains.

The experiment has proved such a success that the surface cars are talking
of running trailer-cars for bicycles on Sundays, and, during certain
seasons, on week-days.

       *       *       *       *       *

War has been declared between Greece and Turkey, and the meddling of the
Powers has brought about nothing better than a long delay, in which the
angry feelings between the two countries have had time to grow so strong
and deep that nothing but blood will satisfy them.

On April 16th Turkey formally declared war upon Greece.

The reason given by Turkey was that Greek troops had taken part in the
last raid made by the brigands, and that therefore Greece had already
commenced war.

In his letter stating his reasons for declaring war, the Sultan said he
hoped the Powers would agree with him that Greece was really to blame for
his action.

Greece has been hoping that she could force Turkey to declare war, that
she might escape from the penalties threatened by the Powers if she was
the first to begin the fight. She is now free from any further fear that
they will blockade her ports, and can fight the enemy without
interference.

The various Consuls and Ministers have been recalled to Turkey from
Greece, and the Sultan has issued an order that all Greeks must leave
Turkish territory within fifteen days.

The fighting has been very furious on both sides.

The war broke out in two different places. On the west coast of Turkey is
the Gulf of Arta. Here the Greek war-ships have bombarded the town of
Preveza, and reduced it to ashes.

Farther inland a Greek force has crossed the border into Epirus, and
driven the Turks before it. The Greeks are endeavoring to march on to
Janina, the capital of Epirus. Epirus is one of the Greek provinces which
King George desires to win back for his country.

On the frontier of Macedonia the Greeks have not been so successful, for
the Turks have won from them a very important mountain pass, the Pass of
Milouna, which opens the plains of Larissa to them.

This has been a very severe blow to the Greeks, and unless they can force
the Turks back again they are in danger of losing the town of Larissa,
where most of the supplies for the army have been sent; its loss would be
a terrible one!

There is another pass to the plains of Larissa, called Reveni. This the
Greeks are holding bravely; the Turks were defeated with great loss in
their attack.

The Crown Prince has sent a telegram to Athens, saying that the victory
lies with Greece so far, and that he intends to try and take back Milouna
from the Turks.

It is said that Germany persuaded Turkey to declare war, and that the
Kaiser is in full sympathy with the Sultan.

England has declared herself neutral, which means she will not side with
either party; but it would appear that strong efforts are being made in
the British Parliament to force England to aid Greece.

It is feared that if Greece should whip the Turks, the great European war
can no longer be avoided. The reason for saying this is that, if Turkey is
defeated, the Ottoman Empire will fall to pieces, and all the Powers may
join in one free fight for a share of the plunder.

                                      GENIE H. ROSENFELD.





LETTERS FROM OUR FRIENDS.


From Monterey, Cal., come the two following letters about books:

    DEAR EDITOR:

    I thought that I should take much pleasure in writing to THE
    GREAT ROUND WORLD.

    I have been reading your magazines for several months, and I
    greatly enjoy them.

    Among the books that I like to read are those of the Stories of
    the Ancient Greeks, but for current events I greatly prefer
    THE GREAT ROUND WORLD.

                                    Ever your reader,
                                        ROSA B.
    MONTEREY, CAL.


    DEAR EDITOR:

    I enjoy reading THE GREAT ROUND WORLD very much. I
    think it is very interesting, as well as instructive.

    One of the books I like best is Kipling's "Jungle Book." I think
    all of the readers of THE GREAT ROUND WORLD would
    enjoy it also.

    I will close now, wishing great success to THE GREAT ROUND
    WORLD.                                MARION C.

    MONTEREY, CAL., April 7th, 1897.


We are very much obliged to our kind young readers.

Rudyard Kipling's "Jungle Book," of which there are two volumes--"The
First Jungle Book" and "The Second Jungle Book"--is a very delightful
series of stories of Indian life, and those of our readers who have not
yet read them have a great treat in store.

"The First Jungle Book" is perhaps the better of the two, and the tale of
the little Mongoose Rikki Tikki is so delightful that you can read it
again and again with pleasure.

    DEAR EDITOR:

    I like THE GREAT ROUND WORLD. Mrs. Mills, my
    teacher, reads something out of it every morning that she has
    time. Will you please answer a few questions? Can the prisoners
    in Sing Sing prison talk together? If not, why not? Can they,
    after doing their day's work, do work for themselves and keep
    the money? Yours truly,

                                            CARL C.
    CHEYENNE, WYO., April 5th, 1897.


MY DEAR CARL:

The prisoners in Sing Sing are not allowed to talk together. This is part
of their punishment. Prisoners cannot do work for themselves and keep the
money. They used to have certain tasks given to them every day, and when
these were done they went back to their cells. Under the present law they
stay in their cells all the time, except for a certain period of exercise,
when they go round and round the prison yard.        EDITOR.




ANCIENT GREECE.


I have already told you some things about the old Roman Empire, which ran
its course long before modern Europe came into existence.

Now I am going to tell you about a civilization so much older than that,
that it makes the Roman Empire seem like a thing of to-day!

The Greeks are the most ancient people in Europe. Their early history,
before there were books or written records, has come down to us through
legends and tradition; that is, fanciful stories, in which fact and fable
are mingled, handed down from generation to generation. These legends tell
us that the founders of their nation were not men but gods, who came down
from heaven and peopled the land; that the massive architecture (of which
there are remains to-day) was the work of these gods, who were the
ancestors of the Greek people.

But you and I know more about the origin of this people than they
themselves did. And the wonderful story has all been found out almost in
our own day!

Their ancestors did not come from heaven, but from Central Asia. Countless
ages ago an Asiatic race, called the Aryans, began to flow westward into
Greece. When they came, or why, nobody knows. But come they did, and for
centuries like a great sea spread farther and farther into Europe, until
at last the continent was covered. And you and I and almost all the people
now in Europe are Aryans, and belong to this great Asiatic race.

It was a long time after the occupation of Greece that the Aryan wave
reached Italy.

Then after long ages another Aryan branch, called the Keltic, came into
Western Europe, and overflowed what we now call France, Spain, and the
British Isles. Long, long after that, still another, the Teutonic branch,
flowed over Central Europe, and became Germany. Then, last of all, came
the Slavonic, which occupied the eastern part (Russia); and then--the
Asiatic Aryans had possessed themselves of the entire Continent of Europe.

It is a strange fact that knowledge and civilization have always, like the
sun, arisen in the East, and moved steadily toward the West!

Probably the first spot in Europe touched by the rays of the coming day
was the little island of Crete! Minos, who was King of Crete in this time
of fable, was always worshipped as the deity who first established
civilization and social order!

Theseus also, King of Athens at this time, was one of their great heroes.
And you must read about his slaying the Minotaur in Crete, and about the
beautiful Ariadne who fell in love with him, and gave him the clue to the
labyrinth where her father, Minos, kept the monster hid. These things
about the classic little island have an especial interest for us now.

At this earliest period the people were called, not Greeks, but
Pelasgians. In the course of time the Hellenes, a more powerful Aryan
race, overpowered them, and after that their country was called Hellas,
and its people Hellenes, until a much later period, when they were known
as Greeks.

The Hellenes, like the ancient Pelasgians, had a system of religion which
we call mythology. They worshipped twelve principal deities and countless
smaller ones, who, they believed, ruled the lives and fortunes of men.
Jupiter was the chief of these, and his will and that of the other gods
were communicated to the people by priestesses, in the form of "Oracles."
These were mysterious utterances, the meaning of which had to be guessed
like riddles. But for centuries no war was undertaken nor a single
important thing done without first consulting the "Oracles."

The "Heroic Age" (as it is called) is all so vague and shadowy, we should
know nothing about it were it not for the great poet Homer. But, strangely
enough, about nine hundred years before Christ, Homer gathered all that
was then known about the early life and habits of the Hellenes into two
great poems, called the "Iliad" and the "Odyssey."

In describing an ancient war which took place between the Hellenes and the
Trojans--a people in Asia Minor--he so minutely pictured the people
engaged in the struggle, their habits of life, their thoughts and
feelings, with the minutest details of the circumstances in which they
lived, that it enables us to know what would otherwise be impossible.

This marvellous work, produced more than a thousand years before there was
a Germany, or an England, and almost a thousand before there was a Roman
Empire, is still the world's great masterpiece, and is to-day an
indispensable part of education.

At the close of the "Heroic Age" something happened, which had the same
effect upon Ancient Greece that many centuries later the descent of the
Goths and Vandals had upon Southern Europe. Greece, too, had its northern
barbarians. Some stronger and fiercer Aryan tribes poured down from
Epirus, and for a time upset everything, just as the Goths did in Europe.

The Dorians, a stern, unrelenting tribe, took possession of the southern
extremity of the peninsula, called the Peloponnesus; and the city of
Sparta was the head of their State. There were other States, too, in
Greece, and each had its king and separate government. But although
jealous of each other and almost always at war, they worshipped the same
deities, consulted the same Oracles, and all alike gloried in being
descended from the same gods and in being Greeks.

The two most powerful States (or cities, which meant the same thing) were
Athens and Sparta. But they were as widely separated in character and
habits as if they did not belong to the same family. Athens was the brain,
and Sparta the rough, strong arm of Greece.

Athens delighted in poetry, music, art, and eloquence. The Spartans
despised all these things. They scorned to use three words where two would
do, and aimed only to make their youth fearless and terrible defenders of
Greece.

When a child was born, if it did not give promise of being physically
strong and perfect, it was cast into a ravine and then left to perish.
When the boys who were permitted to live were seven years old, they were
taken from their mothers and made to endure cold, hunger, and inhuman
severities. They were beaten until the blood flowed, simply to teach them
endurance, and a Spartan boy would die under the lash rather than endure
the disgrace of uttering a cry of pain. There was never any family life,
nor pleasure.

Every boy was trained to be a soldier; and until he was sixty years old
the man belonged to the State absolutely. And all those years he ate his
black broth at a public mess, seasoned only with fatigue and hunger. A
witty Athenian said he did not wonder the Spartans were brave in battle,
for death was preferable to their life.

The severe code of laws by which they were governed was established by
Lycurgus, about 770 B.C. (before Christ).

Athens had her days of severity and cruelty, too, under Draco, who
established her first laws. But the people rebelled, and in 594
B.C. Solon, a man of great sagacity, prepared a constitution,
which was a model of wisdom, justice, and even of gentleness. The
government established by Solon was an aristocratic Republic, in which the
common people had no part. The Chief, or Archon, as he was called, was
chosen by the nobles, and served for a stated time, like our Presidents.

But the supreme authority lay in the "Court of Areopagus," whose members
had already served as Archons. The Areopagus really ruled the State, a
Senate of four hundred members preparing the cases which were to be
brought before it for decision.

Athens prospered under this rule. But an ambitious noble stirred the
people to believe they were unjustly excluded from office and from power,
and produced a new government, which, under the cloak of a democracy, was
really a despotism, with the scheming Pisistratus at its head, or, as it
was called, its "Tyrant" (meaning simply ruler).

But Lycurgus did something else besides placing an austere and merciless
system upon Sparta. He helped to re-establish the famous and ancient
Olympic Games (776 B.C.).

You know how we feel about our great baseball and football games; how
excited we are, and how glad or how sorry if one team or the other is
defeated. Well, suppose, instead of these, there was one great game every
four years, in which all the country could compete. And suppose the victor
in this great game was crowned and treated like a king forever afterward.
That would be what the Olympic Games were in Greece.

Every four years the young Greeks from all parts of the country met at
Olympia and contended for prizes in athletic games. There was running,
jumping, wrestling, boxing, the throwing of javelins and quoits (the
"discus"), and races of horses and chariots. For one month, during this
great festival, wars were suspended throughout Greece.

The only reward of the victor was a crown of wild-olive leaves; but this
was regarded as the dearest prize in life and the greatest honor a Greek
could attain.

The wearer of the olive crown was carried home like a king, with
processions and songs of triumph, and all his life afterward he was a
privileged and honored person. He had conferred everlasting distinction
upon his family and his country, and his statue was erected in the Sacred
Grove of Jupiter, in whose honor these festivals occurred.

Other festivals were established afterward in honor of Apollo, called the
Pythian and Isthmian games, in which there were contests, not alone in
gymnastics and in chariot races, but in music, poetry, and eloquence; and
these prizes were also sought as the richest rewards life could bring. The
Spartans took no part in them. But it was the Olympic games which brought
together all of Greece every four years, cemented the states with a common
sympathy, and kept alive the fraternal spirit.

This national festival was to them what the Christian era is to us. The
interval of four years between the games was called an Olympiad. And time
in Greece was measured from the First Olympiad, which occurred, according
to our reckoning, B.C. 776-772.

With such a stimulus for effort, every young Greek was straining every
nerve and every muscle to win the olive wreath. He was training his body
to the finest perfection for the one prize, and his powers of intellect
and his genius for the others. This goes far to account for the physical
beauty and the supreme excellence which made this race like their own
progenitors of the Heroic Age, more like a race of gods than of men.

But they were great in other things besides athletics and accomplishments.
The shores of Asia Minor and of the Mediterranean were soon fringed with
rich Greek colonies. Every place they touched blossomed into beauty, with
temples and houses adorned with sculpture and painting. One of their
cities on the coast of Italy was called Sybaris, and it has given us the
word "sybarite," which means a person who abandons himself to luxury.

We may form some idea of these Greek cities from Pompeii, which was still
existing on the coast of Italy at the time of the Christian era, and which
has been preserved in its bed of ashes as if to show to a later age
refinements of luxury, so far exceeding its own.

While during five hundred years Greece had been thus developing, its
separate and discordant states were held firmly together by just three
things: They all had the same religion and sacred rites, they were all
striving for the same prizes at the Olympic Games, and all alike revered
their poet Homer. The "Iliad" and the "Odyssey" were, in fact, the Greek
Bible. It was the final appeal in matters of religion, and it was the
history of their divine origin and ancestry. Boys studied it in school,
and men never ceased to study it--many Athenians being able to recite both
poems from beginning to end.

At the time the Greeks were thus becoming a great nation, there was in
Asia an old and powerful empire called Persia. Some of the Greek colonies
in Asia Minor were accused by the great King Darius of inciting his own
people in Asia Minor to revolt. And he sent an army, which punished and
subdued the offending Greeks. King Darius then decided that he would
invade Greece itself. He thought he could easily master that little scrap
of territory, and capture its straggling colonies along the Mediterranean
coast, and thus extend his own dominion into Europe.

Athens and Sparta were, as usual, engaged in a small war; but at the news
of a threatened Persian invasion, the Greek States sprang solidly
together.

The armies met on the field of Marathon (490 B.C.), and the
Asiatic host, after a desperate conflict, turned and fled. So confident
had the Persians been of victory, that they had brought a mass of white
marble with which to erect a monument on the plain of Marathon. This
Phidias, the great Greek sculptor, carved into a gigantic figure of
Nemesis, to represent Divine vengeance.

The proud and arrogant Persians were not used to defeat. For ten years
they brooded over it and prepared to wipe it out by an overwhelming
victory. Darius was dead; but his son Xerxes, in the year 480
B.C., appeared on the coast of Greece with a vast army, which he
himself led.

The first incident in the war was the most renowned in the history of the
world. If you do not know of it already, you will often hear how Leonidas,
with his little Spartan band of three hundred, defended the narrow rocky
pass at Thermopylae against the whole Persian army, and how they stood
their ground until every man was killed.

The Persians pressed on into the heart of Greece. Athens was abandoned,
and then burnt by the conquerors. What made the cause of Greece still more
desperate was the dissensions between the Athenians and the Spartans, who
insisted upon concentrating their forces to guard their own Peloponnesus.
But finally all united in a great battle at Salamis.

The fate of Greece was now to be decided. Xerxes, seated on a jewelled
throne that he might witness the victory of his arms, to his bitter dismay
saw the terrible and overwhelming rout of his entire army, and returned to
Persia with only a ragged remnant of his great host.

Now shall I tell you something more about this great King, and who it was
who became his wife after he went back to Persia?

You all know the story. It is one of the most thrilling and dramatic that
was ever written. You know about the lovely Jewish maiden who was chosen
by the great King to be his wife in the place of Vashti, and how a wicked
minister or adviser to the King plotted the downfall of Mordecai, and was
then after all compelled to lead him in triumph through the streets,
crying, "Thus shall it be done to the man whom the King delighteth to
honor!" And how the brave Queen, at the risk of her own life, saved her
people from extermination. Well, this great King was Xerxes, and his wife
was Queen Esther. And after the war with the Greeks was over, her uncle,
Mordecai, was chief officer to the King, and wisely managed the affairs of
his great kingdom.

And shall I tell you what sort of place Europe was at the time of this
Persian invasion of Greece, and while Queen Esther was pleading for the
life of her people?

On the peninsula of Italy there had arisen a Roman Republic, where a great
civilization was growing. All west of that was called Gaul. It was filled
with Barbarians (excepting the few Greek colonies on the coast). To the
north were the British Isles, filled with another race of Barbarians,
calling themselves Britons; and in Central Europe still more Barbarians,
of the great Teutonic or German race; and still beyond that, where dwelt
the Slavonic or Russian people, all was silence and impenetrable darkness.

It made little difference to these Barbarians then whether Persians or
Greeks occupied the shores of the Mediterranean. But the history of future
Europe would have been strangely changed if the Greeks had not driven back
this deluge of Asiatic people.

So Greece was now at the head of the world, and Athens was at the head of
Greece. And there was a man in Athens who was going to make that city not
alone the greatest of that time, but in a way the greatest of all time!

Her great citizen Pericles changed the government of Athens to a pure
democracy. And then, by the magic of his influence, it sprang from its
ashes in a form so beautiful, it was known as the "City of the Gods." The
matchless temples and colonnades which arose on the Acropolis, adorned by
the sculptures of Phidias, are still the wonder of the world.

But that was not all. No men have ever thought so profoundly, nor spoken
so wisely, nor with such eloquence, as did the men in those temples and
under those Greek arcades. Never have such tragedies been written as were
recited there, and never has there been an entire people so fitted to
comprehend and to enjoy thought so elevated, and art of such a supreme
type.

The outpouring of genius in the "Age of Pericles" is one of the great
mysteries in history. It sent a path of light down through centuries of
darkness, and that light shines just as brightly to-day, uneclipsed and
even undimmed by anything the world has done since.

Pericles drew all this radiant genius into Athens, and made it beautiful
and great. But he did still more than that. Athens, which had first been a
monarchy, then under the rule of a few wise men in the Areopagus, had then
lost all her liberties under the "Tyrants." Pericles created a Democracy.
He believed the true ideal was a government by the people. That if Athens
governed Greece, then the Athenians should govern Athens. And that the
power of a state should rest, not with one, nor a few, but with the many!

During a period of fifty years free Athens was the acknowledged head of
the Greek states, and in those years Greece had reached the meridian of
her glory. But Sparta was jealous of the dazzling splendor of her rival;
and she hated this new democracy which was spreading through all the
states. She believed in the good old idea of one despotic king, and a
people cowed into submission by his authority.

Two parties were thus created in the Greek states, and in a dispute which
occurred about 420 B.C., the friends of the Spartans or
Aristocratic ideal ranged themselves on the one side, and those of the
Athenian or Democratic on the other.

From this arose the long conflict known as the Peloponnesian War, which
lasted for twenty-seven years, its real cause being that Sparta was
determined to lead Greece.

It was in vain that the Athenians fought with the energy of despair. Their
beautiful city--the City of the Gods--was at last surrendered, and the
scoffing Spartans (404 B.C.) took possession of the treasures
they scorned.

Athens had fallen, but her real kingdom was indestructible. She was to be
forever Queen in the empire of ideas, of literature, and of art!

The coarse, harsh rule of Sparta lasted less than a century. Then Thebes,
another powerful Greek state, arose to the leadership of discontented
Greece. And so Hellas, the land in which they all gloried, had become a
mass of quarrelling, struggling states, until it was seized by the rough
hand of a master.

In the north of Greece was the State of Macedonia. It was not composed of
a multitude of free cities like the rest of Greece, but its people were
diffused throughout the state, and all governed by one king.

Compared with the Athenians, these unpolished, rude Macedonians were
almost barbarians.

But in the year 359 B.C. a man came to the throne of this state,
who was not going to be satisfied with being merely a Greek among Greeks.
He was resolved to be the head of the Greeks. This was Philip of Macedon.
He bent all the energies of his strong, crafty mind toward making himself
master of Greece.

Demosthenes, the great Athenian orator, in a desperate effort to save his
people from this man, delivered a set of orations denouncing Philip. These
are the famous "Philippics," of which you will often hear.

The Philippics were in vain. Greece yielded to this dominating King
Philip, and was led into a war of conquest against the Persians. But the
fates intended that a stronger hand than Philip's should lead the
expedition into Asia. Philip was assassinated on the eve of his departure,
and his son Alexander, just twenty years old, succeeded to his father's
throne and projects.

There have been three men who have been called "Masters of the World."
Alexander of Macedon was the first of these (323 B.C.), Julius
Caesar the second (30 B.C.), and Charlemagne the third (800
A.D.). Napoleon Bonaparte came very near making the fourth in
this brief list, but failed.

Among the stories of Alexander's boyhood is that of the "Gordian knot,"
which it was said could only be untied by the person who was destined to
conquer Asia. After striving in vain to loosen this famous knot, it is
said Alexander impatiently drew his sword and cut it--thus prefiguring
what that sword was to do.

Alexander led the Greeks into Asia, and in ten years had conquered Egypt
and all the Persian dominions, and decreed that Babylon should be the
capital of this vast empire of his own creating. He founded Alexandria and
other cities, which are still great centres of commerce. Not satisfied
with this, he was pressing down into Arabia, when after a night's debauch
he suddenly died (aged thirty-two years), and his vast scheme of empire
perished with him.

The world is still feeling the results of those ten years of conquest.
Every Greek province in the Sultan's dominions to-day is such because of
Alexander of Macedon.

Four of Alexander's generals divided his empire among themselves--the
kingdom of Macedonia, the kingdom of Egypt, and two Asiatic kingdoms.
Egypt fell to the share of Ptolemy, who was the first of a line of kings
which ended with the last Ptolemy, who married the famous and fated
Cleopatra (30 B.C.).

The Greeks poured into the two Asiatic kingdoms, and Greek culture and
civilization spread over the Orient (or East). But while Asia was thus
Hellenized, Hellas, the source of this splendid civilizing power, was
moving surely toward annihilation.

Another world-conquering power was coming into existence. Before the
Christian era arrived, the Roman Republic had absorbed the four kingdoms
left by Alexander, and when the Roman Empire came into being (31
B.C.) there were Greeks, but no longer any Greece, except as a
geographical name.

The Roman Empire, after centuries of splendor, also expired. And in about
the year 600 A.D. another great empire was being created by the
Mahometan Saracens, who absorbed all the Greek provinces in the East. This
empire also was to be superseded by another Asiatic race.

I have told you how the Ottoman Empire, starting from a grain of
mustard-seed in the year 1250 A.D., spread with marvellous energy
and rapidity. The Saracen dominions now became Turkish dominions, and the
unhappy Greeks had changed masters for the last time. That proud and
gifted race was doomed to spend years of servitude to the cruel Turk.

You have seen that the Turkish Empire went the way of other great empires.
It reached a climax of power in 1500 A.D., and then swiftly and
surely declined. But, although perishing, its fingers never relaxed their
hold upon the Greek colonies, now no longer pagan, but Christian.

The old Greek love of freedom still burned in the breasts of this unhappy
race. They still cherished the sacred memories of Hellas, still spoke her
language, and gloried in her name.

In 1826 the spell of long captivity was broken, when the Greeks on the
Peninsula--the very heart and shrine of the classic memories--freed
themselves from Turkey and joined the kingdoms of Europe.

Seventy-three years have passed since then, and little has been
accomplished toward the liberating of the race.

You are reading the last thrilling chapter in the history of Greece every
day in the newspapers, while modern Greece, like a brave knight of old, is
risking her very existence in defence of her kinsmen.

Even the names in the despatches seem like a voice from antiquity;
Macedonia, where the Turkish forces are gathering; and Larissa, where
Prince Constantine is intrenched. Larissa is a name older than Rome, older
than the Olympic games, or even than Homer. It is the Pelasgian name for a
fortified city!

Now I hope you will remember that the sufferings of the Armenians and of
the Cretans should deeply move us, not alone because they are Christians,
but because they are Greeks. The world owes a debt to Greece which nothing
can ever repay. She has given us our civilization.

Rome was barbarian until Greece civilized her. What Greek slaves taught to
their Roman masters was then transmitted by Rome to Europe.

Then when this borrowed light burned low after the ages of darkness,
Constantinople relighted the world by sending abroad her stored treasures
of Greek culture. And we to-day are still living in that transcendent
light, and drawing upon those inexhaustible riches.

You know that the college where a man has been educated is called his Alma
Mater. Never forget that Greece is the beloved Alma Mater of the civilized
world. And the sorrows of her oppressed children should move us in a way
quite different from those of any other race.

                                      MARY PLATT PARMELE.

Copyright, 1897 by WILLIAM BEVERLEY HARISON.

Transcriber's note: Extra "to" removed from "he went back to Persia?"





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Great Round World and What Is
Going On In It, Vol. 1, No. 25, April 29, 1897, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GREAT ROUND WORLD AND ***

***** This file should be named 15716.txt or 15716.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/1/5/7/1/15716/

Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Emmy and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team.(www.pgdp.net)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
