The Project Gutenberg eBook, The Eternal Maiden, by T. Everett Harre


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net





Title: The Eternal Maiden


Author: T. Everett Harre



Release Date: June 20, 2005  [eBook #16093]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ETERNAL MAIDEN***


E-text prepared by Al Haines



THE ETERNAL MAIDEN

A Novel

by

T. EVERETT HARRE

Published by
Mitchell Kennerley
New York

Press of J. J. Little & Ives Company
East Twenty-fourth Street
New York

1913







TO

EDGAR WILSON RIDDELL

JANUARY 31, 1892--JULY 2, 1912


IN MEMORY OF

A LIFE'S SUPREME FRIENDSHIP




THE ETERNAL MAIDEN

PRELUDE

_Long ages ago, darkness brooded over the frozen world and held in its
thrall the unreleased waters of the glacial seas.  There was no animal
life upon the land, and in the depth of the waters no living thing
stirred.  Kokoyah, the water god, breathed not; Tornahhuchsuah, the
earth spirit, who rules above the spirits of the wind and air, was
veiled in slumber.  Men had risen like willows from the frozen earth;
but, although they lived, they were as the dead.  They spake not,
neither did they hunt, nor eat, nor did they die.  Then the Great
Spirit, whose name is not known, placed upon earth a man, in his arms
the strength to kill, in his heart the primal urge of love.  And in
that flowerless arctic Eden, out of its bounteous compassion, the Great
Spirit placed also a maiden, her face beautiful with the young
virginity of the world, in her bosom implanted a yearning, not unmixed
with fear, for love.  Gazing upon her, the youth's heart stirred, with
desire, the maiden's with virginal terror.  The maiden fled, the youth
followed.  Over the desolate icy mountains the fleet feet of the youth
sped with the swiftness of the wind gods, over the silent white seas
the maiden with the elusiveness of the air spirits.  In the heart of
the youth throbbed the passion of love, indomitable, eternal, which the
blasting breath of time should never kill.  In the maiden's bosom
quaked a reasonless shame, an unconquerable terror.  Surrounded by her
whirling cloud of hair, the maiden sprang, untiring, across the wild
white world.  His strength failing, the youth pantingly followed.
Thousands of years passed; the breathless pursuit continued; the
maiden's nebulous hair became shot with streaks of golden fire, from
her eyes beams of light streamed across the expanses over which she
exultantly, fearfully bounded; the tremulous faltering youth's face
paled until it shone silvery in the darkness, and the beads of
perspiration on his forehead glowed with a strange lustre.  Reaching,
in their mad race, the very edge of the earth, the maiden leaped,
fiery, into space, and her hair becoming suddenly molten, she became
the sun--the eternal maiden Sukh-eh-nukh, the beautiful, the
all-desired.  Utterly exhausted, his wan arms yearningly outstretched,
the youth swooned after her into the heavens, and was transformed into
the moon--the ever-desiring, ever-sorrowing moon.  In the smile of
Sukh-eh-nukh the seas melted.  Walrus and narwhals, seals and whales
came into being on the bosom of Kokoyah; on the earth the snows
disappeared, and the brow of Tornahhuchsuah was crowned with green
grasses and starry flowers.  Men hunted game, women laughed for joy;
they beat drums, they danced, they sang.  By the eternal, unrequited
passion of the lovers in the skies, happiness and plenty came upon the
earth.  But, with Light, came also Death.  Jealous of men's happiness,
Perdlugssuaq, the Great Evil, brought sickness; he struck men on the
hunt, on the seas, in the mountains.  He was ever feared.  He made the
Great Dark terrible.  But when the night became bright with the
love-lorn glamour of the moon, Perdlugssuaq was for the time forgotten;
in their hearts men felt a vague, tender, and ineffable stirring--the
lure of a passion stronger and stranger even than death.  They gazed
upon the moon with instinctive, undefined pity.  So, as the years
passed, and ages melted and remade the snows, the long day was golden
with the Beauty that is ever desired, the Ideal never attained; the
night was softly silver with the melancholy and eternal hope of the
deathless love that eternally desires, eternally pursues, and is
eternally denied._

Thus runs the Eskimo legend.




I

"_Her cheeks were flushed delicately with the soft pink of the lichen
flowers that bloom in the rare days of early summer.  Her eyes played
with a light as elusive, as quick as the golden radiance on the seas._"


Great excitement prevailed among the members of the tribe.  Along a
mottled green-and-brown stretch of shore, which rolled undulatingly
toward the icy fringe of the polar sea, more than twoscore hunters were
engaged in unusual activity.  Some were lacing tight over the framework
the taut skin of their kayaks.  Others sharpened harpoon points with
bits of flint.  Tateraq busily cut long lashings from tanned walrus
hides.  Maisanguaq deftly took these and pieced them together into long
lines, which were rolled in coils lasso-fashion.  Arnaluk and a half
dozen others sat on their haunches, between their knees great balls
made of the entire hides of seals.  With cheeks extended they blew into
these with gusto.  Filled with air, the hides became floats, which were
attached to the leather lasso lines.  The lines in turn were fastened
by Attalaq and Papik to harpoons, which were to be driven into the
walrus, the natives' chief prey of the arctic sea.

A babel of conversation swayed to and fro among this northernmost
fringe of the human race.  Now and then it was drowned in the raucous,
deafening shriek of auks which swarmed from nearby cliffs and soared in
clouds over the shore.

"_Aveq soah_!  Walrus!  Walrus!" shouted Papik, tossing up his arms and
dancing, his brown face twisting with grotesque grimaces of joy.

"_Aveq soah!  Aveq soah_!"  He leaped in frenzy.  He seized his harpoon
in mimicry of striking, and darted it up and down in the air.  "Walrus!
Walrus!" he cried, and his feverish contagion spread through the crowd.

"_Aveq tedicksoah_!  A great many walrus," echoed Arnaluk.  "_Aveq
tedicksoah_!  Walrus too many to count!"

They stopped their work and gathered in a group, Papik before them, his
arms pointing toward the sea.  His eyes glistened.

To the south, _Im-nag-i-na_, the entrance to the polar sea, was hidden
by grayish mists which, as they shifted across the sun, palpitated with
running streaks of gold.  From the veiled distance the sound of a
glacier exploding pealed over the waters like the muffled roar of
artillery.  The sun, magnified into a great swimming disc by the rising
vapors, poured a rich and colorful light over the sea--it was a light
without warmth.  In the turquoise sky overhead, the moving clouds
changed in hue from crimson to silver, and straggling flecks, like
diaphanous ribbons, became stained with mottled dyes.  Against the
horizon, the arctic armada of eternally moving icebergs drifted slowly
southward and, like the spectral ships of the long dead Norsemen who
had braved these regions, flaunted the semblance of silver-gleaming
sails.  The sea rose in great green emerald swells, the wave crests
broke in seething curls of silver foam, and in the troughs of
descending waters glittered cascades of celestial jewels.  It was late
summer--the hour, midnight.

The keen eyes of the natives searched the seas.

To the south of where the watchers were gathered, the glacial heels of
the inland mountains step precipitously into the sea and rise to a
height of several thousand feet.  At the base of these iron rocks,
corroded with the rust of interminable ages, the fragments of great
floes, like catapults, are tossed by the inrushing sea.  Above, in
summertime, rises and falls constantly a black mist resembling shifting
cloud smoke.  Millions of auks swarm from their moss-ensconced grottos;
an oppressive clamor beats the air.  Along the ocean, where crevices of
the descending iron-chiselled cliffs are fugitively green with ribbons
of pale grass, downy-winged ducks purr, mating guillemots coo
incessantly, and tremulous oogzooks chirrup joyously to their young.

As the natives listened, a deep nasal bellowing from the far ocean
trembled in the air.

Not a man stirred.  The sound vibrated into silence.  The auks
screamed.  Hawks shrilled.  From the far interior valleys came the
echoed wolf-howling of Eskimo dogs.  There the mountain tops,
perpetually covered with ice and snow, gleamed through the clouds with
running colors of amaranth, green and mottled gold.  The air swam with
frigid fire.  As the tribe stood in silence along the shore, a roar as
of gatling guns pealed from the mist-hidden heights.  After a taut
moment of silence, a frightened scream rose from every living thing on
land and sea.  Yet the group of men only bent their heads.  Then, like
an undertone in the chorus of animate life, their quick ears detected
the long-drawn, hoarse call of walrus bulls.  The howls of the dogs
from the distant mountain passes came nearer.  More distant receded the
stertorous nasal bellow on the sea.

The natives feverishly leaped to their tasks.  There was a note of
anxiety in their voices.  Onto the forepart of the kayaks they placed
their weapons, leather lines, floats and drags.  More than twoscore
boats were drawn over the land-adhering ice to the edge of the sea.  A
fierce chatter brought all the women to the doors of their seal-skin
tents.  They looked seaward and shook their heads with dismay.

"Many walrus--far away," the men shouted.

"No, no," the timid women returned.  "Walrus too far
away--_Perdlugssuaq will strike you there_!"

Against the distant horizon mighty bergs loomed.  In swift eddies of
water great floes swirled.  The walrus were too far away to be seen.
Yet the opportunity of securing walrus was too rare to be missed; for
unless food and fuel were soon secured, starvation during the coming
winter confronted the tribe.  The previous winter had been one of
unprecedented severity and had wiped out bears, and herds of caribou
and musk oxen.  The summer season, which was now drawing to a close,
had been destitute of every kind of game.  Musk oxen had been seldom
found and then only in the far inland valleys.  Some blight of nature
seemed to have exterminated even the animals of the sea.  The natives
had lived mainly on the teeming bird life.  From the scrawny bodies of
the arctic birds, however, neither food that could be preserved nor
fuel to be burned in the lamps could be secured.  On musk oxen the
tribes depend chiefly for hides and meat, and on walrus for both food
and fuel.  The ammunition, brought by Danish traders the summer before,
was exhausted, so in the hunt they had for many sleeps to rely solely
upon their skill with their own primitive weapons.  For months the
doughty hunters had gathered but few supplies.  The prospect of the
coming winter was ominous indeed.  Wandering up and down the coast in
their migrating excursions the tribes had scoured land and sea with but
meagre results.  At the village from which they now heard the inspiring
walrus calls, a dozen visiting tribesmen--most of them in search for
wives as well as game--had gathered.  Joy filled them in the prospect
of securing supplies--and possible success in love--at last.

As they launched their kayaks, in impatient haste lest the walrus drift
too far seaward, some one called:

"Ootah!  Ootah!"

They gazed anxiously about.  Ootah, the bravest and most distinguished
of the hunters, was missing.  All the young men would gladly have
started without Ootah, but the elders, who knew his skill and the might
of his arm, were not willing.

To the younger men there was an added zest in the hunt; each felt in
the other a rival, and Ootah the one most to be feared.  A feverish
anxiety, a burning desire to distinguish himself flushed the heart of
each brave hunter.  For whoever brought back the most game, so they
believed, stood the best chance of winning the hand of Annadoah.  Of
all the unmarried maidens of the tribes, none cooked so well, none
could sew so well as Annadoah, none was so skilled in the art of making
_ahttees_ and _kamiks_ as Annadoah.  And, moreover, Annadoah was very
fair.

"Ootah! _aveq soah_!  Hasten thou!  The walrus are drifting to sea."

Attalaq rushed up to the village and paused at the tent of Annadoah.

"Ootah!" he called.

A voice from within replied.

"We start--the wind drifts--the walrus are carried to sea."

"I come!" replied Ootah.

The flap of the tent opened.  The sunlight poured upon the face of the
young hunter.  He smiled radiantly, with the self-assertion of youth,
the joy of life.

Ootah was graced with unwonted beauty.  He was slight and agile of
limb; his body was supple and lithe; his face was immobile, beardless,
and with curving lips vividly red, a nose, small, with nostrils
dilating sensitively, and eyebrows heavily lashed, it possessed
something of the softness of a woman.  His glistening black hair, bound
about his forehead by a narrow fillet of skins, fell riotously over his
shoulders.  His eyes were large and dark and swam with an ardent light.

He turned.

"Thou wilt not place thy face to mine, Annadoah?  Yet I love thee,
Annadoah.  My heart melts as streams in springtime, Annadoah.  My arms
grow strong as the wind, and my hand swift as an arrow for love of
thee, Annadoah.  The joy the sight of thee gives me is greater than
that of food after starving in the long winter!  Yea, thou wilt be
mine?  Surely for my heart bursts for love of thee, Annadoah."

He leaned back, stretching his arms, but Annadoah shyly drew further
inside her shelter.

With a sigh he flung his leather line over his shoulder, seized his
harpoons, and stepped from the tent.  His step was resilient and
buoyant, his slim body moved with the grace of an arctic deer.  He
looked back as he reached the icy shore.  Annadoah stood at the door of
her tent.  Her parting laughter rang after him with the sweetness of
buntings singing in spring.

Ootah's heart leaped within him.  Annadoah possessed a beauty rare
among her people.  From her father, one of the brave white men who had
died with the Greely party years before at Cape Sabine, Annadoah had
inherited a delicacy and beauty more common indeed with the unknown
peoples of the south.  Her face was fresh and smooth, and of a pale
golden hue.  Her cheeks were flushed delicately with the soft pink of
the lichen flowers that bloom in the rare days of early summer.  Her
eyes played with a light as elusive, as quick as the golden radiance on
the seas.  Her dark silken hair straggled luxuriantly from under the
loose hood of immaculate white fox fur which had fallen back from her
head.  The soft skins of blue foxes and of young birds clothed her.
From her sleeves her hands peeped; they were small, dainty, childlike.
Almost childlike, too, was her face, so palely golden, so fresh, so
lovely, so petite.  There were mingled in her the coyness of a child
and the irresistible coquetry of a woman.

She waved her hands joyously to the hunters leaving the shore.  They
called back to her.  Some of the women frowned.  One shook her fist at
Annadoah.

Papik, lingering behind, approached Annadoah timidly.

"Thou art beautiful, Annadoah; thou canst sew with great skill.  With
the needles the white men brought thee, thou hast made garments such as
no other maiden.  Papik would wed thee, Annadoah."

"Thou art a good lad, Papik," Annadoah replied, laughing gaily.  "But
thy fingers are very long--and long, indeed, thy nose!"

Papik flushed, for to him this was a tragedy.

"But with my fingers I speed the arrow with skill," he replied.

"True, but the fate of him who shoots with a skill such as thine is
unfortunate indeed; for soon the day will come when thou wilt not speed
the arrow, when thy hands will be robbed of their cunning.  When
_ookiah_ (winter) comes with his lashes of frost he will smite thy
fingers--they will fall off.  Then how wilt thou get food for thy wife?
_Ookiah_ will twist thy nose, and it will freeze.  Poor Papik!"

Annadoah lay her hand gently on his arm, and a brief sorrow clouded her
smiles.

Papik bowed his head.  He understood the blight nature had set upon him
and it made his heart cold.  Truly his fingers were long and his nose
was long--and either was a misfortune to a tribesman.  He knew, as all
the natives knew, that sooner or later during a long winter his fingers
would inevitably freeze, then he would lose his skill with weapons;
consequently he would not be able to provide for a wife.  His nose,
too, in all probability would freeze; then he would be disfigured and
the trials of life would be more complicated.

From the inherited experience of ages the natives know that a hunter
with short hands and feet is most likely to live long; a man's length
of life can be pretty accurately gauged by the stubbiness of his nose.
The degree of radiation of the human body is such that it can prevent
freezing in this northern region only when the extremities are short;
thus a man with long feet is almost for a certainty doomed to lose his
toes, and the most fortunate is he whose feet and hands are short,
whose nose is stubby and whose ears are small.  The exigencies of life
place an economic value on the structure of a hunter's body, and the
little Eskimo women--endowed with a crude social conscience which
demands that a father shall live and remain efficient so as to care for
his own children--are loath to marry one afflicted as was Papik.

"But I care for thee, Annadoah," Papik protested.

"And well do I know thou art a brave lad, but seek thou another maiden;
thou dost not touch my heart, Papik, and thy fingers are very, very
long."

With native spontaneity, Papik laughed and turned shoreward.  As he
passed the assembled maidens he paused momentarily and greeted them.
He made a brief proposal of marriage to Ahningnetty, a fat maiden, and
was met with laughter.

"Go on, Long Fingers," one called.  "How wilt thou strike the bear when
thy fingers are gone?  How wilt thou seek the musk ox when _ookiah_
hath bitten off thy feet?"

The maiden who spoke was extremely thin.

"Ha, ha!" Papik returned.  "How wilt thou warm thy husband when the
winter comes?  How wilt thou warm the little baby when thou art like
the bear after a famished winter, thou maid of skin and bones!"

"Long-nose!  Long-nose! may thy nose freeze!" she called.

The other maidens laughed and gibed at her.  In anger she fled into her
_tupik_, or tent.  Being very thin she, too, like Papik, suffered from
the bar sinister of nature.  For, in selecting a wife, a native comes
down to the practical consideration of choosing a maid who will likely
grow fat, so that, during the long cold winters, her body will be a
sort of human radiator to keep the husband and children warm.  So love,
you see, in this region, is largely influenced by an instinctive
knowledge of natural economies.

As he launched his kayak, Ootah turned toward Annadoah.

"Thou art the sun, Annadoah!" he called.

"And thou the moon, Ootah," she replied.  "I shall await thee, Ootah!
Bring thou back fat and blubber, Ootah, to warm thy fires, Ootah."  And
she laughed gaily.  Then she turned her back to Ootah, bent her head
coyly and did not turn around again.  To Ootah this was a good
augury--for when a maiden turns her back upon a suitor she thinks
favorably of him.  This is the custom.

Ootah felt a new strength in his veins.  He felt himself master of all
the prey in the sea.


At the entrance of the tent of Sipsu, the _angakoq_, or native
magician, stood Maisanguaq, one of the rivals for the hand of Annadoah.
His face twisted with jealous rage as he heard Annadoah calling to the
speeding Ootah.  His narrow eyes glittered vindictively.  Turning on
his heel he entered Sipsu's dwelling place.

Sipsu sat on the floor near his oil lamp.  When Maisanguaq entered he
did not stir.  He was as still, as grotesque, as evil-looking as the
tortured idols of the Chinese; like theirs his eyes were beadlike,
expressionless, dull; such are the eyes of dead seal.  His face was
brown and cracked like old leather, and was covered with a crust of
dirt; his gray-streaked hair was matted and straggled over his face; it
teemed with lice.  He held his knotty hands motionless over the flame
of his lamp.  His nails were long and curled like sharp talons.  As
Maisanguaq saw him he could not repress a shudder.

Sipsu was feared, and as correspondingly hated, by the tribe.  They
brought to him, it is true, offerings of musk ox meat and walrus
blubber when members fell ill.  But that was the urge of necessity.  Of
late years Sipsu's conjurations for recovery had resulted in few cures;
his heart was not in them; but with greater vehemence did he enter upon
seances of malediction.  With almost unerring exactness he prophesied
many deaths.  For this the tribe did not love him.  Nor did Sipsu love
the tribe; especially did he hate the youthful, and those who courted
and were newly wed.  When Maisanguaq touched his shoulder, he turned
with a growl.

"Canst thou invoke the curse of death upon one who goes hunting upon
the seas?"

Through the rheum of years Sipsu's eyes gleamed.

The aged, gnarled thing found voice.  It was hollow and thin.

"Ha, thou art Maisanguaq," his toothless jaws chattered.  "Thou bearest
no one good will.  Seldom dost thou smile.  For this I like thee."

He laughed harshly.  Maisanguaq impatiently repeated his question:

"Can Sipsu invoke the great curse?  Ha, what dost thou mean?  Art thou
a fool?  Have not many died upon the word of Sipsu, Sipsu whose spirits
never desert him!  Harken!  Did not Sipsu go unto the mountains in his
youth?  Did he not hear the hill spirits speaking?  Did he not carry
food to them, and wood and arrow points for weapons?  And in _ookiah_
(winter) did they not strike?  Did they not kill one Otaq, who hated
Sipsu?  Did Sipsu not go unto the lower land of the dead--did he not
speak to those who freeze in the dark?  Yea, did Sipsu not learn how
the world is kept up, and the souls of nature are bound together?  And
hath he not the power to separate them, yea, as a man from his shadow?"

"Thou evil-tongued wretch, well doth Maisanguaq believe thee!  Here--I
promise thee meat.  I follow Ootah upon the chase.  There are walrus on
the sea.  Invoke the curse of destruction upon Ootah--and I will give
thee meat for the long winter."

"Ootah--Ootah--yah--hah!  Ootah!"  Sipsu snapped the name viciously.
"With joy shall I bring the great evil unto Ootah.  For hath he not
despised my art, hath he not scoffed at my spirits!  But thou--what
reason hast thou to desire his death?"

"Ootah findeth favor with Annadoah," said Maisanguaq briefly.  "I would
she never make his _kamiks_ (boots)."

"Yea, and she shall not.  She shall not!" the old man shrieked in a
sudden access of rage.  "So saith Sipsu, whose spirits never fail."

Lying on the floor Sipsu closed his eyes and, moving his head up and
down, called repeatedly:

"_Quilaka Nauk_!  _Quilaka Nauk_!  Where are my spirits?  Where are my
spirits?"

Presently he rose, and swaying his body crooned:

"_Tassa quilivagit_!  _Tassa quilivagit_!  My spirits are here--they
are here!  _Tassa quilivagit_!"

Grasping a drum made of animal tissue strung over a rib-bone he began
to dance.  He beat a slow, uneasy measure on the drum.  His face
grinned hideously.  His voice at times rose to a harsh shriek, then
suddenly it trailed away until it seemed like the voice of one speaking
very far off.  In a curious sort of intermittent crooning and shrieking
ventriloquism he called down curses upon Ootah.  His dance increased;
he beat the drum frenziedly.  His legs twisted under him, he described
short running circles and jumped up and down in accesses of hysteria.
His scraggy arms, with their tattered clothes, writhed in the air as he
beat the drum above him.  His head began to nod from side to side; his
eyes glowed like coals; his tongue hung from his mouth; foam gathered
at his lips.

"Ootah!  Ootah!  May his _kaneg_ (head) swell with the great fire!  May
he see horrors that do not exist--what the wicked dead dream in their
frigid hell!  May the wrath of the spirits descend upon him!  May the
wrath of the spirits descend upon him!"

Sipsu uttered short howls.  Maisanguaq joined in the incantation, and
re-echoed the blighting curses.

"May he suffer from _kangerdlugpoq_ (terrible body pains).  May they
end not!  May he lie awake forever!  May he never sleep!  May his teeth
chatter during the great dark!"

Sipsu groaned.  He worked himself into an ecstasy of torture.  His form
became a black whirling figure in the dim tent.

"May Ootah's eyes close, may the lids swell; may they burn with fire."

"May he never see the light of day--may he never aim the arrow--may his
harpoons strike forever in the darkness!" Maisanguaq replied
rancorously.  "May the wrath of the spirits descend upon him!"

"May Ootah's tongue fasten to his mouth--may it be as the tongues of
dead _ahmingmah_ (musk oxen)," chanted Sipsu.  "May he never speak--may
Annadoah never hear his voice," chorused Maisanguaq.

"May Ootah lose his _pungo_ (dogs); may they all die!"

Maisanguaq, caught by the evil contagion, began to sway his body in
rhythm to the weird dance.

"May Ootah become a cripple!  May he break his bones!  May he lie
helpless for years!  May his shadow leave him!  May he suffer with the
greatest of all pains!"

As he uttered this terrible curse, desiring that Ootah's shadow,
wherein exists the soul, might depart from his still-living body, and
thus cause the most excruciating bodily anguish, Sipsu sank exhausted
to the ground.  He writhed in a paroxysm.

"May Ootah die slowly; may his legs die, may his hands die--yea, may
the spirits of his body be severed from one another as ice fields in
the breaking; may the spirit of his hands, the spirit of his feet, the
spirit of his lungs, the spirit of his head, the spirit of his heart
wander apart--may they be torn asunder as the clouds in a storm!  May
they wander apart forever seeking and may they never find themselves!
May Ootah suffer as never suffered the unhappy dead!"

And Maisanguaq's deep voice growled hatefully:

"May Ootah's body lie unburied!  May he rot upon the earth!  May the
ravens peck out his eyes!  May a murderer drink his blood!  May the
wolves eat his heart!  May the spirit of the fog grow fat upon his
entrails!  And may the spirits of his body scatter--as the clouds in
the wild _anore_ (winds) scatter!  May his soul forever seek to find
its kindred spirits unavailingly and suffer in _Sila_, (throughout the
universe) forever!"

From under a pile of skins Sipsu, his chant subsiding, brought forth a
bundle.  Opening it, he revealed a collection of old bones; there were
the bones of musk oxen, seals, walrus and smaller animals.

"Yah-hah-hah!  I shall create a _tupilak_!" he crooned vindictively.
"I shall create a _tupilak_!  And from the depths of the waters the
_tupilak_ shall see Ootah.  Yah-hah-hah!  I shall create a _tupilak_,
and from the hands of Sipsu it shall carry destruction to Ootah on the
sea.  Yah-hah-hah!"  He laughed crazily.  Continuing his chant he
constructed of the bones a crude likeness to an animal skeleton.  Over
this he sprinkled a handful of dried turf.  Then, from beneath the
cover of his bed he brought a stone pot and from it poured a sluggish
red liquid over the strange object of his creation.  This was a mixture
of clotted animal blood and water kept for such purposes of
conjuration.  This done, he threw over the bones an aged sealskin.
Then he rose to his feet, and in a low voice uttered the secret
formulas whereby, in the depths of the sea, the result of his labor
should take the form of an artificial walrus.

Maisanguaq stood by, silent, evil exultation shining in his eyes.

While the Sipsu was moaning his spell over the pile of bones,
Maisanguaq turned and left the tent.  Out on the sea he saw the kayaks
of his departing companions.

"Good luck, Maisanguaq, have courage in the chase!  Remember Annadoah
awaits you all!" Annadoah called blithely and coquettishly after him.

Maisanguaq's lips tightened, his heart leaped, but well he knew that he
meant nothing to the maiden, well he knew what little chance he had,
and envy filled him, and bitter doubt, for he knew Ootah's prowess, his
strength of limb, and braveness of heart.  However, he put out with
quick powerful strokes, and with a sense of anticipated triumph, for he
was confident that the magician by his necromancy had created in the
depths of the sea a _tupilak_, or artificial walrus, which should
attack Ootah.  He knew it might upset Ootah's kayak and cause him to be
drowned.  The probabilities were, however, that it would permit itself
to be harpooned, in which case its blighting curse would fall upon
Ootah, who would lose all power and strength of limb, whose body would
become bent and crippled and racked with the _kangerdlugpoq_, and who
would die slowly, inch by inch.  Thus, Ootah would be helpless the rest
of his days and as he died all the dreadful horrors of the curses would
come upon him.  Thus would Maisanguaq be revenged.

As the midnight sun dipped below the horizon, the sea became more
deeply golden.  To the women watching along the shore, the multitude of
kayaks became mere black specks.  They disappeared now and then behind
the crests of leaping waves, and reappearing moved with the swiftness
of birds along the horizon.

At the entrance of her tent Annadoah stood, one hand shading her eyes
as they pierced the radiant distance.  From the mountain passes behind
the village echoed the joyous howls of approaching dogs.  Something
stirred in the heart of Annadoah--something fluttered there like the
wings of a frightened bird.


Ootah's paddle touched the water with the softness of a feather, yet so
quickly that the double blades emitted constant flashes of light
intermittently on either side.  His arms moved with consummate ease.
His kayak made a dark blurred line as it sped forward over the yellow
waters.  Soon he had outdistanced the party.  Then his speed slackened,
he glanced behind.

The other kayaks darted after him like erratic bugs.  The land was a
mere curve on the horizon; all about him the sea rose and fell, and
from the shimmering mirror of every wave the sunlight shot backward in
various directions.  A thousand golden searchlights seemed playing over
the sea.  Now and then through the coppery mists an emerald green berg
loomed titanically, and as it slowly bore down upon him, Ootah would
gracefully manipulate one end of his paddle and shift his kayak about
while the berg lurched toweringly onward.  As he gained distance from
the land the ocean swelled with increasing volume.  His frail skin
kayak was lifted high on the oily crests of waves, and as it descended
with swift rushes, Ootah felt exultant thrills in his heart.  Far away
he heard the resounding explosion of ice bergs colliding.  A low bellow
arose from a floe immediately ahead.  Ootah's blood leaped, the spirit
of the hunter throbbed in his veins, his nostrils sensitively quivered.
With a slow silent movement of the paddle, he prevented his kayak from
going too great a distance forward in order to await the others.
Judging by the sound of the muffled bellowing, he assumed that the
great animals were sunning themselves on the southern ridge of the
floe.  His tactics were to paddle about to the north, land on the floe,
and descend upon the walrus from the protection of the ridges of
crushed ice which always abound on these rafts of the arctic sea.

While he retarded the kayak and played with his paddle, Ootah became
conscious of disquieting things in the world about him.

In the heavens he saw low lying clouds moving slowly southward.  Higher
above, clouds moved more swiftly in another direction.

"The _quilanialeqisut_ (air spirits) are not at rest," murmured Ootah.
"O spirits of the air, what disturbs your ease?"

The clouds in the higher ether circled as if in an eddy of wind.
Certainly the spirits were not at peace among themselves.

"Spirits of the air," spake Ootah, "waft your caresses to Annadoah's
cheeks.  Tell her Ootah waits to kill the walrus, that Ootah loves her
and would make Annadoah his wife--_neuilacto_ Annadoah; tell Annadoah
Ootah presses his nose to hers and calls her _Mamacadosa_ (of all
things that which tastes the most delightful)."

A gust swept the clouds from the zenith.  Still no breath of air
touched the sea.

To the lee a group of small icebergs passed.  They rocked and eddied,
and from their glacial sides the light poured in changing colors.

"O spirit of the light, carry thy bright message to the eyes of
Annadoah, tell her Ootah has loved her for many, many moons."

The bergs crashed into one another, and in the impact sank into the sea.

Ootah bit his lips.  A vague misgiving was cold within his heart.

A flock of gulls passed low over the waters.

He called to them--that they should take his love to Annadoah.  They
were to tell Annadoah that he would soon return, laden with food and
fuel for the winter.  Their raucous cries mocked him.  He demanded what
they meant.  "Ootah--Ootah," they seemed to call, "how foolish art
thou, Ootah, how foolish art thou to love Annadoah.  For fickle is
Annadoah--fickle, fickle the heart of the maiden Annadoah!"

Ootah shrieked an enraged defiance.  His eyes sought the horizon.
_Kokoyah_, the sea god, was breathing deeply, and in the mists which
rose like fire-shot smoke before the sun, singular forms took shape.
Ootah saw the magnified shadows of great dogs.  They seemed to be
dashing along the horizon.  Then, with crushing strides, behind the
adumbration a great sled, a titan figure gathered substance in the
clouds.  It moved with terrific speed; it dominated the sky.  Its dress
was not that of the northern tribes.  Ootah felt a resentful stirring,
as, looking upward, in the clouds overhead, a white face, hard, fierce,
scowling, with burning blue eyes, momentarily appeared.

"A white warrior from the south," Ootah murmured.  "And he comes with
swift tread.  What can it mean?"

In common with many primitive peoples, Ootah possessed the soul of a
poet--nature was vocal with him, and the disembodied beings of other
worlds made themselves manifest and spoke in the light and in the
clouds.  To him everything lived; the clouds were the habitation of
spirits, the waves were alive, all the animals and fish possessed
souls; the very winds were endowed with sex functions and loved and
quarreled among themselves.  The interrelation of man and the forces of
the universe were inseparably intimate and familiar; integral parts of
one another, their destinies were bound together.  And to Ootah nature
found much to gossip about in the affairs of men.

Eagerly Ootah sought the clouds.  Along the horizon they resolved
themselves into a phantasmagoria of Eskimo maidens and white men
resembling the Danes who came each summer to gather riches of ivories
and furs.  And the Eskimo maidens and white men danced together.  As
these mirage-forms melted, Ootah glanced into the water by his side.
Looking up from the ultramarine depths he saw something white.  For an
instant it assumed the likeness of the face of Annadoah.  He saw her
golden skin, her cheeks flushed with the pink of spring lichen
blossoms, her lips red as the mountain poppies of late summer.  He
started back and called aloud:

"Annadoah!  Annadoah!"  For she had smiled, cruelly and disdainfully.
Hoarse laughter answered him--the laughter of white men from the south.
A flock of hawks passed over the water.  He was about to shout when he
heard the sound of kayak paddles behind him.  He recalled himself and
beckoned silence.




II

"_The thought of Annadoah in the embrace of the big blond man, of her
face pressed to his in the white men's strange kiss of abomination,
aroused in Ootah a sense of violation. . . .  He heard Annadoah murmur
tenderly, 'Thou art a great man, thou art strong; thy arms hurt me, thy
hands make me ache.'_"


Slowly, with silent paddles, the hunters moved over the limpid waters
to the north of the floe.  On the far side they saw a horde of walrus
bulls dozing in the sunlight.  Behind a ridge of ice they landed,
drawing their kayaks after them.  With skin lassos, harpoons and
floats, the party crouched low and crept toward the prey.  Thus they
would be mistaken for other walrus by the unsuspecting animals.  Ootah
was ahead.  Softly they all muttered the magic formulas to prevent
themselves from being seen:

"_Nunavdlo sermitdlo-akorngakut-tamarnuga_!"  In the rear, his eyes
evilly alight, Maisanguaq followed.

As they approached the herd they scattered.  Along the edge of the floe
lay about twenty monstrous animals, steam rising from their nostrils as
they snorted in their slumber.  There were a half dozen mother walrus
with half-grown young about them.  Now and then they sleepily opened
their eyes and made low maternal noises.

Before the others realized what had happened, Ootah sprang toward a
bull and delivered his harpoon.  It rose in the air and roared
deafeningly.  Ootah struck a second time.  The animal floundered in a
pool of blood, whipping the floe furiously with its huge tail.

With a thunderous roar all the others leaped with one glide into the
sea.  The floe rocked, the water churned like a boiling cauldron.  In a
few minutes Ootah had despatched the beast.  Standing erect, he gazed
in defiance at the clouds, at the distant gulls.  He forgot the omens,
and laughed with joy.

Not a moment was to be lost, however.  Springing into their kayaks, the
Eskimos put to sea.  Now the battle began in earnest.  Attacking
enraged walrus in these frail skin boats is probably the most dangerous
form of hunting in the world.  At any moment an infuriated animal is
liable to rise from the sea immediately beneath a kayak and upturn it.

Forming a semi-circle on the water about the swimming herd, the
fearless hunters sat in their tossing boats, each with one arm upraised
ready to strike, and with the other manipulating the paddle.  Whenever
a whiskered head rose above the water one of the hunters let a harpoon
descend.  After each attack they waited breathlessly.

Tateraq suddenly let his arm descend--his harpoon point struck home.
He shouted with joy--for he, too, sought Annadoah.  Roaring with rage
the lanced sea-horse dived into the deep.  The foaming water became red
with blood, and a few snorting, bellowing heads appeared.  All about
glared enraged, fiery eyes.  The animals plunged and tossed furiously
in the water--the savor of blood maddened them.  They began a series of
attacks upon the kayaks.

Alive to their danger the men kept an alert watch.  As they saw a
seething streak described on the surface of the water, as an animal
raged toward them, they would skillfully shift their positions.  The
animal would rush snortingly by.

With dexterous movements of the paddle, Ootah playfully moved his kayak
among the herd, in one hand his harpoon ready to strike.  A feverish
desire to make the greatest kill possessed him.  Each time a hunter
made an attack he felt a pang of anxiety.  Tense rivalry spurred the
young hunters.

In the midst of the battle Arnaluk struck a beast.  Ootah summoned all
his skill, and dashed in succession after a number of appearing
heads--he forgot his danger.  Before the others realized it, he had
killed two.  Maisanguaq's harpoon went wild.  He jealously watched
Ootah and struck without skill, carried away by chagrin and rage.  Ere
made valiant attacks for he, too, thought of Annadoah, but the walrus
invariably went skimming from under his blows.  Papik's harpoon glanced
the backs of half a dozen.  Finally it landed.  He shouted with glee.
The inflated floats attached to the harpoon lines bobbed crazily on the
surface of the ensanguined waters as the animals tossed in their death
struggles below.

Two white tusks appeared near Ootah's kayak.  His arm cut the air--his
harpoon sped into the water--an enraged bellow followed.  He withdrew
the handle, free of its line and the attached metal point--the point,
with the sinew, descended into the water.  It had struck home.

Suddenly a cry went up.  One of the natives waved his arms frantically.
A great monster had risen by his kayak and fastened one of its tusks in
the skin covering the boat from gunwale to gunwale.  To strike it with
the harpoon meant that it would plunge and capsize the frail craft.
Crazy with excitement, the native began hissing and spitting in the
beast's face.

"Lift his head!" cried Ootah, paddling near.  "Lift--_tugaq_!--lift his
tusk!"

"Lift his head!" echoed the others.

"_Aureti_!  _Aureti_!  Behave!  Behave!" the panic stricken man
ludicrously shrieked at the animal.

Ootah paddled his kayak to the side of his companion's and, leaning
forward, with a quick movement, threw a lasso over the animal's nose
and under one tusk.  With a terrific jerk of the body, he gave a
backward pull--the walrus rose on the water, the kayak was freed of the
tusk and slipped away.  With a roar the animal sank into the sea.  A
number now rose angrily about Ootah's kayak.  They were bent upon a
combined assault.

Ootah warded off the attacking bulls on all sides with his harpoon.
The air trembled with infuriated calls, the animals were insane with
brute rage.  The other natives, alarmed, paddled to a safe distance and
watched the unequal conflict.  While Ootah manipulated his harpoons,
Maisanguaq, in the shelter of the floe, watched him with eager eyes.

He saw Ootah, with almost superhuman dexterity, striking constantly.
Repeatedly he had to renew the metal points on his weapon-handle.  One
by one the animals gave up the attack and dispersed, until only an
obdurate bull remained.  The battle between man and beast continued,
finally Ootah let the harpoon fly with full strength.  It struck the
animal near the heart.  Ootah uncoiled the free line attached to the
harpoon point quickly--and the walrus, weighing probably three thousand
pounds, plunged with the impetus of a bulk of iron into the sea.  Then
a strange thing happened.

The pan-shaped drag, attached to the extreme end of the long line
securing the harpoon which Ootah had driven into the animal, became
entangled in the lashings on the forepart of Ootah's kayak.  Leaning
forward, Ootah tried to disentangle it.  He feared that the beast, in
its struggle, might drag all his weapons and paraphernalia into the
sea.  He felt it tugging at the line while he unknotted the tangle.
While he was doing this Maisanguaq saw the beast rise to the surface of
the water not far from Ootah and describe a quick circle about his
kayak.  Before he realized it, the leather line had wrapped itself
about his chest and under his arms.  It took but a minute for the
animal to circle the boat--then it plunged.  Maisanguaq saw Ootah
struggle to release himself; then he saw the kayak tilt as the hunter
was drawn, by the mighty impetus of the plunging sea-horse, into the
water.  He heard Ootah's cry--saw the blood red waters seethe as they
closed over him.  In a brief interval the kayak righted itself--it was
empty.

A murmur of dismay rose from the others.  "The _tupilak_! the
_tupilak_!" Maisanguaq exultantly murmured, his eyes alight.  "Happy
_angakoq_!  Thou shalt have much of Ootah's meat!"

Over the spot where Ootah sank the sun flamed.  The water seethed with
the threshing of the animals beneath the sea.  Ootah's float finally
rose.  The natives watched breathlessly for the reappearance of Ootah.
The float bobbed up and down as the animal's death struggles beneath
the water subsided.

Maisanguaq, looking at the floats which marked the dead animals, called
out:

"Ootah hath won Annadoah--hah-hah-hah!  Hah!  Ootah hath won Annadoah
only to lose her!  We shall take Ootah's catch to Annadoah, but Ootah
sleeps.  Ootah hath gone to taste the water in the country of the dead!
Hah-hah!"

At that moment Maisanguaq nearly fell from his kayak.

"Methinks thou wilt perhaps join the fishes first, friend Maisanguaq,"
a familiar voice laughed joyously behind him.

Maisanguaq's face became livid with dismay.  Had the _angakoq_ failed?
And why?

Turning, he saw Ootah, not far away, clambering from the water onto the
floe.  He was unscathed by the mishap--the water even had not
penetrated his skin garments.  A joyous cry arose from the hunters as
they saw him running to and fro, working his arms to get up
circulation.  Noting Maisanguaq's scowling face, Ootah twitted him:

"Laugh, friend Maisanguaq," he said, "for winter comes and then thy
teeth will chatter."  Maisanguaq scowled deeply--Ootah's blithesome
remarks filled him with rancor.

"Peace, Maisanguaq.  Methinks thou, too, lovest Annadoah," continued
Ootah kindly.  "Therefor, I hear thee no spite!  For who cannot love
Annadoah.  _Ka--ka!_  Come--come!"  Shaking the water from him, he bade
the others tow his kayak to the floe.

Ootah entered his kayak.  The struggles of the walrus had subsided, and
only two skin floats bobbed feebly on top of the waves.  The hunters
now strung series of kayaks together with strong leather ropes, three
skin boats being attached in a catamaran.  Taking up the leather floats
one by one, to the rear kayak of each series the hunters fastened the
harpoon lines which secured the prey.  Thus the animals were to be
towed slowly ashore.

Altogether eight walrus had been secured; four of these had fallen to
the skill of Ootah.  Ootah sang for joy.  Again he had achieved
distinction on the hunt, and so, with all the better chances of
success, he believed he might pursue his suit for the hand of Annadoah.
With powerful, steady strokes of their paddles the hunters, in their
processions of kayaks, towed the walrus through the sea shoreward.
They joined unrestrainedly in Ootah's hunting chant.  Only Maisanguaq
was silent.

Now and then, unable to restrain his exuberant joy, Ootah sang his love
to the clouds, the waves, the winds.

"O winds, O happy winds, speed my message to Annadoah!" he called.
"Tell her that I return with the food of the sea!  O spirits of the
air, breathe to her that Ootah's heart hungers for her as starving
_ahmingmah_ desire green grass in winter time.  O happy, happy waters,
I return to Annadoah with food and fuel for winter--say Ootah
_meuilacto_--would wed--Annadoah.  Tell her Ootah calls her
_Mamacadosa_!"

The others, although disappointed in being outwon, in spontaneous
recognition of his superior feat, chimed a chorus of congratulations.
Suddenly Maisanguaq gleefully pointed a significant finger to the sky.

"Pst!" he said.

A black guillemot, like an omen of evil, passed over Ootah's head.


By all the immemorial customs of their people, because of the
established pre-eminence of his prowess, Ootah should now find favor in
the eyes of Annadoah.  Scarce seventeen summers had passed over
Annadoah's head and of wooers she had a score.  The young hunters, not
only of her own tribe, but of others far south, sought her hand.  The
fame of her beauty and skill had travelled far.  None, it was said,
equalled her dexterity in plaiting sinew thread; none cut and sewed
garments as this maid with tender child's hands.  She made weapons, she
brewed marvellous broths.  Since the death of her mother she had served
the tribe with her skill.  Yet, as the summers passed, she remained
carefree and to all suitors shook her head.  "Become a great chief,"
she would say.  "Win in the games, bring back the musk oxen, then
perhaps Annadoah will listen."  Each summer the young men pursued the
hunt with the hope of becoming chief hunter among the tribesmen.  But
for three summers Ootah had won signally above them all.  To the remote
regions of their world the name of Ootah was whispered with awe.  Ootah
carried off honors in the muscle-tapping and finger-pulling matches; he
out-distanced all rivals in kayak races on the sea; he left everyone
behind on perilous journeys to the inland mountains.  Of every living
animal on land and sea he had killed, and in quantity of game he
excelled them all.  Only of late had Annadoah listened with some degree
of favor to his pleadings.  In the days of want he brought blubber to
her for fuel, and provided her with meat.  And she was grateful.
Perhaps her heart stirred, but she feared the quiet passion of Ootah,
and by a perverse feminine instinct she resented a tenderness so gentle
that it seemed almost womanly.  With winter approaching, and food
scarce, it was inevitable that Annadoah should wed.  And now that Ootah
in the quest of the walrus had made the greatest kill, none doubted
that he should be chosen.

As the kayaks approached the village an unexpected sight greeted the
eyes of the hunters.

Along the shore, the women of the tribe and strange men were dancing.

Before the village tents they were gathered in groups.  While the elder
women of the tribe beat a savage dance on membrane drums, the
chubby-bodied maidens, dressed in fur trousers, swayed in the arms of
the foreigners.

As the boats approached the shore, the natives recognized the visitors.
They were one of a half dozen parties of Danish traders who came north
yearly from Uppernavik to gather the results of the season's hunt.
Their visit meant an untold distribution of wealth among the tribe, for
they brought needles, knives, axes, guns, ammunition, and in return
secured a fortune in furs and ivory tusks.  They also doled out tea,
biscuits, matches, tobacco, thread, and gaudy handkerchiefs beloved by
the women.  Their coming had not been expected this season because of
the dearth of game.

The men in the boats shouted to one another joyously.  Only Ootah felt
a heavy sinking at his heart.  He saw the big blond-bearded men
chucking the little women under their chins.  Their method of kissing
was strange and repugnant to him.  Accustomed only to the chaste
touching of a maiden's face, the kiss of the white men he instinctively
regarded as unnameably unclean.  He resented their freedom with the
women.  But, children of the heart and brain, primitive, innocent, the
women did not understand the white men's strange behavior.  And the
husbands, not comprehending, did not care.  A gun, ammunition, a few
boxes of matches--these constituted wealth in value exceeding a wife.

Now and then Ootah saw some of the visitors raising flasks to their
lips.  Then their hilarity rang out more boisterously.

When they saw the kayaks approaching the shore the strangers shouted.
The hunters replied.  Only Ootah remained silent.  Disapproving of the
spectacle, his thoughts were busier elsewhere; his heart glowed.

"Ho, ho, what there?" some called.

"_Aveq soah_," Maisanguaq replied.

"Jolly for you!" shouted a Newfoundland sailor, whom Ootah recognized
as having been in the region with some sportsmen from far away America
several years before.

As they danced the visitors broke into the fragments of a wild sailor's
chorus.

When they had finished, the Newfoundlander, a tall, tough, red-faced
whaler, drank again from his flask and strode to the shore.  His bulky
body reeled unsteadily.

"Come on up--bring 'er in--hurry up!  Gawd, but you'r' blazin' slow!"

Ootah and his companions landed.  Tugging at the leather lines they
drew the walrus one by one from the water to the ice.  In these
monstrous palpitating black bodies were tons of food and fuel.  Without
wasting time, they fell to their task and dressed the animals.
Meanwhile sleds were brought from the tents and the masses of steaming
meat and blubber were loaded.  While the natives were thus busily
engaged, the half-drunken Newfoundlander strode about uttering great
oaths.  The strangers' dogs, attracted by the meat, with shrill howling
descended to the ice and surrounded the sled-loads of blubber.  Ootah
seized an oar and beat them away.

"What the hell d'ye mean," the Newfoundlander demanded.  "Youh'd beat
our dogs?  Eh?  Get away, damn youh!"  He lifted his fist above Ootah.
His face purpled, Ootah raised his lithe body, his muscles quivered
like drawn rubber.  His black eyes flashed proud defiance.

"Youh'd fight me, eh?--youh defy me, youh damn candle-suckin' heathen!"

His hand descended.  Beyond, the drum beaters ceased, the dancers
turned--a surprised cry went up.

Ootah drew hack, his face flushed.  There was a red spot on his cheek
where the white man's fist had struck.  He felt a sense of momentary
terror.  The white men's methods of fighting were unfamiliar to the
natives.  A blow from the fist is a thing unknown among them.  Ootah
drew away--the bullying Newfoundlander followed.

"Youh'd beat our dogs, eh?  Well, I'll show youh, youh oily,
tallow-eatin' husky!"

He called the dogs, and stooping to the treasured mass of blubber threw
a great mass to the howling animals.

"Ha! ha! ha! guess youh thought youh were smart, eh?"  A second team of
dogs, released from their tethering, came wildly dashing shoreward.
The whaler seized another mass of meat and flung it to the animals.

Ootah felt a flush of fierce indignation rise within him.  His food for
the winter, whereby he hoped to win Annadoah, that which might keep
away the wolves of starvation, was being wantonly wasted.  He saw his
companions cowering at the sight of the white man--he drew himself
erect.  He saw the Newfoundlander turn and shout to his companions on
the shore.  Ootah thought of the saying, "Strike thy enemy when his
back is turned."  He seized a heavy harpoon handle, made of a great
narwhal tusk, and swinging it high struck the Newfoundlander a terrific
blow on the head.  He fell senseless to the earth, his face bleeding.
Half stunned he tried to struggle to his feet, but Ootah leaped upon
him, and, as was ethical in the native method of fighting, trampled him
into insensibility.  The man lay unconscious, his face bleeding
effusively.

Without a word Ootah continued loading his share of the game onto his
sleds.  Attracted by the attack, the other members of the trading party
descended and surrounded the fallen man.

"Nice trick, eh?" laughed one.  "Sam got his all right.  'Minds him
right for being so damned fresh."  They surveyed Ootah.  "Slick little
devil," one said, handing Ootah his gun.

"Take it, son," he said, with maudlin magnanimity.  "You've got nerve!"

Ootah smiled bashfully, and shook his head in quiet refusal.

The half-drunken traders, laughing at what they considered a clever
trick, carried their companion into one of the tents and poured brandy
into his mouth.  Then they left him lying alone, half sodden, and
returned to the shore.  Some watched the natives working, while others
clasped the native maidens in their arms and danced.  Half afraid of
the whites, flattered by their attentions, and extremely embarrassed,
the little women jumped and danced in the visitors' arms.

Papik finally drew his single sledge load of walrus toward his tent.
He had been rejected repeatedly, but now--with a load of blubber--he
knew he could not afford to miss the opportunity of seeking a wife.

"Ahningnetty!  Ahningnetty!" he hailed a chubby maiden who, breaking
from the arms of one of the white men, was seen running toward her
shelter.

"What wouldst thou, Papik?" she called.

"Papik would speak with thee.  _Ookiah_ (winter) comes, and his teeth
are sharp.  They will bite thee with pangs of hunger, and the meat
Papik brings will make joyful Papik's wife."

Ahningnetty, summoning some of the other maidens, surveyed Papik's load
of blubber.

"Truly, as he saith, there is little food, and happy will be Papik's
wife," said one.

"But when thy blubber is gone with what shalt thou provide her?" asked
Ahningnetty.

"Perchance the bears will come," Papik said.  "And skillful is Papik's
hand with the lance."

"But thy hand is long, Papik, and long fingers soon lose their skill."

Ahningnetty dubiously shook her head.

"But thou art chubby--yea," said Papik admiringly--"thou art fat as the
mother bears after a fat summer, and thy body is warm; it giveth heat;
Papik would give thee food, and thou shalt keep him warm during the
long winter."

The maiden smiled delightedly.  For, as Papik indicated, whereas a man
may admire a slimmer beauty during the summer, when the long night
comes a maiden fat and chubby is a wife to be prized.

"But alas, thy nose is long, Papik," she said, shaking her head.

And the others chorused:

"Long nose, short life!  Long nose--short life!  Long nose--short
life!"  In anger Papik struck the offending member, and drawing his
sledge after him proceeded toward his tent.

Assisted by a number of the natives, Ootah, smiling, exultant, drew
five sled-loads of blubber up over the ice toward Annadoah's tent.
With their comparatively meagre portions the others followed.  To
Annadoah Ootah meant to show the spoils of his quest.  To her he
desired to present the greater portion of the riches he had by his
prowess secured.  Here was meat to serve them during the long winter,
and in that region the catch was a priceless fortune.  Surely Annadoah
could not refuse him now.  He had proved himself beyond question the
chief hunter of the tribe.  His eyes filled, his temples excitedly
throbbed.  He felt a greater joy than that the natives feel when the
sun dawns after the long night.  In his heart pulsed the sweet song of
spring's first ineffable bird.

Not far from Annadoah's tent he paused.  About him the natives,
wondering, admiring, had gathered.  He turned to them; he felt a
strength, a dignity, an assertion he had never experienced before.  His
voice rose in a happy, ingenuously proud chant of exultation:

"From the bosom of _Nerrvik_, queen of the sea, have I not brought food
for the long winter; yea, have I not for many moons sought to win in
the chase that I might claim Annadoah?  Annadoah!  Annadoah!"

"Yea, that thou mightest claim Annadoah!  Thou art the strongest hunter
of the tribe," the natives rejoicingly chorused.

"Did I not win in the muscle-tapping games?" he sang.  "Did I not speed
the arrow as none other--did I not speed the arrows as the birds fly?"

"Yea," they replied, "thou didst speed the arrow with the skill of the
happy dead playing in the aurora--over the earth as the birds fly didst
thou send the arrows.  Strong is thy arm, Ootah."

Not far away some of the natives, joining in the chorus, began beating
drums.  The white men hilariously drank from bottles and joined in the
merry dances.

"Did I not call the walrus and seal from the sea--as none other?  Have
I not lured the caribou from their hidden lair?  Have I not enticed the
birds, the foxes, and the bear by my calls--as none other of the
tribes?"

In succession Ootah uttered imitations of the calls of the walrus
bulls, the female caribou, and cries of the various birds.

"Have I not held converse with the animals of the land, the birds of
the air, and shall I not one day perchance comb the hair of _Nerrvik_
in the sea!"

The drums beat more loudly; the dancers hopped and leaped.  The chorus
replied:

"Thou lurest the walrus and seal from the sea, thou enticest the
caribou, _ahmingmah_ and birds unto thee!  Thou hast learned the
language of nature, and the happy spirits are kind to thee!  Marvellous
is thy power, Ootah."

And in the chorus, deep, hoarse, sneeringly ironical rang the words of
Maisanguaq:

"Marvellous is thy power, Ootah," and his low bitter laughter followed.

The white men began to sing as they danced with the chubby women.  In
couples they rocked to and fro.

"Have I not killed of all the birds of the air, the animals of the land
and sea!  Have I not observed the customs of the august dead?  Have I
done aught to bring misfortune to the tribe?"

In spontaneous recognition of his pre-eminence the young men freely
yielded Annadoah.  Only Maisanguaq felt bitter.

Ootah summoned his helpers and the sleds of blubber were drawn to the
immediate entrance of Annadoah's tent.  He seemed to step upon air.
His heart bounded.

"Annadoah!  Annadoah!" he called.  "Ootah waits thee.  Ootah hath
brought thee treasure from the depths of the sea.  Strong is the arm
and brave is the heart of Ootah when the arm strikes and the heart
beats with the thought of thee."

Seeing him there, the natives ceased dancing.  The white men, curious,
drew near the tent.

As he stood there, his head erect, proud, expectant, he became
conscious of a sudden ominous silence on the part of his companions.
Some distance away the women were whispering to one another, and above,
in the sky, circled a black guillemot.

"Annadoah," he softly called.

Only the hawk replied.

"Annadoah, I bring thee my love, as constant as my shadow!  I bring
thee riches!  Ootah would give thy couch new furs and caress thee."

From the brown, weather worn sealskin tent came the murmurous sound of
voices.  Ootah heard the voice of Annadoah--and that of another.

The black bird in the sky screamed.

Not far distant in the tent of the _angakoq_ Ootah heard the low
disquieting sound of a drum beaten in some malevolent incantation.

His heart sank as heavily as a dead walrus sinks in the sea.

Something stifled him.  Then the flap of the tent parted and Annadoah
stepped forth, her head tossed haughtily, her beautiful eyes flashing.

"Get hence," she said.  "Thou art a boy, thy tongue is that of a boy.
Thou art soft--thou hast the heart of a woman."

"Annadoah . . ."  Ootah's voice wailed.  The stretch of shore seemed to
heave and writhe.  He put out his hands as if to ward off a blow.

Behind Annadoah, at the door of the tent, the form of a man stooped.
As he emerged, Ootah saw he was taller than Annadoah's tent.  His
shoulders were broad and massive.  His face, bronzed by the burning
sun, was like tanned leather, hard, wrinkled; his expression was as
grim as graven stone.  His large blue eyes glittered with the coldness
of flint.  His hair and long curling moustache were blond.  Ootah
recognized "Olafaksoah"--Olaf, the great white trader--whom he had seen
two seasons before at a southern village.  He was noted for his
brutality and hard bargaining.

"What's all the noise about?" he growled.  His voice was deep and gruff.

Ootah staggered back.

"Annadoah, Annadoah," he moaned softly, supporting himself on the
upstander of his loaded sled.

Olafaksoah strode forward with great steps, scowling.  He critically
surveyed the loads of blubber and gleaming walrus tusks.

"Good haul, boy--good haul!  Game's been pretty scarce all along the
coast.  It's lucky we got here in time, eh, comrades?  What'll you
take"--he turned to Ootah--"I don't know your name."  He spoke in
broken Eskimo.

"Ootah," Annadoah whispered, "that is his name.  Ha-ha, thou callest
him a boy."

Ootah winced.

Olafaksoah, with heavy strides, passed down the line of sledges.
Turning to his men, he called:

"Bring the junk."

A sled of matches, needles, tea, biscuits, knives, tin cups, a few
hatchets, and several guns and cases of ammunition were brought.  While
these were unloaded a half-dozen eager natives hastened into their
tents and hurriedly brought out their portions of the preciously
preserved skins and ivories of the meagre summer hunt.  Clamorous,
insistent, they presented these to Olafaksoah.  They clustered around
him so that he could not walk.  Ootah watched as the bargaining began.
He saw Annadoah clinging near the white trader.  A number of the white
men began dickering down the line with Arnaluk.

"Load blubber--one tin cup--box black powder."

Arnaluk shook his head.  Olafaksoah cuffed him with his fist.  The
timid native did not have the courage to resent this brutality.

"What d'ye want, you greedy savage--two boxes matches!"

"Two boxes matches--one box shooting fire--one tin cup."

Still he could not be persuaded to part with the precious meat.
Olafaksoah swore and shook his fists.  Fearful of offending the
stranger, the women joined in and shrieked at Arnaluk, urging him to
consent.

Unprotesting, he let them draw away his sled of blubber and tusks.  He
had a tin cup, matches and cartridges--which he could not eat.

"Rotten lot," Olafaksoah said to Papik, surveying his single catch of a
young walrus.  Papik winced at this reproach.

"Two boxes fire powder," said Olafaksoah.  Papik refused.  Olafaksoah
browbeat him in a high voice.  Finally he kicked him.  "One case
needles."  He called Papik's mother and chucked her under the chin.
She smiled at him, awed, flattered, half afraid.  Papik parted with his
load for a box of ammunition and a few needles.  Meanwhile the
bartering went on for the hoarded wealth of the tribe.  Eager to
precede one another, the natives rushed to and fro, bringing armfuls of
ivories and furs from their tents.  In exchange for stuff of trifling
value the white men secured, by their method of threatening bargaining,
loads of blue and white fox skins, caribou hides, and walrus and
narwhal tusks which the natives had previously preserved.  One man
parted with five tusks, worth as many hundred dollars, for two gaudy
handkerchiefs for his wife.  Another gave several exquisite fox skins
for a plug of tobacco.  When they demanded more biscuits, tobacco or
matches than were offered, Olafaksoah bullied them with threats.  Yet
they hung about him, eager for the almost worthless barter, for the
time being valuing a box of crackers and allotments of tea more than
their substantial supply of walrus meat.  Finally the leader paused
before Ootah's loaded sledges.

"What'll you take--a gun, fire-powder?"

Ootah shook his head.

Olafaksoah had recourse to his stock-in-trade of oaths, and told his
men to bring a gun, two hatchets, ammunition.

Ootah was still obdurate.  The natives' voices arose murmurously, for
they felt it was not well to offend the strangers.  During future
seasons they might not come again, as they threatened, with ammunition
and guns.  This the natives feared as a calamity.

"Bring some crackers--tea," Olafaksoah paused.  Ootah watched Annadoah
nestling near the "white trader."  He had forgotten all about the
sledges of meat.  He did not hear Olafaksoah.  He still continued
shaking his head.

"I'll be liberal with you, son," Olafaksoah indulgently increased his
offer.

Six more boxes of ammunition, more tea and crackers were added to the
pile.

Ootah again mechanically shook his head.  Amid all of those about him,
he saw only the face of Annadoah, golden as sunlight and pink as the
lichen blossoms of spring.  Through her open _ahttee_, or fur garment,
he saw her breasts as tender as those of eider-feathered birds.  The
sight of her melted his heart, the streams of spring were loosened
within him.  Yet, with an agonized pang, he observed her gaze adoringly
and eagerly at the tall stranger's hard face; he saw her quiver at the
sound of his harsh, gruff voice.  Olafaksoah's brutal masculinity for
the time dominated the shrinking femininity of the girl.  Ootah saw
Annadoah beseechingly, almost fawningly, touch the white chief's horny
hand and nestle it close against her cheek.

Olaf, the trader, was oblivious to this.

"Greedy, eh?  Well, we need the meat!  If we're goin' to stay here to
chance hunting our dogs got to be fed!"  More supplies were brought.
Still Ootah did not speak.

The white chief presently gazed hard at Ootah.  Then his eyes
brightened with amused mirth.  He saw the despairing, yearning gaze of
the youth toward the girl he had selected to favor.

"Ha, ha, ha!" he laughed good-naturedly.  "I see.  I've keel-hauled
your Romeo stunt, eh?  Want the stuff?"  He kicked the supplies
interrogatively.

Ootah sadly shook his head.  He dully heard the vulgar gibes of the
white men and the mocking laughter of Maisanguaq.

One of the natives began beating a drum.  Ootah giddily caught an
evanescent vision of women dancing with reeling traders.  He heard
Olafaksoah as he entered Annadoah's tent laughing heartily.

The thought of Annadoah in the embrace of the big blond man, of her
face pressed to his in the white men's strange kiss of abomination,
aroused in Ootah a sense of violation, an instinctive repugnance akin
to the horror a native feels for the dead.  All the ardent hopes of his
life for many moons had centered upon his bringing the results of a
successful hunt to Annadoah and asking her to share his igloo, to
become his wife.  And now, in his hour of high victory, after everyone
had acclaimed him, he was crushed.

A fervid fever seemed to take fire in his forehead and flush his veins,
yet his heart was colder than ice, his hands and feet were cold.  He
felt as though someone were strangling him; he felt giddy, suddenly
sick.  At that moment he was too stunned to realize fully the blighting
tragedy which had annihilated his hopes.

Nearby in her tent he heard Annadoah's voice, sweet as the song of
buntings.

"Olafaksoah, Olafaksoah," he heard her murmur tenderly, "thou art a
great man.  Thou art strong.  Thy arms hurt me, thy hands make me
ache."  Then Ootah heard the man's hard voice and Annadoah's repressed
murmurs of mingled pain and delight.  The day became black about him.
He felt that he must get away; a wild madness to run seized him.  He
felt the impetus of the winds in his feet.  Turning on his heel, his
face to the northwest, he fled.

In the sky overhead the black guillemot screamed.




III

"_Her lips are red--red as a wound in the throat of a deer._"


For seven weeks Ootah lived in the mountains.  The violence of his
bitterness and grief scared away the wild hawks in whose high nesting
place he found shelter.  At the door of that icy cave above the clouds,
he called upon the spirits of the mountains for vengeance.

"_Ioh--ioh_!" he wailed.  "Spirits of the glaciers, lift your
hands--strike!  Descend and smite Olafaksoah! carry him to the
narwhals; let the whales feed upon his body.  May the soul of his
hands, and the soul of his feet, and the soul of his heart, and the
soul of his head struggle with one another.  May he never rest!
_Ioh--ioh--ioh--ioh_!"

The boom of sliding avalanches answered him.  The sound was like that
of muffled thunder.  Wild cries arose from the mountain birds.  They
sounded demoniacal in the taut air.

Far below soared the black vultures of the arctic.  In a fit of anger
Ootah shook his arms frantically at the shrieking birds.  For they
seemed to mock him.

"Spirits of the clouds," he wailed, "_Ioh--ioh--ioh-h_!  Ye that wander
to the south!  Ye that fly to the north!  Ye that struggle hither and
yon, from the east to the west.  Bear my curses to Annadoah.  Tell her
that the heart of Ootah is bitter.  Tell her Ootah would that her voice
become as harsh as the winds of _ookiah_ (winter).  Tell her Ootah
would that her face become withered as frozen lands in winter.  Tell
her Ootah would that her heart rot within her, that the wild beasts
feed upon her breasts.  _Ioh-h--ioh-h-h_!  Sing unto her the curses of
Ootah, and may she not rest!"

Below him the clouds, burning with vivid fire, moved in the varying
strata of air currents--to Ootah they were conveying his messages.  The
sun, circling low about the horizon, shifted its rays, and within the
nebulous cloud-masses in the valleys, fountains of prism light played.
In this radiant phantasmagoria messages in turn came to Ootah.

He saw the figuration of Annadoah's tent, and within, reclining upon
her couch, the form of Annadoah.  At the mirage picture of the
beauteous and beloved maiden his heart throbbed violently.  In the high
altitude he found respiration difficult, and now he almost suffocated
for lack of breath.  He felt a pang at his heart as he saw the white
chief enter the tent.  The winds wailed sibilant and agonizing messages
into the ears of Ootah:

"Thou hast cursed Annadoah.  Foolish Ootah!  For thou lovest Annadoah!
Yea, her voice is as sweet as the sound of melting streams in
springtime.  Lo, she whispers into the ears of Olafaksoah: 'Thou art
strong, Olafaksoah; Ootah hath the heart of a woman.  Thou hurtest me,
Olafaksoah; thy arms bruise me, thy hands make me ache; but thou art
strong, thou art great, Olafaksoah; the heart of Annadoah trembles for
joy of thee.'  Thus saith Annadoah!"

And in the winds Ootah heard Olafaksoah's coarse laughter.

"_Ioh--ioh-h-h_!" Ootah moaned.

"Thou wouldst that Annadoah's face be blighted as frozen land in
winter," laughed the winds, mockingly.  "Thou dotard Ootah!  Thou
lovest the face of Annadoah.  It is very fair.  It is golden as the
radiant face of _Sukh-eh-nukh_.  Her eyes are as bright as stars in the
winter night.  Oh-h-h, Ootah!  Into the eyes of Olafaksoah Annadoah
gazes, yea, she faints with joy, thou silly Ootah!"

"_Ioh--ioh-h-h_!" wailed Ootah.

"Her lips are red, Ootah---red as a wound in the throat of a deer."

And in the cloud vision Ootah saw the blond chief take the head of
Annadoah between his two palms and press her lips fiercely upon his
own.  Ootah's heart trembled as water.

"_Ioh--io-h-h_!" he sobbed, and tears coursed from his eyes.

The constant haunting thought of Annadoah's face pressed close to that
of Olafaksoah somehow made his face burn and his bosom ache.

"Ootah, Ootah, thou wouldst that Annadoah's heart might wither, yea, as
a frozen bird in the blast of winter, foolish Ootah, who lovest
Annadoah!  Soft beats the heart of Annadoah upon the bosom of
Olafaksoah; yea, for very joy it flutters as a mating bird in summer
time.  Thou wouldst that beasts might rend her little breasts--safe are
they now in the embrace of the strong man from the south.  Ootah!
Ootah!"

Ootah wrung his hands.

"Thy curses fall dead upon the ears of Annadoah, she who hears only the
voice of Olafaksoah."

In the winds Ootah heard the whisper of Olafaksoah in the dim tent.  He
heard Annadoah's rapturously murmurous replies.

"Olafaksoah shareth the igloo of Annadoah," whispered the winds
suggestively.  And Ootah knew the Eskimo custom.

Annadoah, by sharing her simple habitation with him, had by choice
formally become the wife of Olafaksoah.  And according to the unwritten
law of ages she was now as much his property as his dogs.  He might
abuse her, and desert--and thus divorce--her whenever he chose.  She
might, at his pleasure, be loaned as a wife to another, and in this she
would have no word.  Or she might be given away, and dare not protest.
Ootah felt that she was lost to him irretrievably.

For hours Ootah stood at the mouth of his mountain eyrie in dumb agony.
All that he suffered it is beyond me to tell you.  For days he crouched
there, motionless, stark dumb, every fibre of him aching.


In the valleys below, as the hours of the burning days and golden
nights passed, the sunlight constantly shifted.  In the palpitating
mists Ootah read of the days' doings at the camp.  He saw the white men
bartering for the meagre remaining furs and ivories gathered by the
tribe.  With the natives he saw them going on long fruitless hunts.
Finally one day he witnessed them harpoon a half dozen walrus on the
sea.  They laboriously towed the catch ashore and rejoiced over the
unexpected wealth of oil and blubber.  But the white men claimed the
entire prize, loaded their extra sledges, liberally fed their dogs, and
doled out but a penurious allotment of meat and blubber to the tribe.

But in all this Ootah had no concern.  Day by day the cloud-swimming
valleys below blazed with crimson-shot conflagrations . . .  Ootah knew
the dead were lighting their monstrous camp fires--but even in this he
found no interest.  Daily he became fainter and fainter from lack of
food, and daily, constantly, the winds whispered:

"The mouth of Annadoah is very red--red as a wound in the throat of a
deer . . ." and then sibilantly--"softly beats the heart of Annadoah
against the bosom of Olafaksoah."  Then every fibre of him burned and
ached.

One day the radiant valley darkened . . .  Out of the sky, as if rising
from worlds beyond the horizon, a cyclopean phantasm of clouds took
form.  Rising higher and higher toward the zenith, ominous and
sinister, it gathered substance and spread across the glowing heavens
like a film of smoke . . .  It took upon itself the awful semblance of
a mighty thing, half-beast, half-man.  As if to strike, it slowly
lifted the likeness of a gigantic arm shrouded with tattered
clouds . . .  The baleful shade shut off the sunlight from the
earth . . .  Ootah's heart quailed . . .  Terror gripped him . . .  For
he saw--what few men had ever beheld--the shadow of _Perdlugssuaq_, the
Great Evil.  Finally he found voice.

"O most dreadful of the _tornarssuit_ (spirits)," he called, grovelling
on his knees, "smite me!  Smite me!"

During the tragic days of his isolation the full realization of all
that he had lost had come to Ootah.  He fed upon the memory of
Annadoah's face.  He remembered how, with the vision of that face
before him, he had excelled in the hunts and games, and for many moons
had felt confident of winning her.  He dwelt for hours upon her
stunning rejection, of how she clung to the white man; he visioned with
heart corroding bitterness her days with Olafaksoah, and he burned with
unnameable anguished pangs as he conjured her nights.  Now, the
violence of his grief exhausted, he invoked death.

Expectant, fearful, with closed eyes, he waited.

In the valley a storm gathered, and the low whine of the winds Ootah
believed to be the breath of the descending terror.  The air became
unbearably colder as the dreaded creator of death, darkness and ice
descended.  The taut suspense was terrible.  Finally Ootah reached the
limits of human endurance--merciful unconsciousness blotted out the
long agony.

When he recovered the storm had passed.  Scores of birds, driven
against the rocks by the terrible winds, lay dead at the entrance of
the cave.  Surely the Great Evil had struck, but he lived.  Hunger
stirred within him and he fell upon the birds.

Later he sought game in the lower valleys.  He had lances and bows and
arrows with him.  He found an inland vale, where a patch of green grass
was exposed despite a recent fall of snow--there a herd of musk oxen
grazed.  He drew his bow of bone and sinew.  One fell after the first
quiver of his arrow.  His skill was marvellous.  He had struck a vital
spot.  He finished his killing of the fallen animal with a lance.  He
feasted upon the raw meat, and carried away with him up to his eyrie
enough to last for many days.

The sun meanwhile sank lower and lower; there were long hours of
twilight; snow storms came; the cold increased.  Ootah felt the first
whip of approaching winter.  Ootah's spirit melted.  Disquieting
messages came in the cold winds and darkening clouds.  His heart beat
quickly at what the frightened birds told him.  Olafaksoah, they said,
struck Annadoah.  As she lay on the ground he kicked her.  In the
snow-driven wind Ootah heard the echo of her heart-broken weeping.  He
revoked the curses he had uttered; he cursed his own weakness whereby
he had invoked harm to her.  Then in the winds Ootah heard the beat of
drums.  In the clouds he saw the white men dancing with the Eskimo
maidens.  Day after day they danced--day after day Annadoah wept.
Olafaksoah had become wearied.  Disappointed in the failure to secure
greater supplies, he vented his impatience upon Annadoah.  Cruelly he
bruised her little hands, he mocked and jeered her when she pleaded
with him.  In fits of anger he often struck her.  Finally, one day, in
the cloud phantasmagoria, Ootah saw Olafaksoah reeling from the strange
red-gold water the white men drank.  He entered Annadoah's tent.  She
crouched, terrified, in a corner.  With him were three of his rough
blond companions.  They staggered--and in the winds they sang.
Olafaksoah pointed consentingly to Annadoah.  One of the men attempted
to embrace her.  Then she rose defiantly and did what few Eskimo women
ever dared.  She smote the man's leering face and, sobbing, sank on her
knees before Olafaksoah.  He roared out things the Eskimos do not
understand.  "_Goddlmighty_!" and more awful words.  His fist
descended.  In the winds Ootah heard Annadoah scream and call his name.

That day he descended from the mountains.


Much that Ootah conjured in his mind, or imagined he saw in the clouds,
really happened.  Whether he actually sensed these things by some
wonderful power of clairvoyance, which the natives themselves
believe--or whether he just accurately guessed what occurred, I do not
know.  But of this I can tell:

By that strange contradictoriness of the feminine--much the same all
the world over--by that inherent, inborn desire of subjugation to the
brutal and domineering in the male, Annadoah had given herself
unreservedly to Olafaksoah.  At the sound of his firm step she
trembled.  His hard, brutal embraces caused her heart to flutter with
joy.  At first he told her he would take her with him to the south.
Annadoah believed him.  Then he changed his mind, and said she must
wait until the next season for him.  She silently acquiesced.  She
called upon all her simple arts to please him.  Carefully she oiled her
face and made the golden skin soft by rubbing it with the fur of
animals; with a broken comb, left with her mother years before by a
party of explorers, she combed her long, black and wonderful hair and
elaborately arranged it behind her.  About her forehead she bound a
narrow fillet of fine, furry hares' skin.  She donned new garments; her
_ahttee_ was made of the delicate skins of birds, her hood of white fox
hides.  To all this Olafaksoah seemed blind; at times, with coarse,
half-maudlin tenderness, he caressed her, called her his "little girl"
and promised to "come back next spring."  But Annadoah was useful to
him otherwise.

During the days when Olafaksoah and his men were hunting or gathering
furs and ivory at nearby villages along the coast, Annadoah sewed skins
into garments for Olafaksoah and his men.  Sometimes she went with
Olafaksoah on his expeditions and employed her coquetry upon the
susceptible men of the migrating tribes to secure bargains for him.
For a box of matches she would cajole from her people ivories worth
hundreds of dollars.  She persuaded them to rob themselves of the
walrus meat and blubber they had gathered for winter and give them to
her master in exchange for tin cups and ammunition, all of which would
be useless when the night came on.  To Ootah she gave no thought until
one day the white man struck her.  As he vented his rage at not
securing more riches upon her during the ensuing days, her heart more
and more instinctively turned to the youth "with the heart of a woman"
whom she had rejected.  When Olafaksoah brought his companions to the
tent her soul rose in rebellion.  In the camp there was an orgy.  None
of the married men, who for a slight consideration were willing to
permit their wives to dance with the traders, objected to the drunken
carousal.  Ribald songs sounded strange in this region of the world.
Yet after Olafaksoah had kicked her and left her lying in the tent,
high above the sound of the sailors' doggerel songs, Annadoah
frantically called aloud:

"Ootah!  Ootah!"

For a long time she lay in a stupor.  Her face was bleeding.  When she
regained consciousness the white chief and his men had left.  They had
taken with them all available furs, ivories and provisions in the
village.

At the door of her tent Annadoah stood, dry-eyed, her hair dishevelled.
To the south she yearningly extended her arms.  Her heart still ached
toward the man who had lied to her and deserted her.  She was left, a
divorced woman, alone among her people, with no one to care for her
during the long winter night.

As she stood there the light of the descending sun, which was now far
below the rim of the horizon, paled.  Driven by a frigid wind, howling
raucously from the mountains, great snow clouds piled along the sky
line.  Out at sea the tips of the waves became capped--leprous white
arms seemed reaching hopelessly for help from the depths of the sea.
The sky blackened.  The increasing gusts tore at the frail tents.  The
wolf-dogs crouched low to the ground and whined.  A tremor of anxiety
filled the hearts of the tribe.  Presently the clouds were torn to
shreds and whipped furiously over the sky.  In the thickening grey
gloom Annadoah watched the men of the tribe fastening their sleds and
belongings to the earth . . . mere dark shadows.  Above her tent,
tossed by the wind in its eddying flight, a raven screamed.

Annadoah finally entered and threw herself upon the rocky floor of her
dwelling.  As the furies were loosed outside her voice rose and fell
with the wailing grief and wrath of the wind.  "Olafaksoah!
Olafaksoah!"  But only the hoarse evil call of the black bird answered
during lulls in the storm.  And Annadoah heard it, with a sinking of
her cold heart, as the voice of fate.




IV

"_'Do the gulls that freeze to death in winter fly in springtime?' she
asked, simply. . .  'The teeth of the wolves are in my heart' . . ._"


Desolate and alone, Annadoah walked along a crevice in the
land-adhering ice of the polar sea.

The prolonged grey evening of the arctic was resolving into the long
dark, and the Eskimo women, as is their custom at this time of the
year, had gathered along the last lane of open water--which writhed
like a sable snake over the ice--to celebrate that period of mourning
which precedes the dreadful night, and to give their last messages and
farewells to the unhappy and disconsolate souls of the drowned, who,
when the ice closed, should for many moons be imprisoned in the sea.

An unearthly twilight, not unlike that dim greenish luminescence which
filters through emerald panes in the high nave of a great cathedral,
lay upon the earth.  The forms of the mourning women were strangely
magnified in the curious semi-luminance and, as their bodies moved to
and fro in the throes of their grief, they might have been, for all
they seemed, shadowy ghosts bemoaning their sins in some weird
purgatory of the dead.

In the northern sky a faint quivering streak of light, resembling the
reflection of far away lightning, played--the first herald of the
aurora.  To the south a gash of reddish orange, like the tip of a
bloody-gleaming knife-blade, severed the thick purple clouds.  There
was a faint reflected glimmer on the unfrozen southern sea.

Snow had fallen on the land, igloos had been built.  Over the village
and against the frozen promontories loomed a majestic yet fearful
shadowy shape--that of a giant thing, swathed in purple, its arm
uplifted threateningly--the spectre of suffering and famine.

This wraith, brought into being by the gathering blackness in the
gulches and crevices of the mountains, filled the hearts of the natives
with unwonted foreboding.

Profound silence prevailed.

Already the sea for miles along the shore was frozen.  The open water
lay at so great a distance from the land that the sound of the waves
was stilled.  The birds had disappeared.  Even the voices of the
sinister black guillemots and ravens were heard no more.

Annadoah's sobs rose softly over the ice.

"Spirit of my mother, thou who wast carried by the storm-winds into the
sea!  Hear me!  Annadoah loved one Olafaksoah, a chief from the south;
for him the heart of Annadoah became very great within her.  And now
the heart of Annadoah aches.  For he hath gone to the south.  And not
until the birds sing in spring will he return.  And Annadoah is left
alone.  _Ookiah_ comes with the lash of wicked walrus thongs, and there
is no blubber buried outside Annadoah's shelter.  Neither is there oil.
And the couch of Annadoah is cold--so very cold.  Yea, listen, spirit
of my mother, and bring Olafaksoah back, that he may bruise Annadoah's
hands, that he may cast Annadoah to the ground and crush Annadoah if he
wills with his feet!  Io-oh-h!"

She moaned this in a curious sing-song sort of chant.  Over the ice the
voices of the other women rose, and each, to her departed relatives and
friends who had died in the sea, told about the important incidents of
the year and the misgivings for the winter, in a varying crooning song.

Annadoah passed Tongiguaq, who jumped and danced in a frenzy of grief.
Tongiguaq had lost three children; two had been drowned, and a new-born
baby, three months before, was born maimed.  According to the custom of
the people, a fatherless defective child is doomed to death.  So
rigorous is their struggle to survive, so limited the means of
existence, that a tribe cannot bear the burden of a single unnecessary
life.  So in keeping with this Lycurgean law, worked out by instinct
after the stern experience of ages, a rope had been twisted about the
neck of Tongiguaq's baby and it had been cast into the sea.

All this the weeping woman told in her chant to the departed.  When she
saw Annadoah approaching, she paused.

"Here cometh the she-wolf that hath devoured the food of our tribe,"
she wailed, intense bitterness in her voice.  "Yea, by her cajolery she
persuaded our men to give unto the traders from the south our precious
food.  And now we starve!  Yea, she hath robbed us.  She is as the
breath of winter, as the blackness of the night."

Along the line of wailing women Tongiguaq's reproach was suddenly taken
up.  As Annadoah walked by them they did a strange thing.  The natives
fear their dead--they never even mention their names.  For possessed of
great power are the dead, and they can wreak, as befits their moods,
unlimited good or ill.  Believing they could persuade the dead to array
themselves against Annadoah, the women took up Tongiguaq's denunciation
and reviled Annadoah in their weird chant to the departed.  Annadoah
wrung her hands and wept.  Bitter and jealous because the white chief
had selected her during his stay, their bosoms full of the harbored ill
will and envy of years because she had been the most desired by the
young men of the tribes, the women now invoked curses upon the deserted
and unprotected girl through the medium of the incorporeal powers.

The dread of it filled poor Annadoah's heart.  She quailed at the
bitter execrations called upon her head.  Instinctively her hand
reached through the opening of her _ahttee_ and she clutched at a piece
of old half-decayed skin.  This was a remnant of her mother's father's
clothing, a amulet given her as a child, when saliva from the maternal
grandfather's mouth had been rubbed on her lips, and which she believed
protected her from ill fortune.

"Io-ooh! io-oh!" Annadoah moaned in pain.

The women forgot their own tragedies.  They forgot the messages they
were imparting to the dead.  Directly they might not be able to invoke
any effective curse upon Annadoah; but well they knew, indeed, the
awful power of the disembodied.  And to the dead in the cold shuddering
sea they told how Annadoah had played with the men, how she had
betrayed them to the white traders, cajoling them to rob themselves of
food, and how, because of her, famine now confronted the tribe; they
told of the long devotion of Ootah, the desired of all the maidens, and
how Annadoah had rejected him.

Possessed by a frantic contagion of released rage, their voices rose
and fell in a frightful chanting malediction.  In the weird gloom their
vague forms leaped about, their arms writhing like black things in the
air as they called the names of their individual dead to hear.

As their voices approached a crescendo they danced with increasing
hysteria.  Some shrieked and fell to the ice groaning, their bodies
twisting in  convulsions.  Others laughed madly--laughed at the
dreadful horrors with which the dead would smite Annadoah.  Losing all
control they were carried away by their delirious malevolence; their
voices reached a high shrill pitch.  Their arms clawed the air.
Through the dead curses were invoked upon Olafaksoah, the great trader,
who had cowed them and robbed them.  They begged of the _tornarssuit_
that he might be rended by wolves, that his body might rot unburied,
and that the spirits of his limbs might be severed and be compelled to
wander in restless torment forever.  They called anathemas upon his
unborn children; and of their dead, who should be imprisoned in
darkness in the depths of the sea, they furiously invoked upon
Annadoah's offspring the curse of the long night . . .  Their voices
shuddered over the ice as they demanded that most dreadful of all
dreaded evils--that Annadoah's child might be born as blind to light
and the joy of light as the dead in the sea.

Annadoah crouched in frantic terror upon the ice.  From the Greenland
highlands a moaning echo answered the women.  To Annadoah the hill
spirits had joined in cursing her--all nature seemed to upbraid her.
Tremblingly, with a last lingering hope, she crept on her knees to the
edge of the lane of lapping black water.  She whispered a pathetic plea
to _Nerrvik_, the gentle queen of the sea, whose hand had been severed
by those she loved, and who felt great tenderness for men.  Annadoah
listened.

"Thou art cold of heart to him who loves thee, Annadoah," a voice
seemed to whisper in the lapping waves.  "Thou art beautiful as the
sun, but as _Sukh-eh-nukh_ shall thou be eternally sad.  Thou shalt
lose because of thine own self the greatest of all treasures.  That is
fate."

Far out on the open ocean spectral fire-flecks flashed like mast-lights
on swinging ships.  These mysterious jack o' lanterns of the arctic are
caused by the crashing together of icebergs covered with phosphorescent
algae.

To Annadoah the dead were lighting their oil lamps for the long night.
As she watched the weird illuminations a paralyzing fear of the vague
unknown world beyond the gate of death filled her, and her blood ran
cold.  She felt utterly crushed, utterly helpless, and utterly
deserted, both in the affection of the living and that of the dead.
She uttered a despairing cry and fell back in a cold faint.  The women
drew about as if to leap upon her.

A momentary wavering of the northern lights revealed her face grown sad
and wan.  The women stood still, however, for approaching in the
distance they heard a man's voice calling:

  "Avatarpay--avatarpay,
  akorgani--akorgani,
  anagpungah . . ."

Those mystic words, believed to give magic speed to the one who utters
them, came in the well known tones of Ootah.  A joyous cry went up from
the women.

When Annadoah opened her eyes Ootah was bending over her.

"I was held in the mountains, Annadoah.  The hill spirits were at war.
The snow came, the storm spirits loosed the ice.  I fell into an abyss
. . .  I lay asleep . . . for very long.  It seemed like many moons.  I
could barely walk when I awoke.  I had no food.  I became very weak,
but I uttered the _serrit_ (magic formula;), those words of the days
when man's sap was stronger, and the good winds bore me hither."

A mystical silver light had risen over the horizon, and in the soft
glimmer Annadoah saw that the face of Ootah was haggard and drawn.  His
voice was weak.

"The sun hath gone," murmured Ootah.  "The long night comes.  Ootah
heard thy cry and has come to care for thee, Annadoah."

His voice was a caress.  His face sank dangerously near the face of the
girl.  She panted into full consciousness and struggled to free
herself.  Ootah helped her to her feet.

"The winter comes . . . and famine," muttered Annadoah, hopelessly.
She pointed to the gaunt, hollow-eyed shadow, empurpled-robed, against
the frozen cliffs.  "My heart is cold--I am resigned to death."

"But I have come to give furs for thy couch," murmured Ootah, a
beseeching look in his eyes.  "Thou wilt need shelter--I shall build
thee an igloo.  Thou wilt need food--I shall share all that I have with
thee and seek more.  Thou wilt need oil for heat.  I shall get this for
thee."

Annadoah made a passionate gesture.  A curious perverse resentment for
the youth's insistent devotion rose in her heart.

"Nay," she said, warding him away.  "My shadow yearns only to the south
. . . the far, far south."

"Thy soul yearns to the south--forsooth, will I all the more cherish
thee.  Thou art frail, and the teeth of _ookiah_ (winter) are sharp."

"The teeth of _ookiah_ are not so sharp as the teeth in my heart,"
sobbed Annadoah.

Ootah felt a great pity for her--a pity and tenderness greater than his
jealousy.

"But I shall teach thee to forget, Annadoah."

"I cannot forget.  Even as the ravens in their winter shelter dream of
the summer sun, so my soul grows warm, in all my loneliness, in the
memory of Olafaksoah."

Ootah groaned with an access of misery.  Frenziedly he caught her hands
and pressed them.  Annadoah struggled.  His words beat hotly in her
ears:

"But I want thee.  My blood burns at the thought of thee.  It is
against the custom of the tribe that thou shouldst be alone.  Thou must
take a husband."

"No--no," she shook her head.

"But some one must care for thee.  I love thee.  Thou wilt forget
Olafaksoah.  Thy hurt will heal."

Annadoah shook her head piteously.

"Do the gulls that freeze to death in winter fly in springtime?" she
asked, simply.

Ootah did not reply.

"He was strong," she murmured.  "His hands bruised me.  He was cruel.
He hurt me.  Yet he gave my heart joy.  My heart is dying--dying as the
birds die.  I feel the teeth of the wolves in my heart."

Ootah pointed to the women.  The soft crooning of their voices reached
him as they resumed the dismal dirge of their own woes.

"They hate thee," he said.  He pointed to the constellation of the
Great Bear which glittered faintly in the sky.  "Yonder _qiligtussat_
(the barking dogs) would rend the gentle bear.  Thou rememberest the
old men's tale.  A woman ran away from her family.  She was false at
heart.  The good mother bear protected her and gave her food.  But
yearning for her husband, she returned and to gain his favor betrayed
the hiding place of the mother-bear and her young.  Then the husband
drove out with sledges.  His dogs attacked the bear.  But they all
became stars and went up into the sky.  Even as the bear was good to
the false woman so hast thou made clothing for those yonder, and now
they would as the dogs rend thee.  Thou needest a husband."

"They would be bitter to thee," she argued.

"Perchance, but I would protect thee.  I love thee."

Annadoah shook her head.  "The teeth of the wolves are in my heart,"
she said.  "And I no longer care."

"Yonder _Nalagssartoq_ (he who waits and listens) bends to hear thy
reply."  Ootah pointed to Venus, the brightest of the stars--to the
Eskimos an old man who waits by a blow-hole in the heavenly icefloes
and listens for the breathing of seals.  "Thou wilt come to Ootah, who
loves thee?  Answer, Annadoah!  Ootah listens."

He soothed her little hands.  A wondrous light burned in his eyes.
Every fibre of his being yearned for her.  But Annadoah's hands were
cold, her eyes were sullenly turned away.  In her heart a vague fear of
him, a resentment of his very love, stirred.

"My shadow yearns to the south," she repeated pathetically.  "I shall
wait.  Perhaps he will come as he said when the spring hunting sings."
In her heart she feared that he would not.

Ootah in utter anguish dropped her hands.  Annadoah sadly turned away.
Falling to his knees on the ice, he covered his face with his arms.
The sound of his heartbroken sobbing was drowned in the funereal chant
of the women as, in a long procession, they passed near him on their
way to the shore.

When he raised his head, the rim of the moon, a great quarter-disc of
silver, peeped above the horizon.  A mystical melancholy light flooded
the gloriously gleaming desolate white world.  The ice floes glistened
as with the dust of diamonds.  The ice covered faces of the
promontories glowed with the sheen of burnished metal.  The clouds
became tremulous masses of argent phosphorescence.  Far away the
women's chants subsided.  One by one they joined the men in their
grotesque dances in the distant igloos.  Ootah was left alone.

He gazed long upon the pearly lamp of heaven.  The subtle sorrow of
this world of magical moonlight filled his soul.  Then the hopelessness
and tragedy of all it symbolized were unfolded to him, and, extending
his arms in a vague wild sympathy, in a vague wild despair, he moaned:

"Desolate and lonely moon!  Oh, desolate and unhappy moon! . . .
Desolate and unhappy is the heart of Ootah!"

Far away, in her shelter, Annadoah heard the sobbing voice of Ootah.
And nearer, in an igloo where the men beat drums and danced, she heard
the voice of Maisanguaq laughing evilly.  Of late Maisanguaq had gibed
her with her desertion; he was bitter toward her.  But nothing mattered
to Annadoah.  She thought of the blond man in the south, and the
pleading of Ootah.  As she heard his weeping, she shook her head sadly.
She beat her breast and muttered over and over again:

"Do the gulls that freeze to death in winter fly in springtime?"




V

"_What they heard was, to them all, the Voice of the Great
Unknown, . . .  He who made the world, created the Eternal Maiden
Sukh-eh-nukh, and placed all the stars in the skies . . .  Whose voice,
far, far away, itself comes as the faintly remembered music of long
bygone dreams preceding birth . . .  And now, out of the blue-black
sky, great globes of swimming liquid fire floated constantly, and
dispersing into feathery flakes of opal light, melted softly . . ._"


Ootah began work on an igloo for Annadoah.  None of the tribesmen had
offered to do this for her, and, as only the men develop the
architectural skill required to construct a snow shelter, Annadoah,
until Ootah's return, was forced to continue to live in her seal-skin
tent, where she suffered bitterly from the cold.  His back aching,
scarcely pausing to rest, Ootah constructed an icy dome of more than
usual solidity.  This completed, he went many miles, through the
darkness, to the south, where, in the shelter of certain rocks, he knew
there was much soft moss.  Digging through the frozen blanket of ice he
secured a quantity, and returning, made with it a soft bed for Annadoah
over a tier of stones.  This he covered in turn with the soft skin of
caribou.  Inside the immaculate house of snow he fashioned an interior
tent of heavy skins to retain the heat of the oil lamps.  Of his own
supplies of blubber and walrus meat, which he had secretly buried early
in the hunting season and which had thus escaped the rapacity of the
white men, he gave more than half to Annadoah.  He fixed her lamps with
oil, and arranged them solicitously in positions where they would give
most heat.  He placed supplies in the house, and buried the rest
outside so that Annadoah might readily reach them.  Meanwhile Annadoah
sat alone in her tent, her sad face buried in her hands, "her shadow
yearning toward the south."  Many of the tribe, emerging from their
igloos, had paused to taunt Ootah at his labors.

"A-ha--a-ha!" they laughed.  "Thinkest thou that Annadoah will let thee
share her igloo when the snow closes in?"  They laughed again.  Ootah
seriously shook his head.

"I would that Annadoah be protected from the storm," he said simply.

"A-ha--ha!  No man buildeth a house wherein he may not have shelter; no
man layeth a bed of soft moss whereon he doth not expect to lie.  Idiot
Ootah, as well mayest thou expect the willows to sprout in the long
night--Annadoah thinketh naught of thee.  Why seekest thou not a
sensible maiden?"

"He hath given Annadoah half of his meat and fuel," the women murmured
complainingly among themselves.

"He hath given her his skins; he hath thieved upon himself."

"Why hath he not taken another to wife?  Verily men are few; women are
many.  And all gaze favorably upon Ootah."

"Yea, his arm is strong."

"There is courage in his heart."

"He feareth not the night."

"He should press his face upon the face of one who is fair; his wife
should bear children."

When Annadoah passed from her tent into her new home the women scolded
her bitterly.  The men goodnaturedly jeered Ootah.  Annadoah huddled
near Ootah and gazed gratefully into his eyes.  In the thought that he
was there to protect her the heart of Ootah pulsed with joy.
Annadoah's heart was cold.  Annadoah sat inside the new little house of
snow, the oil lights flickering fitfully.  In the dancing shadows
Annadoah saw the semblance of the form of the blond chief.  Joylessly
Ootah built his own home.

And in their houses, in celebration of the fall of night, the natives
continued their grotesque dances.  Beating membrane drums, and singing
jerky chants, they danced frenziedly, forcing a false hilarity.  They
felt the overwhelming approach of the dread spectre of famine.  In
their dances some sobbed, others passed into uncontrollable hysteria.

Ootah alone did not indulge in the fierce ceremonies.  His own igloo
built, day after day, night after night, he sat alone.  His heart ached
with the unrequited and eternal desire of all the loveless and lonely
things of the world.  Outside, the moon increased in fulness and soared
in a low circle about the sky.  The dogs crouched low on the ground,
howling dismally.

During the first days of the long night the natives held a series of
dog fights inside the snow and stone houses.  Ordinarily Ootah would
have attended these, for a dog fight is of keenest interest to a
tribesman, and the Eskimos' most exciting form of sport.

To a hunter with healthy blood in his veins the dog encounter affords
the same thrills as other men, in more southern lands, find in bull
fights, horse racing, card playing and other games of chance.  Two
lovers, both desirous of a maiden, may hold a fight between their king
dogs, each hoping that success may determine the girl's favor.  Pieces
of blubber, animal skins, ivory carvings and less valuable objects are
often bet by the contestants and the onlookers.

By all logical assumptions, one might naturally suppose that the
Eskimos--whose night is many months long--through many dark and
rigorous ages, would have developed into a taciturn and moody people,
just as the denizens of sunny climes are joyful, effervescent and
pleasure loving.  However, this is not so.  Troublous as is their
existence, they preserve until old age that playful joy of life, that
carefree ignoring of danger, which we find in our children--which,
alas, we lose too soon.  Each day brings to them its novel delights; in
their monotonous foods they find a constant variety of pleasure; in
their simple games of muscle-tapping, throwing of carved ivories, and
fighting of dogs they experience the exultant and exuberant fun of our
schoolboys.  Constant experience with jeopardous tasks has eliminated
the human fear of danger, and even death, in its most tragic shapes, by
long association has lost its terrors.  When the long night falls, and
an ominous depression makes heavy the heart of the lover or fills with
anxiety the heart of the father, they turn, with a delightful
spontaneity, to play.

Now great interest was aroused by the news that Papik was to fight his
king dog with the magnificent brute owned by Attalaq.  Both Papik and
Attalaq were paying evident attentions to Ahningnetty, the chubby and
ever smiling maiden, who, while she showed a certain leaning toward
Papik, had misgivings as to his eligibility as a husband because of his
long fingers.

Born of noted fighters, a dog attains the position of "king" or chief
dog of a team by whipping all the dogs in the team of his particular
master.  When he has asserted his supremacy over the dogs of his own
team, he is successively set before the rulers of other teams.  And by
a process of elimination of those which lose, the two final victors in
a village are finally aligned against one another.

In the series of fights held between the king dogs of the various
teams, both Papik's and Attalaq's had come off with final honors.  The
immediate contest between the two most distinguished canines in the
village was an event of exciting importance, and to the women there was
a romantic zest in it, for all believed that victory would determine
Ahningnetty's favor.

At the time of the event all who could do so crowded into Attalaq's
stone house.  In the centre of a tense group of onlookers the two dogs
were placed before each other.  They were handsome animals, with long
keen noses, denoting an aristocracy of canine birth, and long shaggy
coats, mottled brown and white, as soft as silk.  A long line of
victories lay to the credit of each.

A sharp howl announced the fight--the two lithe bodies leaped
together--the air within the little circle became electric.  The dogs
snapped, tumbled over each other.  Their sharp teeth sank into each
other's shanks.  The natives cheered whenever a favorite secured an
advantage.  Bets were made.  Papik's eyes gleamed as he alternately
watched his dog and the face of Ahningnetty as she peered interestedly
over the onlookers' shoulders.  Attalaq's countenance was grim--not a
muscle moved.

Finally Attalaq's dog, with a chagrined growl, unexpectedly rushed from
the enclosure and crouched in a corner of the igloo.

The natives effusively gathered about Papik, who bent over his dog with
proud affection.  In the excitement Ahningnetty quickly left the igloo,
and standing outside gazed meditatively at the stars.  They hung in the
sky above like great pendulous jewels, palpitant with interior
name--there were purple stars, and blue stars, and orange-colored
stars; some resembled monstrous amethysts, some emeralds fierily green,
some rubies spitting sparks vindictively red; others globular sheeny
pearls, creamy of lustre but shot with faint gleams of rose; and
fugitively sprinkling the firmament here and there were orbs that
glistened like diamonds, wonderfully and purely white.  Saturn,
distinct among all the heavenly bodies, throbbed with a van-colored
changing glow like a bulbous opal, and about it, with a strange
shimmer, visibly swirled its iridescent rings.

"Thou standest alone--thou wouldst leave me?"  Papik, eager,
triumphant, questioning, emerged from the stone entrance to the house
and approached the girl.  The other natives, homeward bent, followed.

The girl was silent.

"Methought thou wouldst be glad----"

"Thy dog is strong," the girl replied.

"Dost thou love that dotard Attalaq?"

"No," the maid replied.  "He is clumsy as the musk ox."

They turned, walking toward the igloo occupied by Ahningnetty and her
aged father.

"Wilt thou not be Papik's wife?" Papik pleaded.  "My shelter is
cold--little meat have I.  The white men robbed the tribe.  But
perchance the bears come--then I shall kill them; valiant is my dog."
He patted the animal's shaggy head.

"But thy fingers, Papik--Papik!  No--no!"

"But Papik loves thee," he protested; "his skin flushes with the
thought of thee."

"That thou didst also say to Annadoah, whom thou didst seek before me."

Papik was silent; it was true that Ahningnetty was only a second choice.

At that moment an ominous noise was heard on the sea.  The tide, in
moving, caused the massive floe-ice to grate against that adhering to
the shore.  To the simple natives, the noise indicated something more
sinister.

"Hearest that?" Ahningnetty asked.

"Yea," replied Papik, "_Qulutaligssuaq_, the monster who lives in the
sea, cometh with his hammers."

"He cometh to steal the children.  In winter he is very hungry."

"They say he frightens people to death when a baby which is fatherless
screams."

"And after he heats his ladles, the babies often die."

Again the grating noise shuddered along the shore, and Ahningnetty,
frightened, fled to her house.  Papik, pursuing his way, accosted Ootah.

As they were speaking they saw Otaq and his wife emerge from their
house.  Between them they carried a small stark body.  The woman was
weeping piteously.  It was their child, which a brief while before had
died.  The sea monster had again claimed its human toll.

Papik and Ootah disappeared--Papik to his shelter, Ootah to Annadoah's
igloo.  The parents, left alone, dug up stones and ice and buried the
child.  Then beneath the stars they stood in silent grief.  Other
natives, emerging from their houses and seeing them, understood and
disappeared, for while relatives weep over their dead none dare disturb
their mourning.  For five days, in commemoration of the death, the
parents would visit the grave of their child, During this time no
native dare cross the path leading from their igloo to the silent
resting place, and while they stood beneath the stars all alien to
their sorrow must remain within their houses.  Only the Great Spirit,
who lives beyond the golden veils of the boreal lights, may hear the
sobbing of a stricken human creature over the thing of which it has
been bereft.

In the course of ten sleeps--as days are called--the first moon of the
long night sank below the horizon and the colorful stars fierily
glittered over a world of black silence.  The cold increased to an
intolerable bitterness.  Ootah, venturing from his igloo to dig up
walrus meat, found the earth frozen so solid that it split his steel
axe.

It was not long before many white mounds appeared beneath the liquid
stars.  The old and the very young, unable to endure the rigorous cold
and dearth of food, passed into the mysterious unknown of which the
long dark of earth is only the portal.  After the passing of the first
moon the storms came; the sky blackened; the winds voiced the desolate
woe of millions of aerial creatures.  Terrific snow storms kept the
tribe within their shelters for days.  Often the winds tore away the
membrane windows of their snow houses, and blasts of frigid cold
dissipated the precious warmth within.  In the lee of circular walls of
ice, right at the immediate entrance of the houses, the natives kept
their dogs.  Inside they had only room for the mother dogs, which at
this period brought into being litters of beautiful little puppies with
which the Eskimo children played.  Outside, scores of splendid animals,
which could not be sheltered, were frozen to death in great drifts.
These, during the following days, were dug out and used as food both
for men and the living animals.

During a quiet period between storms, Ootah, venturing from his
shelter, heard a shuffling noise near his igloo.  In the northern sky a
creamy light palpitated, and in one of the quick flares he saw a bear
nosing about the village.  He called his dogs and they soon surrounded
the animal.  Fortunately the incandescent light of the aurora
increased--now and then a ribbon of light, palpitant with every color
of the rainbow, was flung across the sky.  Ootah lifted his harpoon
lance--the sky was momentarily flooded with light--he struck.  In the
next flare he saw the bear lying on the ice--his lance had pierced the
brute's heart.  Attracted by the barking of Ootah's dogs, several
tribesmen soon joined him in dressing the animal.  During their task,
one suddenly beckoned silence, and whispered softly:

"The Voice . . . the Voice . . ."  And they paused.

A weird whistling sound sang eerily through the skies.  The air,
electrified, seemed to snap and crackle.  It was the voice that comes
with the aurora.

The knives fell from the natives' hands.  The howling of the hungry
dogs was stilled.  In hushed awe, in reverence, with vague wondering,
they listened.  Ootah was on his knees.  An inspired light transfigured
his face.  His pulses thrilled.  For what they heard was, to them all,
the Voice of the Great Unknown, He whose power is greater than that of
_Perdlugssuaq_, He who made the world, created the Eternal Maiden
_Sukh-eh-nukh_, and placed all the stars in the skies, who, never
coming Himself earthward, instead sends in the aurora His spirits with
messages of hope and encouragement to men, and Whose Voice sometimes,
far, far away, itself comes as the faintly remembered music of long
by-gone dreams preceding birth . . .  Yea, it was the Voice . . . the
Voice . . .

And now, out of the black-blue sky, as if released from invisible
hands, great globes of swimming liquid fire floated constantly, and
dispersing into millions of feathery flakes of opal light, melted
softly . . .  Along the lower heavens there was a fugitive flickering
of a rich creamy light, as of the reflection of celestial fires far
beyond the horizon.

Speechless, Ootah viewed the flameous wonder, and, although he knew no
prayer, he felt in his soul an instinctive love, a profound awe . . .
In the silent sanctity of that auroral-shot and frigidly glorious
region he seemed to feel the pulsing of an Unseen Presence--a presence
of which he was a part, of which, with a glow, he felt the soul of her
he loved was a part, to which all nature, everything that lives and
breathes, was vitally linked . . .  He felt the drawing urge, the
thrilling tingling impetus, as it were, of the terrific currents of
vital spirit force that sweep vastly through the universe, keeping the
earth and all the planets in their orbits . . .  He felt, what possibly
the primitive and pure of heart feel most keenly . . . the presence of
the Great Unknown, He who is the fountain source of love, and whose
hands on the sable parchment of the northern skies perchance write, in
irid traceries of fire, mystic messages of hope which none, of all
humanity, during all the centuries, has ever learned entirely to
understand.

Not until the wonder lights were fading did the tribesmen take up the
precious bear meat, and according to Ootah's instructions divide
portions among the community.  His arm full of meat, Ootah joyously
entered Annadoah's igloo.

Annadoah, sad and lonely, sat by her lamp.  Her igloo was like that of
all the others.  Inside, so as to retain the heat and carry off the
water which dripped from the melting dome of snow, there was an
interior tent of seal skin.  In a great pan of soapstone was a line of
moss, which absorbed the walrus fat, and served as a wick for the lamp.
This emitted a line of thin, reddish blue flame.  Over the light, and
supported by a framework, was a large soapstone pot in which bits of
walrus meat were simmering.  By the side of the pot a large piece of
walrus blubber hung over a rod.  In the heat of the lamp this slowly
exuded a thick oil which, falling into the pan below and saturating the
moss wick, gave a constant and steady supply of fuel.

Like the other women, Annadoah sat by her lamp day after day.  When she
could endure hunger no longer she would eat ravenously of the meagre
food in the pot.  Regular meals are unknown in the arctic--a native
abstains from food as long as he can in days of famine, but when he
eats he eats unstintedly.

As Ootah entered the low enclosure Annadoah's eyes lighted.

Ootah told her of the bear encounter, and, with the joy of children,
they placed bits of the meat in the pot and sat by, delightedly
inhaling the odor as it cooked.

Several days later, while they were eating the last remainder of the
meat, both heard an uproar outside.  They crept from the igloo and
discovered most of the village assembled without.

"Attalaq hath carried off Ahningnetty," one told them.

"He broke into her father's house and seized her with violence!"

Not far away they heard Ahningnetty's screams.

"Attalaq is strong," said one.

"Yea, as a boy did he not kill his brother?"  All remembered the brutal
encounter of the two brothers years before, when, throwing him to the
ground, Attalaq jumped on his brother's body and striking his head with
stones beat him to death.  Attalaq was a type of the older warriors;
unlike his more gentle tribesmen he possessed the atavistic savagery of
his forebears of centuries ago when it was customary to abduct brides.

An excited crowd gathered outside of Attalaq's house.  Soon Attalaq
himself appeared.  He was exultant.

"Ha!  Ha!" he laughed.  "Methinks that is the way to treat a woman!"
Then with swollen-up gusto he told them all about it.  Tiring of being
alone he determined to carry off Ahningnetty.  "A woman's mind is as
the wind--it constantly changeth," he said.  "Women should be driven as
the dogs."  Ahningnetty, still weeping, still protesting, came to the
door.  Attalaq turned fiercely upon her and struck her in the face.
Then he laughed again.  The girl screamed.

"Well," he said, turning to her.  "I carried thee here--if thou wouldst
return thou canst walk back.  Eh?"  The girl cowered away, but on her
face there was the semblance of a pleased expression.  The other women
regarded her with a tinge of envy.

"'Tis not often in these days a lover careth sufficiently to carry a
maid away," said an aged crone.

"In the days of old there were men like Attalaq," said a younger woman,
admiringly.

"Where is Papik?" one asked.  He was not to be seen.

"Dost thou not wish to return to thy father?" Annadoah asked
Ahningnetty, approaching her.

The girl shook her head.  Much as she had protested, she was
unquestionably pleased by the forcible abduction.

One of the gossips, desiring to impart the unpleasant news to Papik,
had gone to his house.

"Papik sits alone," she called, on her return.  "And when I told him
Ahningnetty hath been carried away by Attalaq, he replied, ''Tis well!
'Tis well!'  And then he showed me his hands--they were frozen--frozen!
Verily, he would now be a sorry husband to provide for a wife."

"Papik's fingers frozen!" took up the others.  "Unhappy Papik."

"He sobs and weeps--he sobs and weeps," said the old woman.  "He saith
the dreaded misfortune hath come, and the days of his skill on the hunt
are over!"

"Long fingers, short hunt; long nose--short life," remarked Maisanguaq,
sententiously.

Attalaq, happy in his conquest, was broad enough to be generous.  He
declared that Papik should never want as long as he could shoot the
arrow.  Generous-hearted, many of the others joined in and bits of
blubber were soon offered the lonely Papik, as he sat, nursing his
frozen members, in his house.  The mishap was tragic, for, his hands
injured, he had lost not only his skill in the hunt but his ability to
protect himself in case of accidents.  And from the experience of ages
all knew that, sooner or later, he was doomed to a comparatively early
death.

During the first period of the night, and after Ootah's first capture,
several prowling bears were shot.  The howl of occasional wolves was
heard in the mountains; then all the bears disappeared, the hunger of
the wolves was stilled.

When the third moon rose not a thing stirred outside the igloos.  A
glacial silence gripped the northern world.  In their shelters the
natives clustered together, warming one another with their breathing
and the heat of their bodies.  They lacked the courage even to speak.

Day by day their supply of food had run low.  Day by day they decreased
their portions; their cheeks sunk, hunger burned in their eyes.  To
save the precious fuel they burned only one lamp in their houses; they
were unable to sleep because of the intense cold.  Finally their food
gave out.  From his store Ootah silently doled out allotments until
starvation confronted him.  One by one the dogs were eaten.  And this
caused a dull ache, for the men loved their dogs only a little less
than they did their wives and children.  The quaking fear of the long
hours slowly gave way to a dull lethargy.  In their igloos, where
single lamps smoked, they sat, and to keep up their circulation and to
prevent themselves from falling into a coma, they rocked their bodies
like things only half alive.

The black days and black nights slowly, tediously, achingly passed.
One day was like another--one night seemed to mark no progress of time.
Only the children, to whom parents gave the last bits of food, showed
some animation.  They played listlessly with one another.  For toys
they had crude carvings of soapstone--tiny soapstone lamps and pots
with which they made pitiful mimicry of cooking.  The little girls
played with crude dolls just as do little girls in more southern
lands--but they were grotesque effigies, made of skin roughly sewn
together.  The boys found brief zest in a game which was played by
sticking ivory points in a piece of bone, hanging from the roof of the
igloo, and which was perforated with holes.  Finally, as the night wore
on, the children lost interest in their games, and with aching
stomachs, lay silent by the fires.  Starvation steadily claimed its
toll.  Death, slowly, surely, laid its grim and terrible hands upon
that pitiful fringe of earth's humanity on the desolate star-litten
roof of the world.  One by one a stark body would be carried from an
igloo into the black, bitter cold silence without and buried under
blocks of snow.  And above, intense and incandescent, the Pole
Star--that unerring time mark of God's inevitable and unerring
laws--burned like an all-seeing, sentient and pitiless eye of fire in
the heavens.


Annadoah lay upon her couch of furs.  Her face was thin, and white as
the snows without.  The flame in her stone lamp was about to flicker
into extinction.

Ootah, entering the igloo, sprang quickly to her side.  Her breath came
very faintly.  He seized her hands.  He breathed on her face.  He
opened her ahttee and rubbed her little breasts.  He felt something
very strange, and wonderful, stirring within him.  And with it a
ghastly fear that the thing he loved was dying.

Into the lamp he placed the last meagre bits of remaining blubber.
Then he again set to chafing the tender little hands.  Cold and hunger
had wrought havoc upon Annadoah.  Ootah's heart ached.

Finally her eyelids stirred.  Her lips parted.  A smile brightened her
face.  Ootah leaned forward, breathlessly.  Her lips framed an
inaudible word:

"Olafaksoah . . .  Olafaksoah . . ."  She opened her eyes.  The smile
faded.  "Thou . . . ?" she said.

"Yea, Annadoah, I have brought thee food," Ootah said.  It was his last.

"I hunger," she breathed.  "It is very cold . . .  I was in the
south . . . where the sun is warm . . . it is very cold here."

Eagerly he pressed her hands.  She drifted again into a stupor and for
a long while was silent.  Ootah's warm panting breath finally brought
blood to her cheeks.

"Thou art so big . . . and strong . . ." she smiled again.  "Thy arms
hurt me . . . as the embrace of _nannook_ (the bear). . . ."  Her smile
deepened . . . her breath came more quickly.  "Oh, oh, it is
pleasant . . . here . . . in . . . the south."

"Annadoah!"  Ootah's wail of hurt recalled her.

Her eyes sought the igloo wonderingly.

"Thou?" she repeated, dully.  "Yea, it is cold here.  I am hungry . . .
Are there not _ahmingmah_ in the mountains, Ootah?  Didst thou not tell
me there were _ahmingmah_ in the mountains . . . why do not the men of
the tribe seek the musk oxen in the mountains?"

With a sudden start Ootah remembered having told Annadoah of the herd
he had found in the inland valley--it was strange, he thought, he had
not remembered the herd before.  And it was stranger still that now she
should remind him.  But the improbability of ever reaching the game,
the obvious impossibility of such a journey at this time of winter, had
prevented any such suggestion.

"Many musk oxen are there in the mountains," he said, soothing her
hands.  She drew them away.  "And thou art hungry . . ."

"I am hungry," she replied, faintly.

After he had given her the last bit of meat he left her igloo.  Above
him the stars burned, the air was clear and still.  Not a thing moved,
not a sound was heard--the earth was gripped in that unrelenting spell
of wintry silence.  Above the imprisoned sea the January moon was
rising and for ten sleeps--ten twenty-four hour days--it would circle
about the horizon of the entire sky.  Already the sky above the sea was
bright as a frosted globe of glass, and pearly fingers of light were
stealing upward over the interior mountains.

"She is hungry," Ootah repeated over and over again.  "And the tribe
starves . . . and there may be _ahmingmah_ in the mountains."  Behind
him they loomed, gigantic and precipitous.  That such a journey meant
almost certain death he knew; but that did not deter him in the resolve
to essay a feat no native had ever dared in many hundreds of years.


The face of Sipsu, the _angakoq_, as I have said, resembled dried and
wrinkled leather.  He had been an old man when the eldest of the tribe
were children.  He had seen hard times, he had suffered from starvation
during many winters; yet never even in his experience had the lashes of
_ookiah_ struck so blastingly upon the tribe.  Yea, they had even lost
their fear of the _tornarssuit_ and no longer brought propitiatory
offerings of blubber to him.  Yet being wise with age, early in the
summer he had buried sufficient supplies beneath the floor of his house
to keep him from starving.  He scowled maliciously as he heard someone
creeping through the underground entrance of his igloo.  Presently the
cadaverous face of Maisanguaq appeared.

The interior was heavy with the stench of oil.  The room hung with soot
from the lamp.  A thin spiral thread of black smoke rose from the
taper.  In the dim light the leering face of Sipsu appeared like the
face of the great demon himself.  His small half-closed eyes blazed
through their slits.

"The spirits are wrathful.  The tribe is forgetful.  What wilt thou
have?"

Maisanguaq, with unconcealed hesitation, placed a bit of blubber before
the magician.

"The last I have," he mumbled.  Sipsu seized it avidly.

"Ootah goeth to the mountains," Maisanguaq said, panting for breath.

The old man sneered bitterly:

"He cannot brave the spirits.  No man can live in the mountains.  The
breath of the spirits is death."

"Yea, he goeth.  He says that he knows where the _ahmingmah_ abound.
The air is still; the moon rises for ten sleeps.  By then, so he saith,
he can return with meat."

"No man hath ever ventured there.  The shadow of _Perdlugssuaq_ is very
dark."

"Yea, may he smite Ootah!" exclaimed Maisanguaq.

Sipsu laughed harshly.

"Couldst thou cause the hill spirits to strike?" Maisanguaq asked
eagerly.

Sipsu faced Maisanguaq fiercely.

"In my youth I went unto the mountains and I heard the hill spirits
sing.  Thereupon I became a great magician.  They spoke to me; I was
silent; thereafter, when I called they answered.  What wouldst thou?"

Maisanguaq indicated the blubber.

"I would thou call them now; that they release the glaciers, that Ootah
may be carried to his death.  I hate Ootah, I would that he die."  He
shook his fist.

Sipsu's body quivered from head to foot.  "Ootah hath never consulted
my familiar spirits," he rejoined bitterly.  "He despiseth them."

Rising from his sitting posture Sipsu seized his drum and began moving
his body.  He groaned with extreme pain.  By degrees his dance
increased.  He improvised a monotonous spirit song.  His face grimaced
demoniacally.  As his conjuration approached the climax, his voice rose
to a series of shrieks.  He shuddered violently; he seemed to suffer
agonies in his limbs.  Finally he fell to the floor in a writhing
paroxysm.

"_Pst_!"  Maisanguaq's eyes lighted.

Outside he heard the sharp barking of dogs.  "_Huk_!  _Huk_!" Ootah's
voice called.  Others joined in the clamor.  The entire tribe seemed to
wake as from a sleep of the dead.

"He starts for the mountains," said Maisanguaq.  "Thinkest thou the
spirits will strike?"

Sipsu opened his eyes--and glared wildly at Maisanguaq.

"Speak," Maisanguaq demanded.  "Hast thou not the power?"

"Did I not once go to the bottom of the sea to _Nerrvik_, she who rules
over the sea creatures?  Hath she not only one hand, and is she not
powerless to plait her hair?  Doth she not obey me?  For did I not
plait her hair?  Did I not carry wood for weapons to the spirits of the
mountains?  And have they not answered for nigh a thousand moons?"

"Yet there is doubt in thy voice, Sipsu!"

"Yea, to be truthful with thee, Maisanguaq, there is dispute among the
spirits.  I cannot determine what they say."  He bent his head as if
listening.  Then he asked:

"Doth Ootah not go that Annadoah may have food?"

Maisanguaq nodded assent.

"And the tribe?"

Maisanguaq again nodded.

As though he suddenly heard some terrifying converse among his
familiars the necromancer's face blanched.  He struggled to his feet.

"Take thy food," he flung the blubber to Maisanguaq.  "I dare not take
thy gift.  I am afraid."

Maisanguaq sprang at the old man.  "Revoke not thy curse," he breathed,
his fingers sinking into the _angakoq's_ throat.  "Will the hill
spirits strike?"

"Yea," the old man gasped, "but they say----"

Maisanguaq's fingers loosened.  "What?" he demanded.

"That there is . . . some other power . . . which is very
strange--which----"

"Yea, yea----"

"Protecteth Ootah . . .  It concerneth . . . Annadoah.  I do not wish
thy gift.  I fear the spirits.  The magic of Ootah--what it is . . .  I
cannot tell thee . . .  But the spirits say . . . it . . .
concerneth . . .  Annadoah.  And against it none of the _tornarssuit_
can prevail."  Maisanguaq threw the old man fiercely to the floor and,
disgusted, left the igloo.


Outside, the entire tribe, with the exception of those dying of hunger,
had gathered in groups.  Ootah lifted his whip.  His team of eight lean
dogs howled.

"_Tugto_!  _Tugto_!" he called.  The dogs leaped into the air--his sled
shot forward.  Ootah strode forward.

In his desperate adventure Ootah was joined by one of the younger
members of the tribe, Koolotah by name, a lad barely eighteen years of
age.  All the others had hung back.  Koolotah's mother was dying; a
desperate desire to save her stirred in his heart as he lifted his whip
in the signal to start.  The tribe cheered.

"_Huk_!  _Huk_!" he shouted, and his lean dogs followed Ootah's team.

"_Au-oo-au-oo_!" called the natives.

"_Auoo-auoo_!" the voices of Ootah and Koolotah returned.

Over the snow-covered stretch of level shoreland the moon poured a
flood of silver incandescence.  In this magical light the forms of
Ootah and his companion were magnified into the likeness of those of
the giants that the old men said once lived in the highlands.  Their
dogs were distended into creatures of the size of musk oxen.  Their
whips exploded as they dashed past the straggling line of snow and
stone houses; the snow crisply cracked and splintered under their feet.

Then the village disappeared behind them.  The voices of their
tribesmen trailed shudderingly into silence.

The assembled tribe watched the teams diminishing in the distance.
Presently someone whispered a terrible thing.

"Sipsu hath cursed Ootah."

A low ominous murmur passed from lip to lip among the gathered men and
women.  In the distance a black speck in the moonlight marked the
departing hunters.

"Yea, he hath called upon the spirit of the mountains to destroy Ootah."

A low groan followed this.

"Methinks he hath prophesied too many deaths," said Arnaluk.

"He hath declared that Koolotah's mother will die."

"And Koolotah--did he not say two moons ago that Koolotah would depart
on a long journey from which he should never return?"

"And the wife of Kyutah--did she not perish after his evil prophesy?
And Piuaitsoq--did not the spirit of the skin tents strike him when he
lay asleep?  And did not yon evil wretch tell of it long before?"

A dozen voices angrily rose in assent.

"Verily he hath found hatred in his heart for Ootah.  For Ootah hath
had no need of his powers.  Did not Ootah's mother sew into his cap the
skin from the roof of a bear's mouth?  And hath he not become as strong
as the bear?  Did not his father place in his _ahttee_ the feet of a
hawk--and have not his own feet the swiftness of the wings of a bird?
And doth not Sipsu hate him for his strength?  Yea, as he hateth all
who are young, who are brave, and who find joy in their shadow."

Their voices rose threateningly.  Maisanguaq, chagrined and bitter at
the old man, leered among the crowd.

"Hath he not lived too long," he whispered softly.  And the others
suddenly shouted:

"Let Sipsu die!"

In a wild rush they bore down upon the _angakoq's_ igloo.  Screaming
with rage they kicked in the sides.  The icy dome shattered about the
startled old man.  They leaped upon him as hungry dogs upon a dying
bear.  A dozen hands ferociously gripped his throat.  They moved to and
fro in a mad struggle over the uneven ice.  They seized hold of one
another in the blood-thirsty desire to lay their hands upon the old
man.  He made no struggle.  Finally all drew away.  Amid the wreck of
his igloo Sipsu lay, motionless, his face sneering evilly in the
moonlight.  His dead lips seemed to frame a curse.

They secured a rope of leather lashings and placed a noose about the
old man's neck.  Then they dragged his body from the wrecked igloo.
Weak from lack of food, they still forced themselves to dig up the
frozen snow at a spot where they knew there were stones, for according
to their belief they had to bury the old man--otherwise, his spirit
would haunt them.  To this spot they brought the rotted skins of his
bed, and on them placed the body, fearful lest they touch it.  By the
body they placed the old man's lamp, stone dishes, membrane-drum and
instruments of incantation.  Over the corpse they piled the ice
encrusted stones, and over these in turn weighty masses of frozen snow.
Then they turned in silence and entered their respective shelters.
Thenceforth, until a child should be born to whom it could be given,
the name of Sipsu might not pass their lips.




VI

"_As he looked upon the descending wraiths, Koolotah saw they had the
spirit-semblance of gleaming faces, and that their eyes burned, through
the enveloping cloud-veils, like fire . . .  'The dead--the dead . . .'
he said, 'we have come into a land of the dead.' . . .

"Then the glacial mountainside to which he clung trembled . . . the
silver-swimming world of white dust-driven fire became suddenly
black--and the earth seemed removed from under him . . ._"


Leaving the low-lying shore, Ootah's path led up through a narrow gorge
between two great cliffs.  Since he had returned from the mountains the
path had been covered by many successive falls of snow.  At places the
path sloped abruptly downward at a terrible angle, and the ice cracked
and slid beneath the hardy hunters' feet.  With the agility of cats,
the dogs fastened their claws into the ice and climbed upward.

Constantly the two men had to hold to the jagged rocks to their right,
otherwise, time after time, they would have slipped into the perilous
abyss below.  Through the chasm the moon poured its liquid rays.  At
certain points towering crags shut off the light--then Ootah and his
companion had to feel their way slowly upward in the dark.  Finally
Ootah's dogs, with a loud chorus of barking, leaped ahead.  Seizing an
overhanging ledge of rock Ootah lifted himself to the top of the
precipice.  Koolotah's team followed.

For interminable miles a vast icy plateau stretched before them--a
plain glistening with snow and reflecting like a burnished mirror the
misty silveriness of the moon.  Over the glacial expanse an eerily
greenish phosphorescence, which palpitated and shifted at times with
vivid splashes of opal and deeper tones of burning blue, hung low.

The upland was split with thousands of canyons that writhed over the
white expanse like snakes in tortuous convulsions.  From these
bottomless abysses arose a luminous amethystine vapor.  In the depths
jutting icicles took fire and glowed through the lustrous mists like
burning eyes.   Where the chasms joined with others or widened, ominous
shapes, swathed in wind-blown blackish-purple robes, with extended
arms, took form.  As Ootah and Koolotah dashed forward, great spaces of
clear ice palpitated on all sides of them with interior opaline fires.

Neither spoke.  Holding the rear framework of their sleds, they trusted
to the instinct of their dogs.  Mile after mile swept under their feet.
Their road often lay along the very edges of purple-black abysses.  The
echoes of their sharp gliding sleds cutting the ice, of the very patter
of their dogs' feet, were magnified in volume in the clear air, and it
seemed as though, in the hollow depths on every side, ghostly teams
were following.  Koolotah was white with fear.  But Ootah encouraged
him onward.

They paced off twenty miles.  They reached an altitude of more than a
thousand feet above the sea.

The great moon slowly circled about the sky; the scurrying clouds
contorted like grotesque living things.

The two hunters made precipitous descents over unexpected frozen
slopes--at times it seemed as though they were about to be hurled to
instantaneous death.  Yet Ootah steeled his heart.  His teeth chattered
but he gritted them firmly.

"Annadoah needeth food," he murmured, "and----"

His eyes shone, a new pity not unmingled with a taint of bitterness
filled his heart.  Annadoah must live; she must have food.  For a
strange thing, he observed, had come upon her.  Her inexplicable moods,
her brief moments of tenderness, her riotous griefs, and other
prefigurements of maternity--these made her dearer to Ootah.  So he
vigorously cracked his whip and urged the dogs.

The chasms twisted with lifelike motion all around him.  Behind, as in
a dream, Ootah heard the whip of Koolotah, and the barking of
Koolotah's dogs.  For hours his feet moved swiftly and mechanically
under him.  Once his foot slipped.  He swerved to the right.  A vast
black mouth yawned hungrily to receive him; then it closed behind him.
The leaping team of dogs had pulled him forward.  Luckily he maintained
a tenacious hold to the rear upstander of his sled.

Narrow chasms constantly cut their trail.  With sharp howls the dogs
leaped over these, the sleds passed safely, and by instinct Ootah would
bound forward.  Narrower than a man's stride in width, Ootah knew these
slits in the glacial ice were hundreds of feet in depth, that a slip of
the foot might plunge him to immediate death.  Now and then he lost his
footing on the uneven ice; his heart leaped for fear, but he held
grimly to the sledge and the lithe, lean but strong dog-bodies carried
him to safety.  These faithful animals bounded over the glimmering ice
field with amazing speed.  They snapped and barked with the joy of the
race.  In the white moonlight the vapor of their breathing enveloped
them like a silvery cloud.

For hours the hunters continued the trail.  Their mighty purpose fought
off fatigue.  The moon passed behind cumulous mountains of clouds along
the horizon, and periods of darkness blotted the world from Ootah.
Then they traveled in darkness.  A chill dampness rising from the
gaping abysses that sundered the ice field told them of their danger;
then Ootah's heart chilled, his teeth were set chattering; but he
thought of Annadoah and the grim need of food, and he gripped the
upstander of his sled more determinedly.  When the moon again unclosed
its pearly sheen over the ice, the serpentine chasms moved their
tortuous backs and writhed about them, the icy hummocks billowed, and
the glittering ice-peaked horizon swam in a dizzy circle of diamonded
light.

As their trail ascended higher the penetrating cold dampness somewhat
moderated.  In the taut air the sound of their whips was like that of
splitting metal.  Shuddering and sepulchral echoes answered the barking
of their dogs.  The faithful ghosts of the dogs of fallen hunters were
following their departed masters in the amethystine mists of the
canyons about them.  Ootah and Koolotah trembled with the thought of
the dreadful nearness of the dead.  Believing other animals to be
ahead, the dogs set up a wilder, shriller howling.  Then the echoes
came back with more startling and terrifying proximity.  Ootah's flesh
crept.  Finally, with an explosive sound, Koolotah let his whip fall.

"_Aulate_--halt!" he called.

They came to a dead standstill.

"_Pst_!" he whispered.  He hit the snapping, whining dogs.  "_Pst_!"
They crouched to the ground and whined mournfully.

"Dost thou hear?" Koolotah asked in a hushed voice.  In the moonlight
Ootah saw that the lad's face was as white as the face of the dead, and
that in his eyes was a wild fear.  From the mountain ridges, which
loomed beyond, came an ominous noise--resembling a low wind.  Ootah
bent his head and listened to the sobbing monotone, then whispered:

"The breathing of the spirits of the hills who sleep."

"Perchance we waken them," Koolotah ventured.

"That would be bad," Ootah replied.

"I have left my mother forever," Koolotah wailed.

"Be brave, lad; they need food; beseech the spirits of those who lived
when men's sap was stronger, thy ancestors, for strength.  Come!"

Koolotah raised his head--then uttered a low cry of alarm.  He drew
back, fearfully, pointing with a trembling arm to the mountain pass
ahead.

Covered with glacial snow and ice the slopes of the first ridge of the
interior mountains gleamed with frosted silver.  Over the white
expanse, formed by the countless clefts and indentations of the slope,
cyclopean shadows took form, and like eldritch figures joining their
hands in a wild dance, loomed terrifyingly before the two men.  Their
trail now ascended through a gorge which abruptly opened immediately
before them.  Into this rugged chasm the argent moonlight poured, and
from unseen caverns in the pass glowered monstrous phosphorescent green
and ruby eyes.

From the heights above fragments of clouds descended through the chasm.
In the full moonlight they were transformed into tall aerial beings, of
unearthly beauty.  They were swathed in luminous robes that fluttered
gently upon the air, and like the birds they soared, with tremulous
wings resembling films of silver.  They moved softly, with great
majesty.  As he looked upon the descending wraiths, Koolotah saw they
had the spirit-semblance of gleaming faces, and that their eyes burned,
through the enveloping cloud-veils, like fire.  He drew back, afraid.

"The dead . . ." he murmured . . .  "We have come unto the land of the
dead."

Both stood in silence, reverent, awed, half-afraid.

Then Ootah snapped his whip.  He called to the dogs.

"Let us go unto them . . .  Let us show that men are not afraid.
_Huk_!  _Huk_!  _Huk_!  Come!"

The dogs howled, the traces tightened, the sleds sped forward.  They
entered the defile.  The trail twisted up the side of the abyss.  Less
than three feet wide for long stretches, the dogs had to slacken and
pass upward in line, one by one.  Covered with new ice it was
dangerously slippery, and in climbing the men had to hold to jutting
icicles for support.

Ootah was ahead.  At times sheer walls of ice confronted him.  At
certain places there had been drifts, at others glacial fragments had
slipped from the mountain above.  Before these almost insuperable walls
Ootah would pause and with his axe hew steps in the hard ice.

They slowly toiled ahead for an hour.  Then a blank sloping ice wall,
twice the height of Ootah, blocked the path.  He grasped his axe and
began hewing a series of ascending steps.  He breathed with difficulty;
the air in the high altitude made respiration difficult.  He was soon
bathed in perspiration.  The moisture of his breath and beads of sweat
froze about his face, covering him with an icy mask.  His eyelashes
froze together.  He had to pause to melt the quickly congealing tears.
He suffered unendurably.  Finally his axe split; the ice was harder
than his steel.  He uttered an impatient exclamation.

"Thy axe!" he called to Koolotah.

Koolotah swung his axe in the air and over the dog team separating
them.  Ootah leaped from his feet and caught the axe as it soared above
him.  In a half hour the step-like trail was cut, and he clambered over
the wall.  Digging their nails into the indentations, the dogs
followed.  Then Koolotah and his team scaled the obstruction.

Koolotah felt his heart choking him as it seemed to enlarge within;
Ootah, in truth, was not entirely unafraid.  Both knew that a slip of
the foot would plunge them to instant death.  As they ascended the
trail, the gathering clouds surrounded them.  They could no longer see
their dogs.  They could not even perceive the blackness of the chasm to
their right.  Above and below they were enveloped in a silver mist.
Only the reflected glitter of the moonlight on jutting icicles on the
opposite indicated the depths so perilously near.  Through the mist
Koolotah saw the green and crimson eyes of baleful creatures that
might, at any moment, spring upon him.


When they reached the inland valley they were both spent in strength.
In sheer relief from the agonized suspense of the journey they sank on
their sledges and lay palpitating for an hour or more.  But the cold
froze their perspiring garments and they had to rise and exercise so as
not to freeze to death.  Ootah knew that no time could be lost.  In the
interior mountains the breathing of the hill spirits was becoming more
uneasy.  And Ootah noted with anxiety the increasing moderation of the
atmosphere.  That was not well.  When the cold relented the hill
spirits released the glaciers.

With frantic eagerness they explored the valley.  The green grass
whereon Ootah had seen the splendid animals grazing months before was
covered with ice.  There was no sign of the _ahmingmah_.  Ootah's heart
sank.  He felt very much like weeping.

Suddenly the dogs began to sniff the air and bark hungrily.

"_Ahmingmah_!" Koolotah cried, joyfully.

Ootah released the team--the dogs made a misty black streak in their
dash over the ice.  The men followed.

In the shelter of a cave they found five musk oxen.  They were huddled
together and half numb with cold.  They roared dully as the howling
dogs assaulted them, and rushed lumberingly from the cave into the
moonlight.  Five great black hulks, with mighty manes of coarse hair,
they ambled over the ice for a space of five hundred feet and then,
surrounded by the dogs, assembled in a circle, their backs together,
their heads facing the howling dogs.  Thus they were prepared to
protect themselves from attack.

The dogs, frantic with hunger, made fierce rushes at the animals.  Now
and then, as the dogs dashed forward, one of the great beasts would
charge, its head lowered, and the dogs would leap backward into the air
and scatter.  Then turning, the animal would rush back to its
companions as fast as its numbed legs could carry it.

Through the white vapor of their breath, which half hid their great
horned heads, Ootah could see the eyes of the musk-oxen--they were
greenish and phosphorescent.  Occasionally the creatures roared
sullenly, but the fight was less exciting than it would have been had
they been less torpid from hunger and cold.

Ootah called away the dogs, and raised his gun, one which Olafaksoah,
in payment for the five sledloads of walrus blubber which he
confiscated after Ootah's flight to the mountains, had left with a
generous supply of ammunition with a companion.  Ootah now realized the
value of the payment which he had scorned.

There was a yellow flash in the moonlight--a mighty roar went up.  The
dogs, with a cyclonic dash, swooped upon the fallen monster, snapping
viciously at it as it roared in its death agony.  Frightened, the other
four scattered--one rushed into the shelter of the cave, the other
three, dispersing, soon became diminishing black specks in the
moonlight.  The dogs would have followed, but Ootah called them back.
One animal was even more than they could manage.

With quick despatch they fell upon the animal with their knives.
Neither spoke--they worked breathlessly.  With marvellous skill they
peeled off the heavy skin, and with amazing dexterity carved great
masses of bleeding meat clean from the bones.  When they had finished,
only a great skeleton remained.  Outside the cave, eager, whining, the
starving dogs obediently crouched.  When they had completed the task of
dressing, Ootah lifted his hand and the canines, with howling avidity,
fell upon the steaming mass of entrails.

Upon the two sledges the hunters loaded and lashed securely their
treasure of meat.  In the moonlight the hot steam rose from the
tremulous masses and Ootah's nostrils dilated with eager, anticipatory
delight.  The blood dripped upon the snow and Ootah's stomach ached.
He had not dared to think of eating until now.  Their hands shaking
with nervous hunger, the two fell upon the remaining meat.  They
feasted with that savage hungry joy known only to human creatures who
have faced starvation.  When they started on the return journey there
was a new vibrant elasticity in their steps.

Ootah snapped his whip and sang.

And his heart sang, too, of Annadoah.

Looking at the clouds, as they drifted through the valley, Ootah
imagined he saw Annadoah lying upon her couch asleep, and in the faint
light of an oil lamp he saw upon her face a pleased smile.

"Of what doth Annadoah dream?" Ootah asked the winds.

"Of springtime when the flowers bloom," the winds replied.

"And Annadoah will move to a new skin tent with Ootah!" he said,
joyously, exultantly.  "Ootah will bring food unto Annadoah and she
will reward him with her love."

"Foolish Ootah," moaned the wind, "love cannot be won with food,
neither with _ahmingmah_ meat nor walrus blubber."  Ootah felt his
heart sink; a vague and heavy misgiving filled him.  Being very simple,
he had always thought that by securing wealth, in dogs and food, in
guns and ammunition, and by achieving pre-eminence on the hunt, he
should win Annadoah's confidence and love.  But now, upon the breath of
the winds, by the voices of nature, doubt came into his heart.  The
mistake of many men the world over, and of many wiser than he, he could
not understand just why this was--this thing the winds said, and which
his own heart correspondingly whispered.  With food he might possibly
win Annadoah's consent to be his wife, yes, he knew that; but
Annadoah's love--that was another thing.  Surely, he now realized, as
he strode along, that by simply giving her food he could not expect to
stir in her heart a response to that which throbbed in his.  But why?
Singularly he never thought of the bravery of his seeking food on this
perilous adventure, an act which, had he known it, had indeed touched
the heart of the beautiful maiden.

With the quick atmospheric change of the arctic--a phenomenon common to
zones of extreme temperature--the wind steadily increased in velocity
and warmth.  The shallow moon-shot clouds on the ice thickened and
swept softly under the two travellers' feet.  Above their waists the
air was clear--they saw each other distinctly in the moonlight.  Yet
their dogs, hidden in the low-lying vapor, were invisible.  Great
masses of clouds slowly piled along the horizon and the moon was often
obscured.  Then the two walked in a darkness so thick it seemed
palpable.

"Hark!" Ootah called, during one of these spells.  "What is that?"  A
shuddering sound split the air; the ice field on which they travelled
vibrated with an ominous jar.  The echoes of splitting ice came like
distant explosions.

"Have we disturbed the spirits of the hills?" asked Koolotah, in a
whisper.

"No, no," answered Ootah, anxiously.  "_Huk_!  _Huk_!"  He snapped his
whip and urged the dogs.  They had not gone twenty paces when from the
interior heights of Greenland came a series of muffled explosions.
Undoubtedly the hill spirits had wakened, and, angry, were hurling
their terrible weapons.


They reached, in due course, the top of a mountain ridge down part of
the glassy slopes of which they had to make their way to the entrance
of the cleft in which the trail they had so laboriously hewn lay.  The
gorge yawned blackly some five hundred feet below.  In anticipation of
their return with loaded sledges, Ootah, on the last reach of their
upland climb, had chopped on the smooth snows of the mountainside a
narrow path that ran backward and forward in the fashion of a gently
inclining elongated spiral.  The mountain sloped at an angle of eighty
degrees, but by descending cautiously along this circuitous trail a
safe descent was possible.

While Ootah and his companion stood on the peak, the moon passed behind
a veil of clouds and Ootah felt two soft wraith-like hands pass over
his face--cloud-hands which his simple mind believed were sentient
things.  His heart for the moment seemed to stop.  Thus the kind
spirits warn men of danger.

At that instant a stinging sound smote the air.  The glacial side of
the mountain trembled, and as the moon reappeared, on the icy slopes
Ootah saw narrow black cracks zigzagging in various directions.  A
cataclysmic rumbling sounded deep in the earth.

When the echoes died away he turned to Koolotah.

"Be brave of heart.  Let us go--there is no time to lose."

"_Huk_!  _Huk_!  _Huk_!"  They urged the dogs gently.  Arranging
themselves instinctively in single file, the traces slackening, the
wonderful dogs, with feline caution, crept ahead.  Lowering their
bodies, each behind his sledge, Ootah and Koolotah began moving
stealthily downward.  With one hand each clung to the rough icy
projections of the slope; with the other they held the rear upstander
of their sleds to prevent them from sliding, with their precious loads
of meat, down the mountainside.

Half way down, Ootah uttered a cry.

His quick ear detected a faint splitting noise, like the crack of young
ice in forming, under his feet.  In an instant he realized their danger.

At the time he had reached a hollow in the perilous slope.  The dogs
ahead, with quick instinct, retreated and crouched at his feet in the
sheltering cradle.

Ootah saw Koolotah turn and look inquiringly upward.  The next moment,
driven downward by the wind, a mass of clouds, glittering with bleached
moonfire, rolled over the slopes and hid Koolotah.  Ootah only heard
his voice.

Then the glacial mountainside to which he clung trembled.  A terrific
crash, like that of cannon, followed.  The very mountain seemed to
shake.  For a brief awful spell everything was still--then, with an
appalling thunder, the ice split and began to move.  The moon
reappeared and Ootah--in a tense moment--saw chasms widening about him
on the glistening slope.  He heard the deafening echoing explosions of
splitting ice in the distance . . .  With fierce ferocity he
instinctively fastened one bleeding hand to an icy projection above
him, with the other he held with grimly desperate determination to the
sled . . .  In the next dizzy instant he felt the icy floor beneath him
lurch itself forward and downward . . .  before his very eyes he saw
Koolotah and his team--not twenty feet below--wiped from existence by
the descending glacier to which he clung and in the hollow crevice of
which he found security . . .  In a second's space he caught a clear
vision of tremendous masses of green and purple glaciers being ground
to fine powder in their swift descent on all sides of him, . . .  he
saw the feathery ice fragments catch fire in the moonlight, . . . he
heard the elemental roar and grinding crash of ice mountains sundering
in a titanic convulsion . . . then he lost hearing . . .  In that same
sick bewildering moment of preternatural consciousness he thought
wildly of Annadoah . . . he saw her appealing wan face amid the blur of
white moonlight . . . he knew she needed food . . . and he felt an ache
at his heart . . . he called upon the spirits of his ancestors.  Then
the silvery swimming world of white dust-driven fire became suddenly
black--and the earth seemed removed from under him.


In the village the natives were awakened from their lethargic sleep by
the far-away crash of the avalanche.  Their faces blanched as they
thought of the hunters.  "The hill spirits have smitten!  _Ioh_!
_Ioh_!" they moaned.  In her igloo Annadoah, who had waited with
sleepless anxiety, wept alone.  Of all in the village only the heart of
one, Maisanguaq, was glad.




VII

"_The utter tragedy of her devotion to the man who had deserted her,
and the utter hopelessness of his own deep passion, blightingly,
horribly forced itself upon him . . .  Ootah asked himself all the
questions men ask in such a crisis . . . and he demanded with wild
weeping their answer from the dead rejoicing in the auroral Valhalla.
But there was no answer--as perhaps there may be no answer; or, if
there is, that God fearing lest, in attaining the Great Desire, men
should cease to endeavor; to serve and to labor has kept it locked
where He and the dead live beyond the skies._"


The moon dipped behind the horizon.  For five sleeps naught had been
heard from Ootah and his companion.  Inetlia, the sister of Koolotah,
followed in turn by some of the other women, visited the igloo of
Annadoah.  Upon her couch of moss Annadoah lay, and over her a cover
given by Ootah and lined with the feathers of birds.

"'Twas thou who sent Ootah to the mountains," one complained.  "May the
ravens peck thine eyes!" cried another.  Annadoah shook her head sadly
and wept.

"'Twas thou who chose Olafaksoah, the robber from the south, that thou
mightest be his wife; and 'twas thou, his wife, who beguiled the men
and robbed thy tribe.  Did we not give away our skins, and didst thou
not make garments for Olafaksoah?  And do we not now shudder from the
cold?  'Twas thou who put the madness into the head of Ootah, the
strongest of the tribe.  Many are the maidens who are husbandless and
yet Ootah pined for thee.  Why didst thou not choose Ootah?  Then he
would have remained and prevented the thievery of the strangers, we
should not have been robbed, and he would not have had to go far unto
the mountains, where the spirits have struck him in their wrath?  Nay,
nay, thou didst make the men of our tribe sick with thoughts of thee.
They have quarrelled among themselves.  And before the white men came,
did they not reproach us, their wives and their betrothed, with thy
name and the vaunted skill of thee?  Thou art as the woman with an iron
tail, she who killed men when they came to her, their skins flushed
with love.  Thou destroyest men!  Thou didst send Ootah and Koolotah to
the mountains!  And they have perished!  _Ioh-h_!  _Ioh-h_!"

Entering her igloo two or three at a time they reproachfully recited in
chiding chants to Annadoah the story of her life; how her worthy mother
and august grand-parents had died, hoping she would choose a husband
from the hunters, and how she had refused all who sought her; they
told, with reiterant detail, how she had caused quarrels among the men,
and sent many of the warriors in their competitive hunts to death; and
how, finally, when Ootah, the bravest of the hunters, wanted to wed
her, she had chosen a foreign man, who deserted her and left her a
burden on the tribe.  Sometimes they shook her roughly.

To the native women the brutality and virility of the men from the
south exert a potent appeal; and the fact that Olafaksoah had chosen
Annadoah many moons since still made their mouth taste bitter.  This
jealousy rankling within them, they now with angry exultation took
occasion to mock and abuse her.  The girl lay still and did not reply.
Her heart indeed seemed like a bird lying dead in wintertime.

Then one of three women who stood by Annadoah's couch leaned forward
and whispered a terrible thing.  The others looked at the girl and
fear, mingled with hatred, shone in their eyes.

"Thou sayest this thing," said one, "how dost thou know?"

And the other, pointing accusingly to the girl who lay before them, her
face hidden in her arms, replied:

"The night my baby died . . .  I heard her voice."

They stood in silence, rigid, implacable, bitter.

During the latter dark days a terrible calamity had made itself felt
among the tribe.  This was the death of many of the newly born.
Outside the igloos during the past months, as the babies had come, the
number of tiny mounds had increased, and when the aurora flooded the
skies heart-broken mothers could be seen weeping over these graves of
snow.  It is not uncommon in this land for babies to die at birth or
come prematurely; but the number of recent deaths and tragic accidents
to expectant mothers was unprecedented.  This was undoubtedly due to
the depleted vitality of the starving mothers--but to the natives there
was some other, some unaccountable, some sinister, cause.  In their
hearts they experienced, each time a new mound rose white in the
moonlight, that tremulous terror of a people who instinctively fear
extinction.  The grief of a mother was for a personal loss; to the
tribe each death meant an even greater, more significant loss, a thing
of more than personal consequence.

And when, out of the dim regions of her brain, one of the women now
conjured the terrible thing which she whispered concerning Annadoah, it
was little wonder the other two regarded the girl as a thing hateful
and accursed.

"_She stealeth souls!_"

Nothing more frightful could have been said.

"Yea, the night my baby died I heard her voice," repeated Inetlia
angrily.

And the other, among the superstitious voices in her memory, found it
not difficult to recall a similar thing:

"Methinks I heard her sing the night my own little one came--too soon."

And the third whispered:

"She is as the hungry hill spirit who feasts upon the entrails of the
dead.  Yea, she carrieth off the souls of the children.  _Ioh_!
_Iooh_!"

Their voices rose in a maniacal cry of terror and denunciation.

Annadoah rose.  Clasping her hands, she demanded piteously:

"Why . . . sayest ye this of me?"

And they shrieked:

"Thou stealest souls!  By the _angakoq_ shalt thou be accursed!"

"No, no!  No, no!" the girl pleaded, falling on her knees and weeping.

Although they suddenly ceased their reviling, hearing outside the
barking of dogs, the women thereafter in secret often assembled
together; there were ominous whisperings; and each time a child died
visits were paid to the _angakoq_, and the unseen powers were invoked
to bring misfortune to Annadoah.

Outside the silenced women detected the barking of dogs approaching the
village from the distance.  They heard the excited calls of tribesmen
and the chatter of other women.  One by one they crept from the igloo.
A strange light in her eyes, Annadoah followed.

Over the mountains to the north a soft and wondrous light began to
palpitate tremulously . . .  While the men of the tribe rushed to meet
the oncoming team of dogs in the distance, the women stood and gazed
with awe upon the increasing wonder in the skies . . .  The northern
lights, seen nowhere else so splendidly in all the world, had begun the
weaving of their glorious and eerie imagery.  A nebulous film of
silvery light wavered with incredible swiftness over the heavens . . .
The snow-blanketed land took instantaneous fire in the sudden
flares . . .  In the torridly tropic heaven of the virtuous dead an
Unknown God, so the tribes believe, makes fire--just as in the nether
regions beneath the earth the Great Evil, who has revealed himself with
a more terrible reality than the Great Benign, creates cold and forges
ice.  In that land of the happy dead, disclosed in the aurora, there is
never any night, nor is it ever cold.  So the souls there are always
happy.  Sometimes in their revels they troop earthward to cheer the
mortals who suffer from _Perdlugssuaq's_ frigid breath as it comes
during winter from hell . . .  The women looked at one another.  The
augury was good.

"The spirits of the dead," one whispered, "are happy . . .  They are
playing ball."

Into their midst, surrounded by the glad cheering men of the tribe,
Ootah staggered.  His face was cut and covered with black clotted
blood.  His legs dragged with utter exhaustion.  His features were
gaunt and marked by lines of frightful suffering.  His eyes were bright
with the light of fever.  When he saw Annadoah a faint but very glad
smile passed over his countenance; he made an effort to forget the
anguished throes of pain in his limbs and the intermittent shudderings
of cold and flushes of intense fever.  He tried to speak, but then
shook his head sadly.  Instead, he pointed to the dilapidated sledge.
Three of his dogs had perished--five had been saved.  The sled had been
battered, but was lashed together.  Upon it, however, the precious load
of meat was intact.  The subtle aroma of it sent a wave of gladness
through the crowd.  They danced about Ootah, asking questions.  Ootah
staggered backward and sank helpless against the sledge.  After a while
he found voice.

"I am very weak," he managed to say.

Several of the women disappeared and soon returned with a bit of walrus
blubber.  This, having undergone a process of fermentation in the
earth, possessed the intoxicating qualities of alcohol.  It is used by
the natives for purposes of stimulation in such cases and in their
celebrations.  Ootah with difficulty ate this.

He felt stronger, and rose.

"Thou art ill," said Annadoah, approaching him, and gently touching his
wounded face.  "Enter, Annadoah will care for thee."

Her face was perilously near him; it was very wan and beautiful in the
auroral light--Ootah felt his heart beat wildly.  But it was pity, not
love, that shone softly from Annadoah's eyes.

"Thy igloo is cold, thy lamp unlighted," Annadoah insisted.  "Come!
The others will prepare thy couch and light thy lamps.  Until then my
bed is thine.  It is warm within."

With difficulty Ootah bent low and followed Annadoah through the
underground entrance of her igloo.  His dogs, which the men had
unhitched, and as many as could enter the small enclosure, followed.
The stench of the oil lamp at first almost suffocated him.  He sank to
Annadoah's couch from sheer weakness, and his dogs, licking his face
and hands, crept about him.

Meanwhile Annadoah began melting snow over her lamp.  The others plied
Ootah with questions.  Did he go far into the mountains?  Were there
many _ahmingmah_?  Did Koolotah perish?  Was he in the mountains when
the spirits struck?  To all of this he could only move his head in
response.  While he sipped the warm water gratefully, Annadoah cut away
his leather boots and bathed his injuries.  His flesh was torn and one
ankle was sprained--by a miracle not a bone had been broken in the
fall.  With unguents left years before by white men, Annadoah treated
his many cuts and bruises and bound them securely with clean leather.
After he lay back on the couch she bathed his face, and rubbed into the
wounds salves which her father had given to her mother and which for
years had been preciously preserved.

Ootah lay with his eyes closed; he seemed to float in the auroral skies
without, in the very happy land of the dead.  He forgot the pain in his
limbs, the furnace in his forehead.  He felt only the soothing touch of
Annadoah's dear hands, and her breath at times very near, fanning his
face; he heard her voice murmuring to the onlooking natives.  Not
satisfied with these ministrations, in which they really had little
faith, the others presently brought a young _angakoq_, one better loved
than the dead Sipsu.  For being young he had not prophesied many deaths.

All moved away as the magician began beating his membrane drum over
Ootah's body.  Working himself into frenzy, he called upon his familiar
spirits.  For, according to their belief, illness, and the suffering
resultant from wounds, are actually caused by the spirits of the
various members of the body falling out of harmony.  Then the _angakoq_
must persuade his friends in the other world to restore peace among the
spirits of the human hands, feet, head, or whatever limbs may be
affected.  The soul, or great spirit, they say resides in one's shadow,
and sometimes this falls out of agreement with the minor spirits of the
body.  Then one is in bad shape, indeed.

For half an hour the chant and dance continued.  Meanwhile Ootah opened
his eyes and often smiled at Annadoah.  He was better, he told them,
and motioned the _angakoq_ to go.  He bade Annadoah sit beside him.  He
felt unquestionably better.

"You have asked me whether I went far over the mountains?  Yea, we
travelled many sleeps, yet we scarcely rested.  The world was white
about us.  The spirits carried us over dark places in the hills,
wherein _Perdlugssuaq_ makes his home.  But he did not strike.  We were
borne over abysses.  The spirits of one's ancestors are often kind.  We
went through the world of the fog, she who was the wife of that hill
spirit who carried the dead from their graves and ate them.  Yea, she
passed beneath our feet.  We came to the high mountains.  We passed
upward where the eyes of strange beasts glared upon us.  I was afraid.
But I called upon my father.  Then the spirits of the great dead came
down upon us.  They wove _kamiks_ and _ahttees_ of fire.  Their eyes
burned as the great light of the stars.  They did not regard us.  We
came unto the _ahmingmah_ . . .  But upon our return the hill spirits
who live in the caves wakened and struck with their great harpoons.
They shook the mountains.  Then the good ancestors carried me through
_sila_--the world of the air--yea, my dogs, my sledge, and the
_ahmingmah_ meat.  I had called upon those who went before me.  I woke
at the bottom of the mountain, three of my dogs were crushed, my sledge
was broken . . .  I lay there a while . . .  I slept again . . .
often . . .  Then I lashed the sled, ate a little of the _ahmingmah_
meat, and came . . . hither . . .  How . . .  Ootah knows not . . .  It
was hard at times . . .  I could hardly walk . . . the ice moved about
me . . . always . . . so--"  He described a circle with his hand.  "But
I bethought me of Annadoah--" he smiled--"and I said I go to
Annadoah . . .  That is how I came . . .  I said Annadoah is
hungry--yea, as I said it when the eyes looked at me on the mountains,
when the hill spirits made my heart grow cold, when Koolotah desired to
return . . .  Koolotah--he hath gone . . .  Koolotah's dogs are
gone . . .  But I called upon my dead father, my dead grandfather, and
the older ones--and I thought of Annadoah."  He leaned toward her
yearningly, his voice trembling.  Fearfully the girl drew away.  "It is
she who brought the _ahmingmah_ meat," he said.  "It is she who led me
to the _ahmingmah_.  Yea, she brings you the _ahmingmah_ meat.  For the
thought of her brings Ootah back after the spirits strike . . .  It is
she, who lives in the heart of Ootah, who has done all this . . .  But
you are hungry.  Come!"

He rose slowly and crept through the underground tunnel leading from
the igloo.  The others followed.  Without, most of the tribe were
waiting.  At Ootah's command the men unlashed the sledge-load of meat,
and the division began.  To Annadoah Ootah gave one-eighth of the load,
enough to last by frugal use for more than two moons, or months.  Among
the others, of whom there were about twenty-five, the remainder was
proportionately divided.  For himself Ootah reserved only as much as he
gave the others.

Outside Annadoah's igloo all engaged in a joyous revel.  Hungrily they
feasted upon the raw meat.  Then they beat drums and danced.  Their
voices rose in hilarious chants.  Wild joy shook them.  Ootah was
acclaimed hero of the tribe.  Although they have no chiefs, he was
accorded the honor of being the bravest and strongest among them.  And
to the strongest and most heroic the last word in all things belongs.

Of all who were able to participate in the celebration, Maisanguaq
alone retired.  From the seclusion of his igloo entrance he watched the
scene with rancor in his heart.

Over the northern skies the auroral lights played, lighting the scene
of spontaneous rejoicing with magical glory.  Great silver coronas--or
rings of light--constantly arose in the north, passed to the zenith and
melted as they descended to the south.  Luminous curtain-like films
closed and parted alternately like the veils of a Valhalla drawn back
and forth before the warrior souls of the north.  Tremendous fan-shaped
shafts of opalescent fire shot toward the zenith and like search-lights
moved to and fro across the sky.  The clouds became illumined with an
interior flame and glowed like diaphanous mists of gold half concealing
the vague faces of the beauteous spirits of the dead.  Their billowing
edges palpitated with a tremor as of quicksilver.  Within and through
this empyreal web of light marvellous scenes were simultaneously woven.
They lasted a moment's space and vanished.  The natives, dancing
unrestrainedly, saw heavenly mountain slopes covered with grass of
emerald fire and glittering with starry flowers.  They saw the gigantic
shadows of celestial _ahmingmah_ passing behind the clouds . . . and
here and there were the cyclopean adumbrations of great caribou, and
creatures for which they did not have a name.  A tossing sea of
rippling waves of light was presently unfolded, and over it they saw
millions of birds, with wings of fire, soaring with bewildering
rapidity from horizon to zenith . . .  This faded . . .  Monstrous and
gorgeous flowers of living rainbow tints burst into bloom--fields of
them momentarily covered the heaven.  These the natives regarded with
only half accustomed wonder, for they knew there were strange flowers
in the land of the dead.

As they danced, the colored imageries steadily faded in the growing
intensity of the great banded coronas that rose from the north.  A
light of cold electric fire increasingly blazed over the heavens until
a frigid silver day, brighter than any day of sunshine, reached its
brief noon upon the earth.

Rocking their bodies and singing, the natives dispersed to their
respective igloos.  Sitting on his sledge by Annadoah, Ootah dimly
heard their voices echoing into silence; he experienced terrible pains
again in his limbs and the fever in his head.  Everything became dizzy,
and with a sick feeling of faintness he crept into Annadoah's igloo and
fell upon her couch.

It was in his heart to ask her once again to be his, to repeat the
protestation of his love; he felt that he had shown he deserved to win
her.  But his utter weakness, and the very enthralling delight of her
soft hands on his forehead, kept him still.  He lay in a semi-delirium
suffering greatly, but at heart very happy.  A new peace possessed him.
Never had Annadoah caressed him before, never had he felt the tingling
thrill of her tender hands, never had her breath so perilously warmed
his face.  For an hour she sat by him, perfunctorily bathing his wounds
with the white men's ointment and rubbing a yellow salve upon his face.
And while she did this, often, very often, she closed her eyes.
Sometimes her hands, as they passed over his forehead, absently
wandered to the couch, sometimes they soothed the air near the
suffering man.  Then she would recall herself.  Gazing upon Ootah, pity
would fill her; and then--well, then her mind would wander.  She was
faint herself, tired and half-asleep.

Once, as she touched Ootah's hand, he closed it impulsively over hers.
Her heart gave a thud.  Her eyelids quivered.  A smile appeared on her
face.  Ootah pressed her hand more firmly--he did not realize how
fiercely in his fever.  His blood ran high; in a mingled delirium of
pain and transport he drew her slowly toward him.  Her one hand soothed
his brow, softly, very gently.  The smile on her face deepened.  She
gasped with a throe of the old memories.

"Olafaksoah," she breathed, rapturously.

Ootah felt a horrible pain grip his heart.  He opened his eyes, stark
conscious.  He saw the eyes of Annadoah were closed.  On her face he
observed the fond, far-away smile; he knew her heart was in the south.
And in that frightful moment his untutored mind by instinct realized
why she had bandaged and soothed him so tenderly, realized, indeed,
that in doing so, in his stead, her mind had conjured up the vision of
Olafaksoah.  His hands were strong, she had said, they hurt her.
Ootah, with ferocity, gripped her little hand tighter.

"Olafaksoah," she murmured again, with delight--then, recalling
herself, suddenly uttered a sharp cry of dismay as she opened her eyes.

Ootah staggered to his feet.  The utter tragedy of her devotion to the
man who had deserted her, the utter hopelessness of his own deep
passion blightingly, horribly forced itself upon him.

"Annadoah!  Annadoah!  Annadoah!" he wailed, his voice sobbing the
beloved name.

The igloo was stifling; he felt that he was suffocating.  Everything
reeling about him, he crept painfully from the igloo into the night.
He felt he must be alone.

Outside the aurora was paling with intermittent cascades of resolving
lights.  Over the snows glittering rosy fingers painted running rainbow
traceries.  It seemed as though the spirit revellers were pouring fiery
jewels from the skies.

Ootah stood before that revealed and radiant land of the dead--the dead
who danced and were happy--his hands clenched and upraised above him.

"Annadoah!  Annadoah!" he sobbed the name again and again, and in his
voice throbbed all the piteousness, all the bitterness of his utter
heartbreak.  There was no reproach in his shuddering sobs; only sorrow,
only the desolation and eternal heart-ache of that which loves
mightily, unrequitedly, and realizes that all it desires can never,
never be.

Ootah asked himself all the questions men ask in such a crisis; why,
when he loved so indomitably, the heart of Annadoah should stir only
with the thought of another; why the spirits that weave the fabric of
men's fate had designed it thus.  Why the ultimate desire of the heart
is forever ungranted and an intrinsically unselfish love too often
finds itself defeated--these questions, in his way, he asked of his
soul, and he demanded, with wild weeping, their answer from the dead
rejoicing in the paling Valhalla.  But there was no answer--as perhaps
there may be no answer; or, if there is, that God, fearing lest in
attaining the Great Desire men should cease to endeavor, to serve and
to labor, has kept it locked where He and the dead live beyond the
skies.

Ootah fell prostrate to the ground and his body throbbed on the ice in
uncontrollable throes of grief.  The aurora faded above him.  Darkness
closed upon the earth.  Sitting in her igloo, startled, vaguely
perplexed and half-afraid, Annadoah heard him sobbing throughout the
night.




VIII

"_For a long black hour of horror they were driven over the thundering
seas and through a frigid whirlwind of snow sharp as flakes of
steel . . .

"Seeing Ootah turn slightly toward Annadoah, Maisanguaq sprang at his
throat.  Their arms closed about one another . . .  The floe rocked
beneath them--they slipped to and fro on the ice . . .  About them the
frightful darkness roared; they felt the heaving sea under them.  And
while they struggled in their brief death-to-death fight, the floe was
tossed steadily onward._"


The long night began to lift its sable pall, and at midday, for a brief
period, a pale glow appeared above the eastern horizon.  In this brief
spell of daily increasing twilight the desolate region took on a
grey-blue hue; the natives, as they appeared outside their shelters,
looked like greyish spectres.  Ootah felt the grim grey desolation
color his soul.

He had regained his strength, and his wounds had healed with the
remarkable rapidity that nature effects in people who lead a primitive
life; only the hurt in his heart remained.  Annadoah had often visited
him, and while he lay on his bed of furs she had boiled _ahmingmah_
meat and made hot water over the lamp very solicitously.  Once,
half-hesitating, she looked into his eyes, and as though she had a
confession to make, said quietly:

"Thou art very brave, Ootah."

This pleased him--once she had said he had the heart of a woman.

He had thrilled when she soothed him, and now he was half sorry that
the injuries no longer needed attention.  He loved Annadoah more deeply
than ever, and his greatest concern was for her.  He might win
her--yes, perhaps some day, but he could not forget that, whenever she
had touched him with tenderness, she thought of Olafaksoah.

Standing before his igloo, musing upon these things, Ootah espied in
the semi-light a dark speck moving on the ice.

"_Nannook_! (_Bear_)" he called, and the men rushed from their houses.
Without pausing to get his gun Ootah ran down to the ice-sheeted shore.
Nature, as if repenting of her bitterness, had sent milder weather, and
the bear, emerging from its winter retreat, made its way over the ice
in search of seal.  Lifting his harpoon, Ootah attacked the bear.  It
rose on its haunches and parried the thrusts.  A half-dozen lean dogs
came dashing from the shelters and jumped about the creature.  The bear
grunted viciously--the dogs howled.  The bear was lean and faint from
hunger, and its fight was brief--the lances of four natives pierced the
gaunt body.  The bear meat was divided after the communal custom of the
tribe, and the gnawing of their stomachs was again somewhat appeased.
Some days later three bears were killed near the village.  The hearts
of the tribe arose, for spring was surely dawning.

Early in March Arnaluk, skirmishing along the shore, saw a bear
disappearing in the distance.  The animal was making its direction
seaward, and this indicated to the astute native that its quick senses
had detected the presence of seal.

"Ootah!  Ootah!" he called.  "Attalaq!  Attalaq!"  The two tribesmen
responded.  With harpoons and lances they followed the trail of the
bear.  Less than a mile from shore they found it sitting near a seal
blow hole in the ice.  At the sight of the men it fled.  A close
inspection resulted in the discovery of a half dozen blow holes--or
open places to which the seal rise under the ice and come to the
surface to breathe.  For a long while the men waited.  Standing near
the holes, their weapons ready to strike, they imitated the call of
seals.  Finally there was a snorting noise beneath one of the holes.
Ootah detected a slight rise of vapor.  Attalaq's harpoon descended.  A
joyous cry arose.  Breaking open the ice about the hole a seal was
drawn to the surface.  Daily visits were thereafter made to the
vicinity and the hunters, patiently watching near the holes, succeeded
in catching several seals.  Other blow holes were later detected along
the ice, then they disappeared and for a period no seal rewarded the
hunters.

The weather continued to moderate, and these excursions on the sea ice
became more and more dangerous.  One day Attalaq and Ootah, while
walking along the shore, heard a familiar call in the far distance, out
toward the open sea.

"Walrus," said Ootah, the zest of the hunt tingling in his veins.

"But the danger is great--the ice splits," said Attalaq.

"But we need food."  Ootah thought of Annadoah.  She had not been well,
she needed food--that was sufficient.  Moreover, he thought of the
children; three were dying of lack of food.  So he called the tribesmen
and gave the signal for preparations to depart.  A selection had to be
made of the best dogs for the dangerous trip.  Few dogs remained in the
village; many had been frozen by the bitter cold; others had to be
killed as food for their companions; some had occasionally been
devoured by the famished natives.  And this the desperate people had
done with reluctance and great sorrow--for, as I have said, a native
loves his dog but little less than his child.

Ootah in the lead, with five others, started on the hunt, with three
sledges, each of which was drawn by a team of five lean, hungry dogs.
After some urging Maisanguaq had sullenly consented to accompany the
party.

Joy flushed the natives' skin, for a thin film of sunlight trembled low
over the eastern horizon.  As they sped northward past great
promontories they saw several auks.  Later two ptarmigan were spotted,
and still later an eider duck.  They began chanting songs of the race.

Quickly, however, the brief sunlight faded, heavy grey clouds piled
along the sky-line, the atmosphere became perceptibly warmer, and
intermittent gusts of wind blew downward from the inland mountains.

They directed their steps over the ice to a distant black spot,
somewhat more than a mile distant, which they knew to be open water.
There, if there were any, the walrus would be found.  As they were
marching, a very faint crackling noise vibrated through the ice under
their feet.  They ceased singing.  Four of the party paused and would
have turned back.  Ootah urged them onward.  They paced off half a
mile.  The wind increased in volume and whined dolefully.  Their steps
lagged.  Suddenly they heard the harsh nasal bellow they knew so well.
The hearts of all expanded with the joy of the hunt.

The dogs howled hungrily and, with tails swishing savagely, tore ahead.
As they approached the edge of the sea ice they passed great lakes of
open water.  The twilight still continued to thicken, the wind came in
increasingly furious blasts.  Nearer and nearer came the low call of
walrus bulls.

In a lake of lapping black water, about five hundred feet from the open
sea, a small herd rose to the surface intermittently for breath.  In
the deep gloom the hunters saw fountains of spray ascending as they
breathed.  Hitching their dogs to harpoon stakes driven in the ice,
they separated and quietly took positions about the open water.

"Wu-r-r!"  The low walrus call rose over the ice.  Ootah leaned over
the edge of the ice and imitated the animal cry.  "Woor-r," Maisanguaq,
near him, replied.  The water seethed, and two glistening white tusks
appeared.  Ootah raised his harpoon--it hissingly cut the air.  A
terrific bellow followed.  The little lake seethed.  A dozen fiery
eyes, of a phosphorescent green, appeared above the water.  Maisanguaq
struck, so did Arnaluk.  They let out their harpoon lines--the savage
beasts dove downward, then rose for breath.  In their frantic struggle
their heads beat against the ice about the edge of the space of open
water.  The natives fled backward--the ice broke into thousands of
fragments.  Each time the animals came up the hunters delivered more
harpoons so as to pinion securely and at the same time despatch the
prey.  In the gathering gloom they had to aim by instinct.  For an hour
the struggle between the alert men and the enraged beasts continued.
Several times Ootah and Arnaluk fired their guns as the green eyes
appeared so as to finish the task of killing.

Meanwhile the grey reflection of the descending sun entirely faded
along the horizon; a bluish gloom blotted out the landscape.  The wind
swept over the ice with fiendish hisses.  With a quick change the air
became colder and snow flakes fell.  The natives became alarmed.  As
they were drawing the first walrus to the ice a sound, like the
discharge of a gun beneath the sea, startled them.  Seizing their
knives they dexterously fell upon the animal and lifted the meat and
blubber in long slices from the bones.  A great quantity was cast to
the ravenous dogs.  Two more walrus were lumberingly drawn to the ice;
the first sledge load and two hunters started shoreward; soon the
second sledge was loaded.  Ootah and Maisanguaq remained to dress the
third beast.

Like scorpions in the hands of the mighty _tornarssuit_ the wind now
steadily beat upon the ice.  The two men were almost lifted from their
feet.  Not far away they heard the tumultuous crash of the rising
waves.  As they were lashing the blubber to Ootah's sledge, a
resounding detonation vibrated through the ice under him--the field on
which they stood slowly but unmistakably began to move!

Maisanguaq spoke.  The wind drowned his voice.  Above its clamor they
heard the ice separating with the splitting sound of artillery.
Whipped by the terrific gale the snow cut their faces like bits of
steel.  In the darkness, which steadily thickened, they heard the
appalling boom of bergs and the grind of floes colliding on the sea.

Ootah leaped to the team of dogs and interrupted their feast.  He knew
they had not a single moment to lose--the field had surely parted from
the land ice and it was now a dreadful question as to whether a return
was possible.  As he was hitching the dogs to the loaded sledge he
suddenly gave a start.  Was he dreaming?  Was he hearing the
disembodied speak, as men did in dreams?  He listened intently--surely
he heard a soft sweet voice calling piteously through the wind.  His
heart gave a great thud.

Through the gathering gloom he saw something . . . a blur of
blackness . . . gathering substance as it approached over the ice.  It
moved uncertainly . . . and seemed to be driven toward him by the
furious wind.

"Look--who is it?" he called to Maisanguaq.

For answer, through the din of the elements, a voice called brokenly,
sobbingly:

"Ootah! . . .  Ootah!"

Ootah leaped to his feet.  Out of the snow-driven blackness a frail
figure staggered toward him.

"Annadoah," Ootah murmured, seizing the trembling woman in his arms.
She seemed about to faint.

"Why hast thou come hither?"  He hugged her fiercely to his bosom.  He
felt a throb of ecstatic delight; for the first time she had
surrendered to his arms; for the first time he held her close to him;
death--for the moment--lost its terrors--he felt that he would be
willing to die, in that storming darkness, with her heart beating, so
that he felt its every pulse, close, close to his.

The wild winds almost drowned Annadoah's words.

"The women came to me," she panted with difficulty, and Ootah had to
bend his ear to her mouth so as to hear.  "They were angry.  They said
'She stealeth souls!  Annadoah stealeth souls!'  They said, 'Annadoah
hath caused the death of many children!'  Ootah!  Ootah!  They came, as
they do when thou art absent.  They threatened me--they called upon the
spirits, as they once called to them beneath the sea.  And the curse of
the long night--of darkness--hunger--death . . . they invoked . . . of
the dead . . . upon me . . .  I was afraid."  Ootah felt her shuddering
in his arms.  "The women came unto my igloo," she repeated
wildly--"they desired that ravens peck my eyes--that I rest without a
grave--that my body lie unburied and that my spirit never rest.  And
the curse of darkness--_io-o-h-h_!--they called the curse of darkness
upon me.  They trampled upon me with their feet, and they tore at my
hair . . .  They came unto my igloo as the storm came and called upon
the spirits of the skins to strike me; for they said I had again driven
thee to thy death, that I had sent the others to their death.  Thou
knowest I lay ill when thou didst depart.  But they fell on me one by
one and hurt me--I feared they would kill me.  They were angry and they
called upon the dead.  The storm strikes; the spirits of the winds are
angry; the ice breaks, and it is the fault of Annadoah.  So they said."

Her eyes were wild, her hair dishevelled.  Ootah felt her forehead--it
burned with fever.

"How didst thou come hither--and why?" he asked, his heart bounding in
the thought that she had followed him, that of him she sought
protection.

"I know not--methinks I called upon the spirits.  I knew thou didst
come this way--I knew thou wouldst save me from the women.  And I
followed.  The way was dark.  The wind held me back.  But I knew thou
wert here--my heart led me; my heart found thee as birds find grass in
the mountains.  Ootah!  Ootah!  I fear I shall die!"  She collapsed in
his arms.  The wind shrieked!  In the distance two icebergs
exploded--there was a flash of phosphorus on the sea as the arctic
dinosaurs collided.

"Come!  Or we perish in the sea!" Maisanguaq, his head bent near so as
to hear, now yelled into Ootah's ear.

Annadoah cowered at the sound of his voice.  Ootah felt her trembling,
in his arms.

"And he . . . is here?" she whispered.  "I am afraid."

They felt the great ice field rocking on the waves imprisoned beneath
them.  It trembled whenever it touched a passing berg.

Maisanguaq prodded the terror-stricken dogs.  Their howls shrilled
through the storm,

"_Huk_!  _Huk_!  _Huk_!" he urged.

Supporting Annadoah with one arm Ootah pushed forward after the moving
team.  He knew they were being carried steadily and slowly seaward, but
he had hopes that the ice field would swerve landward toward the south
where an armlike glacier jutted, elbow-fashion, into the sea and caught
the current.

Snapping their whips and frantically urging the dogs, they fought
through the snow-driven darkness and over the moving field of ice.
Annadoah murmured wild and incoherent things in her delirium.  They
paced off half a mile.

"_Aulate_!" Ootah suddenly called, panic-stricken.  "Halt! halt!"
Maisanguaq stopped the dogs.  Before them a snaky space of water,
blacker than the darkness about them, and capped with faintly
phosphorescent crests of tossing waves, separated them--Ootah knew not
how far--from the land.

"To the right!" Ootah called.  "Let us go onward!"

"_Huk_!  _Huk_!" Maisanguaq encouraged the dogs.

"The floe may land near the glacier," Ootah cried.

He spoke to Annadoah.  She made an irrelevant reply about the women who
called upon the spirits--and their terrible maledictions.

With Maisanguaq ahead driving the dogs, they turned to the south.
Annadoah sank helpless in Ootah's arms--she could no longer walk.
Ootah supported her.  At times his feet slipped.  He felt himself
becoming dizzy.  The beloved burden in his arms became unsupportably
heavy.  They travelled in utter darkness, near them the desirous clamor
of the waves.  Seaward, at times, where the splitting floes crashed
against one another, there ran zigzag lines of phosphorescence.  The
winds howled in the ears of Ootah like the voices of the unhappy dead.
Occasionally he heard the voice of Maisanguaq ahead urging the team.

Ice froze on their faces, frigid water swept the floe.  Their garments
became saturated and froze to the skin.  Finally the dogs refused to
move.  "We can go no further," said Maisanguaq, in terror.  "I am
resigned to die."  Ootah stubbornly invoked the spirits of his
ancestors for succor.  He called to the dogs.

Thereupon a terrific shock caused both men to reel.  The ice field
trembled under them--then stopped.

Ootah realized that a section of it had swept against one of the many
land-adhering glaciers.  There was hope--and greater danger.

With a rumbling crash that reverberated above the storm the field
separated into countless tossing fragments.  The cake on which the
terror-stricken party cowered swirled dizzily in an eddy of the
released foaming waters.  On all sides the inky waves seethed up among
the crevices of the sundering floes.  To the south Ootah heard the
breakers booming against the ice cliffs, which perilously barred the
currents of the angry sea.  The caps of the curling waves took on a
pale white and appalling luminesence.

"The faces of the dead!" cried Maisanguaq in superstitious terror.
"From the bosom of _Nerrvik_ they come to greet us."

Ootah, however, felt no fear.  For once he felt unheedful of those in
the other world.  His mind was occupied with a more immediate
interest--that of saving the life of the woman he loved.

With quick presence of mind, Ootah grasped the rear upstander of the
sled, which had begun to slide to and fro, and planted his harpoon in
the ice.

"Thy axe!" he shouted.  Maisanguaq passed the axe.  Ootah grappled for
it in the darkness.  "Hold the harpoon," he directed.  Mechanically
Maisanguaq groped for the harpoon and held it while Ootah, with his one
free hand, lifted the axe and drove it into the ice.  With the other
hand he still gripped the unconscious woman.  Her hair swished about
his legs in the howling wind.  Maisanguaq planted his own weapon in the
ice on the opposite side of the sledge, and Ootah, with unerring
strokes, hardly able to see it in the darkness, pounded it firmly into
the ice.

"Thy lashings," he called.  Maisanguaq passed a coil of skin rope.

About the improvised stakes which secured the sled Ootah whipped the
lashings, then he passed them under and over the sled until it was
securely pinioned.  Very gently he placed Annadoah upon the mass of
walrus meat and lashed her body in turn to the sled and about the
stakes.  With Maisanguaq's assistance he tied the cowering dogs to the
harpoons.  This done, the two men, benumbed and dazed, clung to the
anchor for support.

As the severed ice cakes dispersed, a curling wave lifted the floe on
which they clung high on its crest and tossed it southward.  As it rose
on the surging breakers Ootah felt the dread presence of _Perdlugssuaq_
ready to strike.  Each time they made swift, sickening descents in the
seething troughs he felt all consciousness pass away.  On all sides the
waves hissed.  Torrents of water swept over the floe.  Ootah felt his
limbs freezing; he felt his arms becoming numb.  He feared that at any
moment he should lose his grip and be swept into the raging sea.  Then
he thought of Annadoah and conjured new courage.  For a while the dogs
whined--then they became silent.  One already was drowned.  Ootah bent
over Annadoah to protect her from the mountainous onslaughts of icy
water.  His teeth chattered--he suffered agonies.  For a long black
hour of horror they were driven over the thundering seas and through a
frigid whirlwind of snow, sharp as flakes of steel.


The recoiling impetus of the waters gradually increased under them.
Ootah knew this indicated an approach to land.  The waves came in
shorter, but quicker swells.  The floe bumped into others.  Ootah
roused himself and hopefully turned toward Maisanguaq.

"We approach the land," he called.  "We must bide our time--then jump."

The waves washed the floe toward the distant shore.  Land ice steadily
thickened about them.  Maisanguaq realized that they were actually
being carried to the sheltering harbor of the arm-like glacier south of
the village.  Ootah quickly began unlashing Annadoah so as to be
prepared to seize her and spring, when the opportunity came, from cake
to cake, to safety.

Impelled by a warning instinct, Ootah suddenly looked up from his task,
and felt rather than saw Maisanguaq near and about to leap upon him.
Maisanguaq's eyes dimly glowered in the dark.  Ootah rose quickly.
Maisanguaq drew back and uttered an exclamation of chagrin.  Ootah
understood.  With rescue possible, Maisanguaq had quickly come to a
desperate resolution.

The girl lay between them.

Ootah braced himself.

"I hate thee, Ootah," Maisanguaq shouted, no longer able to suppress
the baffled jealousy and seething envy endured quietly for many
seasons.  He moved about, parleying for time and a chance to spring
upon Ootah when he was unguarded.

"I hate thee not, Maisanguaq," Ootah replied.

He steeled himself, for he knew Maisanguaq was strong, he knew the ice
was treacherous; he waited for the man to strike.

"My heart warms for Annadoah; so doth thine: therefore, thou or I must
die."  Maisanguaq's deep voice sounded hoarse through the storm.

"As thou sayest," Ootah replied, "but why?"

"Annadoah must be thine or mine; dead, she cannot choose thee, and with
thee dead, my strength shall cow her.  As men did of old I shall carry
her away by force.  She shall be mine."

"Annadoah hath already chosen--her heart is in the south," Ootah
replied, sadly.

"Fool!" the other man shrieked.  "Didst thou not go to the mountains to
get her food; didst thou not thieve from thine own self to give oil to
her; didst thou not fawn upon her and perform the services of a woman?
Thou liest if thou sayest thou wilt not have her for thy wife.  No man
doeth this unseeking of reward."

"I love Annadoah," Ootah said, bitterly.

"Yea, and thou hast hope."

"Perchance--perchance I have hope."

"And Annadoah looks with favor upon thee--I have seen it in her eyes.
Did she not greet thee as women greet their lovers when thou camest
from the mountains, and did she not bind thy wounds with strange
ointment?"

"She thought of another--her heart was in the south."

"Hath she not sought thee hither--upon the ice--when the women fell
upon her with their curses?  Her heart wings to thee, did she not say,
as birds to green grasses in the mountains?"

"Her heart is in the south," Ootah sadly moaned.

"The heart of woman changes always," cried Maisanguaq.  "The heart of
woman always yields to force.  _Pst_?"

Seeing Ootah turn slightly toward Annadoah, Maisanguaq sprang at his
throat.  Their arms closed about one another.  Maisanguaq breathed the
wrath of the spirits upon Ootah.  He fought with the fierce strength of
one insane with jealous, murderous rage.  The icy floe rocked beneath
them.  They slipped to and fro on the treacherous ice.  The sharp snow
beat their faces.  Water washed under their feet.  At times they
reached, in their frightful struggle, the very edge of the floe, and
seemed about to tumble into the seething sea.  Ootah felt Maisanguaq
trying to force him into the watery abyss--but he fought backward . . .
time and time again . . .  They constantly fell over the unconscious
woman on the sledge.  About them the darkness roared; they felt the
heaving sea beneath them.  And while they struggled, in their brief
terrible death-to-the-death fight, the floe was tossed steadily onward.
Ootah felt his breath giving out.  Maisanguaq felt Ootah's hands
closing about his throat.  He felt the blood pound in his temples.
Desperation filled him--he determined to kill Ootah by any means.  A
grim suggestion came to him.  He endeavored to release himself.

In a lull of the wind both heard something that made them start.
Aroused from her feverish coma by the two men falling against her,
Annadoah suddenly cried aloud.  The two men stood stone-still, locked
in a deadly grip.  At that moment Annadoah felt the warmth of their
panting breath as they paused near her.  Where she was at first she did
not realize.  She heard a clamor of wind and breaking waters.  She
imagined herself being tossed through the air in the arms of the
_tornarssuit_.  At the same time she became vividly aware of the
desperate struggle nearby.  Subconsciously she realized Maisanguaq and
Ootah were engaged in a fight to the death.  In the darkness she sensed
them moving away from her.  Straining her eyes she began, very
dimly--as Eskimos can even in pitch darkness--to descry the black
outlines of the two men wrestling as they shifted nearer and nearer the
edge of the ice.  Then it dawned upon Annadoah's mind that they were
being carried, in the jeopardy of an awful storm, on a floe that was
tossed hither and thither in a maelstrom of angry waters.  A frantic
desire to save Ootah surged up within her.  Behind him she saw the
swimming blackness of the heaving waves.  She attempted to rise.  Her
head swam; there was loud ringing in her ears.  Her hands were not
free, her ankles were bound--she struggled to release herself.
Twisting her wrists and ankles in the tight lashings until they bled,
it suddenly flashed upon her that she was lashed to the sled.  She knew
that at any moment the floe might crash into a glacier and be crushed
to atoms.  She knew that Maisanguaq and Ootah were fighting for the
possession of her--that both might perish, or, what was worse, that
Maisanguaq might win.  Chaotic terror filled her.  Struggling
frantically but ineffectually, she uttered a maniacal scream.

"Ootah!  Ootah!"

Ootah did not reply.

The storm howled.  The wind lashed the floe--it fell like a whip on her
face.  Annadoah felt the surging impetus of the angry sea under them.
She felt herself rising on the crests of mighty waves and being swiftly
hurled into foaming troughs of water.  Frigid spray bathed her face.
Still the two vague shadows, darker than the night, slowly and
laboriously moved about her.  At times they brushed her lashed
body--then she felt the quick gasps of their breath; she sensed the
strain of Ootah's limbs twisting in the struggle.

Again she perceived the two shifting away and being merged into the
swimming blackness.  Presently she saw only the phosphorescent crest of
a mountainous wave . . . rising in the distance . . .  She became cold
with white fear--she felt her blood turn to ice . . .  She screamed and
struggled vainly with the lashings . . .  She felt the floe rise, felt
herself being steadily lifted into the sheer air, and of paralyzed
fright again swooned.

Maisanguaq, by a fierce wrench, managed to release one hand, struck
Ootah a heavy blow and broke away.  Leaping to the opposite side of the
sledge, with a terrific pull, he drew one of the harpoons out of the
ice and with his knife speedily cut it loose from the lashings.  Ootah,
stunned for a moment, turned upon him.  Maisanguaq desperately raised
the weapon.  Ootah heard it hiss through the air.  He reeled
backward--the harpoon grazed his arm and struck the ice.

At that very instant the oncoming breaker descended with a rush from
behind--a torrent of water washed the floe.  Ootah was lifted from his
feet and dashed against the sled.  When he rose he waited in silence
for an attack.  There was none.  He moved over the floe cautiously,
feeling the darkness.  Creeping to the edge he saw something dimly
white and blurred on the receding wave.  "Maisanguaq," he called,
softly.  There was a pang at his heart, for he was truly gentle.  He
strained his ears to hear through the din of the elements.  The floe
suddenly jolted him as it was carried, with a thud, against
shore-clinging ice.  Ootah peered seaward, and called again, loudly--

"Maisanguaq!"

Only the waves replied.

Hurriedly he cut the leather lashings and, leaping from floe to floe,
carried Annadoah to the shelter of the shore.  Returning he loosened
the dogs.  Only three lived.  Biding his time until the floe was ground
securely among others, he then dragged his load of meat ashore.
Sinking to the earth he rubbed Annadoah's hands and breathed with eager
and enraptured transport into her face.

He called her name.  Presently she stirred.

"Ootah," she murmured.  "It is very dark--very dark--I wonder . . .
whether . . . it will soon . . . be spring."

He chafed her hands.  For a lucid moment she nestled to him and in a
terrified voice whispered----

"Maisanguaq--where is he?"  She heard Ootah's reply.

"He hath gone the long journey of the dead."

Annadoah breathed a sigh of relief and again floated into the coma of
fever and exhaustion.

The journey before Ootah was desperately difficult in the storm and
darkness.  In his way of reckoning he knew they had floated about two
miles south of the village.  The return lay along the sea and over
crushed, blocked ice.  Much as he regretted it, he was compelled to
leave the precious load of walrus blubber behind, so as to carry
Annadoah, who was unable to walk, on the sledge.  He covered the
blubber with cakes of ice, hopeful that it might by chance escape the
ravaging bears.  His companions might come for it after his return.  He
knew the probabilities were, however, that the keen noses of bears or
wolves would detect it.

After lashing Annadoah to the sledge, so she might not be jolted from
it, Ootah, with a brave heart, started in the teeth of the biting wind.
The half-frozen dogs rose to their task nobly and pulled at the traces.
Ootah pushed the sledge from behind.  He trusted to the sure instinct
of the animals to find a safe way.  Progress was necessarily slow.
Fortunately the snow stopped falling and one agony was removed.

In lulls of the storm Ootah heard Annadoah moaning in her delirium.

When they reached the village, a half dozen men were assembled outside
their houses.  They rejoicingly hailed Ootah, whom they had counted
among the dead.  He learned that two of his companions had gone to join
Maisanguaq.  The first party had safely reached the shore before the
breaking away of the ice.  The news of Ootah's arrival brought out the
women.  When they saw Annadoah they crowded about her, scolding.  Ootah
silenced the garrulous throng with a fierce command.  They shrank away.

"She came to me on the ice," he said.  "Knew ye not that the spirits
fared not well within her, that she was ill, ye she-wolves?  She sees
things that are not so and raves of the curses ye invoked, barking
she-dogs!  _Aga_!  _Aga_!  Go--go!"

Assisted by several of the men, Ootah conveyed Annadoah into her igloo
and laid her upon her couch.  Her face was flushed, and as she lay
there Ootah thought she was very beautiful.  She had become much
emaciated--Ootah did not like that.  But when she opened her eyes Ootah
saw in them a soft, new light.

"Thou art brave, Ootah," she said, essaying a smile of gratitude.
"Thou art brave of heart . . . and kind."

Ootah's heart stirred.  Once she had said that his heart was as soft as
that of a woman; this was, indeed, to him reward for all the frightful
terrors he had endured on the storming sea.

"And do the wings of thy heart not stir, Annadoah?" he asked softly, a
world of pleading in his voice.  "Wilt thou not be mine in the spring?"

"In the spring," she said, dreamily, and her voice quavered . . . "in
the spring . . ."

A far-away look came into her eyes, and Ootah felt an infinite ache at
his heart.

"I am afraid, Ootah," she said presently, in a trembling voice . . .
"Afraid . . . my head burns--the igloo is black . . .  Dost thou
remember what the women told their dead? . . .  They invoked the dead
to curse me . . . as I stood by the open sea . . . when the moon
rose . . .  Ootah!  Ootah!  I cannot see thee . . .  It is very . . .
dark."  Ootah laid his hand upon Annadoah's head.

"The spirits do not fare well within thee," he said.  "But I will care
for thee."


For nearly a moon Annadoah lay ill with a strange fever.  And in her
disturbed dreams, as Ootah watched through the long hours, she murmured
vaguely, but longingly, for the spring.




IX

"_Turning softly, she found a tiny naked baby . . .  Annadoah leaned
forward, gazing at it intently, wildly--then uttered a scream as though
she had been stabbed to the heart . . ._"


The sun rose above the horizon and flooded the earth with liquid gold;
again the sea ran with running light; the melting glaciers shimmered
with burning amethystine hues; the snow-covered mountains took fire and
glowed with burning bars of chrysoberyl and sapphire, while on the
limpid sea the moving bergs glittered like monstrous diamonds
electrically white.  On the sequestered slopes of the low mountain
valleys green mosses once more carpeted the earth, buttercups and
dandelions peeped pale golden eyes from the ground, in the teeming
crevices of the high promontories delicate green and crimson lichens
wove a marvellous lacery, and wherever the sun poured its encouraging
springtime light beauteous small star- and bell-shaped flowers burst
into an effulgence of pale rose and glistening white bloom.  The
suggestion of a very faint, sweet aroma pervaded the air.

Above the promontories millions of auks again made black clouds against
the sky,--eider ducks floated on the molten waters of sheltering
fjords,--along the icy shores puffins, with white swelling breasts, sat
in military line,--guillemots cooed their spring love songs and fulmar
gulls uttered amorous calls,--on the green slopes the white hare of the
arctic gambolled, and tiny bears, soft and silken flossed, played at
the entrances of moss-ensconced caves.  Out on the sea unexpected herds
of walrus lay sleeping on floating ice; harp seals sported joyously in
the waves; a white whale spouted shafts of blue water high into the
air.  From the interior mountains came the howl of wolves and foxes,
the sound of rushing waters and the roar of released glaciers.  Nature
was vocal with awakening life.

In her igloo Annadoah lay alone--for with spring the time of her trial
had come.


In the customary preparations for the coming of Annadoah's unborn child
Ootah had entered with rare tenderness and solicitude.  When a little
one is expected among these northern people, new clothing, of the
rarest skins of animals and the feathers of birds, must be made for
both mother and child; a new igloo is built for the event by the happy
father, for the little one they believe should come in a house
unspotted and white as the driven snow.  Annadoah was deserted,
husbandless; the women of the tribe remained aloof from her; Ootah
alone stood by her.  And Ootah helped her with unselfish, eager
gladness.

For several summers, in anticipation of the day when he might be a
father, Ootah had gathered exquisite and delicate skins.  These he now
brought to Annadoah.  There were silken young caribou hides, soft,
fluffy white and blue fox pelts, as well as the skins of hares and the
young of bears.  Of these, Annadoah, in the last week of fading winter,
made, according to custom, new garments for herself.  Then, as the sun
rose in early spring and the birds mated, Ootah went away to the high
cliffs, where the auks nested, and jumping from crag to crag, hundreds
of feet above the sea, gathered a thousand tiny baby auks, with crests
of wondrous down, of which the hood for the unborn child was made.  In
these high crevices, from which at any moment he might be plunged to
death, Ootah gathered mosses of ineffable softness, which were placed
in the hood as a cushion for the little one.

Near her winter home, Ootah built a new igloo for Annadoah, and never
was one made with more infinite patience and greater care.  Inside it
was immaculately white, and when he lighted the new lamp the walls
glistened like silver; over the light he placed a new pot of soap
stone, for everything in that place in which a new life was to come
into being must by an unwritten law be freshly made and never used
before.  He built a bed of ice, laid it thick with moss, and over this
tenderly placed, in turn, first walrus hides, then thick reindeer and
warm fox skins.  He brought to the igloo a supply of walrus meat, and
then, fearful to be present at an event in which he had no right of
participation, prepared to depart to the mountains to hunt game.

Before leaving he crept half fearfully into Annadoah's old igloo and
told her all was ready.  She smiled fondly and reached forth her little
hands.  "Thou art very kind, Ootah," she said, "thou art brave and
kind."  Ootah was at a loss for words, but his heart beat high, and he
was very glad.

The natives watched Annadoah, as, arrayed in her immaculate garments,
she made her way, with bowed head, to her new home; they whispered
among themselves as they saw the _ilisitok_ (wise woman) follow later.

When she sank on the new and wonderful couch, gratitude filled
Annadoah's heart, and she murmured over and over again: "Thou art very
kind, Ootah: thou art brave and kind."  Somehow the bright igloo became
black and she seemed to be floating on clouds.  She remembered the
Eskimo women wailing in the moonlight . . . by the open sea . . .  and
the curse they invoked upon her through the dead.  She trembled and
felt inordinately cold.  But she knew it was spring, for outside the
igloo, with blithesome and silvery sweetness, a bunting was singing.


When Annadoah awoke from her delirium of agony she saw that the wise
woman had left her.  The walls of the igloo sparkled as the flames of
the lamp flickered.  Over it a pot sizzled with walrus meat frying in
fat.  In her half-waking condition Annadoah realized that something lay
by her, and turning, softly, she found a tiny, naked baby.  Its skin
was pale golden, its hair, unlike that of other babies, was of the
color of the rays of the sun.  With half-fearful gentleness she turned
it over and over.  Speechless with wonder, an inexplicable stirring in
her bosom, she regarded its face--she observed its nose, the contour of
its cheeks, the arrogance of its little chin; she noted in her child
that curious and often brief resemblance of the new-born to the
father--and this immediately recalled vividly and achingly the face of
Olafaksoah.  This was her child, and his.  Surely, surely, with great
joy she understood!  With this thought, an impetuous longing for the
father filled her.  Passionately pressing the little creature to her
breast she gave vent to the homesickness and ache of her heart in wild,
convulsed sobs.  The touch of the little one, the resemblance of its
tiny face to that of the blond man--these brought back the old passion
and longing in all their bitterness.  Yet at the same time the child
brought a new satisfying solace to her; it filled an immeasurable void
in her heart.  Now and again she held it from her, and suppressing her
violent sobs, solemnly regarded its face.  She could not get over the
wonder and half-surprise that possessed her.  With utter abandon she
finally fiercely clutched it to her.  The infant began to cry.
Annadoah, with slow, cautious gentleness laid it down by her side,
scared, amazed.  Thereupon the baby for the first time opened its eyes.
Annadoah leaned forward, gazing at it intently, wildly--then uttered a
scream as though she had been stabbed to the heart.


When the wise woman--who had left Annadoah alone for a long
sleep--returned to prepare food and to seek of the spirits the destined
name of the child, she saw Annadoah lying still, her face upturned,
tear drops glistening beneath her eyes.  The wise woman placed some of
the fried walrus meat, or _seralatoq_--the prescribed food for a mother
the day her child is born--into a stone plate and put it on the floor
within reach of Annadoah.  Then she melted some snow and placed it by
the couch.  Slowly approaching the bed she lifted the naked infant.

"When thy mother wakes," she muttered, "I shall call upon the spirits.
I shall give thee the name they gave thee in the great dark ere thou
earnest hither--the name which was born with thee and which shall be as
thy shadow."

As she laid the little creature by the unconscious mother she saw a
strange and frightful thing.  The curse!  And thereupon she knew she
would not be called upon to learn of the spirits any name for this
unhappy child.  It had, indeed, been named by the dead and with it the
unuttered name must soon return to the great dark.  With set lips, and
the grim determination of duty on her face, she crept softly from the
igloo.

Annadoah awoke.  At first she gazed about dazedly.  Then she realized
that the _ilisitok_ had been with her--she observed the meat and warm
water by her couch.  She realized also that the wise woman must have
seen the horror which had gripped her heart like the teeth of wolves.
Beneath lids scarred as by the claws of a hawk, the baby's eyes had
been blasted by some unknown prenatal disease--the terrible dead, with
their talon-hands, had smitten!  The child was organically blind, and,
being defective and fatherless, Annadoah knew that, by the law of her
people, it was doomed to immediate death.  While she shook with terror,
withal a grim determination rose within her.  All the tremendous urge
of that mighty mother-love which has beautified and ennobled the world
clamored in the heart of this simple woman that her child _must not_
die.

As she touched the infant with a sacred tenderness, her very hands
warmed with the impassioned affection that throbbed through her with
every heart-beat.  As she gazed upon the features, faintly suggestive
of its father's, she felt that she could never part from this familiar
and intimate link with the spontaneous and powerful passion of her
girlhood.  When she peered into those piteous, blighted eyes, mighty
sobs of pity shook her, but she felt that she must be silent, and she
forced back the tears.  Outside, a spring bunting was still singing,
sweetly, ineffably.

As she caressed it, the child's face twisted as if in pain.

"Well do I know, little one, thou dost desire thy
name--_ategarumadlune_," she said.  "Thou dost desire it as that which
is as precious as thy shadow.  But the _ilisitok_ has gone and never
will she breathe o'er thee the name I know . . . the name I felt
stirring within me since the night . . . when the women addressed the
dead . . .  Sweetly didst thou sing within my heart--but thy song came
from the darkness.  Yea . . . from the darkness.  _Ioh-iooh_!"

Very gently, very softly, she pressed her fingers upon the baby's
sightless eyes.

"I shall call thee little Blind Spring Bunting," she softly murmured,
lifting the baby and pressing its tender face to her own.  "Poor Little
Blind Spring Bunting."  She soothed its face, infinite pity in her
eyes.  "Thou wilt never see _Sukh-eh-nukh_, nor the _ahmingmah_, nor
the birds that fly in the air, Spring Bunting.  All thy days shall be
as the long night, and thy whole life shall be without any light of
moon.  But thy heart is warm and bright as the sun in the south, whence
Olafaksoah came, and it makes the heart of Annadoah very warm.
Poor . . . Little . . . Blind Spring Bunting!"

Murmuring softly she rocked the little baby gently in her arms.  Then
she heard the ominous sound of a native rushing by the igloo and voices
upraised.  What were they saying?  That Annadoah's child was blind?

A frantic determination to escape filled her.  The danger was
immediate--she must act at once.  But what should she do?  Where should
she go?

She rose and moved bewilderedly about the igloo.  She felt weak and
dazed.  At any moment they might break into her immaculate new home and
seize the child from her arms.  At any instant they might come with
wicked ropes to wrap about the baby's tender neck.  That she must flee
she knew--but where?  Where?  She thought of Ootah.  But Ootah was in
the mountains.  And not a moment could be lost.  In these matters the
natives lose little time.  Moreover, she knew the women hated her; and
that they had succeeded in making the men gradually bitter.

"Olafaksoah!  Olafaksoah!" she called tragically.  Then she recalled
with a start that Olafaksoah had summer headquarters some twenty miles
to the south.  It was a boxhouse, built on a promontory of the
Greenland coast.  She remembered it, as she had seen it on a journey
south some summers before; the way thither, dangerous at this season of
the year when the ice was breaking, she well knew.  Yes, she would seek
refuge there.

"Perchance Olafaksoah hath returned--did he not say he would return in
the spring?  When the buntings sing?"  She laughed spontaneously.
"Yea, yea!  We will go there, Little Blind Spring Bunting."

Quickly she adjusted her own new garments, and then she took the little
golden baby and over its head and shoulders laced a tight-fitting hood
of soft young fox skin.  This done she gently placed the child into the
hood on her back.  Inside this was lined with the breasts of baby auks
and made downy with fibrous moss.  She hurriedly secured the child to
herself by means of a sinew thread which passed about its body as it
reposed in the hood, and which in turn, passing under her arms, she
tied about the upper portion of her waist.  The voices outside had
ceased.

Suppressing her very breath, she crept through the long tunnel leading
from the igloo and peeped cautiously from the entrance.  She could hear
her heart throb.  She feared the natives might detect it.

Five hundred feet to the north a group were engaged in excited
conversation.  Annadoah's brain whirled with the fragments of what they
said.  She knew the moment had come to depart.  She emerged and on all
fours crept to the protecting lee of her igloo where she was hidden
from their view.

An open space of six hundred feet lay between her and the cliff around
which the trail to the southern shelter lay.  Annadoah summoned all her
strength of will, and then proceeded to walk slowly, with her head bent
and her face concealed, so as to avoid arousing suspicion, over the
dangerous area.  Her heart trembled within her--at any moment she
expected to hear the savage cries.  When she reached the cliff she felt
as if she were about to faint.

Looking fearfully backward, with a sigh of immeasurable relief, she saw
that she was unobserved.  Raising her head heavenward she breathed her
thanks to the dead father and mother who were undoubtedly watching.
She turned about the cliff, her heart bounding tumultuously, and,
panting the words of the magic spell, asked that her legs be given the
swiftness of the wind spirits.  She was very faint, she had scarcely
any feeling whatever in her limbs; but summoning all her courage,
bringing to bear all the love of this child she sought to save, she
turned and ran.

It was not long before she heard--or imagined--the angry cries of
pursuing natives behind her.




X

"_A frail, pitiful figure Annadoah stood on the cliff, wringing her
hands toward the declining sun . . . 'I-o-h-h-h,' she moaned, and her
voice sobbed its pathos over the seas.  'I-o-h-h-h!  I-o-h-h-h,
Sukh-eh-nukh!  Unhappy sun--unhappy sun!  I-o-h-h-h, Annadoah--unhappy,
unhappy Annadoah!'_"


Twenty miles to the south, on a great cliff which stepped stridently
into the polar sea, stood a house built of stray timber and boxes
which, for a half decade, had been the summer headquarters of parties
of Danish and Newfoundland traders who came north annually and scoured
Greenland for ivories and furs.  The hulk of a house was
weather-beaten, dilapidated, and scarred black by the burning cold.  A
more desolate habitation could not be imagined in all the world, a more
devastated land could nowhere else on all the globe be found.  For
leagues and leagues to the north and south, the scrofulous promontories
lay barren under the blight of the merciless northern blasts.  Over the
corroded iron rocks strata of red earth and deeper crimson ore ran like
the streaky stains of monstrous and unhuman murders committed in aeons
past.  Not a particle of vegetation was visible; there were no lichens
nor starry flowers.  There was no life save that of the black birds
which winged restlessly about the sky and squawked in grotesque mockery
at the region and its doom.  In strange contrast, the sky was as blue
as the limpid skies of Umbria,--and nearly two hundred feet below the
gnarled gashed cliff the ocean broke in terrific cascades of diamonded
foam.

The top of the cliff on which the house stood overleaped the sea, so
that, looking below, one saw only the recoiling waters of a rich, deep
gold, capped with silver crescents of broken spray.  From the sheer
precipitous receding face of the cliff, knife-like granite spars
projected, and in the crevices and nooks of these countless birds
nested.  Hungry, desirous, insatiate--the voice of that fearful and
balefully luring world--there sounded eternally the roar and crash of
the breaking golden waves.


Over the uneven scraggy promontory, blinded by the fierce sunlight,
Annadoah staggered.  The world reeled about her; the sky above her had
become black.  Before her--a small speck in the distance--she saw the
black wooden house silhouetted against the molten sea.  She could
scarcely move her legs; she ached in every limb; every moment she felt
as if she would swoon, but the frenzied fear in her heart urged her on.
She suffered intolerably.


Of that long, tortuous journey Annadoah had no clear remembrance--with
each step her one urging, predominant thought had been to forge ahead,
to keep from swooning,--to escape those who were angrily calling far
behind.

Leaving her village, along the difficult broken coast her trail lay; it
crept painfully up over the slippery sides of melting glaciers, some of
them a thousand feet high, and made sheer descents over places where
the ice was splitting; it writhed about hundreds of irregular sounds
and twisted fjords.

In her desperation to escape, Annadoah, without a thought of the
danger, essayed to cross fjords where the ice was breaking.  As she
sped over deceptive unbroken areas the ice often split under her feet.
In one of the sounds jammed ice was moving.  To go around it she knew
would mean a loss of three miles.  She leaped upon the heaving ice.  It
rocked dangerously beneath her feet.  As she left the shore the current
increased, the ice moved more swiftly.  From cake to cake she leaped
with the agility of an arctic deer.  The ice floes swirled under her
and tilted as her feet alighted.  Half way across, her foot
slipped--the ice fragment eluded her wild grasp and she sank into the
frigid water.  She felt herself sinking; for a moment she seemed unable
to continue the struggle--then she recalled the dear burden upon her
back.  She fought the swift current and grappled madly with the jamming
ice.  It gathered about her--she feared she would be buried by the
force of the impact.  But with a mighty struggle she finally grasped
hold of a fortunate ridge on a cake and clambered to its surface.  The
baby was unscathed.  It was crying loudly in its hood.  Although her
hands were almost frozen, the cold water had not entered her garments.
She leaped into the air and fled.  She next scaled the rocky face of a
precipice to gain time--the rocks cut her face and hands.  Swarms of
birds, frightened from their nests, surrounded her.  Their cries filled
her with terror.  Reaching, on the farther side, shallow streams over
which thin ice lay, she bravely forged ahead--the ice broke--her feet
sank into the mud.  Her breath gave out--she felt paralyzing pangs in
her lungs.  Yet the cries behind--which had become somewhat more
distant--urged her on.  Again and again, in crossing water moving with
broken ice her feet slipped into black, treacherous streams, and,
swimming with native skill, she saved the child from the least harm.
By degrees its cries ceased and it fell into slumber.  Occasionally
Annadoah was compelled to rest, to regain her breath.  Her reserve
strength--as is that of her people--was tremendous.  Staggering slowly
ahead, she often sank into engulfing morasses where the earth had
melted and willows were sprouting.  Panting, trembling in every limb,
she fought her way out.  For the better part of the journey her legs
moved mechanically--she was only half conscious.  Urged by her
superhuman determination, the little woman struggled over twenty miles,
and when she reached the great promontory where the house stood, her
_kamiks_ were torn, her clothing was soaked with frigid water, and her
hands were bleeding from wounds inflicted by the sharp rocks.[1]

Behind her, in her delirious flight, Annadoah ever heard the
threatening cries of pursuing tribesmen.

As she approached the wooden house she staggered to and fro, and at one
time was perilously near the edge of the cliff.

Upon her back the infant slept peacefully.

"Olafaksoah!  Olafaksoah!" she struggled to call, but her voice fell to
a whisper.

The windows of the grim house were as black as burnt holes; they glared
at her unseeingly, without welcome--like blind eyes.

Desperately she raised her voice.  Only a panting, breathless plaint
quavered over the dumb, unreplying rocks.  The sea licked its yellow,
hungry tongues below.

At the door of the frame house Annadoah paused and still without losing
hope again essayed to call.  Her voice broke.  The house was
undoubtedly vacant.  There was no reply.

She bent her head to listen.  She could hardly hear because of the
pound of blood in her ears.

Surely he had come--did he not say he would come in the spring?

She tried the door.  It was locked.

She beat it frenziedly with her fists.  She beat it until her fingers
bled.

Then she threw her body against it like a mad thing.  With crooked
fingers she clawed savagely at the wood.  At last she quelled the
tumult in her bosom and found voice.

"Olafaksoah--Olafaksoah--Olafaksoah--_ioh-h-h_!  _Ioh-h-h_!" she
screamed.  She sank to her knees and pounded at the door-sill with her
fists.


When the native tribesmen, furious at her flight, at her temerity in
trying to evade their inviolable law, clambered up the cliff, they saw
a dark, stark figure lying still before the door of the box-house.
Their voices rose in a raucous clamor.

Like wolves descending eagerly upon their prey they bore down upon the
unconscious woman.  Some of the women of the tribe had accompanied
them.  Their voices rose with eager, glad calls to vengeance; they
demanded the life of Annadoah's child without delay.  The shrill howl
of their dogs was mingled in that vindictive, savage chorus.

"Little Blind Spring Bunting," Annadoah murmured, awakened from her
trance by the approaching calls.

Opening her eyes she saw the troop descending.  Staggering to her feet
she stood with her back against the door, facing the clamoring crowd
defiantly.  In their veins the savage blood of fierce centuries was
aroused, in Annadoah's heart all the primitive ferocity of maternal
protection.

They surrounded her.  The struggle was brief.  In a moment--while
strong hands held her--they cut the sinew lashing and rudely tore the
baby from its hood.  Annadoah fell back, half-stunned, against the
floor; in their midst the merciless howling natives had the helpless
infant.

As they bore it over the promontory Annadoah uttered a savage, snarling
cry, as of a mountain wolf robbed of its youngling, and furiously
rushed after them.

Grasping hold of two of the men, she piteously begged them to give her
the child.  She made frantic promises.  She pleaded, she sobbed, she
raved incoherently.  Holding to the men with a fierce grip she was
dragged along on her knees.  Then letting go, she cursed the tribe; she
called upon them the malediction of all the spirits.  Her voice
broke--she could only scream.  She tore her hair and fell prostrate,
her body throbbing on the rocks.

Above the clamor Annadoah suddenly heard a strangely familiar voice
shouting from the distance.  Raising herself slightly, she saw a
well-known figure bounding over the promontory toward the murderous
natives.  Her heart bounded--she recognized Ootah.

Having returned from the mountains Ootah had learned of Annadoah's
flight and the pursuit; and with an unselfish determination to save the
child he had immediately followed.

At the very edge of the cliff the natives paused.  In his hands,
Attalaq, the leader of the pursuit, held the crying babe.  Their voices
were raised to an uproar; the women were chattering fiercely.  With
quick dexterity Attalaq loosely twisted a leather thong about the
baby's neck, and in haste to finish the tragic task began swaying it in
his hands so as to give the helpless creature momentum in its plunge to
death.  Ootah bounded toward them.

"_Aulate_!  _Aulate_!  Halt!" Ootah cried.  "I will be father to
Annadoah's child."

The crowd turned--for a moment they gazed with mingled feelings of awed
surprise, half-incredulous wonder and speechless admiration upon this
man who offered to make the greatest sacrifice possible to one of the
tribe; to become the father, protector and supporter of another man's
helpless, defective infant.  For, according to their custom, they just
as spontaneously grant life to a defective child when a member offers
to assume sole responsibility for its keeping as they are implacably
determined upon its death if its mother is husbandless.  But seldom
does any man make this sacrifice; in this land of rigorous hardship and
starvation it means much.

Ootah fought his way among them.  They gave way, and a low groan
arose--his noble offer had come too late!

On the crest of a golden wave a tiny white speck of a baby face gazed
in open-eyed, frightened astonishment skyward, and in a lull of the
intermittent rush of waters a thin, piercing baby cry arose from the
golden sea.

Awe-stricken, abashed, suddenly overwhelmed with regret and shame, the
natives silently drew back . . .  Ootah paused at the very edge of the
cliff . . . he saw Annadoah's pleading white face . . . he extended his
arms as a bird opens its wings for flight and brought the finger tips
of his hands together above his head.  For a moment his body slightly
swayed, then poising to secure unerring aim, he leaped into the dashing
sea . . .


Still and statuesque as a figure of stone, but wild-eyed, Annadoah
stood alone on the extreme edge of the precipitous cliff and watched
the struggle in the dizzy depths below . . .

Awed by the splendor of a heroism so dauntless, a love so overwhelming,
unselfish and great, the natives retreated to a far distance and waited
in fearful silence.


The prolonged infinity of suspense and horror of many long arctic
nights seemed concentrated in the brief spell that Annadoah tensely,
breathlessly, watched the struggle of the man to save her child.

Annadoah saw Ootah disappear in the waters after his desperate dive
from the cliff and rise with unerring precision on the surface near the
sinking babe.  The sea came thundering against the jagged rocks in
long, terrific swells, and was hurled back in a torrential tumult of
breaking foam.  Ootah fought the seething waves in his effort to
grapple the living thing which was to Annadoah as the heart of her
bosom.  The tiny speck had begun to sink--Ootah made a dive under the
water--and rose with the infant clasped in his left arm.  With only one
hand free, he made a desperate struggle against the onslaught of the
terrible watery catapults as they hurled him, nearer and nearer, toward
the rocks beneath the cliff.  Annadoah saw his white hand, glistening
with water, shine in the sunlight as he tried to climb against the
impetus of the sea.  Sometimes his head sank--then only the struggling
hand was seen.  She crept dangerously closer to the edge of the
cliff . . .  Slowly, but steadily, Ootah and the child were being swept
backward . . .  By degrees the steady strokes of Ootah's arm began to
waver.  Annadoah saw him being carried further and further under the
cliff by the irresistible momentum of the waves . . .  To be dashed
against the jagged rocks beneath she knew meant death.  Her heart
seemed to stop . . . but presently, swirling helplessly in the foaming
cauldron of a receding breaker, she saw Ootah, still clasping the baby,
emerge from under the rocks.  He still lived.  He still fought.
Annadoah watched each desperate, failing stroke.  She saw his strength
giving out in that unequal struggle, saw his arm frenziedly but
ineffectually beating the water, saw his head disappear . . . for
longer and still longer periods . . .  She caught a last vision of his
white upturned face, of his eyes, filled with importunate devotion,
gazing directly at her from out the blinding waters . . .

Then she fell to her knees, and lowering her body, gazed wildly, for a
long, long time, into the sea . . .

Suddenly she uttered a low, sharp, involuntary cry--and the waiting
tribesmen, recoiling as though stunned, understood.  They all loved
Ootah--none dared, none could speak.  Silent, grief-stricken, they
turned away their faces--even their dogs were still.  Annadoah still
peered, searchingly, for a long time, into the sea.

No, there was nothing there--nothing.  On the aureate waves was no
speck of life.

Rising, Annadoah gazed with wide-open, solemn eyes seaward; for the
moment she felt in her heart only a dull ache.

Along the horizon to the east the sun, irradiant and magnified, lay low
over the heaving seas.  Over its face, like a veil of gold, translucent
vapors--the breath of _Kokoyah_, the god of waters--rose from the
melting floes.  A strange spell seemed suddenly to have fallen over the
earth.  Out on the ocean the great bergs, which had majestically moved
southward like the phantoms of perished ships, seemed to pause.  The
little birds which had clustered about the rocks disappeared.  High in
the sky above her, a sinister black bird poised motionless in the air.

At her feet the roaring clamor of the waves seemed resolved into the
solemn sobbing measure of some chant for the dead.

Slowly and by degrees the utter realization of her loss dawned upon the
soul of Annadoah.  And to her in that magical spell the spirits of
nature and the souls of the dead began to manifest themselves.

Out of the crimson-shot vapors mystical forms took shape.  Annadoah saw
the beautiful face of _Nerrvik_, and in the mists saw her watery green
and wondrous tresses of uncombed hair.  She saw the nebulous shadow of
the dreaded _Kokoyah_, the pitiless god of the waters, to whose cold,
compassionless bosom had been gathered Ootah and Little Blind Spring
Bunting.

Along the horizon Annadoah saw the clouds moving to the south.  Higher
up they moved to the west, and toward the zenith stray flecks moved to
the north.  The spirits of the air were not at peace among themselves.
And dire things were brooding.  From the inland highlands of Greenland
now came a series of swift explosions, and in the brief succeeding
interval there was an unearthly silence.  Then a grinding crash rent
the air.  The spirits of the mountains had engaged in combat.  And in
the swift downward surge of the glacial avalanches Annadoah saw tribes
wiped from existence and villages swept into the sun-litten sea.  But
Annadoah knew that the sun-litten sea was a treacherous sea; she knew
that _Koyokah_, whose face in the mist was wan, whose lips were golden,
had no love for men, and she knew that the spirits of the air, who
moved in the diversely soaring clouds, were engaged in some fell
conspiracy against her helpless race.

A vague realization of the impotence of humanity against fate, against
the forces that weave the loom of life within and without one's heart,
weighed crushingly upon her.

Radiant indeed was the sky and softly molten golden the glorious sea,
but yet, grim and grisly, behind this smiling face of nature, Annadoah,
primitive child of the human race, shudderingly felt the malevolent and
evil eyes of _Perdlugssuaq_, the spirit of great evil, he who brings
sickness and death.  Annadoah felt that instinctive fear which humanity
has felt from the beginning--the superstitious terror of tribes who
confront extinction, in the face of famine; the quiet white tremor of
the hard working hordes of modern cities in the face of poverty and
starvation; the dread of savage and civilized races alike of the
incomprehensible factor in the universe which wreaks destruction, that
original and ultimate evil which all the world's religions recognize,
interpret, and offer to placate--the force that is hostile to man and
the happiness of man.

On the smooth tossing waters, reflecting the glory of the sky, there
was no sign of those who had perished.

Then, after the first crushing sense of helplessness, an instinctive,
insurgent hope that would not be defeated asserted itself.  Annadoah
called upon _Nerrvik_, for surely _Nerrvik_ was kind to men.  She
pleaded with _Kokoyah_.  She importuned the spirits of the sea and air
to return her beloved ones to her.

"_Nerrvik_!  _Nerrvik_!" Annadoah supplicated persuasively, "gentle
spirit of the sea, lift Ootah unto me!  Thou who art kind to man and
givest him fishes from the deep for food, give unto Annadoah's arms
Little Blind Spring Bunting."

She swayed her frail body to and fro, and in a tremulous, plaintive
chant told unto the gentle and gracious spirit of the waters all that
Ootah had been, all that he had done for the tribe; of his prowess, of
his love for her, of her own hardness, and how she had turned a deaf
ear to his pleading.  Incident after incident she recalled.  She told
of the long night, when Ootah went by moonlight into the mountains, how
he had braved the hill spirits, how they struck him in the frigid
highlands, and how the beneficent _quilanialequisut_ had brought him
home.  Her exquisite voice rose to a splendid crescendo as she
described that valorous adventure, and in the chant ran the _motifs_ of
the hill spirit's anger, the brave leaping steps of Ootah, the tremor
of the mountains as they were struck, and the deep tenderness of
Ootah's love.  In that customary chanting address to the spirits,
Annadoah told of Ootah's return from the mountains, of the suffering he
endured, and how, when she soothed him, she thought of the great trader
from the south.  She recalled how he had staggered from the igloo, the
agony in his eyes, and how she heard him sobbing his heart-break in the
auroral silence without her igloo through the long sleep.

Extending her arms over the sea, Annadoah reiterated, after each
statement of Ootah's bravery, her plea to _Nerrvik_ that Ootah be given
back to her.

"_Nerrvik_!  _Nerrvik_!" she called, "surely thou art kind!  O thou
whom, when the great petrel raised a storm, wast cast into the depths
by those thou didst love, thou whose heart achest for affection--hear
me, hear me, and Annadoah will surely come to thee very soon and comb
thy hair in the depths of the cold, cold sea." [2]

Tears fell from her eyes.  With self-reproach she told of her old
longing for Olafaksoah, the blond man from the south, whose grim,
fierce face had cowed her, yet whose brutality had thrilled her, to
whose beast-strength and to whose beast-passion all that was feminine
in her had surrendered itself.  But he had left her--he said that he
would come back in the spring.  Now, she knew he would not come
back--and she did not care.  As if to convince the spirit of this, she
compared Olafaksoah with Ootah; she knew now that he had used her to
rob her people, that his heart was as stone.  Ootah, she had once said,
had the heart of a woman; but now she realized the difference between
them.  She knew the arms of Ootah were strong, that the words of Ootah
were true, that the heart of Ootah was kind.  And she felt stirring in
her bosom things she could not express; a vague comprehension of the
pure spirituality of the man who had died to save her child, a response
to the love that had stirred in the bosom now cold beneath the sea.
All the primitive deep profundity of the devotion of that wild-hearted
man who had brought a wealth of food to her from over the mountains,
who had faced death for her on the frozen seas, who had tended her in
her time of trial with the gentleness of a woman, his indomitable
heroism, the splendor, the dauntless unselfishness and bravery of his
offering to father her sightless child--all this--all this, and
more--welled up in the heart of Annadoah.

"_Nerrvik_!  _Nerrvik_!  To him who loved her Annadoah lied.  Dead, she
told him, was her heart as a frozen bird in wintertime--but her heart
was only sleeping!  And now the wings are beating--beating within her
breast!  _Ootah_!  _Ootah_!  _Ioh-h, ioh-h_!"

Her voice broke.  She beat her little breasts.  She bent over the sea
and listened.  For a long while she watched.

Then, from the shadows in the clouds, the answer came.  Truly Ootah was
brave, and his heart was marvellously kind; unsurpassed was his skill
on the hunt and of every animal did he kill; and great was his love for
Annadoah.  Even the spirits had marvelled and spoken of it among
themselves; but Annadoah had chosen her fate; she had denied the love
that had unfalteringly pursued her, and now that she desired it, even
so to her was that love to be denied.  That was fate.

Then in a clamorous outbreak did Annadoah plead with Kokoyah.  She
grovelled on the ground.  She called upon all the spirits of the winds
and air.  In a tremulous, heart-broken plaint she finally called upon
the spirits of her father, her mother, and those who had gone before
them.

But unrelenting, passionless, the answer came--from the shadows in the
clouds, from the winds, from the moaning sea.  To warm the wild heart
under the water was beyond the power of all the spirits.  They repeated
to her, as in mockery, all that she had told them that Ootah had done,
of his mighty love for her; but nevermore might she soothe his injured
limbs, nevermore might she touch his gentle hands, nevermore might she
look into his tender and adoring eyes.  His hands were cold, his eyes
were closed, his heart was still.  It throbbed with the thought of her
no more--and that would be forever.  That was fate.


A frail, pitiful figure, Annadoah stood on the cliff, wringing her
hands toward the declining sun.  In the midst of that wild
golden-burning desolation, Annadoah felt her utter loneliness, her
tragic helplessness.  In all the universe she felt herself utterly
alone.

Far away, awed by the heroism, the very splendor of the bravery of the
man who had perished, the tribe stood murmuring.  In their hearts was
no little unkindness toward Annadoah.  But, forsaken, outcast, she did
not care.

Over the aureate shimmering seas she wrung her little hands and into
the waves lapping at her feet her tears fell like rain.  For the heart
of Annadoah ached.  Nothing in the world any more mattered.  All that
she had loved had perished in the sea.  And she loved too late.

Gazing at the low-lying sun, veiled as in a vapor of tears, remote, and
sadly golden in its self-destined isolation, an instinctive
wild-world-understanding of that tragedy of all life, of all the
universe perchance--of that unselfish love that is too often denied and
the unhappy love that accents only too late--vaguely filled her
primitive heart.

Sinking to her knees, convulsed sobs shaking her, she wrung her hands
toward the sun, the eternal maiden _Sukh-eh-nukh_, the beautiful, the
all-desired.

"_I-o-h-h-h_!" she moaned, and her voice sobbed its pathos over the
seas.  "_I-o-h-h-h!  I-o-h-h-h!  I-o-h-h-h, Sukh-eh-nukh!  I-o-o-h-h,
Sukh-eh-nukh_!  Unhappy sun--unhappy sun!  _I-o-o-h-h-h-h_, Annadoah!
_I-o-o-o-h-h-h-h_, Annadoah!  Unhappy, unhappy Annadoah!"

Annadoah's head sank lower and lower.  Her weeping voice melted in the
melancholy sobbing of the aureate sea.  One by one the natives
departed.  She was left alone.  To the north the sky darkened with one
of those sudden arctic storms which come, as in a moment's space, and
blast the tender flowers of spring.  A cold wind moaned a pitiless
lament from the interior mountains.  Yellow vapors gathered about the
dimming sun.  Ominous shadows took form on the shimmering sea.

"_I-o-h-h-h--iooh_!  Unhappy sun--unhappy, unhappy Annadoah!"

Taking fire in the subdued sunlight--and descending from heaven like a
gentle benediction of feathery flakes of gold--over and about the dark,
crouched figure, softly . . . very softly . . . the snow began to fall.



[1] Annadoah's flight, extraordinary as it is, is not without even more
remarkable precedents.  In one case a woman who had been rejected by
her husband made a forty-mile journey during winter to a spot south of
her village where a child, some years before, had been buried.  There
the woman wept and thus consoled herself.  Having exhausted her grief,
she returned to her people.  On the trip she had no food whatever.

[2] _Nerrvik_, a beautiful maiden, according to the legend, married a
storm-petrel who had disguised himself as a man.  When she discovered
the deception she was filled with horror, so that later, when her
relatives visited her, she determined to escape with them.  When the
petrel returned from a hunting trip and discovered that his wife had
gone, he followed, and flapping his great wings raised a terrible storm
at sea.  Water filled the boat in which _Nerrvik_ was escaping.  When
they realized that _Nerrvik_ was the cause of the storm her brothers
cast her into the sea.  With one hand she clung to the boat; her
grandfather lifted his knife and struck.  _Nerrvik_ descended into the
ocean and became the queen of the fishes.  Possessing only one hand she
cannot plait her hair.  A magician who can go to _Nerrvik_ in a trance
and arrange her tresses wins her gratitude and can secure from her for
the hunters quantities of fish.  It is interesting to note the
similarity of the legend of _Nerrvik_ to that of Jonah.  But just as
the Eskimos have changed the masculine sun of southern mythologies to
the feminine, so the victim of the mythological sea storm in the arctic
becomes a woman.



FINALE

_According to the legends of the tribes, not for many long and aching
ages shall the melancholy moon win the radiant but desolate
Sukh-eh-nukh.  For having refused love she is compelled to flee in her
elected lot from the love she now desires but which she once denied,
and this by a fate more relentless than the power of Perdlugssuaq, a
fate which they do not comprehend, but which is, perchance, the Will of
Him Whose Voice sometimes comes as a strange whistling singing in the
boreal lights, and Who, to the creatures of His making, teaches the
lessons of life through the sorrows which result from the acts of their
own choosing . . .  Sometime--when, they do not know--the sun and moon
will meet.  They will then, having endured loneliness and long
yearning, be immeasurably happy, and in the consummation of their
desire all mankind will share . . .  For as ultimate darkness closes,
all who have been true to the highest ideals of the chase will be
lifted into celestial hunting grounds, where no one is ever hungry nor
where is it ever cold; all who have done noble deeds will be hailed as
celestial heroes.  He who died to save another will attain immortal
life; he who gave of his substance to feed the starving will find
ineffable food and in abundance; he who loved greatly, who suffered
rejection uncomplainingly, and who sought untiringly--even as the moon
pursued Sukh-eh-nukh for ages--will, in that land where the heart never
aches and where there are no tears, see the very fair face of his
beloved smiling a divine welcome, and her eyes filled with a radiant
response, gazing into his own.  The end of the world will come, and
with it will cease the suffering struggles of all the world's races.
And then all the highest hopes of men will find their realisation in an
undreamed-of heaven to which all who have lived without cowardice,
ingratitude or taint of selfishness in their hearts, will be translated
as the world's last aurora closes its mystic veils in the northern
skies._



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ETERNAL MAIDEN***


******* This file should be named 16093.txt or 16093.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/1/6/0/9/16093



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.net/fundraising/pglaf.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://www.gutenberg.net/about/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.net/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit:
http://www.gutenberg.net/fundraising/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

