The Project Gutenberg EBook of His Life
by William E. Barton, Theodore G. Soares, Sydney Strong

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: His Life
       A Complete Story in the Words of the Four Gospels

Author: William E. Barton, Theodore G. Soares, Sydney Strong

Release Date: July 4, 2005 [EBook #16184]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HIS LIFE ***




Produced by Diane Monico and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net.










=His Life=

A COMPLETE STORY IN THE WORDS
OF THE FOUR GOSPELS


PREPARED BY

WILLIAM E. BARTON, THEODORE G. SOARES
SYDNEY STRONG

USING THE TEXT OF THE AMERICAN STANDARD
REVISED BIBLE



HOPE PUBLISHING COMPANY

150 MICHIGAN AVENUE
CHICAGO

27 EAST 22ND STREET
NEW YORK.




HIS LIFE

THE STORY OF JESUS IN THE WORDS OF THE FOUR GOSPELS

Paper covers, single copy 15 cents. 10 copies 12-1/2 cents. 25 to 250
copies 10 cents, postage prepaid.

Cloth covers, single copy 25 cents. 10 to 24 copies 22-1/2 cents,
postage prepaid. 25 to 250 copies or more, by express, not prepaid,
$20.00 per 100 net.

Presentation Edition De Luxe, on heavier paper in full leather
binding, with gilt edges and title stamp in gold leaf, 70 cents, net;
postpaid, 75 cents.


HIS FRIENDS

THE STORY OF THE IMMEDIATE DISCIPLES OF JESUS AFTER HIS ASCENSION; AND
THEIR LETTERS

Styles and prices uniform with "His Life."


HIS GREAT APOSTLE

THE LIFE AND LETTERS OF PAUL IN THE WORDS OF SCRIPTURE AND IN
CHRONOLOGICAL ORDER

Styles and prices uniform with "His Life."


HIS LAST WEEK

THE GOSPEL STORY OF THE PASSION AND RESURRECTION OF JESUS

Paper covers, single copy 7 cents. 10 to 49 copies 6 cents. 50 to 500
copies 5 cents, postage prepaid.


HOPE PUBLISHING COMPANY
CHICAGO AND NEW YORK


Copyright, 1906, by the Pastors' Publishing Union. The Text of the
American Standard Revised Bible, copyright 1901, by Thomas Nelson &
Sons, is used by special arrangement and with their permission.




PREFACE.


The four Gospels, each telling in its own way the story of the Life of
Jesus, are the rich heritage of Christians. No one of the Gospels
could be spared. But in reading any one of the four we miss some of
the familiar words and incidents we love. Almost from the days of the
Apostles there have been attempts to unite the Gospels in a single
narrative. The first of these efforts, so far as we know, was
undertaken by the devout scholar Tatian, soon after 173 A.D. His book
served a useful purpose in his own and later generations, and is now a
valuable witness to the antiquity and early acceptance of our four
Gospels.

There have been many harmonies of the Gospel from the second century
to the present; and they are all but indispensable to the scholar.
Almost every minister keeps one at his elbow. But these, for the most
part, are made for purposes of scholarly comparison, and not for
general reading. Moreover, they are expensive.

The editors of this little book have undertaken to prepare an
interwoven story of the Life of Jesus from the four Gospels for
popular reading. A booklet that may be carried in the pocket, and may
be sold, in paper binding, for ten cents, has been their ambition.
They have been led to this undertaking by the large demand for copies
of their booklet, "HIS LAST WEEK," which comprises the last third of
this volume, whose use at Easter time has brought them many requests
for the complete Gospel story, interwoven in the same manner.

The work of preparation has been done by three ministers of Oak Park,
in suburban Chicago, who have shared equally the labor, but the
undertaking has the support and co-operation of the entire group of
fifteen local pastors, representing six different denominations. To
this larger group of brethren is due a grateful acknowledgment of
sympathy and assistance. The book has at least the value of an
illustration in practical interdenominational co-operation. In the
spirit of this fine fellowship it is commended to Christians of every
name.

                                    THE EDITORS




=His Life=


=I. His Birth and Boyhood=

1. THE DIVINE ANNOUNCINGS
     The Word made Flesh.                                      13
     The Promised Birth of John the Baptist.                   14
     The Angel's Visit to Mary.                                15
     Mary's Visit to Her Cousin.                               16
     Mary's Song.                                              17
     The Birth of John the Baptist.                            17
     The Song of Zacharias.                                    18

2. THE BIRTH AND INFANCY OF JESUS
     Joseph and Mary.                                          20
     The Birth of Jesus.                                       20
     The Angels and the Shepherds.                             21
     The Circumcision.                                         22
     The Presentation in the Temple.                           22
     The Visit of the Wise Men.                                23
     The Flight into Egypt.                                    24

3. THE LIFE IN NAZARETH
     The Return to Nazareth.                                   26
     The Boyhood Visit to Jerusalem.                           26
     The Eighteen Silent Years.                                27


=II. The Beginnings of His Ministry=

1. JESUS AND JOHN THE BAPTIST
     The Voice in the Wilderness.                              28
     The Baptism of Jesus.                                     30
     The Temptation in the Wilderness.                         30
     John's Testimony to Jesus.                                31

2. THE BEGINNINGS OF FAITH
     The First Disciples by the Jordan.                        33
     The First Miracle.                                        34

3. JESUS IN JERUSALEM.
     Cleansing His Father's House.                             36
     The Visit of Nicodemus.                                   36

4. PREPARATORY PREACHING
     Jesus Baptizing and Preaching.                            39
     John's Tribute to Jesus.                                  39
     At Jacob's Well.                                          40
     Preaching to the Samaritans.                              41


=III. His Year of Popularity=

1. JESUS IN GALILEE
     John the Baptist Imprisoned.                              43
     Reception of Jesus by the Galilaeans.                      43
     Healing the Nobleman's Son.                               43
     The Recall of the Fishermen.                              44
     A Day of Good Deeds in Capernaum.                         45
     The First Leper Healed.                                   47

2. BEGINNINGS OF CONTROVERSY
     The Healing of a Paralytic.                               48
     The Publican Disciple.                                    49
     The Old and the New.                                      49
     A Sabbath Healing in Jerusalem.                           50
     Plucking Grain on the Sabbath.                            53

3. MANY CALLED AND FEW CHOSEN
     A Multitude of Disciples.                                 54
     The Selection of the Twelve.                              55

4. THE TEACHING OF THE KINGDOM
     The Citizens of the Kingdom.                              56
     The Righteousness of the Kingdom.                         57
     The Danger of Hypocrisy.                                  59
     Simple Trust in God.                                      61
     Charitable Judgment.                                      62
     Prayer.                                                   63
     Sincerity.                                                64

5. A TOUR IN GALILEE
     The Worthy Centurion.                                     66
     Raising the Widow's Son.                                  67
     A Question from John the Baptist.                         67
     Jesus' Estimate of John the Baptist.                      68
     The Death of John the Baptist.                            69
     Forgiveness of the Repentant Woman.                       70
     The Ministering Women.                                    71

6. GROWING POPULARITY AND RISING OPPOSITION
     The Concern of Jesus' Friends.                            72
     Warning of Eternal Sin.                                   72
     The Demand for a Sign.                                    74

7. THE PARABLES OF THE KINGDOM
     The Sower.                                                75
     The Tares.                                                77
     The Growing Grain.                                        77
     The Mustard Seed.                                         77
     The Leaven.                                               78
     The Understanding of Parables.                            78
     The Hid Treasure.                                         79
     The Pearl of Great Price.                                 79
     The Drag Net.                                             79

8. A DAY OF MIRACLES BY THE LAKE
     Jesus Stills the Storm.                                   80
     The Legion of Demons.                                     80
     The Dying Child and the Suffering Woman.                  82
     Healings by the Way.                                      84

9. WIDER EVANGELIZATION OF GALILEE
     A Visit to His Home.                                      85
     Preaching in the Villages.                                86
     The Twelve Sent Forth.                                    87

10. THE CRISIS IN CAPERNAUM
     The Five Thousand Fed.                                    91
     Jesus Walking on the Water.                               92
     The Disappointment of the People.                         93
     Rejection of the Tradition of the Elders.                 97
     The Plot of the Pharisees.                                99


=IV. His Withdrawal with the Twelve=

1. THE MINISTRY BEYOND GALILEE
     The Phoenician Retirement and the Gentile Cure.          100
     Miracles and Multitudes Again.                           101
     The Four Thousand Fed.                                   101
     The Pharisees and Sadducees Demand a Sign.               102
     The Blind Man Healed.                                    103

2. JESUS THE MESSIAH
     Peter's Confession.                                      105
     The Passion and Resurrection Foretold.                   105
     The Transfiguration.                                     106
     The Epileptic Boy.                                       108

3. THE TRAINING OF THE TWELVE
     The Passion and Resurrection Again Foretold.             110
     The Greatest Disciple.                                   110
     Forgiveness.                                             112
     The Shekel for the Temple.                               113


=V. His Face Toward Jerusalem=

1. THE FINAL DEPARTURE FROM GALILEE
     The Beginning of the End.                                114
     The Grateful Samaritan Leper.                            114
     New Disciples.                                           115

2. IN JERUSALEM--THE ATTEMPT TO STONE HIM
     Jesus at the Feast of Tabernacles.                       116
     Jesus and the Accused Woman.                             118
     The Light of the World.                                  119
     The Freedom of the Soul.                                 121

3. THE MINISTRY IN PEREA
     The Mission of the Seventy.                              123
     The Return of the Seventy.                               124
     The Meek and Lowly.                                      124
     The Unrepentant Cities.                                  125
     The Good Samaritan.                                      125

4. IN JERUSALEM--THE ATTEMPT TO ARREST HIM
     The Friends at Bethany.                                  127
     A Miracle in Jerusalem.                                  127
     The Good Shepherd.                                       130
     Jesus at the Feast of Dedication.                        131

5. RENEWED MINISTRY IN PEREA
     Jesus and the Pharisees.                                 133
     Warning Against Covetousness.                            134
     The Fall of the Tower.                                   134
     The Uses of the Sabbath.                                 135
     A Question of Salvation.                                 136
     A Message to Herod.                                      136
     The Ox in the Pit.                                       137
     The Chief Places at the Feast.                           137
     The Slighted Invitation.                                 138
     Counting the Cost.                                       139
     The Ninety and Nine.                                     139
     The Lost Coin.                                           140
     The Prodigal Son.                                        140
     The Unjust Steward.                                      142
     A Parable to the Lovers of Money.                        143
     "Increase Our Faith."                                    144

6. NEAR JERUSALEM--THE PLOT TO KILL HIM
     The Raising of Lazarus.                                  145
     The Decision of the Council.                             148

7. HIS WITHDRAWAL TO EPHRAIM
     The Coming of the Kingdom.                               149
     The Unjust Judge.                                        149
     The Pharisee and the Publican.                           150
     Concerning Divorce.                                      150
     Jesus and the Children.                                  151
     The Rich Young Ruler.                                    151
     The Parable of the Vineyard.                             153

8. THE LAST JOURNEY TO JERUSALEM
     The Shadow of the Cross.                                 155
     The Sons of Thunder.                                     155
     The Blind Man of Jericho.                                156
     The Visit to Zacchaeus.                                   157
     The Parable of the Pounds.                               157
     Going up to Jerusalem.                                   159
     The Feast at Bethany.                                    159


=VI. His Last Week=

1. PALM SUNDAY--THE DAY OF TRIUMPH
     The Triumphal Entry.                                     161

2. MONDAY--THE DAY OF AUTHORITY
     The Cursing of the Fig Tree.                             163
     The Cleansing of the Temple.                             163

3. TUESDAY--THE DAY OF CONTROVERSY
     The Lesson from the Withered Fig Tree.                   164
     The Challenge of Christ's Authority.                     164
     Three Warning Parables.                                  165
        (a) the two sons.                                     165
        (b) the wicked husbandmen.                            165
        (c) the marriage of the king's son.                   167
     Three Hostile Questions asked of Jesus.                  167
        (a) tribute to Caesar.                                 167
        (b) the question of the resurrection.                 168
        (c) the greatest commandment.                         169
     The Unanswerable Question of Jesus.                      170
     Discourse of Jesus Against the Scribes and Pharisees.    170
     The Widow's Two Mites.                                   173
     The Gentiles Seek Jesus.                                 173
     The Jews Reject Jesus.                                   174
     Discourse Concerning the Future.                         175
     Three Lessons to the Disciples.                          179
        (a) the parable of the ten virgins.                   179
        (b) the parable of the talents.                       180
        (c) the judgment scene.                               181
     The Conspiracy Against Jesus.                            183

4. WEDNESDAY--THE DAY OF RETIREMENT                           184

5. THURSDAY--THE DAY OF FELLOWSHIP
     Preparation for the Passover.                            185
     Strife among the Disciples.                              185
     Jesus Washing the Disciples' Feet.                       186
     The Betrayer Pointed Out.                                187
     The Lord's Supper.                                       188
     The Farewell Conversation.                               189
     The Intercessory Prayer.                                 196

6. FRIDAY--THE DAY OF SUFFERING
     The Agony in Gethsemane.                                 199
     The Betrayal and Arrest.                                 200
     The Trial before the Jewish Authorities.                 201
     The Denial of Peter.                                     203
     The Remorse of Judas.                                    204
     The Trial before Pilate.                                 205
     Jesus before Herod.                                      206
     The Trial before Pilate Resumed.                         207
     The Sorrowful Way.                                       210
     The Crucifixion.                                         210
     The Burial.                                              214

7. SATURDAY--THE DAY OF SILENCE AND SORROW
     The Watch at the Tomb.                                   215


=VII. His Resurrection=

1. SUNDAY--THE DAY OF RESURRECTION
     The Earthquake.                                          216
     The Empty Tomb.                                          216
     The Appearance to Mary.                                  217
     The Appearance to the Women.                             217
     Report of the Watch.                                     218
     The Appearance at Emmaus.                                218
     The Appearance to the Disciples.                         220

2. AFTER THE RESURRECTION DAY
     The Appearance to the Disciples and to Thomas.           222
     The Appearance to the Seven by the Sea.                  222
     The Appearance to the Eleven on the Mountain.            225
     The Last Appearance and Ascension.                       225




=His Life=

       *       *       *       *       *

=HIS BIRTH AND BOYHOOD=

       *       *       *       *       *

THE DIVINE ANNOUNCINGS


THE WORD MADE FLESH.

In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word
was God. The same was in the beginning with God. All things were made
through him; and without him was not anything made that hath been
made. In him was life; and the life was the light of men. And the
light shineth in the darkness; and the darkness apprehended it not.

There came a man, sent from God, whose name was John. The same came
for witness, that he might bear witness of the light, that all might
believe through him. He was not the light, but came that he might bear
witness of the light. There was the true light, even the light which
lighteth every man, coming into the world. He was in the world, and
the world was made through him, and the world knew him not. He came
unto his own, and they that were his own received him not. But as many
as received him, to them gave he the right to become children of God,
even to them that believe on his name: who were born, not of blood,
nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God.

And the Word became flesh, and dwelt among us (and we beheld his
glory, glory as of the only begotten from the Father), full of grace
and truth. John beareth witness of him, and crieth, saying, "This was
he of whom I said, He that cometh after me is become before me: for he
was before me."

For of his fulness we all received, and grace for grace. For the law
was given through Moses; grace and truth came through Jesus Christ. No
man hath seen God at any time; the only begotten Son, who is in the
bosom of the Father, he hath declared him.


THE PROMISED BIRTH OF JOHN THE BAPTIST.

There was in the days of Herod, king of Judaea, a certain priest named
Zacharias, of the course of Abijah: and he had a wife of the daughters
of Aaron, and her name was Elisabeth. And they were both righteous
before God, walking in all the commandments and ordinances of the Lord
blameless. And they had no child, because that Elisabeth was barren,
and they both were now well stricken in years.

Now it came to pass, while he executed the priest's office before God
in the order of his course, according to the custom of the priest's
office, his lot was to enter into the temple of the Lord and burn
incense. And the whole multitude of the people were praying without at
the hour of incense.

And there appeared unto him an angel of the Lord standing on the right
side of the altar of incense.

And Zacharias was troubled when he saw him, and fear fell upon him.
But the angel said unto him, "Fear not, Zacharias: because thy
supplication is heard, and thy wife Elisabeth shall bear thee a son,
and thou shalt call his name John. And thou shalt have joy and
gladness; and many shall rejoice at his birth. For he shall be great
in the sight of the Lord, and he shall drink no wine nor strong drink;
and he shall be filled with the Holy Spirit, even from his mother's
womb. And many of the children of Israel shall he turn unto the Lord
their God. And he shall go before his face in the spirit and power of
Elijah, to turn the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the
disobedient to walk in the wisdom of the just; to make ready for the
Lord a people prepared for him."

And Zacharias said unto the angel, "Whereby shall I know this? for I
am an old man, and my wife well stricken in years."

And the angel answering said unto him, "I am Gabriel, that stand in
the presence of God; and I was sent to speak unto thee, and to bring
thee these good tidings. And behold, thou shalt be silent and not able
to speak, until the day that these things shall come to pass, because
thou believedst not my words, which shall be fulfilled in their
season."

And the people were waiting for Zacharias, and they marvelled while he
tarried in the temple. And when he came out, he could not speak unto
them: and they perceived that he had seen a vision in the temple: and
he continued making signs unto them, and remained dumb.

And it came to pass, when the days of his ministration were fulfilled,
he departed unto his house.

And after these days Elisabeth his wife conceived; and she hid herself
five months, saying, "Thus hath the Lord done unto me in the days
wherein he looked upon me, to take away my reproach among men."


THE ANGEL'S VISIT TO MARY.

Now in the sixth month the angel Gabriel was sent from God unto a city
of Galilee, named Nazareth, to a virgin betrothed to a man whose name
was Joseph, of the house of David; and the virgin's name was Mary.
And he came in unto her, and said, "Hail, thou that art highly
favored, the Lord is with thee."

But she was greatly troubled at the saying, and cast in her mind what
manner of salutation this might be.

And the angel said unto her, "Fear not, Mary: for thou hast found
favor with God And behold, thou shalt conceive in thy womb, and bring
forth a son, and shalt call his name JESUS. He shall be great, and
shall be called the Son of the Most High: and the Lord God shall give
unto him the throne of his father David: and he shall reign over the
house of Jacob forever; and of his kingdom there shall be no end."

And Mary said unto the angel, "How shall this be, seeing I know not a
man?"

And the angel answered and said unto her, "The Holy Spirit shall come
upon thee, and the power of the Most High shall overshadow thee:
wherefore also the holy thing which is begotten shall be called the
Son of God. And behold, Elisabeth thy kinswoman, she also hath
conceived a son in her old age; and this is the sixth month with her
that was called barren. For no word from God shall be void of power."

And Mary said, "Behold, the handmaid of the Lord; be it unto me
according to thy word"

And the angel departed from her.


MARY'S VISIT TO HER COUSIN.

And Mary arose in these days and went into the hill country with
haste, into a city of Judah; and entered into the house of Zacharias
and saluted Elisabeth. And it came to pass, when Elisabeth heard the
salutation of Mary, the babe leaped in her womb; and Elisabeth was
filled with the Holy Spirit; and she lifted up her voice with a loud
cry, and said, "Blessed art thou among women, and blessed is the fruit
of thy womb. And whence is this to me, that the mother of my Lord
should come unto me? For behold, when the voice of thy salutation came
into mine ears, the babe leaped in my womb for joy. And blessed is she
that believed; for there shall be a fulfilment of the things which
have been spoken to her from the Lord."


MARY'S SONG.

And Mary said,

    "My soul doth magnify the Lord.
    And my spirit hath rejoiced in God my Saviour.
    For he hath looked upon the low estate of his handmaid:
    For behold, from henceforth all generations shall call me blessed.
    For he that is mighty hath done to me great things;
    And holy is his name.
    And his mercy is unto generations and generations
    On them that fear him.
    He hath showed strength with his arm:
    He hath scattered the proud in the imagination of their heart.
    He hath put down princes from their thrones,
    And hath exalted them of low degree.
    The hungry he hath filled with good things;
    And the rich he hath sent empty away.
    He hath given help to Israel his servant,
    That he might remember mercy
    (As he spake unto our fathers)
    Toward Abraham and his seed for ever."

And Mary abode with her about three months, and returned unto her
house.


THE BIRTH OF JOHN THE BAPTIST.

Now Elisabeth's time was fulfilled that she should be delivered; and
she brought forth a son. And her neighbors and her kinsfolk heard that
the Lord had magnified his mercy towards her; and they rejoiced with
her.

And it came to pass on the eighth day, that they came to circumcise
the child; and they would have called him Zacharias, after the name of
his father.

And his mother answered and said, "Not so; but he shall be called
John."

And they said unto her, "There is none of thy kindred that is called
by this name."

And they made signs to his father, what he would have him called.

And he asked for a writing tablet, and wrote, saying, "His name is
John."

And they marvelled all. And his mouth was opened immediately, and his
tongue loosed, and he spake, blessing God.

And fear came on all that dwelt round about them: and all these
sayings were noised abroad throughout all the hill country of Judaea.

And all that heard them laid them up in their heart, saying, "What
then shall this child be?"

For the hand of the Lord was with him.


THE SONG OF ZACHARIAS.

And his father Zacharias was filled with the Holy Spirit, and
prophesied, saying,

    "Blessed be the Lord the God of Israel;
    For he hath visited and wrought redemption for his people,
    And hath raised up a horn of salvation for us
    In the house of his servant David
    (As he spake by the mouth of his holy prophets that have been
        from of old),
    Salvation from our enemies and from the hand of all that hate us;
    To show mercy towards our fathers.
    And to remember his holy covenant;
    The oath which he sware unto Abraham our father,
    To grant unto us that we being delivered out of the hand of
        our enemies
    Should serve him without fear,
    In holiness and righteousness before him all our days.
    Yea and thou, child, shalt be called the prophet of the Most High:
    For thou shalt go before the face of the Lord to make ready
        his ways;
    To give knowledge of salvation unto his people
    In the remission of their sins,
    Because of the tender mercy of our God,
    Whereby the dayspring from on high shall visit us,
    To shine upon them that sit in darkness and the shadow of death;
    To guide our feet into the way of peace."

And the child grew, and waxed strong in spirit, and was in the deserts
till the day of his showing unto Israel.




THE BIRTH AND INFANCY OF JESUS


JOSEPH AND MARY.

Now the birth of Jesus Christ was on this wise: When his mother Mary
had been betrothed to Joseph, before they came together she was found
with child of the Holy Spirit. And Joseph her husband, being a
righteous man, and not willing to make her a public example, was
minded to put her away privily.

But when he thought on these things, behold, an angel of the Lord
appeared unto him in a dream, saying, "Joseph, thou son of David, fear
not to take unto thee Mary thy wife: for that which is conceived in
her is of the Holy Spirit. And she shall bring forth a son; and thou
shalt call his name JESUS; for it is he that shall save his people
from their sins."

Now all this is come to pass, that it might be fulfilled which was
spoken by the Lord through the prophet, saying,

    "Behold, the virgin shall be with child, and shall bring
        forth a son,
    And they shall call his name Immanuel;"

which is, being interpreted, "God with us."

And Joseph arose from his sleep, and did as the angel of the Lord
commanded him, and took unto him his wife; and knew her not till she
had brought forth a son.


THE BIRTH OF JESUS.

Now it came to pass in those days, there went out a decree from Caesar
Augustus, that all the world should be enrolled. This was the first
enrolment made when Quirinius was governor of Syria. And all went to
enrol themselves, every one to his own city. And Joseph also went up
from Galilee, out of the city of Nazareth, into Judaea, to the city of
David, which is called Bethlehem, because he was of the house and
family of David; to enrol himself with Mary, who was betrothed to him,
being great with child.

And it came to pass, while they were there, the days were fulfilled
that she should be delivered. And she brought forth her firstborn son;
and she wrapped him in swaddling clothes, and laid him in a manger,
because there was no room for them in the inn.


THE ANGELS AND THE SHEPHERDS.

And there were shepherds in the same country abiding in the field, and
keeping watch by night over their flock. And an angel of the Lord
stood by them, and the glory of the Lord shone round about them: and
they were sore afraid.

And the angel said unto them, "Be not afraid; for behold, I bring you
good tidings of great joy which shall be to all the people: for there
is born to you this day in the city of David a Saviour, who is Christ
the Lord. And this is the sign unto you: Ye shall find a babe wrapped
in swaddling clothes, and lying in a manger."

And suddenly there was with the angel a multitude of the heavenly host
praising God, and saying,

    "Glory to God in the highest,
    And on earth peace among men in whom he is well pleased."

And it came to pass, when the angels went away from them into heaven,
the shepherds said one to another, "Let us now go even unto
Bethlehem, and see this thing that is come to pass, which the Lord
hath made known unto us."

And they came with haste, and found both Mary and Joseph, and the babe
lying in the manger. And when they saw it, they made known concerning
the saying which was spoken to them about this child.

And all that heard it wondered at the things which were spoken unto
them by the shepherds.

But Mary kept all these sayings, pondering them in her heart.

And the shepherds returned, glorifying and praising God for all the
things that they had heard and seen, even as it was spoken unto them.


THE CIRCUMCISION.

And when eight days were fulfilled for circumcising him, his name was
called JESUS, which was so called by the angel before he was conceived
in the womb.


THE PRESENTATION IN THE TEMPLE.

And when the days of their purification according to the law of Moses
were fulfilled, they brought him up to Jerusalem, to present him to
the Lord (as it is written in the law of the Lord, Every male that
openeth the womb shall be called holy to the Lord), and to offer a
sacrifice according to that which is said in the law of the Lord, "A
pair of turtledoves, or two young pigeons."

And behold, there was a man in Jerusalem, whose name was Simeon: and
this man was righteous and devout, looking for the consolation of
Israel: and the Holy Spirit was upon him. And it had been revealed
unto him by the Holy Spirit, that he should not see death, before he
had seen the Lord's Christ. And he came in the Spirit into the temple:
and when the parents brought in the child Jesus, that they might do
concerning him after the custom of the law, then he received him into
his arms, and blessed God, and said,

    "Now, lettest thou thy servant depart, Lord,
    According to thy word, in peace;
    For mine eyes have seen thy salvation,
    Which thou hast prepared before the face of all peoples;
    A light for revelation to the Gentiles,
    And the glory of thy people Israel."

And his father and his mother were marvelling at the things which were
spoken concerning him; and Simeon blessed them, and said unto Mary his
mother,

    "Behold, this child is set for the falling and the rising of
        many in Israel;
    And for a sign which is spoken against;
    Yea and a sword shall pierce through thine own soul;
    That thoughts out of many hearts may be revealed."

And there was one Anna, a prophetess, the daughter of Phanuel, of the
tribe of Asher (she was of a great age, having lived with a husband
seven years from her virginity, and she had been a widow even unto
fourscore and four years), who departed not from the temple,
worshipping with fastings and supplications night and day. And coming
up at that very hour she gave thanks unto God, and spake of him to all
them that were looking for the redemption of Jerusalem.


THE VISIT OF THE WISE MEN.

Now when Jesus was born in Bethlehem of Judaea in the days of Herod the
king, behold, Wise-men from the east came to Jerusalem, saying, "Where
is he that is born King of the Jews? for we saw his star in the east,
and are come to worship him."

And when Herod the king heard it, he was troubled, and all Jerusalem
with him. And gathering together all the chief priests and scribes of
the people, he inquired of them where the Christ should be born. And
they said unto him, "In Bethlehem of Judaea: for thus it is written
through the prophet,

    "'And thou Bethlehem, land of Judah,
    Art in no wise least among the princes of Judah:
    For out of thee shall come forth a governor,
    Who shall be shepherd of my people Israel.'"

Then Herod privily called the Wise-men, and learned of them exactly
what time the star appeared. And he sent them to Bethlehem, and said,
"Go and search out exactly concerning the young child; and when ye
have found him, bring me word, that I also may come and worship him."

And they, having heard the king, went their way; and lo, the star,
which they saw in the east, went before them, till it came and stood
over where the young child was. And when they saw the star, they
rejoiced with exceeding great joy. And they came into the house and
saw the young child with Mary his mother; and they fell down and
worshipped him; and opening their treasures they offered unto him
gifts, gold and frankincense and myrrh.

And being warned of God in a dream that they should not return to
Herod, they departed into their own country another way.


THE FLIGHT INTO EGYPT.

Now when they were departed, behold, an angel of the Lord appeareth to
Joseph in a dream, saying, "Arise and take the young child and his
mother, and flee into Egypt, and be thou there until I tell thee: for
Herod will seek the young child to destroy him." He arose and took the
young child and his mother by night, and departed into Egypt; and was
there until the death of Herod: that it might be fulfilled which was
spoken by the Lord through the prophet, saying, "Out of Egypt did I
call my son."

Then Herod, when he saw that he was mocked of the Wise-men, was
exceeding wroth, and sent forth, and slew all the male children that
were in Bethlehem, and in all the borders thereof, from two years old
and under, according to the time which he had exactly learned of the
Wise-men. Then was fulfilled that which was spoken through Jeremiah
the prophet, saying,

    "A voice was heard in Ramah,
    Weeping and great mourning,
    Rachel weeping for her children;
    And she would not be comforted, because they are not."




THE LIFE IN NAZARETH


THE RETURN TO NAZARETH.

But when Herod was dead, behold, an angel of the Lord appeareth in a
dream to Joseph in Egypt, saying, "Arise and take the young child and
his mother, and go into the land of Israel: for they are dead that
sought the young child's life."

And he arose and took the young child and his mother, and came into
the land of Israel.

But when he heard that Archelaus was reigning over Judaea in the room
of his father Herod, he was afraid to go thither: and being warned of
God in a dream, he withdrew into the parts of Galilee, and came and
dwelt in their own city Nazareth; that it might be fulfilled which was
spoken through the prophets, that he should be called a Nazarene.

And the child grew, and waxed strong, filled with wisdom: and the
grace of God was upon him.


THE BOYHOOD VISIT TO JERUSALEM.

And his parents went every year to Jerusalem at the feast of the
passover. And when he was twelve years old, they went up after the
custom of the feast; and when they had fulfilled the days, as they
were returning, the boy Jesus tarried behind in Jerusalem; and his
parents knew it not; but supposing him to be in the company, they went
a day's journey: and they sought for him among their kinsfolk and
acquaintance: and when they found him not, they returned to Jerusalem,
seeking for him.

And it came to pass, after three days they found him in the temple,
sitting in the midst of the teachers, both hearing them, and asking
them questions: and all that heard him were amazed at his
understanding and his answers.

And when they saw him, they were astonished; and his mother said unto
him, "Son, why hast thou thus dealt with us? behold, thy father and I
sought thee sorrowing."

And he said unto them, "How is it that ye sought me? knew ye not that
I must be in my Father's house?"

And they understood not the saying which he spake unto them.


THE EIGHTEEN SILENT YEARS.

And he went down with them, and came to Nazareth; and he was subject
unto them: and his mother kept all these sayings in her heart.

And Jesus advanced in wisdom and stature, and in favor with God and
men.




=THE BEGINNINGS OF HIS MINISTRY=

       *       *       *       *       *

JESUS AND JOHN THE BAPTIST


THE VOICE IN THE WILDERNESS.

Now in the fifteenth year of the reign of Tiberius Caesar, Pontius
Pilate being governor of Judaea, and Herod being tetrarch of Galilee,
and his brother Philip tetrarch of the region of Ituraea and
Trachonitis, and Lysanias tetrarch of Abilene, in the high-priesthood
of Annas and Caiaphas, the word of God came unto John the son of
Zacharias in the wilderness.

And John was clothed with camel's hair, and had a leathern girdle
about his loins, and did eat locusts and wild honey.

And he came into all the region round about the Jordan, preaching the
baptism of repentance unto remission of sins; and saying, "Repent ye;
for the kingdom of heaven is at hand."

For this is he that was spoken of by Isaiah the prophet, saying,

    "The voice of one crying in the wilderness,
    Make ye ready the way of the Lord,
    Make his paths straight.
    Every valley shall be filled,
    And every mountain and hill shall be brought low;
    And the crooked shall become straight,
    And the rough ways smooth;
    And all flesh shall see the salvation of God."

And there went out to him all the country of Judaea, and all they of
Jerusalem, and they were baptized of him in the river Jordan,
confessing their sins.

But when he saw many of the Pharisees and Sadducees coming to his
baptism he said unto them, "Ye offspring of vipers, who warned you to
flee from the wrath to come? Bring forth therefore fruits worthy of
repentance, and begin not to say within yourselves, 'We have Abraham
to our father': for I say unto you, that God is able of these stones
to raise up children unto Abraham. And even now the axe also lieth at
the root of the trees: every tree therefore that bringeth not forth
good fruit is hewn down, and cast into the fire."

And the multitudes asked him, saying, "What then must we do?"

And he answered and said unto them, "He that hath two coats, let him
impart to him that hath none; and he that hath food, let him do
likewise."

And there came also publicans to be baptized, and they said unto him,
"Teacher, what must we do?"

And he said unto them, "Extort no more than that which is appointed
you."

And soldiers also asked him, saying, "And we, what must we do?"

And he said unto them, "Extort from no man by violence, neither accuse
any one wrongfully; and be content with your wages."

And as the people were in expectation, and all men reasoned in their
hearts concerning John, whether haply he were the Christ; John
answered, saying unto them all, "I indeed baptize you with water; but
there cometh he that is mightier than I, the latchet of whose shoes I
am not worthy to unloose: he shall baptize you in the Holy Spirit and
in fire: whose fan is in his hand, thoroughly to cleanse his
threshing-floor, and to gather the wheat into his garner; but the
chaff he will burn up with unquenchable fire."

With many other exhortations therefore preached he good tidings unto
the people.


THE BAPTISM OF JESUS.

And it came to pass in those days, when all the people were baptized,
that Jesus came from Nazareth of Galilee to the Jordan unto John, to
be baptized of him.

But John would have hindered him, saying, "I have need to be baptized
of thee, and comest thou to me?"

But Jesus answering said unto him, "Suffer it now: for thus it
becometh us to fulfil all righteousness."

Then he suffereth him. And Jesus, when he was baptized, went up
straightway from the water; and lo, the heavens were opened unto him,
and he saw the Spirit of God descending as a dove, and coming upon
him; and lo, a voice out of the heavens, saying, "This is my beloved
Son, in whom I am well pleased."


THE TEMPTATION IN THE WILDERNESS.

Then straightway was Jesus led up of the Spirit into the wilderness to
be tempted of the devil, and he was with the wild beasts, and did eat
nothing in those days. And when he had fasted forty days and forty
nights, he afterward hungered.

And the tempter came and said unto him, "If thou art the Son of God,
command that these stones become bread."

But he answered and said, "It is written, 'Man shall not live by bread
alone, but by every word that proceedeth out of the mouth of God.'"

Then the devil taketh him into the holy city; and he set him on the
pinnacle of the temple, and saith unto him, "If thou art the Son of
God, cast thyself down: for it is written,

     "'He shall give his angels charge concerning thee, to guard
     thee.'

and,

    "'On their hands they shall bear thee up,
    Lest haply thou dash thy foot against a stone.'"

Jesus said unto him, "Again it is written, 'Thou shalt not make trial
of the Lord thy God.'"

Again, the devil taketh him unto an exceeding high mountain, and
showeth him all the kingdoms of the world in a moment of time, and the
glory of them.

And the devil said unto him, "To thee will I give all this authority,
and the glory of them: for it hath been delivered unto me; and to
whomsoever I will I give it. If thou therefore wilt worship before me,
it shall all be thine."

Then saith Jesus unto him, "Get thee hence, Satan: for it is written.
'Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, and him only shalt thou serve.'"

And when the devil had completed every temptation, he departed from
him for a season; and behold, angels came and ministered unto him.


JOHN'S TESTIMONY TO JESUS.

And this is the witness of John, when the Jews sent unto him from
Jerusalem priests and Levites to ask him, "Who art thou?" And he
confessed and denied not; and he confessed, "I am not the Christ."

And they asked him, "What then? Art thou Elijah?"

And he saith, "I am not."

"Art thou the prophet?"

And he answered "No."

They said therefore unto him, "Who art thou? that we may give an
answer to them that sent us? What sayest thou of thyself?"

He said, "I am the voice of one crying in the wilderness, 'Make
straight the way of the Lord,' as said Isaiah the prophet."

And they had been sent from the Pharisees. And they asked him, and
said unto him, "Why then baptizest thou, if thou art not the Christ,
neither Elijah, neither the prophet."

John answered them, saying, "I baptize in water: in the midst of you
standeth one whom ye know not, even he that cometh after me, the
latchet of whose shoe I am not worthy to unloose."

These things were done in Bethany beyond the Jordan, where John was
baptizing.

On the morrow he seeth Jesus coming unto him, and saith, "Behold, the
Lamb of God, that taketh away the sin of the world! This is he of whom
I said, 'After me cometh a man who is become before me: for he was
before me.' And I knew him not; but that he should be made manifest to
Israel, for this cause came I baptizing in water."

And John bare witness, saying, "I have beheld the Spirit descending as
a dove out of heaven; and it abode upon him. And I knew him not: but
he that sent me to baptize in water, he said unto me, 'Upon whomsoever
thou shalt see the Spirit descending, and abiding upon him, the same
is he that baptizeth in the Holy Spirit.' And I have seen, and have
borne witness that this is the Son of God."




THE BEGINNINGS OF FAITH


THE FIRST DISCIPLES BY THE JORDAN.

Again on the morrow John was standing, and two of his disciples; and
he looked upon Jesus as he walked and saith, "Behold, the Lamb of
God!" And the two disciples heard him speak, and they followed Jesus.

And Jesus turned, and beheld them following, and saith unto them,
"What seek ye?"

And they said unto him, "Rabbi" (which is to say, being interpreted,
Teacher), "where abidest thou?"

He saith unto them, "Come, and ye shall see."

They came therefore and saw where he abode; and they abode with him
that day: it was about the tenth hour.

One of the two that heard John speak, and followed him, was Andrew,
Simon Peter's brother. He findeth first his own brother Simon, and
saith unto him, "We have found the Messiah" (which is, being
interpreted, Christ). He brought him unto Jesus.

Jesus looked upon him, and said, "Thou art Simon the son of John: thou
shalt be called Cephas" (which is by interpretation, Peter).

On the morrow he was minded to go forth into Galilee, and he findeth
Philip: and Jesus saith unto him, "Follow me." Now Philip was from
Bethsaida, of the city of Andrew and Peter. Philip findeth Nathanael,
and saith unto him, "We have found him, of whom Moses in the law and
the prophets, wrote, Jesus of Nazareth, the son of Joseph."

And Nathanael said unto him. "Can any good thing come out of
Nazareth?"

Philip saith unto him, "Come and see."

Jesus saw Nathanael coming to him, and saith of him, "Behold, an
Israelite indeed, in whom is no guile!"

Nathanael saith unto him, "Whence knowest thou me?"

Jesus answered and said unto him, "Before Philip called thee, when
thou wast under the fig tree, I saw thee."

Nathanael answered him, "Rabbi, thou art the Son of God; thou art King
of Israel."

Jesus answered and said unto him, "Because I said unto thee, 'I saw
thee underneath the fig tree,' believest thou? thou shalt see greater
things than these."

And he saith unto him, "Verily, verily, I say unto you, Ye shall see
the heaven opened, and the angels of God ascending and descending upon
the Son of man."


THE FIRST MIRACLE.

And the third day there was a marriage in Cana of Galilee; and the
mother of Jesus was there: and Jesus also was bidden, and his
disciples, to the marriage.

And when the wine failed, the mother of Jesus saith unto him, "They
have no wine."

And Jesus saith unto her, "Woman, what have I to do with thee? mine
hour is not yet come."

His mother saith unto the servants, "Whatsoever he saith unto you, do
it."

Now there were six waterpots of stone set there after the Jews' manner
of purifying, containing two or three firkins apiece. Jesus saith unto
them, "Fill the waterpots with water."

And they filled them up to the brim.

And he saith unto them, "Draw out now, and bear unto the ruler of the
feast."

And they bare it. And when the ruler of the feast tasted the water now
become wine, and knew not whence it was (but the servants that had
drawn the water knew), the ruler of the feast calleth the bridegroom,
and saith unto him, "Every man setteth on first the good wine; and
when men have drunk freely, then that which is worse: thou hast kept
the good wine until now."

This beginning of his signs did Jesus in Cana of Galilee, and
manifested his glory; and his disciples believed on him.

After this he went down to Capernaum, he, and his mother, and his
brethren, and his disciples; and there they abode not many days.




JESUS IN JERUSALEM


CLEANSING HIS FATHER'S HOUSE.

And the passover of the Jews was at hand, and Jesus went up to
Jerusalem. And he found in the temple those that sold oxen and sheep
and doves, and the changers of money sitting: and he made a scourge of
cords, and cast all out of the temple, both the sheep and the oxen;
and he poured out the changers' money, and overthrew their tables; and
to them that sold the doves he said, "Take these things hence; make
not my Father's house a house of merchandise."

His disciples remembered that it was written, "Zeal for thy house
shall eat me up."

The Jews therefore answered and said unto him, "What sign showest thou
unto us, seeing that thou doest these things?"

Jesus answered and said unto them, "Destroy this temple, and in three
days I will raise it up."

The Jews therefore said, "Forty and six years was this temple in
building, and wilt thou raise it up in three days?"

But he spake of the temple of his body. When therefore he was raised
from the dead, his disciples remembered that he spake thus; and they
believed the scripture, and the word which Jesus had said.


THE VISIT OF NICODEMUS.

Now when he was in Jerusalem at the passover, during the feast, many
believed on his name, beholding his signs which he did. But Jesus did
not trust himself unto them, for that he knew all men, and because he
needed not that any one should bear witness concerning man; for he
himself knew what was in man.

Now there was a man of the Pharisees, named Nicodemus, ruler of the
Jews; the same came unto him by night, and said to him, "Rabbi, we
know that thou art a teacher come from God; for no one can do these
signs that thou doest, except God be with him."

Jesus answered and said unto him, "Verily, verily, I say unto thee,
Except one be born anew, he cannot see the kingdom of God."

Nicodemus saith unto him, "How can a man be born when he is old? can
he enter a second time into his mother's womb, and be born?"

Jesus answered, "Verily, verily, I say unto thee, Except one be born
of water and the Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God. That
which is born of the flesh is flesh: and that which is born of the
Spirit is spirit. Marvel not that I said unto thee, 'Ye must be born
anew.' The wind bloweth where it will, and thou hearest the voice
thereof, but knowest not whence it cometh, and whither it goeth; so is
every one that is born of the Spirit."

Nicodemus answered and said unto him, "How can these things be?"

Jesus answered and said unto him, "Art thou the teacher of Israel, and
understandest not these things? Verily, verily, I say unto thee, We
speak that which we know, and bear witness of that which we have seen;
and ye receive not our witness. If I told you earthly things and ye
believe not, how shall ye believe if I tell you heavenly things? And
no one hath ascended into heaven but he that descended out of heaven,
even the Son of man, who is in heaven. And as Moses lifted up the
serpent in the wilderness even so must the Son of man be lifted up;
that whosoever believeth may in him have eternal life.

"For God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that
whosoever believeth on him should not perish, but have eternal life.
For God sent not the Son into the world to judge the world; but that
the world should be saved through him. He that believeth on him is not
judged: he that believeth not hath been judged already, because he
hath not believed on the name of the only begotten Son of God. And
this is the judgment, that the light is come into the world, and men
loved the darkness rather than the light; for their works were evil.
For every one that doeth evil hateth the light, and cometh not to the
light, lest his works should be reproved. But he that doeth the truth
cometh to the light, that his works may be made manifest, that they
have been wrought in God."




PREPARATORY PREACHING


JESUS BAPTIZING AND PREACHING.

After these things came Jesus and his disciples into the land of
Judaea; and there he tarried with them, and baptized (although Jesus
himself baptized not, but his disciples).

And John also was baptizing in AEnon near to Salim, because there was
much water there: and they came, and were baptized. For John was not
yet cast into prison.

And Jesus himself, when he began to teach, was about thirty years of
age.


JOHN'S TRIBUTE TO JESUS.

There arose therefore a questioning on the part of John's disciples
with a Jew about purifying. And they came unto John, and said to him,
"Rabbi, he that was with thee beyond the Jordan, to whom thou hast
borne witness, behold, the same baptizeth, and all men come to him."

John answered and said, "A man can receive nothing, except it have
been given him from heaven. Ye yourselves bear me witness, that I
said, I am not the Christ, but, that I am sent before him. He that
hath the bride is the bridegroom: but the friend of the bridegroom,
that standeth and heareth him, rejoiceth greatly because of the
bridegroom's voice: this my joy therefore is made full. He must
increase, but I must decrease."

He that cometh from above is above all: he that is of the earth is of
the earth, and of the earth he speaketh: he that cometh from heaven is
above all. What he hath seen and heard, of that he beareth witness;
and no man receiveth his witness. He that hath received his witness
hath set his seal to this, that God is true. For he whom God hath sent
speaketh the words of God: for he giveth not the Spirit by measure.
The Father loveth the Son, and hath given all things into his hand. He
that believeth on the Son hath eternal life; but he that obeyeth not
the Son shall not see life, but the wrath of God abideth on him.


AT JACOB'S WELL.

When therefore the Lord knew that the Pharisees had heard that Jesus
was making and baptizing more disciples than John, he left Judaea, and
departed again into Galilee.

And he must needs pass through Samaria. So he cometh to a city of
Samaria, called Sychar, near to the parcel of ground that Jacob gave
to his son Joseph: and Jacob's well was there. Jesus therefore, being
wearied with his journey, sat thus by the well. It was about the sixth
hour.

There cometh a woman of Samaria to draw water: Jesus saith unto her,
"Give me to drink." For his disciples were gone away into the city to
buy food.

The Samaritan woman therefore saith unto him, "How is it that thou,
being a Jew, askest drink of me, who am a Samaritan woman?" (for Jews
have no dealings with Samaritans).

Jesus answered and said unto her, "If thou knewest the gift of God,
and who it is that saith to thee, 'Give me to drink' thou wouldest
have asked of him, and he would have given thee living water."

The woman saith unto him, "Sir, thou hast nothing to draw with, and
the well is deep; whence then hast thou that living water? Art thou
greater than our father Jacob, who gave us the well, and drank thereof
himself, and his sons, and his cattle?"

Jesus answered and said unto her, "Every one that drinketh of this
water shall thirst again; but whosoever drinketh of the water that I
shall give him shall never thirst; but the water that I shall give him
shall become in him a well of water, springing up unto eternal life."

The woman saith unto him, "Sir, give me this water, that I thirst not,
neither come all the way hither to draw."

Jesus saith unto her, "Go, call thy husband, and come hither."

The woman answered and said unto him, "I have no husband."

Jesus saith unto her, "Thou saidst well, I have no husband: for thou
hast had five husbands; and he whom thou now hast is not thy husband:
this hast thou said truly."

The woman saith unto him, "Sir, I perceive that thou art a prophet.
Our fathers worshipped in this mountain; and ye say, that in Jerusalem
is the place where men ought to worship."

Jesus saith unto her, "Woman, believe me, the hour cometh, when
neither in this mountain, nor in Jerusalem, shall ye worship the
Father. Ye worship that which ye know not: we worship that which we
know; for salvation is from the Jews. But the hour cometh, and now is,
when the true worshippers shall worship the Father in spirit and
truth: for such doth the Father seek to be his worshippers. God is a
Spirit: and they that worship him must worship in spirit and truth."

The woman saith unto him, "I know that Messiah cometh (he that is
called Christ): when he is come, he will declare unto us all things."

Jesus saith unto her, "I that speak unto thee am he."


PREACHING TO THE SAMARITANS.

And upon this came his disciples; and they marvelled that he was
speaking with a woman; yet no man said, "What seekest thou?" or, "Why
speakest thou with her?"

So the woman left her waterpot, and went away into the city, and saith
to the people, "Come, see a man, who told me all things that ever I
did: can this be the Christ?"

They went out of the city, and were coming to him.

In the mean while the disciples prayed him, saying, "Rabbi, eat."

But he said unto them, "I have meat to eat that ye know not."

The disciples therefore said one to another, "Hath any man brought him
aught to eat?"

Jesus saith unto them, "My meat is to do the will of him that sent me,
and to accomplish his work. Say not ye, 'There are yet four months,
and then cometh the harvest'? behold, I say unto you, Lift up your
eyes and look on the fields, that they are white already unto harvest.
He that reapeth receiveth wages, and gathereth fruit unto life
eternal; that he that soweth and he that reapeth may rejoice together.
For herein is the saying true, One soweth, and another reapeth. I sent
you to reap that whereon ye have not labored: others have labored and
ye are entered into their labor."

And from that city many of the Samaritans believed on him because of
the word of the woman, who testified, "He told me all things that ever
I did."

So when the Samaritans came unto him, they besought him to abide with
them: and he abode there two days. And many more believed because of
his word; and they said to the woman, "Now we believe, not because of
thy speaking: for we have heard for ourselves, and know that this is
indeed the Saviour of the world."




=HIS YEAR OF POPULARITY=

       *       *       *       *       *

JESUS IN GALILEE


JOHN THE BAPTIST IMPRISONED.

Herod the tetrarch sent forth and laid hold upon John, and bound him
in prison for the sake of Herodias, his brother Philip's wife; for he
had married her. For John said unto Herod, "It is not lawful for thee
to have thy brother's wife."

And Herodias set herself against him, and desired to kill him: and she
could not; for Herod feared John, knowing that he was a righteous and
holy man, and kept him safe.

And when he would have put him to death, he feared the multitude,
because they counted him as a prophet.


RECEPTION OF JESUS BY THE GALILAEANS.

Now when Jesus heard that John was delivered up, he returned in the
power of the Spirit into Galilee, and the Galilaeans received him,
having seen all the things that he did in Jerusalem at the feast: for
they also went unto the feast.

And a fame went out concerning him through all the region round about.
And he taught in their synagogues, preaching the gospel of God, and
saying, "The time is fulfilled, and the kingdom of God is at hand:
repent ye, and believe in the gospel."


HEALING THE NOBLEMAN'S SON.

He came therefore again unto Cana of Galilee, where he made the water
wine. And there was a certain nobleman, whose son was sick at
Capernaum. When he heard that Jesus was come out of Judaea into
Galilee, he went unto him, and besought him that he would come down,
and heal his son; for he was at the point of death.

Jesus therefore said unto him, "Except ye see signs and wonders, ye
will in no wise believe."

The nobleman saith unto him, "Sir, come down ere my child die."

Jesus saith unto him, "Go thy way; thy son liveth."

The man believed the word that Jesus spake unto him, and he went his
way. And as he was now going down, his servants met him, saying that
his son lived. So he inquired of them the hour when he began to amend.

They said therefore unto him, "Yesterday at the seventh hour the fever
left him."

So the father knew that it was at that hour in which Jesus said unto
him, "Thy son liveth": and himself believed, and his whole house.

This is again the second sign that Jesus did, having come out of Judaea
into Galilee.


THE RECALL OF THE FISHERMEN.

And he came down to Capernaum, a city of Galilee, which is by the sea,
in the borders of Zebulun and Naphtali: that it might be fulfilled
which was spoken through Isaiah the prophet, saying,

    "The land of Zebulun and the land of Naphtali,
    Toward the sea, beyond the Jordan,
    Galilee of the Gentiles,
    The people that sat in darkness
    Saw a great light,
    And to them that sat in the region and shadow of death,
    To them did light spring up."

Now it came to pass, while the multitude pressed upon him and heard
the word of God, that he was standing by the lake of Gennesaret; and
he saw two boats standing by the lake: but the fishermen had gone out
of them, and were washing their nets. And he entered into one of the
boats, which was Simon's, and asked him to put out a little from the
land. And he sat down and taught the multitudes out of the boat.

And when he had left speaking, he said unto Simon, "Put out into the
deep, and let down your nets for a draught."

And Simon answered and said, "Master, we toiled all night, and took
nothing: but at thy word I will let down the nets."

And when they had done this, they inclosed a great multitude of
fishes; and their nets were breaking; and they beckoned unto their
partners in the other boat, that they should come and help them. And
they came, and filled both the boats, so that they began to sink.

But Simon Peter, when he saw it, fell down at Jesus' knees, saying,
"Depart from me; for I am a sinful man, O Lord!"

For he was amazed, and all that were with him, at the draught of the
fishes which they had taken; and so were also James and John, sons of
Zebedee, who were partners with Simon. And Jesus said unto Simon,
"Fear not; from henceforth thou shalt catch men."

And when they had brought their boats to land, they left all, and
followed him.


A DAY OF GOOD DEEDS IN CAPERNAUM.

And straightway on the sabbath day he entered into the synagogue and
taught. And they were astonished at his teaching: for his word was
with authority.

And in the synagogue there was a man, that had a spirit of an unclean
demon; and he cried out with a loud voice, "Ah! what have we to do
with thee, Jesus thou Nazarene? art thou come to destroy us? I know
thee who thou art, the Holy One of God!"

And Jesus rebuked him, saying, "Hold thy peace, and come out of him."

And when the demon had thrown him down in the midst, tearing him and
crying out with a loud voice, he came out of him, having done him no
hurt.

And amazement came upon all, and they spake together, one with
another, saying, "What is this word? for with authority and power he
commandeth the unclean spirits, and they come out."

And there went forth a rumor concerning him into every place of the
region of Galilee round about.

And he rose up from the synagogue, and entered into the house of
Simon. And Simon's wife's mother was holden with a great fever; and
they besought him for her. And he stood over her, and rebuked the
fever; and it left her: and immediately she rose up and ministered
unto them.

And at even, when the sun did set, they brought unto him all that were
sick, and them that were possessed with demons. And all the city was
gathered together at the door. And he cast out many demons with a
word, and he suffered not the demons to speak, because they knew that
he was the Christ. And he laid his hands on every one of them, and
healed all that were sick of divers diseases; that it might be
fulfilled which was spoken through Isaiah the prophet, saying,
"Himself took our infirmities, and bare our diseases."


THE FIRST LEPER HEALED.

And in the morning, a great while before day, he rose up and went out,
and departed into a desert place, and there prayed. And Simon and they
that were with him followed after him; and they found him, and say
unto him, "All are seeking thee."

And he saith unto them, "Let us go elsewhere into the next towns, that
I may preach there also; for to this end came I forth."

And he went into their synagogues throughout all Galilee, preaching
and casting out demons.

And it came to pass, while he was in one of the cities, there cometh
to him a man full of leprosy, beseeching him, and kneeling down to
him, and saying unto him, "Lord, if thou wilt, thou canst make me
clean."

And being moved with compassion, he stretched forth his hand, and
touched him, and saith unto him, "I will; be thou made clean." And
straightway the leprosy departed from him, and he was made clean. And
he strictly charged him, and straightway sent him out, and saith unto
him, "See thou say nothing to any man: but go show thyself to the
priest, and offer for thy cleansing the things which Moses commanded,
for a testimony unto them."

But he went out, and began to publish it much, and to spread abroad
the matter, insomuch that Jesus could no more openly enter into a
city, but withdrew himself to desert places and prayed: and they came
to him from every quarter to hear and to be healed of their
infirmities. And the power of the Lord was with him to heal.




BEGINNINGS OF CONTROVERSY


THE HEALING OF A PARALYTIC.

And when he entered again into Capernaum after some days, it was
noised that he was in the house. And many were gathered together, so
that there was no longer room for them, no, not even about the door;
and he spake the word unto them.

And they come, bringing unto him a man sick of the palsy, borne of
four. And when they could not come nigh unto him for the crowd, they
went up to the housetop, and uncovered the roof where he was: and when
they had broken it up, they let down the bed whereon the sick of the
palsy lay.

And Jesus seeing their faith saith unto the sick of the palsy, "Son,
thy sins are forgiven."

But there were certain of the scribes sitting there, and reasoning in
their hearts, "Why doth this man thus speak? he blasphemeth: who can
forgive sins but one, even God?"

And straightway Jesus, perceiving in his spirit that they so reasoned
within themselves, saith unto them, "Why reason ye these things in
your hearts? Which is easier, to say to the sick of the palsy, 'Thy
sins are forgiven,' or to say, 'Arise, and take up thy bed, and walk?'
But that ye may know that the Son of man hath authority on earth to
forgive sins (he saith to the sick of the palsy), 'I say unto thee,
Arise, take up thy bed, and go unto thy house.'"

And he arose, and straightway took up the bed, and went forth before
them all; insomuch that they were all amazed, and were filled with
fear, and glorified God, saying, "We never saw it on this fashion: we
have seen strange things to-day."


THE PUBLICAN DISCIPLE.

And Jesus went forth again by the sea side; and all the multitude
resorted unto him, and he taught them. And as he passed by, he saw a
man, called Levi Matthew, the son of Alphaeus, sitting at the place of
toll, and he saith unto him, "Follow me."

And he forsook all, and arose and followed him.

And Levi made him a great feast in his house. And there was a great
multitude of publicans and sinners that were sitting at meat with
Jesus and his disciples.

And when the Pharisees saw it, they said unto his disciples, "Why
eateth your Teacher with the publicans and sinners?"

But when he heard it, he said, "They that are whole have no need of a
physician, but they that are sick. But go ye and learn what this
meaneth, 'I desire mercy, and not sacrifice': for I came not to call
the righteous, but sinners."


THE OLD AND THE NEW.

And John's disciples and the Pharisees were fasting, and they come and
say unto him, "The disciples of John fast often, and make
supplications; likewise also the disciples of the Pharisees; but thine
eat and drink."

And Jesus said unto them, "Can ye make the sons of the bride-chamber
fast, while the bridegroom is with them? But the days will come; and
when the bridegroom shall be taken away from them, then will they fast
in those days."

And he spake also a parable unto them: "No man rendeth a piece from a
new garment and putteth it upon an old garment; else he will rend the
new, and also the piece from the new will not agree with the old. And
no man putteth new wine into old wine-skins; else the new wine will
burst the skins, and itself will be spilled, and the skins will
perish. But new wine must be put into fresh wine-skins. And no man
having drunk old wine desireth new; for he saith, The old is good."


A SABBATH HEALING IN JERUSALEM.

After these things there was a feast of the Jews; and Jesus went up to
Jerusalem.

Now there is in Jerusalem by the sheep gate a pool, which is called in
Hebrew Bethesda, having five porches. In these lay a multitude of them
that were sick, blind, halt, withered. And a certain man was there,
who had been thirty and eight years in his infirmity. When Jesus saw
him lying, and knew that he had been now a long time in that case, he
saith unto him, "Wouldest thou be made whole?"

The sick man answered him, "Sir, I have no man, when the water is
troubled, to put me into the pool: but while I am coming, another
steppeth down before me."

Jesus saith unto him, "Arise, take up thy bed, and walk."

And straightway the man was made whole, and took up his bed and
walked.

Now it was the sabbath on that day.

So the Jews said unto him that was cured, "It is the sabbath, and it
is not lawful for thee to take up thy bed."

But he answered them, "He that made me whole, the same said unto me,
'Take up thy bed, and walk.'"

They asked him, "Who is the man that said unto thee, 'Take up thy bed,
and walk'?"

But he that was healed knew not who it was; for Jesus had conveyed
himself away, a multitude being in the place. Afterward Jesus findeth
him in the temple, and said unto him, "Behold, thou art made whole:
sin no more, lest a worse thing befall thee."

The man went away, and told the Jews that it was Jesus who had made
him whole. And for this cause the Jews persecuted Jesus, because he
did these things on the sabbath.

But Jesus answered them, "My Father worketh even until now, and I
work."

For this cause therefore the Jews sought the more to kill him, because
he not only brake the sabbath, but also called God his own Father,
making himself equal with God.

Jesus therefore answered and said unto them, "Verily, verily, I say
unto you, The Son can do nothing of himself, but what he seeth the
Father doing: for what things soever he doeth, these the Son also
doeth in like manner. For the Father loveth the Son, and showeth him
all things that himself doeth: and greater works than these will he
show him, that ye may marvel. For as the Father raiseth the dead and
giveth them life, even so the Son also giveth life to whom he will.
For neither doth the Father judge any man, but he hath given all
judgment unto the Son; that all may honor the Son, even as they honor
the Father. He that honoreth not the Son honoreth not the Father that
sent him. Verily, verily, I say unto you, He that heareth my word, and
believeth him that sent me, hath eternal life, and cometh not into
judgment, but hath passed out of death into life. Verily, verily, I
say unto you, The hour cometh, and now is, when the dead shall hear
the voice of the Son of God; and they that hear shall live. For as the
Father hath life in himself, even so gave he to the Son also to have
life in himself: and he gave him authority to execute judgment,
because he is a son of man. Marvel not at this: for the hour cometh,
in which all that are in the tombs shall hear his voice, and shall
come forth; they that have done good, unto the resurrection of life;
and they that have done evil, unto the resurrection of judgment.

"I can of myself do nothing: as I hear, I judge: and my judgment is
righteous; because I seek not mine own will, but the will of him that
sent me. If I bear witness of myself, my witness is not true. It is
another that beareth witness of me; and I know that the witness which
he witnesseth of me is true. Ye have sent unto John, and he hath borne
witness unto the truth. But the witness which I receive is not from
man: howbeit I say these things, that ye may be saved. He was the lamp
that burneth and shineth; and ye were willing to rejoice for a season
in his light. But the witness which I have is greater than that of
John; for the works which the Father hath given me to accomplish, the
very works that I do, bear witness of me, that the Father hath sent
me. And the Father that sent me, he hath borne witness of me. Ye have
neither heard his voice at any time, nor seen his form. And ye have
not his word abiding in you: for whom he sent, him ye believe not.

"Ye search the scriptures, because ye think that in them ye have
eternal life; and these are they which bear witness of me; and ye will
not come to me, that ye may have life. I receive not glory from men.
But I know you, that ye have not the love of God in yourselves. I am
come in my Father's name, and ye receive me not: if another shall come
in his own name, him ye will receive. How can ye believe, who receive
glory one of another, and the glory that cometh from the only God ye
seek not? Think not that I will accuse you to the Father: there is one
that accuseth you, even Moses, on whom ye have set your hope. For if
ye believed Moses, ye would believe me; for he wrote of me. But if ye
believe not his writings, how shall ye believe my words?"


PLUCKING GRAIN ON THE SABBATH.

At that season Jesus went on the sabbath day through the grainfields;
and his disciples were hungry and began to pluck ears and to eat,
rubbing them in their hands.

But the Pharisees, when they saw it, said unto him, "Behold, thy
disciples do that which it is not lawful to do upon the sabbath."

But he said unto them, "Have ye not read what David did, when he had
need and was hungry, and they that were with him: how he entered into
the house of God, and ate the showbread, which it was not lawful for
him to eat, neither for them that were with him, but only for the
priests? Or have ye not read in the law, that on the sabbath day the
priests in the temple profane the sabbath, and are guiltless? But I
say unto you, that one greater than the temple is here. But if ye had
known what this meaneth, 'I desire mercy, and not sacrifice,' ye would
not have condemned the guiltless."

And he said unto them, "The sabbath was made for man, and not man for
the sabbath: so that the Son of man is lord even of the sabbath."




MANY CALLED AND FEW CHOSEN


A MULTITUDE OF DISCIPLES.

And the report of him went forth into all Syria: and they brought unto
him all that were sick, holden with divers diseases and torments,
possessed with demons, and epileptic, and palsied; and he healed them.

And Jesus with his disciples withdrew to the sea: and a great
multitude from Galilee followed; and from Judaea, and from Jerusalem,
and from Idumaea, and beyond the Jordan, and about Tyre and Sidon, a
great multitude, hearing what great things he did, came unto him.

And he spake to his disciples, that a little boat should wait on him
because of the crowd, lest they should throng him: for he had healed
many; insomuch that as many as had plagues pressed upon him that they
might touch him: for power came forth from him, and healed them all.

And the unclean spirits, whensoever they beheld him, fell down before
him, and cried, saying, "Thou art the Son of God."

And he charged them much that they should not make him known: that it
might be fulfilled which was spoken through Isaiah the prophet,
saying,

    "Behold my servant whom I have chosen;
    My beloved in whom my soul is well pleased;
    I will put my Spirit upon him,
    And he shall declare judgment to the Gentiles.
    He shall not strive, nor cry aloud;
    Neither shall any one hear his voice in the streets.
    A bruised reed shall he not break.
    And smoking flax shall he not quench.
    Till he send forth judgment unto victory.
    And in his name shall the nations hope."


SELECTION OF THE TWELVE.

And it came to pass in these days, that he went out into the mountain
to pray; and he continued all night in prayer to God. And when it was
day, he called his disciples; and he chose from them twelve, that they
might be with him, and that he might send them forth to preach, and to
have authority to cast out demons.

Now the names of the twelve apostles are these: Simon, whom he
surnamed Peter, and Andrew, his brother; James, the son of Zebedee,
and John his brother, and them he surnamed Boanerges, which is sons of
thunder; Philip and Bartholomew; Thomas and Matthew the publican;
James the son of Alphaeus, and Thaddaeus; Simon, who was called the
Zealot, and Judas Iscariot, who became a traitor.




THE TEACHING OF THE KINGDOM


THE CITIZENS OF THE KINGDOM.

And he lifted up his eyes on his disciples, and said:

"Blessed are the poor in spirit: for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.

"Blessed are they that mourn: for they shall be comforted.

"Blessed are the meek: for they shall inherit the earth.

"Blessed are they that hunger and thirst after righteousness: for they
shall be filled.

"Blessed are the merciful: for they shall obtain mercy.

"Blessed are the pure in heart: for they shall see God.

"Blessed are the peacemakers: for they shall be called sons of God.

"Blessed are they that have been persecuted for righteousness' sake:
for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. Blessed are ye when men shall
reproach you, and persecute you, and say all manner of evil against
you falsely, for my sake. Rejoice, and be exceeding glad: for great is
your reward in heaven: for so persecuted they the prophets that were
before you.

"Ye are the salt of the earth: but if the salt have lost its savor,
wherewith shall it be salted? it is thenceforth good for nothing, but
to be cast out and trodden under foot of men.

"Ye are the light of the world. A city set on a hill cannot be hid.
Neither do men light a lamp, and put it under the bushel, but on the
stand; and it shineth unto all that are in the house. Even so let
your light shine before men; that they may see your good works, and
glorify your Father who is in heaven.


THE RIGHTEOUSNESS OF THE KINGDOM.

"Think not that I came to destroy the law or the prophets: I came not
to destroy, but to fulfil. For verily I say unto you, Till heaven and
earth pass away, one jot or one tittle shall in no wise pass away from
the law, till all things be accomplished. Whosoever therefore shall
break one of these least commandments, and shall teach men so, shall
be called least in the kingdom of heaven: but whosoever shall do and
teach them, he shall be called great in the kingdom of heaven. For I
say unto you, that except your righteousness shall exceed the
righteousness of the scribes and Pharisees, ye shall in no wise enter
into the kingdom of heaven.

"Ye have heard that it was said to them of old time, 'Thou shalt not
kill; and whosoever shall kill shall be in danger of the judgment:'
but I say unto you, that every one who is angry with his brother shall
be in danger of the judgment; and whosoever shall say to his brother,
'Raca,' shall be in danger of the council; and whosoever shall say,
'Thou fool,' shall be in danger of the hell of fire.

"If therefore thou art offering thy gift at the altar, and there
rememberest that thy brother hath aught against thee, leave there thy
gift before the altar, and go thy way, first be reconciled to thy
brother, and then come and offer thy gift. Agree with thine adversary
quickly, while thou art with him in the way; lest haply the adversary
deliver thee to the judge, and the judge deliver thee to the officer,
and thou be cast into prison. Verily I say unto thee, Thou shalt by
no means come out thence, till thou have paid the last farthing.

"Ye have heard that it was said, 'Thou shalt not commit adultery:' but
I say unto you, that every one that looketh on a woman to lust after
her hath committed adultery with her already in his heart. And if thy
right eye causeth thee to stumble, pluck it out, and cast it from
thee: for it is profitable for thee that one of thy members should
perish, and not thy whole body be cast into hell. And if thy right
hand causeth thee to stumble, cut it off, and cast it from thee: for
it is profitable for thee that one of thy members should perish, and
not thy whole body go into hell.

"It was said also, 'Whosoever shall put away his wife, let him give
her a writing of divorcement:' but I say unto you, that every one that
putteth away his wife, saving for the cause of fornication, maketh her
an adulteress: and whosoever shall marry her when she is put away
committeth adultery.

"Again, ye have heard that it was said to them of old time, 'Thou
shalt not forswear thyself, but shalt perform unto the Lord thine
oaths:' but I say unto you, Swear not at all; neither by the heaven,
for it is the throne of God; nor by the earth, for it is the footstool
of his feet; nor by Jerusalem, for it is the city of the great King.
Neither shalt thou swear by thy head, for thou canst not make one hair
white or black. But let your speech be, 'Yea, yea; Nay, nay:' and
whatsoever is more than these is of the evil one.

"Ye have heard that it was said, 'An eye for an eye, and a tooth for a
tooth:' but I say unto you, Resist not him that is evil: but whosoever
smiteth thee on thy right cheek, turn to him the other also. And if
any man would go to law with thee, and take away thy coat, let him
have thy cloak also. And whosoever shall compel thee to go one mile,
go with him two. Give to every one that asketh thee; and of him that
taketh away thy goods ask them not again, and from him that would
borrow of thee turn not thou away. All things therefore whatsoever ye
would that men should do unto you, even so do ye also unto them: for
this is the law and the prophets.

"Ye have heard that it was said, 'Thou shalt love thy neighbor, and
hate thine enemy:' but I say unto you, Love your enemies, do good to
them that hate you, bless them that curse you, pray for them that
despitefully use you, that ye may be sons of your Father who is in
heaven: for he maketh his sun to rise on the evil and the good, and
sendeth rain on the just and the unjust. For if ye love them that love
you, what reward have ye? do not even the publicans the same? And if
ye salute your brethren only, what do ye more than others? do not even
the Gentiles the same? And if ye do good to them that do good to you,
what thank have ye? for even sinners do the same. And if ye lend to
them of whom ye hope to receive, what thank have ye? even sinners lend
to sinners, to receive again as much. But love your enemies, and do
them good, and lend, never despairing; and your reward shall be great,
and ye shall be sons of the Most High: for he is kind toward the
unthankful and evil. Ye therefore shall be perfect, as your heavenly
Father is perfect.


THE DANGER OF HYPOCRISY.

"Take heed that ye do not your righteousness before men, to be seen of
them: else ye have no reward with your Father who is in heaven.

"When therefore thou doest alms, sound not a trumpet before thee, as
the hypocrites do in the synagogues and in the streets, that they may
have glory of men. Verily I say unto you, They have received their
reward. But when thou doest alms, let not thy left hand know what thy
right hand doeth: that thine alms may be in secret: and thy Father who
seeth in secret shall recompense thee.

"And when ye pray, ye shall not be as the hypocrites: for they love to
stand and pray in the synagogues and in the corners of the streets,
that they may be seen of men. Verily I say unto you, They have
received their reward. But thou, when thou prayest, enter into thine
inner chamber, and having shut thy door, pray to thy Father who is in
secret, and thy Father who seeth in secret shall recompense thee. And
in praying use not vain repetitions, as the Gentiles do: for they
think that they shall be heard for their much speaking. Be not
therefore like unto them: for your Father knoweth what things ye have
need of before ye ask him. After this manner therefore pray ye:

    Our Father who art in heaven,
    Hallowed be thy name.
    Thy kingdom come.
    Thy will be done, as in heaven, so on earth.
    Give us this day our daily bread.
    And forgive us our debts, as we also have forgiven our debtors.
    And bring us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil.

"For if ye forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly Father will
also forgive you. But if ye forgive not men their trespasses, neither
will your Father forgive your trespasses.

"Moreover when ye fast, be not, as the hypocrites, of a sad
countenance: for they disfigure their faces, that they may be seen of
men to fast. Verily I say unto you, They have received their reward.
But thou, when thou fastest, anoint thy head, and wash thy face; that
thou be not seen of men to fast, but of thy Father who is in secret:
and thy Father, who seeth in secret, shall recompense thee.


SIMPLE TRUST IN GOD.

"Lay not up for yourselves treasures upon the earth, where moth and
rust consume, and where thieves break through and steal: but lay up
for yourselves treasures in heaven, where neither moth nor rust doth
consume, and where thieves do not break through nor steal: for where
thy treasure is, there will thy heart be also.

"The lamp of the body is the eye: if therefore thine eye be single,
thy whole body shall be full of light. But if thine eye be evil, thy
whole body shall be full of darkness. If therefore the light that is
in thee be darkness, how great is the darkness!

"No man can serve two masters: for either he will hate the one, and
love the other; or else he will hold to one, and despise the other. Ye
cannot serve God and mammon.

"Therefore I say unto you, Be not anxious for your life, what ye shall
eat, or what ye shall drink; nor yet for your body, what ye shall put
on. Is not the life more than the food, and the body than the raiment?
Behold the birds of the heaven, that they sow not, neither do they
reap, nor gather into barns; and your heavenly Father feedeth them.
Are not ye of much more value than they? And which of you by being
anxious can add one cubit unto the measure of his life?

"And why are ye anxious concerning raiment? Consider the lilies of
the field, how they grow; they toil not, neither do they spin: yet I
say unto you, that even Solomon in all his glory was not arrayed like
one of these. But if God doth so clothe the grass of the field, which
to-day is, and to-morrow is cast into the oven, shall he not much more
clothe you, O ye of little faith? Be not therefore anxious, saying,
'What shall we eat?' or, 'What shall we drink?' or, 'Wherewithal shall
we be clothed?' For after all these things do the Gentiles seek; for
your heavenly Father knoweth that ye have need of all these things.
But seek ye first his kingdom, and his righteousness; and all these
things shall be added unto you. Fear not, little flock; for it is your
Father's good pleasure to give you the kingdom.

"Be not therefore anxious for the morrow: for the morrow will be
anxious for itself. Sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof.


CHARITABLE JUDGMENT.

"Be ye merciful, even as your Father is merciful. And judge not, and
ye shall not be judged: and condemn not, and ye shall not be
condemned: release, and ye shall be released: give, and it shall be
given unto you; good measure, pressed down, shaken together, running
over, shall they give into your bosom. For with what measure ye mete
it shall be measured to you again."

And he spake also a parable unto them, "Can the blind guide the blind?
shall they not both fall into a pit? The disciple is not above his
teacher: but every one when he is perfected shall be as his teacher.
And why beholdest thou the mote that is in thy brother's eye, but
considerest not the beam that is in thine own eye? Or how canst thou
say to thy brother, 'Brother, let me cast out the mote that is in
thine eye,' when thou thyself beholdest not the beam that is in thine
own eye? Thou hypocrite, cast out first the beam out of thine own eye,
and then shalt thou see clearly to cast out the mote that is in thy
brother's eye.

"Give not that which is holy unto the dogs, neither cast your pearls
before the swine, lest haply they trample them under their feet, and
turn and rend you."


PRAYER.

And he said unto them, "Which of you shall have a friend, and shall go
unto him at midnight, and say to him, 'Friend, lend me three loaves;
for a friend of mine is come to me from a journey, and I have nothing
to set before him;' and he from within shall answer and say, 'Trouble
me not: the door is now shut, and my children are with me in bed; I
cannot rise and give thee?' I say unto you, Though he will not rise
and give him because he is his friend, yet because of his importunity
he will arise and give him as many as he needeth.

"And I say unto you, Ask, and it shall be given you; seek, and ye
shall find; knock, and it shall be opened unto you: for every one that
asketh receiveth; and he that seeketh findeth; and to him that
knocketh it shall be opened. Or what man is there of you that is a
father, who, if his son shall ask him for a loaf, will give him a
stone; or if he shall ask for a fish, will give him a serpent; or if
he shall ask an egg, will give him a scorpion? If ye then, being evil,
know how to give good gifts unto your children, how much more shall
your Father who is in heaven give good things to them that ask him?


SINCERITY.

"Enter ye in by the narrow gate: for wide is the gate, and broad is
the way, that leadeth to destruction, and many are they that enter in
thereby. For narrow is the gate, and straitened the way, that leadeth
unto life, and few are they that find it.

"Beware of false prophets, who come to you in sheep's clothing, but
inwardly are ravening wolves. By their fruits ye shall know them. Do
men gather grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles? Even so every good
tree bringeth forth good fruit; but the corrupt tree bringeth forth
evil fruit. A good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit, neither can a
corrupt tree bring forth good fruit. Every tree that bringeth not
forth good fruit is hewn down, and cast into the fire. Therefore by
their fruits ye shall know them.

"The good man out of the good treasure of his heart bringeth forth
that which is good; and the evil man out of the evil treasure bringeth
forth that which is evil: for out of the abundance of the heart his
mouth speaketh.

"Not every one that saith unto me, 'Lord, Lord,' shall enter into the
kingdom of heaven; but he that doeth the will of my Father who is in
heaven. Many will say to me in that day, 'Lord, Lord, did we not
prophesy by thy name, and by thy name cast out demons, and by thy name
do many mighty works?' And then will I profess unto them, I never knew
you: depart from me, ye that work iniquity.

"Every one therefore that heareth these words of mine, and doeth them,
shall be likened unto a wise man, who built his house upon the rock:
and the rain descended, and the floods came, and the winds blew, and
beat upon that house; and it fell not: for it was founded upon the
rock. And every one that heareth these words of mine, and doeth them
not, shall be likened unto a foolish man, who built his house upon the
sand: and the rain descended, and the floods came, and the winds blew,
and smote upon that house; and it fell: and great was the fall
thereof."

And it came to pass, when Jesus had finished these words, the
multitudes were astonished at his teaching: for he taught them as one
having authority, and not as their scribes.




A TOUR IN GALILEE


THE WORTHY CENTURION.

After he had ended all his sayings in the ears of the people, he
entered into Capernaum.

And a certain centurion's servant, who was dear unto him, was sick and
at the point of death. And when he heard concerning Jesus, he sent
unto him elders of the Jews, asking him that he would come and save
his servant.

And they, when they came to Jesus, besought him earnestly, saying, "He
is worthy that thou shouldest do this for him; for he loveth our
nation, and himself built us our synagogue."

And Jesus went with them. And when he was now not far from the house,
the centurion sent friends to him, saying unto him, "Lord, trouble not
thyself; for I am not worthy that thou shouldest come under my roof:
wherefore neither thought I myself worthy to come unto thee: but say
the word, and my servant shall be healed. For I also am a man set
under authority, having under myself soldiers: and I say to this one,
'Go,' and he goeth; and to another, 'Come,' and he cometh; and to my
servant, 'Do this,' and he doeth it."

And when Jesus heard these things, he marvelled at him, and turned and
said unto the multitude that followed him, "Verily I say unto you, I
have not found so great faith, no, not in Israel. And I say unto you,
that many shall come from the east and the west, and shall sit down
with Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, in the kingdom of heaven: but the
sons of the kingdom shall be cast forth into the outer darkness:
there shall be the weeping and the gnashing of teeth."

And they that were sent, returning to the house, found the servant
whole.


RAISING THE WIDOW'S SON.

And it came to pass soon afterwards, that he went to a city called
Nain; and his disciples went with him, and a great multitude. Now when
he drew near to the gate of the city, behold, there was carried out
one that was dead, the only son of his mother, and she was a widow:
and much people of the city was with her.

And when the Lord saw her, he had compassion on her, and said unto
her, "Weep not."

And he came nigh and touched the bier: and the bearers stood still.
And he said, "Young man, I say unto thee, Arise."

And he that was dead sat up, and began to speak. And he gave him to
his mother.

And fear took hold on all: and they glorified God, saying, "A great
prophet is arisen among us: and, God hath visited his people."

And this report went forth concerning him in the whole of Judaea, and
all the region round about.


A QUESTION FROM JOHN THE BAPTIST.

And the disciples of John told him in the prison of all these things.
And John calling unto him two of his disciples sent them to the Lord,
saying, "Art thou he that cometh, or look we for another?"

And when the men were come unto him, they said, "John the Baptist hath
sent us unto thee, saying, 'Art thou he that cometh, or look we for
another?'"

In that hour he cured many of diseases and plagues and evil spirits;
and on many that were blind he bestowed sight. And he answered and
said unto them, "Go and tell John the things which ye have seen and
heard; the blind receive their sight, the lame walk, the lepers are
cleansed, and the deaf hear, the dead are raised up, the poor have
good tidings preached to them. And blessed is he, whosoever shall find
no occasion of stumbling in me."


JESUS' ESTIMATE OF JOHN THE BAPTIST.

And when the messengers of John were departed, he began to say unto
the multitudes concerning John, "What went ye out into the wilderness
to behold? a reed shaken with the wind? But what went ye out to see? a
man clothed in soft raiment? Behold, they that are gorgeously
apparelled, and live delicately, are in kings' courts. But what went
ye out to see? a prophet? Yea, I say unto you, and much more than a
prophet. This is he of whom it is written.

    "'Behold, I send my messenger before thy face,
    Who shall prepare thy way before thee.'

"Verily I say unto you, Among them that are born of women there hath
not arisen a greater than John the Baptist: yet he that is but little
in the kingdom of heaven is greater than he. And all the people when
they heard, and the publicans, justified God, being baptized with the
baptism of John. But the Pharisees and the lawyers rejected for
themselves the counsel of God, being not baptized of him.

"And from the days of John the Baptist until now the kingdom of heaven
suffereth violence, and men of violence take it by force. For all the
prophets and the law prophesied until John. And if ye are willing to
receive it, this is Elijah that is to come. He that hath ears to hear,
let him hear.

"But whereunto shall I liken this generation? It is like unto
children sitting in the marketplaces, who call unto their fellows and
say, 'We piped unto you, and ye did not dance; we wailed, and ye did
not mourn.' For John came neither eating nor drinking, and they say,
'He hath a demon.' The Son of man came eating and drinking, and they
say, 'Behold, a gluttonous man and a winebibber, a friend of publicans
and sinners!' And wisdom is justified of all her children."


THE DEATH OF JOHN THE BAPTIST.

And Herod on his birthday made a supper to his lords, and the high
captains, and the chief men of Galilee. And the daughter of Herodias
danced in the midst, and pleased Herod, and them that sat at meat with
him; and the king said unto the damsel, "Ask of me whatsoever thou
wilt, and I will give it thee."

And he sware unto her, "Whatsoever thou shalt ask of me, I will give
it to thee, unto the half of my kingdom."

And she went out, and said unto her mother, "What shall I ask?"

And she said, "The head of John the Baptist."

And she came in straightway with haste unto the king, and asked,
saying, "I will that thou forthwith give me on a platter the head of
John the Baptist."

And the king was exceeding sorry; but for the sake of his oaths, and
of them that sat at meat, he would not reject her. And straightway the
king sent forth a soldier of his guard, and commanded to bring his
head: and he went and beheaded him in the prison, and brought his head
on a platter, and gave it to the damsel; and the damsel gave it to her
mother.

And when his disciples heard thereof, they came and took up his
corpse, and laid it in a tomb; and they went and told Jesus.


FORGIVENESS OF THE REPENTANT WOMAN.

And one of the Pharisees desired him that he would eat with him. And
he entered into the Pharisee's house, and sat down to meat. And
behold, a woman who was in the city, a sinner; and when she knew that
he was sitting at meat in the Pharisee's house, she brought an
alabaster cruse of ointment, and standing behind at his feet, weeping,
she began to wet his feet with her tears, and wiped them with the hair
of her head, and kissed his feet, and anointed them with the ointment.

Now when the Pharisee that had bidden him saw it, he spake within
himself, saying, "This man, if he were a prophet, would have perceived
who and what manner of woman this is that toucheth him, that she is a
sinner."

And Jesus answering said unto him, "Simon, I have somewhat to say unto
thee."

And he saith, "Teacher, say on."

"A certain lender had two debtors: the one owed five hundred
shillings, and the other fifty. When they had not wherewith to pay, he
forgave them both. Which of them therefore will love him most?"

Simon answered and said, "He, I suppose, to whom he forgave the most."

And he said unto him, "Thou hast rightly judged." And turning to the
woman, he said unto Simon, "Seest thou this woman? I entered into thy
house, thou gavest me no water for my feet: but she hath wetted my
feet with her tears, and wiped them with her hair. Thou gavest me no
kiss: but she, since the time I came in, hath not ceased to kiss my
feet. My head with oil thou didst not anoint: but she hath anointed
my feet with ointment. Wherefore I say unto thee, Her sins, which are
many, are forgiven; for she loved much: but to whom little is
forgiven, the same loveth little."

And he said unto her, "Thy sins are forgiven."

And they that sat at meat with him began to say within themselves,
"Who is this that even forgiveth sins?"

And he said unto the woman, "Thy faith hath saved thee; go in peace."


THE MINISTERING WOMEN.

And it came to pass soon afterwards, that he went about through cities
and villages, preaching and bringing the good tidings of the kingdom
of God, and with him the twelve, and certain women who had been healed
of evil spirits and infirmities: Mary that was called Magdalene, from
whom seven demons had gone out, and Joanna the wife of Chuzas Herod's
steward, and Susanna, and many others, who ministered unto them of
their substance.




GROWING POPULARITY AND RISING OPPOSITION


THE CONCERN OF JESUS' FRIENDS.

And he cometh into a house. And the multitude cometh together again,
so that they could not so much as eat bread. And when his friends
heard it, they went out to lay hold on him: for they said, "He is
beside himself."

And there came to him his mother and brethren, and they could not come
at him for the crowd. And it was told him, "Thy mother and thy
brethren stand without, desiring to see thee."

But he answered and said unto him that told him, "Who is my mother?
and who are my brethren?" And he stretched forth his hand towards his
disciples, and said, "Behold, my mother and my brethren! For whosoever
shall do the will of my Father who is in heaven, he is my brother, and
sister, and mother."


WARNING OF ETERNAL SIN.

Then was brought unto him one possessed with a demon, blind and dumb:
and he healed him, insomuch that the dumb man spake and saw. And all
the multitudes were amazed, and said, "Can this be the son of David?"

But when the Pharisees heard it, and the scribes that came down from
Jerusalem, they said, "This man doth not cast out demons, but by
Beelzebub the prince of the demons."

And knowing their thoughts he said unto them, "Every kingdom divided
against itself is brought to desolation; and every city or house
divided against itself shall not stand: and if Satan casteth out
Satan, he is divided against himself; how then shall his kingdom
stand? And if I by Beelzebub cast out demons, by whom do your sons
cast them out? therefore shall they be your judges. But if I by the
Spirit of God cast out demons, then is the kingdom of God come upon
you.

"When the strong man fully armed guardeth his own court, his goods are
in peace: but when a stronger than he shall come upon him, and
overcome him, he taketh from him his whole armor wherein he trusted,
and divideth his spoils. He that is not with me is against me; and he
that gathereth not with me scattereth.

"Verily I say unto you, All their sins shall be forgiven unto the sons
of men, and their blasphemies wherewith soever they shall blaspheme:
but whosoever shall blaspheme against the Holy Spirit hath never
forgiveness, but is guilty of an eternal sin:" because they said, "He
hath an unclean spirit."

"Either make the tree good, and its fruit good; or make the tree
corrupt, and its fruit corrupt: for the tree is known by its fruit. Ye
offspring of vipers, how can ye, being evil, speak good things? for
out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaketh. The good man out
of his good treasure bringeth forth good things: and the evil man out
of his evil treasure bringeth forth evil things. And I say unto you,
that every idle word that men shall speak, they shall give account
thereof in the day of judgment. For by thy words thou shalt be
justified, and by thy words thou shalt be condemned."


THE DEMAND FOR A SIGN.

Then certain of the scribes and Pharisees answered him, saying,
"Teacher, we would see a sign from thee."

But he answered and said unto them, "An evil and adulterous generation
seeketh after a sign; and there shall no sign be given to it but the
sign of Jonah the prophet; for even as Jonah became a sign unto the
Ninevites, so shall also the Son of man be to this generation. The
queen of the south shall rise up in the judgment with the men of this
generation, and shall condemn them: for she came from the ends of the
earth to hear the wisdom of Solomon; and behold, a greater than
Solomon is here. The men of Nineveh shall stand up in the judgment
with this generation, and shall condemn it: for they repented at the
preaching of Jonah; and behold, a greater than Jonah is here.

"But the unclean spirit, when he is gone out of the man, passeth
through waterless places, seeking rest, and findeth it not. Then he
saith, 'I will return into my house whence I came out;' and when he is
come, he findeth it empty, swept, and garnished. Then goeth he, and
taketh with himself seven other spirits more evil than himself, and
they enter in and dwell there: and the last state of that man becometh
worse than the first. Even so shall it be also unto this evil
generation."

And it came to pass, as he said these things, a certain woman out of
the multitude lifted up her voice, and said unto him, "Blessed is the
womb that bare thee, and the breasts which thou didst suck."

But he said, "Yea rather, blessed are they that hear the word of God
and keep it."




THE PARABLES OF THE KINGDOM


THE SOWER.

On that day went Jesus out of the house, and sat by the sea side. And
there were gathered unto him great multitudes, so that he entered into
a boat, and sat; and all the multitude stood on the beach. And he
spake to them many things in parables, saying, "Hearken: Behold, the
sower went forth to sow: and it came to pass, as he sowed, some seed
fell by the wayside, and the birds came and devoured it. And other
fell on the rocky ground, where it had not much earth; and straightway
it sprang up, because it had no deepness of earth: and when the sun
was risen, it was scorched; and because it had no root, it withered
away. And other fell among the thorns, and the thorns grew up, and
choked it, and it yielded no fruit. And others fell into the good
ground, and yielded fruit, growing up and increasing; and brought
forth, thirtyfold, and sixtyfold, and a hundredfold." And he said,
"Who hath ears to hear, let him hear."

And when he was alone, they that were about him with the twelve came,
and said unto him, "Why speakest thou unto them in parables?"

And he answered and said unto them, "Unto you it is given to know the
mysteries of the kingdom of heaven, but to them it is not given. For
whosoever hath, to him shall be given, and he shall have abundance:
but whosoever hath not, from him shall be taken away even that which
he hath. Therefore speak I to them in parables; because seeing they
see not, and hearing they hear not, neither do they understand. And
unto them is fulfilled the prophecy of Isaiah, which saith,

    "'By hearing ye shall hear, and shall in no wise understand;
    And seeing ye shall see, and shall in no wise perceive;
    For this people's heart is waxed gross,
    And their ears are dull of hearing,
    And their eyes they have closed;
    Lest haply they should perceive with their eyes.
    And hear with their ears,
    And understand with their heart,
    And should turn again,
    And I should heal them.'

"But blessed are your eyes, for they see; and your ears, for they
hear. For verily I say unto you, that many prophets and righteous men
desired to see the things which ye see, and saw them not; and to hear
the things which ye hear, and heard them not."

And he saith unto them, "Know ye not this parable? and how, shall ye
know all the parables? The sower soweth the word. The seed is the word
of God. When any one heareth the word of the kingdom, and
understandeth it not, then cometh the evil one, and snatcheth away
that which hath been sown in his heart. This is he that was sown by
the way side. And he that was sown upon the rocky places, this is he
that heareth the word, and straightway with joy receiveth it; yet hath
he not root in himself, but endureth for a while; and when tribulation
or persecution ariseth because of the word, straightway he stumbleth.
And he that was sown among the thorns, this is he that heareth the
word; and the care of the world, and the deceitfulness of riches, and
the pleasures of this life, choke the word, and he becometh
unfruitful. And he that was sown upon the good ground, this is he that
heareth the word in an honest and good heart, and understandeth it,
who verily beareth fruit, and bringeth forth, some a hundredfold,
some sixty, some thirty."


THE TARES.

Another parable set he before them, saying, "The kingdom of heaven is
likened unto a man that sowed good seed in his field: but while men
slept, his enemy came and sowed tares also among the wheat, and went
away. But when the blade sprang up and brought forth fruit, then
appeared the tares also. And the servants of the householder came and
said unto him, 'Sir, didst thou not sow good seed in thy field? whence
then hath it tares?' And he said unto them, 'An enemy hath done this.'
And the servants say unto him, 'Wilt thou then that we go and gather
them up?' But he saith, 'Nay; lest haply while ye gather up the tares,
ye root up the wheat with them. Let both grow together until the
harvest: and in the time of the harvest I will say to the reapers,
Gather up first the tares, and bind them in bundles to burn them; but
gather the wheat into my barn.'"


THE GROWING GRAIN.

And he said, "So is the kingdom of God, as if a man should cast seed
upon the earth; and should sleep and rise night and day, and the seed
should spring up and grow, he knoweth not how. The earth beareth fruit
of herself; first the blade, then the ear, then the full grain in the
ear. But when the fruit is ripe, straightway he putteth forth the
sickle, because the harvest is come."


THE MUSTARD SEED.

And he said, "How shall we liken the kingdom of God? or in what
parable shall we set it forth? It is like a grain of mustard seed,
which, when it is sown upon the earth, though it be less than all the
seeds that are upon the earth, yet when it is sown, groweth up, and
becometh greater than all the herbs, and putteth out great branches;
so that the birds of the heaven can lodge under the shadow thereof."


THE LEAVEN.

Another parable spake he unto them: "The kingdom of heaven is like
unto leaven, which a woman took, and hid in three measures of meal,
till it was all leavened."


THE UNDERSTANDING OF PARABLES.

All these things spake Jesus in parables unto the multitudes; and
without a parable spake he nothing unto them: that it might be
fulfilled which was spoken through the prophet, saying,

    "I will open my mouth in parables;
    I will utter things hidden from the foundation of the world."

Then he left the multitudes, and went into the house: and his
disciples came unto him, saying, "Explain unto us the parable of the
tares of the field."

And he answered and said, "He that soweth the good seed is the Son of
man; and the field is the world; and the good seed, these are the sons
of the kingdom; and the tares are the sons of the evil one; and the
enemy that sowed them is the devil: and the harvest is the end of the
world; and the reapers are angels. As therefore the tares are gathered
up and burned with fire; so shall it be in the end of the world. The
Son of man shall send forth his angels and they shall gather out of
his kingdom all things that cause stumbling and them that do iniquity
and shall cast them into the furnace of fire: there shall be the
weeping and the gnashing of teeth. Then shall the righteous shine
forth as the sun in the kingdom of their Father. He that hath ears let
him hear."


THE HID TREASURE.

"The kingdom of heaven is like unto a treasure hidden in the field;
which a man found, and hid; and in his joy he goeth and selleth all
that he hath, and buyeth that field."


THE PEARL OF GREAT PRICE.

"Again, the kingdom of heaven is like unto a man that is a merchant
seeking goodly pearls: and having found one pearl of great price, he
went and sold all that he had, and bought it."


THE DRAG NET.

"Again, the kingdom of heaven is like unto a net, that was cast into
the sea, and gathered of every kind: which, when it was filled, they
drew up on the beach; and they sat down, and gathered the good into
vessels, but the bad they cast away. So shall it be in the end of the
world: the angels shall come forth, and sever the wicked from among
the righteous, and shall cast them into the furnace of fire: there
shall be the weeping and the gnashing of teeth.

"Have ye understood all these things?"

They say unto him, "Yea."

And he said unto them, "Therefore every scribe who hath been made a
disciple to the kingdom of heaven is like unto a man that is a
householder, who bringeth forth out of his treasure things new and
old."




A DAY OF MIRACLES BY THE LAKE


JESUS STILLS THE STORM.

And on that day, when even was come, he saith unto them, "Let us go
over unto the other side."

And leaving the multitude, they take him with them, even as he was, in
the boat. And other boats were with him. And there ariseth a great
storm of wind, and the waves beat into the boat, insomuch that the
boat was now filling. And he himself was in the stern, asleep on the
cushion: and they awake him, and say unto him, "Save, Lord; we
perish."

And he awoke, and rebuked the wind, and said unto the sea, "Peace, be
still."

And the wind ceased, and there was a great calm. And he said unto
them, "Why are ye fearful? have ye not yet faith?"

And they feared exceedingly, and said one to another, "Who then is
this, that even the wind and the sea obey him?"


THE LEGION OF DEMONS.

And they arrived at the country of the Gerasenes, which is over
against Galilee. And when he was come forth upon the land, there met
him a certain man out of the city, who had demons; and for a long time
he had worn no clothes, and abode not in any house, but in the tombs.

And when he saw Jesus, he cried out, and fell down before him, and
with a loud voice said, "What have I to do with thee, Jesus, thou Son
of the Most High God? I beseech thee, torment me not." For he was
commanding the unclean spirit to come out from the man. For
oftentimes it had seized him; and he was kept under guard, and bound
with chains and fetters; and breaking the bands asunder, he was driven
of the demon into the deserts.

And Jesus asked him, "What is thy name?"

And he said, "Legion;" for many demons were entered into him.

And they entreated him that he would not command them to depart into
the abyss. Now there was there a herd of many swine feeding on the
mountain. And the demons besought him, saying, "If thou cast us out,
send us away into the herd of swine."

And he said unto them, "Go."

And they came out, and went into the swine: and behold, the whole herd
rushed down the steep into the sea, in number about two thousand; and
they were drowned in the sea.

And they that fed them fled, and told it in the city, and in the
country. And they came to see what it was that had come to pass. And
they come to Jesus, and behold him that was possessed with demons
sitting, clothed and in his right mind, even him that had the legion:
and they were afraid. And they that saw it declared unto them how it
befell him that was possessed with demons, and concerning the swine.
And they began to beseech him to depart from them; for they were
holden with great fear.

And as he was entering into the boat, he that had been possessed with
demons besought him that he might be with him. And he suffered him
not, but saith unto him, "Go to thy house unto thy friends, and tell
them how great things the Lord hath done for thee, and how he had
mercy on thee."

And he went his way, and began to publish in Decapolis how great
things Jesus had done for him: and all men marvelled.


THE DYING CHILD AND THE SUFFERING WOMAN.

And when Jesus had crossed over again in the boat unto the other side,
the multitude welcomed him; for they were all waiting for him; and he
was by the sea.

And there cometh one of the rulers of the synagogue, Jairus by name;
and seeing him, he falleth at his feet, and beseecheth him much,
saying, "My little daughter is at the point of death: I pray thee,
that thou come and lay thy hands on her, that she may be made whole,
and live."

And he went with him; and a great multitude followed him, and they
thronged him.

And a woman, who had an issue of blood twelve years, and had suffered
many things of many physicians, and had spent all that she had, and
was nothing bettered, but rather grew worse, having heard the things
concerning Jesus, came in the crowd behind, and touched the border of
his garment. For she said, "If I touch but his garments, I shall be
made whole." And straightway the fountain of her blood was dried up;
and she felt in her body that she was healed of her plague.

And straightway Jesus, perceiving in himself that the power proceeding
from him had gone forth, turned him about in the crowd, and said, "Who
touched my garments?"

And when all denied, Peter said, and they that were with him, "Master,
the multitudes press thee and crush thee, and sayest thou, 'Who
touched me?'"

But Jesus said, "Some one did touch me; for I perceived that power had
gone forth from me."

And he looked round about to see her that had done this thing. And
when the woman saw that she was not hid, she came trembling, and
falling down before him declared in the presence of all the people for
what cause she touched him, and how she was healed immediately.

And he said unto her, "Daughter, thy faith hath made thee whole; go in
peace, and be whole of thy plague."

While he yet spake, they come from the ruler of the synagogue's house,
saying, "Thy daughter is dead: why troublest thou the Teacher any
further?"

But Jesus, not heeding the word spoken, saith unto the ruler of the
synagogue, "Fear not: only believe, and she shall be made whole."

And he suffered no man to follow with him, save Peter, and James, and
John the brother of James. And when Jesus came into the ruler's house,
and saw the flute-players, and the crowd making a tumult, and many
weeping and wailing greatly, he said, "Give place: why make ye a
tumult and weep? the child is not dead, but sleepeth."

And they laughed him to scorn, knowing that she was dead. But he,
having put them all forth, taketh the father of the child and her
mother and them that were with him, and goeth in where the child was.
And taking the child by the hand, he saith unto her. "Talitha cumi;"
which is, being interpreted, "Damsel, I say unto thee, Arise."

And her spirit returned. And straightway the damsel rose up, and
walked: for she was twelve years old. And they were amazed straightway
with a great amazement. And he charged them much that no man should
know this: and he commanded that something should be given her to eat.

And the fame hereof went forth into all that land.


HEALINGS BY THE WAY.

And as Jesus passed by from thence, two blind men followed him, crying
out, and saying, "Have mercy on us, thou son of David."

And when he was come into the house, the blind men came to him: and
Jesus saith unto them, "Believe ye that I am able to do this?"

They say unto him, "Yea, Lord."

Then touched he their eyes, saying, "According to your faith be it
done unto you."

And their eyes were opened. And Jesus strictly charged them, saying,
"See that no man know it."

But they went forth, and spread abroad his fame in all that land.

And as they went forth, behold, there was brought to him a dumb man
possessed with a demon. And when the demon was cast out, the dumb man
spake: and the multitudes marvelled, saying, "It was never so seen in
Israel."

But the Pharisees said, "By the prince of the demons casteth he out
demons."




WIDER EVANGELIZATION OF GALILEE


A VISIT TO HIS HOME.

And he went out from thence; and he cometh into his own country to
Nazareth, where he had been brought up; and his disciples follow him.
And when the sabbath was come, he entered, as his custom was, into the
synagogue, and stood up to read. And there was delivered unto him the
book of the prophet Isaiah. And he opened the book, and found the
place where it was written,

    "The Spirit of the Lord is upon me,
    Because he anointed me to preach good tidings to the poor;
    He hath sent me to proclaim release to the captives,
    And recovering of sight to the blind,
    To set at liberty them that are bruised,
    To proclaim the acceptable year of the Lord."

And he closed the book, and gave it back to the attendant, and sat
down: and the eyes of all in the synagogue were fastened on him.

And he began to say unto them, "To-day hath this scripture been
fulfilled in your ears."

And all bare him witness, and wondered at the words of grace which
proceeded out of his mouth: and they said, "Whence hath this man these
things?" and, "What is the wisdom that is given unto this man, and
what mean such mighty works wrought by his hands? Is not this the
carpenter, the son of Mary, and brother of James, and Joses, and
Judas, and Simon? and are not his sisters here with us?" And they were
offended in him.

And he said unto them, "Doubtless ye will say unto me this parable,
Physician, heal thyself: whatsoever we have heard done at Capernaum,
do also here in thine own country."

And he said, "Verily I say unto you, A prophet is not without honor,
save in his own country, and among his own kin, and in his own house.
But of a truth I say unto you, There were many widows in Israel in the
days of Elijah, when the heaven was shut up three years and six
months, when there came a great famine over all the land; and unto
none of them was Elijah sent, but only to Zarephath, in the land of
Sidon, unto a woman that was a widow. And there were many lepers in
Israel in the time of Elisha the prophet; and none of them was
cleansed, but only Naaman the Syrian."

And they were all filled with wrath in the synagogue, as they heard
these things; and they rose up, and cast him forth out of the city,
and led him unto the brow of the hill whereon their city was built,
that they might throw him down headlong. But he passing through the
midst of them went his way.

And he could there do no mighty work, save that he laid his hands upon
a few sick folk, and healed them.


PREACHING IN THE VILLAGES.

And Jesus went about all the cities and the villages, teaching in
their synagogues, and preaching the gospel of the kingdom, and healing
all manner of disease and all manner of sickness. But when he saw the
multitudes, he was moved with compassion for them, because they were
distressed and scattered, as sheep not having a shepherd.

Then saith he unto his disciples, "The harvest indeed is plenteous,
but the laborers are few. Pray ye therefore the Lord of the harvest,
that he send forth laborers into his harvest."


THE TWELVE SENT FORTH.

And he calleth unto him his twelve disciples, and began to send them
forth by two and two; and he gave them power and authority over
unclean spirits, to cast them out, and to heal all manner of disease
and all manner of sickness.

And he charged them, saying, "Go not into any way of the Gentiles, and
enter not into any city of the Samaritans: but go rather to the lost
sheep of the house of Israel. And as ye go, preach, saying, 'The
kingdom of heaven is at hand.' Heal the sick, raise the dead, cleanse
the lepers, cast out demons: freely ye received, freely give.

"Get you no gold, nor silver, nor brass in your purses. Take nothing
for your journey, save a staff only; no bread, no wallet; neither have
two coats, nor shoes, but go shod with sandals: for the laborer is
worthy of his food. And into whatsoever city or village ye shall
enter, search out who in it is worthy; and there abide till ye go
forth. And as ye enter into the house, salute it. And if the house be
worthy, let your peace come upon it: but if it be not worthy, let your
peace return to you. And whosoever shall not receive you, nor hear
your words, as ye go forth out of that house or that city, shake off
the dust from your feet for a testimony against them. Verily I say
unto you, It shall be more tolerable for the land of Sodom and
Gomorrah in the day of judgment, than for that city.

"Behold, I send you forth as sheep in the midst of wolves: be ye
therefore wise as serpents, and harmless as doves. But beware of men:
for they will deliver you up to councils, and in their synagogues they
will scourge you; yea and before governors and kings shall ye be
brought for my sake, for a testimony to them and to the Gentiles. But
when they deliver you up, be not anxious how or what ye shall speak:
for it shall be given you in that hour what ye shall speak. For it is
not ye that speak, but the Spirit of your Father that speaketh in you.
And brother shall deliver up brother to death, and the father his
child: and children shall rise up against parents, and cause them to
be put to death. And ye shall be hated of all men, for my name's sake:
but he that endureth to the end, the same shall be saved. But when
they persecute you in this city, flee into the next: for verily I say
unto you, Ye shall not have gone through the cities of Israel, till
the Son of man be come.

"A disciple is not above his teacher, nor a servant above his lord. It
is enough for the disciple that he be as his teacher, and the servant
as his lord. If they have called the master of the house Beelzebub,
how much more them of his household? Fear them not therefore: for
there is nothing covered, that shall not be revealed; and hid, that
shall not be known. What I tell you in the darkness, speak ye in the
light; and what ye hear in the ear, proclaim upon the house-tops. And
be not afraid of them that kill the body, but are not able to kill the
soul: but rather fear him who is able to destroy both soul and body in
hell. Are not two sparrows sold for a penny? and not one of them shall
fall on the ground without your Father: but the very hairs of your
head are all numbered. Fear not therefore: ye are of more value than
many sparrows. Every one therefore who shall confess me before men,
him will I also confess before my Father who is in heaven. But
whosoever shall deny me before men, him will I also deny before my
Father who is in heaven.

"I came to cast fire upon the earth; and what do I desire, if it is
already kindled? But I have a baptism to be baptized with; and how am
I straitened till it be accomplished!

"Think not that I came to send peace on the earth: I came not to send
peace, but a sword. For there shall be from henceforth five in one
house divided, three against two, and two against three. For I came to
set a man at variance against his father, and the daughter against her
mother, and the daughter in law against her mother in law: and a man's
foes shall be they of his own household. He that loveth father or
mother more than me is not worthy of me; and he that loveth son or
daughter more than me is not worthy of me. And he that doth not take
his cross and follow after me, is not worthy of me. He that findeth
his life shall lose it; and he that loseth his life for my sake shall
find it.

"He that receiveth you receiveth me, and he that receiveth me
receiveth him that sent me. He that receiveth a prophet in the name of
a prophet shall receive a prophet's reward: and he that receiveth a
righteous man in the name of a righteous man shall receive a righteous
man's reward. And whosoever shall give to drink unto one of these
little ones a cup of cold water only, in the name of a disciple,
verily I say unto you he shall in no wise lose his reward."

And they departed, and went throughout the villages, preaching the
gospel, and healing everywhere.

And they cast out many demons, and anointed with oil many that were
sick, and healed them.

And Jesus departed thence to teach and preach. And wheresoever he
entered, into villages, or into cities, or into the country, they laid
the sick in the marketplaces, and besought him that they might touch
if it were but the border of his garment: and as many as touched him
were made whole.

At that season Herod the tetrarch heard the report concerning Jesus,
and said unto his servants, "This is John the Baptist; he is risen
from the dead; and therefore do these powers work in him."

But others said, "It is Elijah." And others said, "It is a prophet,
even as one of the prophets."

But Herod, when he heard thereof, said, "John, whom I beheaded, he is
risen."

And he sought to see him.




THE CRISIS IN CAPERNAUM


THE FIVE THOUSAND FED.

And the apostles, when they were returned unto Jesus, told him all
things, whatsoever they had done, and whatsoever they had taught.

Now the passover, the feast of the Jews, was at hand. And he saith
unto them, "Come ye yourselves apart into a desert place, and rest a
while." For there were many coming and going, and they had no leisure
so much as to eat.

And they went away in the boat to a desert place apart. And the people
saw them going, and many knew them, and they ran together there on
foot from all the cities, and outwent them.

And he came forth and saw a great multitude. And he welcomed them, and
spake to them of the kingdom of God, and them that had need of healing
he cured. And he had compassion on them, because they were as sheep
not having a shepherd.

And the day began to wear away; and the twelve came, and said unto
him, "Send the multitude away, that they may go into the villages and
country round about, and lodge, and get provisions: for we are here in
a desert place."

But Jesus said unto them, "They have no need to go away: give ye them
to eat."

Philip answered him, "Two hundred shillings' worth of bread is not
sufficient for them, that every one may take a little."

Jesus saith unto them, "How many loaves have ye? go and see."

One of his disciples, Andrew, Simon Peter's brother, saith unto him,
"There is a lad here, who hath five barley loaves, and two fishes: but
what are these among so many?"

And Jesus said, "Bring them hither to me."

And he commanded them that all should sit down by companies upon the
green grass. Now there was much grass in the place. And they sat down
in ranks, by hundreds, and by fifties. And he took the five loaves and
the two fishes, and looking up to heaven, he blessed, and brake the
loaves; and he gave to the disciples to set before them; and the two
fishes divided he among them all. And they all ate, and were filled.
And they took up broken pieces, twelve basketfuls, and also of the
fishes. And they that ate the loaves were five thousand men.

When therefore the people saw the sign which he did, they said, "This
is of a truth the prophet that cometh into the world."

Jesus therefore perceiving that they were about to come and take him
by force, to make him king, constrained the disciples to enter into
the boat, and to go before him unto the other side, till he should
send the multitudes away.

And after he had sent the multitudes away, he went up into the
mountain apart to pray: and when even was come, he was there alone.


JESUS WALKING ON THE WATER.

And his disciples were going over the sea unto Capernaum. And it was
now dark, and Jesus had not yet come to them. And the sea was rising
by reason of a great wind that blew. And in the fourth watch of the
night, when they had rowed about five and twenty or thirty furlongs,
they behold Jesus walking on the sea, and drawing nigh unto the boat.
And when the disciples saw him walking on the sea, they were troubled,
saying, "It is a ghost;" and they cried out for fear.

But straightway Jesus spake unto them, saying, "Be of good cheer; it
is I; be not afraid."

And Peter answered him and said, "Lord, if it be thou, bid me come
unto thee upon the waters."

And he said, "Come."

And Peter went down from the boat, and walked upon the waters, to come
to Jesus. But when he saw the wind, he was afraid; and beginning to
sink, he cried out, saying, "Lord, save me."

And immediately Jesus stretched forth his hand, and took hold of him,
and saith unto him, "O thou of little faith, wherefore didst thou
doubt?"

And when they were gone up into the boat, the wind ceased: and they
were sore amazed in themselves; for they understood not concerning the
loaves, but their heart was hardened.

And when they had crossed over, they came to the land unto Gennesaret,
and moored to the shore. And when they were come out of the boat,
straightway the people knew him, and ran round about that whole
region, and began to carry about on their beds those that were sick,
where they heard he was.


THE DISAPPOINTMENT OF THE PEOPLE.

On the morrow the multitude that stood on the other side of the sea
saw that there was no other boat there, save one, and that Jesus
entered not with his disciples into the boat, but that his disciples
went away alone (howbeit there came boats from Tiberias nigh unto the
place where they ate the bread after the Lord had given thanks): when
the multitude therefore saw that Jesus was not there, neither his
disciples, they themselves got into the boats, and came to Capernaum,
seeking Jesus.

And when they found him on the other side of the sea, they said unto
him, "Rabbi, when camest thou hither?"

Jesus answered them and said, "Verily, verily, I say unto you, Ye seek
me, not because ye saw signs, but because ye ate of the loaves, and
were filled. Work not for the food which perisheth, but for the food
which abideth unto eternal life, which the Son of man shall give unto
you; for him the Father, even God, hath sealed."

They said therefore unto him, "What must we do, that we may work the
works of God?"

Jesus answered and said unto them, "This is the work of God, that ye
believe on him whom he hath sent."

They said therefore unto him, "What then doest thou for a sign, that
we may see, and believe thee? what workest thou? Our fathers ate the
manna in the wilderness; as it is written, 'He gave them bread out of
heaven to eat.'"

Jesus therefore said unto them, "Verily, verily, I say unto you, It
was not Moses that gave you the bread out of heaven; but my Father
giveth you the true bread out of heaven. For the bread of God is that
which cometh down out of heaven, and giveth life unto the world."

They said therefore unto him, "Lord, evermore give us this bread."

Jesus said unto them, "I am the bread of life: he that cometh to me
shall not hunger, and he that believeth on me shall never thirst. But
I said unto you, that ye have seen me, and yet believe not. All that
which the Father giveth me shall come unto me; and him that cometh to
me I will in no wise cast out. For I am come down from heaven, not to
do mine own will, but the will of him that sent me. And this is the
will of him that sent me, that of all that which he hath given me I
should lose nothing, but should raise it up at the last day. For this
is the will of my Father, that every one that beholdeth the Son, and
believeth on him, should have eternal life; and I will raise him up at
the last day."

The Jews therefore murmured concerning him, because he said, "I am the
bread which came down out of heaven." And they said, "Is not this
Jesus, the son of Joseph, whose father and mother we know? how doth he
now say 'I am come down out of heaven'?"

Jesus answered and said unto them, "Murmur not among yourselves. No
man can come to me, except the Father that sent me draw him: and I
will raise him up in the last day. It is written in the prophets, 'And
they shall all be taught of God.' Every one that hath heard from the
Father, and hath learned, cometh unto me. Not that any man hath seen
the Father, save he that is from God, he hath seen the Father. Verily,
verily, I say unto you, He that believeth hath eternal life. I am the
bread of life. Your fathers ate the manna in the wilderness, and they
died. This is the bread which cometh down out of heaven, that a man
may eat thereof, and not die. I am the living bread which came down
out of heaven: if any man eat of this bread, he shall live for ever:
yea and the bread which I will give is my flesh, for the life of the
world."

The Jews therefore strove one with another, saying, "How can this man
give us his flesh to eat?"

Jesus therefore said unto them, "Verily, verily, I say unto you,
Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man and drink his blood, ye have
not life in yourselves. He that eateth my flesh and drinketh my blood
hath eternal life; and I will raise him up at the last day. For my
flesh is meat indeed, and my blood is drink indeed. He that eateth my
flesh and drinketh my blood abideth in me, and I in him. As the living
Father sent me, and I live because of the Father; so he that eateth
me, he also shall live because of me. This is the bread which came
down out of heaven: not as the fathers ate, and died; he that eateth
this bread shall live for ever."

These things said he in the synagogue, as he taught in Capernaum.

Many therefore of his disciples, when they heard this, said, "This is
a hard saying; who can hear it?"

But Jesus knowing in himself that his disciples murmured at this, said
unto them, "Doth this cause you to stumble? What then if ye should
behold the Son of man ascending where he was before? It is the spirit
that giveth life; the flesh profiteth nothing: the words that I have
spoken unto you are spirit, and are life. But there are some of you
that believe not."

For Jesus knew from the beginning who they were that believed not, and
who it was that should betray him. And he said, "For this cause have I
said unto you, that no man can come unto me, except it be given unto
him of the Father."

Upon this many of his disciples went back, and walked no more with
him. Jesus said therefore unto the twelve, "Would ye also go away?"

Simon Peter answered him, "Lord, to whom shall we go? thou hast the
words of eternal life. And we have believed and know that thou art the
Holy One of God."

Jesus answered them, "Did not I choose you the twelve, and one of you
is a devil?"

Now he spake of Judas, the son of Simon Iscariot, for he it was that
should betray him, being one of the twelve.


REJECTION OF THE TRADITION OF THE ELDERS.

And there are gathered together unto him the Pharisees, and certain of
the scribes, who had come from Jerusalem, and had seen that some of
his disciples ate their bread with defiled, that is, unwashen, hands.
(For the Pharisees, and all the Jews, except they wash their hands
diligently, eat not, holding the tradition of the elders; and when
they come from the market-place, except they bathe themselves, they
eat not; and many other things there are, which they have received to
hold, washings of cups, and pots, and brasen vessels.) And the
Pharisees and the scribes ask him, "Why walk not thy disciples
according to the tradition of the elders, but eat their bread with
defiled hands?"

And he said unto them, "Well did Isaiah prophesy of you hypocrites, as
it is written,

    'This people honoreth me with their lips,
    But their heart is far from me.
    But in vain do they worship me,
    Teaching as their doctrines the precepts of men.'

"Ye leave the commandment of God, and hold fast the tradition of men."

And he said unto them, "Full well do ye reject the commandment of God,
that ye may keep your tradition. For Moses said, 'Honor thy father and
thy mother;' and, 'He that speaketh evil of father or mother, let him
die the death;' but ye say, 'If a man shall say to his father or his
mother, That wherewith thou mightest have been profited by me is
Corban,' that is to say, Given to God; ye no longer suffer him to do
aught for his father or his mother; making void the word of God by
your tradition, which ye have delivered: and many such like things ye
do."

And he called to him the multitude again, and said unto them, "Hear me
all of you, and understand: there is nothing from without the man,
that going into him can defile him; but the things which proceed out
of the man are those that defile the man."

Then came the disciples, and said unto him, "Knowest thou that the
Pharisees were offended, when they heard this saying?"

But he answered and said, "Every plant which my heavenly Father
planted not, shall be rooted up. Let them alone: they are blind
guides. And if the blind guide the blind, both shall fall into a pit."

And when he was entered into the house from the multitude, his
disciples asked of him the parable.

And he saith unto them, "Are ye also even yet without understanding?
Perceive ye not, that whatsoever from without goeth into the man, it
cannot defile him; because it goeth not into his heart, but into his
belly, and goeth out into the draught?"

This he said, making all meats clean. And he said, "That which
proceedeth out of the man, that defileth the man. For from within, out
of the heart of men, evil thoughts proceed, fornications, thefts,
murders, adulteries, covetings, wickedness, deceit, false witness,
lasciviousness, an evil eye, railing, pride, foolishness: all these
evil things proceed from within, and defile the man; but to eat with
unwashen hands defileth not the man."


THE PLOT OF THE PHARISEES.

And it came to pass on a sabbath, that he entered into the synagogue
and taught: and there was a man there, and his right hand was
withered. And the scribes and the Pharisees watched him, whether he
would heal on the sabbath; that they might find how to accuse him.

But he knew their thoughts; and he said to the man that had his hand
withered, "Rise up, and stand forth in the midst."

And he arose and stood forth. And Jesus said unto them, "I ask you, Is
it lawful on the sabbath to do good, or to do harm? to save a life or
to destroy it? What man shall there be of you, that shall have one
sheep, and if this fall into a pit on the sabbath day, will he not lay
hold on it, and lift it out? How much then is a man of more value than
a sheep! Wherefore it is lawful to do good on the sabbath day."

But they held their peace. And when he had looked round about on them
with anger, being grieved at the hardening of their heart, he saith
unto the man, "Stretch forth thy hand."

And he stretched it forth; and his hand was restored whole, as the
other.

But they were filled with madness; and communed one with another what
they might do to Jesus.

And the Pharisees went out, and straightway with the Herodians took
counsel against him, how they might destroy him.




=HIS WITHDRAWAL WITH THE TWELVE=

       *       *       *       *       *

THE MINISTRY BEYOND GALILEE


THE PHOENICIAN RETIREMENT AND THE GENTILE CURE.

And Jesus went out thence, and withdrew into the parts of Tyre and
Sidon.

And he entered into a house, and would have no man know it; and he
could not be hid. But straightway a woman, whose little daughter had
an unclean spirit, having heard of him, came and fell down at his
feet. Now the woman was a Greek, a Syrophoenician by race.

And she cried, saying, "Have mercy on me, O Lord, thou son of David;
my daughter is grievously vexed with a demon."

But he answered her not a word. And his disciples came and besought
him, saying, "Send her away, for she crieth after us."

But he answered and said, "I was not sent but unto the lost sheep of
the house of Israel."

But she came and worshipped him, saying, "Lord help me."

And he said unto her, "Let the children first be filled: for it is not
meet to take the children's bread and cast it to the dogs."

But she answered and saith unto him, "Yea, Lord; even the dogs under
the table eat of the children's crumbs."

Then Jesus answered and said unto her, "O woman, great is thy faith:
be it done unto thee as thou wilt. Go thy way; the demon is gone out
of thy daughter."

And she went away unto her house, and found the child laid upon the
bed, and the demon gone out.


MIRACLES AND MULTITUDES AGAIN.

And again he went out from the borders of Tyre, and came through Sidon
unto the sea of Galilee, through the midst of the borders of
Decapolis.

And he went up into the mountain, and sat there. And there came unto
him great multitudes, having with them the lame, blind, dumb, maimed,
and many others, and they cast them down at his feet; and he healed
them; insomuch that the multitude wondered, when they saw the dumb
speaking, the maimed whole, and the lame walking, and the blind
seeing; and they glorified the God of Israel.

And they bring unto him one that was deaf, and had an impediment in
his speech; and they beseech him to lay his hand upon him. And he took
him aside from the multitude privately, and put his fingers into his
ears, and he spat, and touched his tongue; and looking up to heaven,
he sighed, and saith unto him, "Ephphatha," that is, "Be opened."

And his ears were opened, and the bond of his tongue was loosed, and
he spake plain. And he charged them that they should tell no man; but
the more he charged them, so much the more a great deal they published
it. And they were beyond measure astonished, saying, "He hath done all
things well; he maketh even the deaf to hear, and the dumb to speak."


THE FOUR THOUSAND FED.

In those days, when there was again a great multitude, and they had
nothing to eat, he called unto him his disciples, and saith unto
them, "I have compassion on the multitude, because they continue with
me now three days, and have nothing to eat; and if I send them away
fasting to their home, they will faint on the way; and some of them
are come from far."

And his disciples answered him, "Whence shall one be able to fill
these men with bread here in a desert place?"

And he asked them, "How many loaves have ye?"

And they said, "Seven."

And he commandeth the multitude to sit down on the ground: and he took
the seven loaves, and having given thanks, he brake, and gave to his
disciples, to set before them; and they set them before the multitude.

And they had a few small fishes: and having blessed them, he commanded
to set these also before them. And they ate and were filled: and they
took up, of broken pieces that remained over, seven baskets. And they
were about four thousand men, besides women and children.

And he sent away the multitudes, and entered into the boat, and came
into the borders of Magadan.


THE PHARISEES AND SADUCCEES DEMAND A SIGN.

And the Pharisees and Sadducees came forth, and began to question with
him, seeking of him a sign from heaven, trying him.

But he answered and said unto them, "When it is evening, ye say, 'It
will be fair weather,' for the heaven is red. And in the morning, 'It
will be foul weather to-day,' for the heaven is red and lowering. Ye
know how to discern the face of the heaven; but ye cannot discern the
signs of the times."

And he sighed deeply in his spirit, and saith. "Why doth this
generation seek a sign? verily I say unto you, There shall no sign be
given unto this generation."

And he left them, and again entering into the boat departed to the
other side.

And they forgot to take bread; and they had not in the boat with them
more than one loaf. And he charged them, saying, "Take heed, beware of
the leaven of the Pharisees and the leaven of Herod."

And they reasoned one with another, saying, "We have no bread."

And Jesus perceiving it saith unto them, "O ye of little faith, why
reason ye among yourselves, because ye have no bread? Do ye not yet
perceive, neither understand? have ye your heart hardened? Having
eyes, see ye not? and having ears, hear ye not? and do ye not
remember? When I brake the five loaves among the five thousand, how
many baskets full of broken pieces took ye up?"

They say unto him, "Twelve."

"And when the seven among the four thousand, how many basketfuls of
broken pieces took ye up?"

And they say unto him, "Seven."

And he said unto them, "How is it that ye do not perceive that I spake
not to you concerning bread? But beware of the leaven of the Pharisees
and Sadducees."

Then understood they that he bade them not beware of the leaven of
bread, but of the teaching of the Pharisees and Sadducees.


THE BLIND MAN HEALED.

And they come unto Bethsaida. And they bring to him a blind man, and
beseech him to touch him. And he took hold of the blind man by the
hand, and brought him out of the village; and when he had spit on his
eyes, and laid his hands upon him, he asked him, "Seest thou aught?"

And he looked up, and said, "I see men; for I behold them as trees,
walking."

Then again he laid his hands upon his eyes; and he looked stedfastly,
and was restored, and saw all things clearly. And he sent him away to
his home, saying, "Do not even enter into the village."




JESUS THE MESSIAH


PETER'S CONFESSION.

And Jesus went forth, and his disciples, into the villages of Caesarea
Philippi.

And it came to pass, as he was praying apart, the disciples were with
him: and he asked them, saying, "Who do the multitudes say that I am?"

And they answering, said, "Some say John the Baptist; some Elijah; and
others, Jeremiah; and others, that one of the old prophets is risen
again."

And he said unto them, "But who say ye that I am?"

And Simon Peter answered and said, "Thou art the Christ, the Son of
the living God."

And Jesus answered and said unto him, "Blessed art thou, Simon
Bar-Jonah: for flesh and blood hath not revealed it unto thee, but my
Father who is in heaven. And I also say unto thee, that thou art
Peter, and upon this rock I will build my church; and the gates of
Hades shall not prevail against it. I will give unto thee the keys of
the kingdom of heaven: and whatsoever thou shalt bind on earth shall
be bound in heaven; and whatsoever thou shalt loose on earth shall be
loosed in heaven."

Then charged he the disciples that they should tell no man that he was
the Christ.


THE PASSION AND RESURRECTION FORETOLD.

From that time began Jesus to show unto his disciples, that he must go
unto Jerusalem, and suffer many things and be rejected by the elders,
and the chief priests, and the scribes, and be killed, and after three
days rise again. And he spake the saying openly.

And Peter took him, and began to rebuke him, saying, "Be it far from
thee, Lord: this shall never be unto thee."

But he turning about, and seeing his disciples, rebuked Peter, and
saith, "Get thee behind me, Satan: thou art a stumbling-block unto me:
for thou mindest not the things of God, but the things of men."

And he called unto him the multitude with his disciples, and said unto
them, "If any man would come after me, let him deny himself, and take
up his cross daily, and follow me. For whosoever would save his life
shall lose it; and whosoever shall lose his life for my sake and the
gospel's shall save it. For what doth it profit a man to gain the
whole world, and forfeit his life? For what should a man give in
exchange for his life? For whosoever shall be ashamed of me and of my
words in this adulterous and sinful generation, the Son of man also
shall be ashamed of him, when he cometh in his own glory, and the
glory of the Father, and of the holy angels. But I tell you of a
truth, There are some of them that stand here, who shall in no wise
taste of death, till they see the kingdom of God come with power."


THE TRANSFIGURATION.

And it came to pass about eight days after these sayings, that he took
with him Peter and John and James, and went up into the mountain to
pray. And as he was praying he was transfigured before them; and his
face did shine as the sun, and his garments became glistering, white
as the light, so as no fuller on earth can whiten them.

And behold, there talked with him two men, who were Moses and Elijah;
who appeared in glory, and spake of his decease which he was about to
accomplish at Jerusalem.

Now Peter and they that were with him were heavy with sleep; but when
they were fully awake, they saw his glory, and the two men that stood
with him. And it came to pass, as they were parting from him, Peter
said unto Jesus, "Master, it is good for us to be here: and let us
make three tabernacles; one for thee, and one for Moses, and one for
Elijah:" not knowing what he said.

While he was yet speaking, behold, a bright cloud overshadowed them:
and they feared as they entered into the cloud.

And behold, a voice out of the cloud, saying, "This is my beloved Son,
in whom I am well pleased; hear ye him."

And when the disciples heard it, they fell on their face, and were
sore afraid. And Jesus came and touched them and said, "Arise, and be
not afraid."

And suddenly looking round about, they saw no one any more, save Jesus
only with themselves.

And as they were coming down from the mountain, he charged them that
they should tell no man what things they had seen, save when the Son
of man should have risen again from the dead.

And they kept the saying, questioning among themselves what the rising
again from the dead should mean. And they asked him, saying, "How is
it that the scribes say that Elijah must first come?"

And he said unto them, "Elijah indeed cometh first, and restoreth all
things: and how is it written of the Son of man, that he should
suffer many things and be set at nought? But I say unto you, that
Elijah is come, and they have also done unto him whatsoever they would
even as it is written of them."

Then understood the disciples that he spake unto them of John the
Baptist.


THE EPILEPTIC BOY.

And when they came to the disciples, they saw a great multitude about
them, and scribes questioning with them. And straightway all the
multitude, when they saw him, were greatly amazed, and running to him
saluted him. And he asked them, "What question ye with them?"

And one of the multitude came to him kneeling, and saying, "Teacher, I
beseech thee to look upon my son: for he is mine only child: and
behold, he hath a dumb spirit; and wheresoever it taketh him, it
dasheth him down: and he foameth, and grindeth his teeth, and pineth
away: for he is epileptic, and suffereth grievously; for oft-times he
falleth into the fire, and oft-times into the water. And I brought him
to thy disciples, and they could not cure him."

And Jesus answered and said, "O faithless and perverse generation, how
long shall I be with you? how long shall I bear with you? Bring hither
thy son."

And they brought him unto him: and when he saw him, straightway the
spirit tare him grievously; and he fell on the ground, and wallowed
foaming.

And he asked his father, "How long time is it since this hath come
unto him?"

And he said, "From a child. And oft-times it hath cast him both into
the fire and into the waters, to destroy him: but if thou canst do
anything, have compassion on us, and help us."

And Jesus said unto him, "If thou canst! All things are possible to
him that believeth."

Straightway the father of the child cried out and said, "I believe;
help thou mine unbelief."

And when Jesus saw that a multitude came running together, he rebuked
the unclean spirit, saying unto him, "Thou dumb and deaf spirit, I
command thee, come out of him, and enter no more into him."

And having cried out, and torn him much, he came out: and the boy
became as one dead; insomuch that the more part said, "He is dead."

But Jesus took him by the hand, and raised him up; and he arose, and
Jesus gave him back to his father. And they were all astonished at the
majesty of God.

And when he was come into the house, his disciples asked him
privately, "How is it that we could not cast it out?"

And he said unto them, "This kind can come out by nothing, save by
prayer. Verily I say unto you, If ye have faith as a grain of mustard
seed, ye shall say unto this mountain, 'Remove hence to yonder place,'
and it shall remove; and nothing shall be impossible unto you."




THE TRAINING OF THE TWELVE


THE PASSION AND RESURRECTION AGAIN FORETOLD.

And they went forth from thence, and passed through Galilee; and he
would not that any man should know it. For he taught his disciples,
and said unto them, "Let these words sink into your ears: for the Son
of man shall be delivered up into the hands of men, and they shall
kill him; and when he is killed, after three days he shall rise
again."

But they understood not the saying, and were afraid to ask him.


THE GREATEST DISCIPLE.

And they came to Capernaum: and when he was in the house he asked
them, "What were ye reasoning on the way?"

But they held their peace: for they had disputed one with another on
the way, who was the greatest.

And he sat down, and called the twelve; and he said unto them, "If any
man would be first, he shall be last of all, and servant of all."

And he took a little child, and set him in the midst of them: and
taking him in his arms, he said unto them, "Verily I say unto you,
Except ye turn, and become as little children, ye shall in no wise
enter into the kingdom of heaven. Whosoever therefore shall humble
himself as this little child, the same is the greatest in the kingdom
of heaven. And whoso shall receive one such little child in my name
receiveth me: and whosoever receiveth me, receiveth not me, but him
that sent me."

John said unto him, "Teacher, we saw one casting out demons in thy
name; and we forbade him, because he followed not us."

But Jesus said, "Forbid him not: for there is no man who shall do a
mighty work in my name, and be able quickly to speak evil of me. For
he that is not against us is for us. For whosoever shall give you a
cup of water to drink, because ye are Christ's, verily I say unto you,
he shall in no wise lose his reward. But whoso shall cause one of
these little ones that believe on me to stumble, it is profitable for
him that a great mill-stone should be hanged about his neck, and that
he should be sunk in the depth of the sea.

"Woe unto the world because of occasions of stumbling! for it must
needs be that the occasions come; but woe to that man through whom the
occasion cometh! And if thy hand or thy foot causeth thee to stumble,
cut it off, and cast it from thee: it is good for thee to enter into
life maimed or halt, rather than having two hands or two feet to be
cast into the eternal fire. And if thine eye causeth thee to stumble,
pluck it out, and cast it from thee: it is good for thee to enter into
life with one eye, rather than having two eyes to be cast into the
hell of fire, where their worm dieth not, and the fire is not
quenched. For every one shall be salted with fire. Salt is good; but
if the salt have lost its saltness, wherewith will ye season it? Have
salt in yourselves, and be at peace one with another.

"See that ye despise not one of these little ones: for I say unto you,
that in heaven their angels do always behold the face of my Father who
is in heaven. How think ye? if any man have a hundred sheep, and one
of them be gone astray, doth he not leave the ninety and nine, and go
unto the mountains, and seek that which goeth astray? And if so be
that he find it, verily I say unto you, he rejoiceth over it more than
over the ninety and nine which have not gone astray. Even so it is
not the will of your Father who is in heaven, that one of these little
ones should perish.


FORGIVENESS.

"And if thy brother sin against thee, go, show him his fault between
thee and him alone: if he hear thee, thou hast gained thy brother. But
if he hear thee not, take with thee one or two more, that at the mouth
of two witnesses or three every word may be established. And if he
refuse to hear them, tell it unto the church: and if he refuse to hear
the church also, let him be unto thee as the Gentile and the publican.
Verily I say unto you, What things soever ye shall bind on earth shall
be bound in heaven; and what things soever ye shall loose on earth
shall be loosed in heaven. Again I say unto you, that if two of you
shall agree on earth as touching anything that they shall ask, it
shall be done for them of my Father who is in heaven. For where two or
three are gathered together in my name, there am I, in the midst of
them."

Then came Peter and said to him, "Lord, how oft shall my brother sin
against me, and I forgive him? until seven times?"

Jesus saith unto him, "I say not unto thee, Until seven times; but,
Until seventy times seven. Therefore is the kingdom of heaven likened
unto a certain king, who would make a reckoning with his servants. And
when he had begun to reckon, one was brought unto him, that owed him
ten thousand talents. But forasmuch as he had not wherewith to pay,
his lord commanded him to be sold, and his wife, and children, and all
that he had, and payment to be made. The servant therefore fell down
and worshipped him, saying, 'Lord, have patience with me, and I will
pay thee all.' And the lord of that servant, being moved with
compassion, released him, and forgave him the debt. But that servant
went out, and found one of his fellow-servants, who owed him a hundred
shillings: and he laid hold on him, and took him by the throat,
saying, 'Pay what thou owest.' So his fellow-servant fell down and
besought him, saying, 'Have patience with me, and I will pay thee.'
And he would not: but went and cast him into prison, till he should
pay that which was due. So when his fellow-servants saw what was done,
they were exceeding sorry, and came and told unto their lord all that
was done. Then his lord called him unto him, and saith to him, 'Thou
wicked servant, I forgave thee all that debt, because thou besoughtest
me: shouldst not thou also have had mercy on thy fellow-servant, even
as I had mercy on thee?' And his lord was wroth, and delivered him to
the tormentors, till he should pay all that was due. So shall also my
heavenly Father do unto you, if ye forgive not every one his brother
from your hearts."


THE SHEKEL FOR THE TEMPLE.

And they that received the half-shekel came to Peter, and said "Doth
not your teacher pay the half-shekel?"

He saith, "Yea."

And when he came into the house, Jesus spake first to him, saying,
"What thinkest thou, Simon? the kings of the earth, from whom do they
receive toll or tribute? from their sons, or from strangers?"

And when he said, "From strangers," Jesus said unto him, "Therefore,
the sons are free. But, lest we cause them to stumble, go thou to the
sea, and cast a hook, and take up the fish that first cometh up; and
when thou hast opened his mouth, thou shalt find a shekel: that take,
and give unto them for me and thee."




=HIS FACE TOWARD JERUSALEM=

       *       *       *       *       *

THE FINAL DEPARTURE FROM GALILEE


THE BEGINNING OF THE END.

Now the feast of the Jews, the feast of tabernacles, was at hand. His
brethren therefore said unto him, "Depart hence, and go into Judaea,
that thy disciples also may behold thy works which thou doest. For no
man doeth anything in secret, and himself seeketh to be known openly.
If thou doest these things, manifest thyself to the world." For even
his brethren did not believe on him.

Jesus therefore saith unto them, "My time is not yet come; but your
time is always ready. The world cannot hate you; but me it hateth,
because I testify of it, that its works are evil. Go ye up unto the
feast; I go not up yet unto this feast; because my time is not yet
fulfilled." And having said these things unto them, he abode still in
Galilee.

And it came to pass, when the days were well-nigh come that he should
be received up, he stedfastly set his face to go to Jerusalem, and
sent messengers before his face: and they went, and entered into a
village of the Samaritans, to make ready for him. And they did not
receive him, because his face was as though he were going to
Jerusalem. And when his disciples James and John saw this, they said,
"Lord, wilt thou that we bid fire to come down from heaven, and
consume them?"

But he turned, and rebuked them. And they went to another village.


THE GRATEFUL SAMARITAN LEPER.

And it came to pass, as they were on the way to Jerusalem, that he was
passing along the borders of Samaria and Galilee. And as he entered
into a certain village, there met him ten men that were lepers, who
stood afar off: and they lifted up their voices, saying, "Jesus,
Master, have mercy on us."

And when he saw them, he said unto them, "Go and show yourselves unto
the priests."

And it came to pass, as they went, they were cleansed. And one of
them, when he saw that he was healed, turned back, with a loud voice
glorifying God; and he fell upon his face at his feet, giving him
thanks: and he was a Samaritan.

And Jesus answering said, "Were not the ten cleansed? but where are
the nine? Were there none found that returned to give glory to God,
save this stranger?"

And he said unto him, "Arise, and go thy way: thy faith hath made thee
whole."


NEW DISCIPLES.

And as they went on the way, a certain scribe said unto him, "I will
follow thee whithersoever thou goest."

And Jesus said unto him, "The foxes have holes, and the birds of the
heaven have nests; but the Son of man hath not where to lay his head."

And he said unto another, "Follow me."

But he said, "Lord, suffer me first to go and bury my father."

But he said unto him, "Leave the dead to bury their own dead; but go
thou and publish abroad the kingdom of God."

And another also said, "I will follow thee, Lord; but first suffer me
to bid farewell to them that are at my house."

But Jesus said unto him, "No man, having put his hand to the plow, and
looking back, is fit for the kingdom of God."




IN JERUSALEM--THE ATTEMPT TO STONE HIM


JESUS AT THE FEAST OF TABERNACLES.

Then went he up unto the feast, not publicly, but as it were in
secret. The Jews therefore sought him at the feast, and said, "Where
is he?" And there was much murmuring among the multitudes concerning
him: some said, "He is a good man;" others said, "Not so, but he
leadeth the multitude astray." Yet no man spake openly of him for fear
of the Jews.

But when it was now the midst of the feast Jesus went up into the
temple, and taught. The Jews therefore marvelled, saying, "How knoweth
this man letters, having never learned?"

Jesus therefore answered them, and said, "My teaching is not mine, but
his that sent me. If any man willeth to do his will, he shall know of
the teaching, whether it is of God, or whether I speak from myself. He
that speaketh from himself seeketh his own glory: but he that seeketh
the glory of him that sent him, the same is true, and no
unrighteousness is in him. Did not Moses give you the law, and yet
none of you doeth the law? Why seek ye to kill me?"

The multitude answered, "Thou hast a demon: who seeketh to kill thee?"

Jesus answered and said unto them, "I did one work, and ye all marvel
because thereof. Moses hath given you circumcision (not that it is of
Moses, but of the fathers); and on the sabbath ye circumcise a man. If
a man receiveth circumcision on the sabbath, that the law of Moses may
not be broken; are ye wroth with me, because I made a man every whit
whole on the sabbath? Judge not according to appearance, but judge
righteous judgment."

Some therefore of them of Jerusalem said, "Is not this he whom they
seek to kill? And lo, he speaketh openly, and they say nothing unto
him. Can it be that the rulers indeed know that this is the Christ?
Howbeit we know this man whence he is; but when the Christ cometh, no
one knoweth whence he is."

Jesus therefore cried in the temple, teaching and saying, "Ye both
know me, and know whence I am; and I am not come of myself, but he
that sent me is true, whom ye know not. I know him: because I am from
him, and he sent me."

They sought therefore to take him: and no man laid his hand on him,
because his hour was not yet come. But of the multitude many believed
on him; and they said, "When the Christ shall come, will he do more
signs than those which this man hath done?"

The Pharisees heard the multitude murmuring these things concerning
him; and the chief priests and the Pharisees sent officers to take
him.

Jesus therefore said, "Yet a little while am I with you, and I go unto
him that sent me. Ye shall seek me, and shall not find me: and where I
am, ye can not come."

The Jews therefore said among themselves, "Whither will this man go
that we shall not find him? will he go unto the Dispersion among the
Greeks, and teach the Greeks? What is this word that he said, 'Ye
shall seek me, and shall not find me; and where I am, ye cannot
come'?"

Now on the last day, the great day of the feast, Jesus stood and
cried, saying, "If any man thirst, let him come unto me and drink. He
that believeth on me, as the scripture hath said, from within him
shall flow rivers of living water."

But this spake he of the Spirit, which they that believed on him were
to receive: for the Spirit was not yet given; because Jesus was not
yet glorified.

Some of the multitude therefore, when they heard these words, said,
"This is of a truth the prophet." Others said, "This is the Christ."
But some said, "What, doth the Christ come out of Galilee? Hath not
the scripture said that the Christ cometh of the seed of David, and
from Bethlehem, the village where David was?"

So there arose a division in the multitude because of him. And some of
them would have taken him; but no man laid hands on him.

The officers therefore came to the chief priests and Pharisees; and
they said unto them, "Why did ye not bring him?"

The officers answered, "Never man so spake."

The Pharisees therefore answered them, "Are ye also led astray? Hath
any of the rulers believed on him, or of the Pharisees? But this
multitude that knoweth not the law are accursed."

Nicodemus saith unto them (he that came to him before, being one of
them), "Doth our law judge a man, except it first hear from himself
and know what he doeth?"

They answered and said unto him, "Art thou also of Galilee? Search,
and see that out of Galilee ariseth no prophet."


JESUS AND THE ACCUSED WOMAN.

And they went every man unto his own house: but Jesus went unto the
mount of Olives.

And early in the morning he came again into the temple, and all the
people came unto him; and he sat down, and taught them. And the
scribes and the Pharisees bring a woman taken in adultery; and having
set her in the midst, they say unto him, "Teacher, this woman hath
been taken in adultery, in the very act. Now in the law Moses
commanded us to stone such: what then sayest thou of her?" And this
they said, trying him, that they might have whereof to accuse him.

But Jesus stooped down, and with his finger wrote on the ground. But
when they continued asking him, he lifted up himself and said unto
them, "He that is without sin among you, let him first cast a stone at
her."

And again he stooped down, and with his finger wrote on the ground.
And they, when they heard it, went out one by one, beginning from the
eldest, even unto the last: and Jesus was left alone, and the woman,
where she was, in the midst. And Jesus lifted up himself, and said
unto her, "Woman, where are they? did no man condemn thee?"

And she said, "No man, Lord."

And Jesus said, "Neither do I condemn thee: go thy way; from
henceforth sin no more."


THE LIGHT OF THE WORLD.

Again therefore Jesus spake unto them, saying, "I am the light of the
world: he that followeth me shall not walk in the darkness, but shall
have the light of life."

The Pharisees therefore said unto him, "Thou bearest witness of
thyself; thy witness is not true."

Jesus answered and said unto them, "Even if I bear witness of myself,
my witness is true; for I know whence I came, and whither I go; but ye
know not whence I come, or whither I go. Ye judge after the flesh; I
judge no man. Yea and if I judge, my judgment is true; for I am not
alone, but I and the Father that sent me. Yea and in your law it is
written, that the witness of two men is true. I am he that beareth
witness of myself, and the Father that sent me beareth witness of me."

They said therefore unto him, "Where is thy Father?"

Jesus answered, "Ye know neither me, nor my Father: if ye knew me, ye
would know my Father also."

These words spake he in the treasury, as he taught in the temple: and
no man took him; because his hour was not yet come.

He said therefore again unto them, "I go away, and ye shall seek me,
and shall die in your sin: whither I go, ye cannot come."

The Jews therefore said, "Will he kill himself, that he saith,
'Whither I go, ye cannot come?'"

And he said unto them, "Ye are from beneath; I am from above: ye are
of this world; I am not of this world. I said therefore unto you, that
ye shall die in your sins: for except ye believe that I am he, ye
shall die in your sins."

They said therefore unto him, "Who art thou?"

Jesus said unto them, "Even that which I have also spoken unto you
from the beginning I have many things to speak and to judge concerning
you; howbeit he that sent me is true; and the things which I heard
from him, these speak I unto the world."

They perceived not that he spake to them of the Father.

Jesus therefore said, "When ye have lifted up the Son of man, then
shall ye know that I am he, and that I do nothing of myself, but as
the Father taught me, I speak these things. And he that sent me is
with me; he hath not left me alone; for I do always the things that
are pleasing to him."

As he spake these things, many believed on him.


THE FREEDOM OF THE SOUL.

Jesus therefore said to those Jews that had believed him, "If ye abide
in my word, then are ye truly my disciples; and ye shall know the
truth, and the truth shall make you free."

They answered unto him, "We are Abraham's seed, and have never yet
been in bondage to any man; how sayest thou, 'Ye shall be made free'?"

Jesus answered them, "Verily, verily, I say unto you, Every one that
committeth sin is the bondservant of sin. And the bondservant abideth
not in the house for ever: the son abideth for ever. If therefore the
Son shall make you free, ye shall be free indeed. I know that ye are
Abraham's seed; yet ye seek to kill me, because my word hath not free
course in you. I speak the things which I have seen with my Father:
and ye also do the things which ye heard from your father."

They answered and said unto him, "Our father is Abraham."

Jesus saith unto them, "If ye were Abraham's children, ye would do the
works of Abraham. But now ye seek to kill me, a man that hath told you
the truth, which I heard from God: this did not Abraham. Ye do the
works of your father."

They said unto him, "We were not born of fornication; we have one
Father, even God."

Jesus said unto them, "If God were your Father, ye would love me: for
I came forth and am come from God; for neither have I come of myself,
but he sent me. Why do ye not understand my speech? Even because ye
cannot hear my word. Ye are of your father the devil, and the lusts of
your father it is your will to do. He was a murderer from the
beginning, and standeth not in the truth, because there is no truth
in him. When he speaketh a lie, he speaketh of his own: for he is a
liar, and the father thereof. But because I say the truth, ye believe
me not. Which of you convicteth me of sin? If I say truth, why do ye
not believe me? He that is of God heareth the words of God: for this
cause ye hear them not, because ye are not of God."

The Jews answered and said unto him, "Say we not well that thou art a
Samaritan, and hast a demon?"

Jesus answered, "I have not a demon: but I honor my Father, and ye
dishonor me. But I seek not mine own glory: there is one that seeketh
and judgeth. Verily, verily, I say unto you, If a man keep my word, he
shall never see death."

The Jews said unto him, "Now we know that thou hast a demon. Abraham
died, and the prophets; and thou sayest, 'If a man keep my word, he
shall never taste of death.' Art thou greater than our father Abraham,
who died? and the prophets died: whom makest thou thyself?"

Jesus answered, "If I glorify myself, my glory is nothing: it is my
Father that glorifieth me; of whom ye say, that he is your God; and ye
have not known him: but I know him; and if I should say, 'I know him
not,' I shall be like unto you, a liar; but I know him, and keep his
word. Your father Abraham rejoiced to see my day; and he saw it, and
was glad."

The Jews therefore said unto him, "Thou art not yet fifty years old,
and hast thou seen Abraham?"

Jesus said unto them, "Verily, verily, I say unto you. Before Abraham
was born, I am."

They took up stones therefore to cast at him; but Jesus hid himself,
and went out of the temple.




THE MINISTRY IN PEREA


THE MISSION OF THE SEVENTY.

And he arose and cometh into the borders of Judaea and beyond the
Jordan; and great multitudes followed him; and he healed them there.

And the Lord appointed seventy others, and sent them two and two
before his face into every city and place, whither he himself was
about to come. And he said unto them, "The harvest indeed is
plenteous, but the laborers are few; pray ye therefore the Lord of the
harvest, that he send forth laborers into his harvest. Go your ways;
behold, I send you forth as lambs into the midst of wolves. Carry no
purse, no wallet, no shoes; and salute no man on the way. And into
whatsoever house ye shall enter, first say, 'Peace be to this house.'
And if a son of peace be there, your peace shall rest upon him; but if
not, it shall turn to you again. And in that same house remain, eating
and drinking such things as they give: for the laborer is worthy of
his hire. Go not from house to house. And into whatsoever city ye
enter, and they receive you, eat such things as are set before you:
and heal the sick that are therein, and say unto them, 'The kingdom of
God is come nigh unto you.' But into whatsoever city ye shall enter,
and they receive you not, go out into the streets thereof and say,
'Even the dust from your city, that cleaveth to our feet, we wipe off
against you: nevertheless know this, that the kingdom of God is come
nigh.' I say unto you, It shall be more tolerable in that day for
Sodom, than for that city. He that heareth you heareth me; and he
that rejecteth you rejecteth me; and he that rejecteth me rejecteth
him that sent me."


THE RETURN OF THE SEVENTY.

And the seventy returned with joy, saying, "Lord, even the demons are
subject unto us in thy name."

And he said unto them, "I beheld Satan fallen as lightning from
heaven. Behold, I have given you authority to tread upon serpents and
scorpions, and over all the power of the enemy: and nothing shall in
any wise hurt you. Nevertheless in this rejoice not, that the spirits
are subject unto you: but rejoice that your names are written in
heaven."


THE MEEK AND LOWLY.

In that same hour he rejoiced in the Holy Spirit, and said, "I thank
thee, O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, that thou didst hide these
things from the wise and understanding, and didst reveal them unto
babes; yea, Father; for so it was well-pleasing in thy sight. All
things have been delivered unto me of my Father: and no one knoweth
who the Son is, save the Father; and who the Father is, save the Son,
and he to whomsoever the Son willeth to reveal him."

And turning to the disciples, he said privately, "Blessed are the eyes
which see the things that ye see: for I say unto you, that many
prophets and kings desired to see the things which ye see, and saw
them not; and to hear the things which ye hear, and heard them not.

"Come unto me, all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give
you rest. Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me; for I am meek and
lowly in heart: and ye shall find rest unto your souls. For my yoke is
easy, and my burden is light."


THE UNREPENTANT CITIES.

Then began he to upbraid the cities wherein most of his mighty works
were done, because they repented not. "Woe unto thee, Chorazin! woe
unto thee, Bethsaida! for if the mighty works had been done in Tyre
and Sidon which were done in you, they would have repented long ago in
sackcloth and ashes. But I say unto you, it shall be more tolerable
for Tyre and Sidon in the day of judgment, than for you. And thou,
Capernaum, shalt thou be exalted unto heaven? thou shalt go down unto
Hades: for if the mighty works had been done in Sodom which were done
in thee, it would have remained until this day. But I say unto you
that it shall be more tolerable for the land of Sodom in the day of
judgment, than for thee."


THE GOOD SAMARITAN.

And behold, a certain lawyer stood up and made trial of him, saying,
"Teacher, what shall I do to inherit eternal life?"

And he said unto him, "What is written in the law? how readest thou?"

And he answering said, "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy
heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy strength, and with all
thy mind; and thy neighbor as thyself."

And he said unto him, "Thou hast answered right: this do and thou
shalt live."

But he, desiring to justify himself, said unto Jesus, "And who is my
neighbor?"

Jesus made answer and said, "A certain man was going down from
Jerusalem to Jericho; and he fell among robbers, who both stripped him
and beat him, and departed, leaving him half dead. And by chance a
certain priest was going down that way: and when he saw him, he passed
by on the other side. And in like manner a Levite also, when he came
to the place, and saw him, passed by on the other side. But a certain
Samaritan, as he journeyed, came where he was: and when he saw him, he
was moved with compassion, and came to him, and bound up his wounds,
pouring on them oil and wine; and he set him on his own beast, and
brought him to an inn, and took care of him. And on the morrow he took
out two shillings, and gave them to the host, and said, 'Take care of
him: and whatsoever thou spendest more, I, when I come back again,
will repay thee.' Which of these three, thinkest thou, proved neighbor
unto him that fell among the robbers?"

And he said, "He that showed mercy on him."

And Jesus said unto him, "Go, and do thou likewise."




IN JERUSALEM--THE ATTEMPT TO ARREST HIM.


THE FRIENDS AT BETHANY.

Now as they went on their way, he entered into a certain village: and
a certain woman named Martha received him into her house.

And she had a sister called Mary, who also sat at the Lord's feet and
heard his word.

But Martha was cumbered about much serving; and she came up to him,
and said, "Lord, dost thou not care that my sister did leave me to
serve alone? bid her therefore that she help me."

But the Lord answered and said unto her, "Martha, Martha, thou art
anxious and troubled about many things: but one thing is needful: for
Mary hath chosen the good part, which shall not be taken away from
her."


A MIRACLE IN JERUSALEM.

And as he passed by, he saw a man blind from his birth. And his
disciples asked him, saying, "Rabbi, who sinned, this man, or his
parents, that he should be born blind?"

Jesus answered, "Neither did this man sin, nor his parents: but that
the works of God should be made manifest in him. We must work the
works of him that sent me, while it is day: the night cometh, when no
man can work. When I am in the world, I am the light of the world."

When he had thus spoken he spat on the ground, and made clay of the
spittle, and anointed his eyes with the clay, and said unto him, "Go,
wash in the pool of Siloam" (which is by interpretation, Sent).

He went away therefore, and washed, and came seeing.

The neighbors therefore, and they that saw him aforetime, that he was
a beggar, said, "Is not this he that sat and begged?"

Others said, "It is he:" others said, "No, but he is like him."

He said, "I am he."

They said therefore unto him, "How then were thine eyes opened?"

He answered, "The man that is called Jesus made clay and anointed mine
eyes, and said unto me, 'Go to Siloam, and wash:' so I went away and
washed, and I received sight."

And they said unto him, "Where is he?"

He saith, "I know not."

They bring to the Pharisees him that aforetime was blind. Now it was
the sabbath on the day when Jesus made the clay, and opened his eyes.
Again therefore the Pharisees also asked him how he received his
sight.

And he said unto them, "He put clay upon mine eyes, and I washed, and
I see."

Some therefore of the Pharisees said. "This man is not from God,
because he keepeth not the sabbath."

But others said, "How can a man that is a sinner do such signs?"

And there was a division among them.

They say therefore unto the blind man again, "What sayest thou of him,
in that he opened thine eyes?"

And he said, "He is a prophet."

The Jews therefore did not believe concerning him, that he had been
blind, and had received his sight, until they called the parents of
him that had received his sight, and asked them, saying, "Is this your
son, who ye say was born blind? how then doth he now see?"

His parents answered and said, "We know that this is our son, and that
he was born blind: but how he now seeth, we know not; or who opened
his eyes, we know not: ask him; he is of age; he shall speak for
himself."

These things said his parents, because they feared the Jews; for the
Jews had agreed already, that if any man should confess him to be
Christ, he should be put out of the synagogue. Therefore said his
parents, "He is of age; ask him."

So they called a second time the man that was blind, and said unto
him, "Give glory to God: we know that this man is a sinner."

He therefore answered, "Whether he is a sinner, I know not: one thing
I know, that, whereas I was blind, now I see."

They said therefore unto him, "What did he to thee? how opened he
thine eyes."

He answered them, "I told you even now, and ye did not hear; wherefore
would ye hear it again? would ye also become his disciples?"

And they reviled him, and said, "Thou art his disciple; but we are
disciples of Moses. We know that God hath spoken unto Moses: but as
for this man, we know not whence he is."

The man answered and said unto them. "Why, herein is the marvel, that
ye know not whence he is, and yet he opened mine eyes. We know that
God heareth not sinners: but if any man be a worshipper of God, and do
his will, him he heareth. Since the world began it was never heard
that any one opened the eyes of a man born blind. If this man were not
from God, he could do nothing."

They answered and said unto him, "Thou wast altogether born in sins,
and dost thou teach us?" And they cast him out.

Jesus heard that they had cast him out: and finding him, he said,
"Dost thou believe on the Son of God?"

He answered and said, "And who is he, Lord, that I may believe on
him?"

Jesus said unto him, "Thou hast both seen him, and he it is that
speaketh with thee."

And he said, "Lord, I believe."

And he worshipped him.

And Jesus said, "For judgment came I into this world, that they that
see not may see; and that they that see may become blind."

Those of the Pharisees who were with him heard these things, and said
unto him, "Are we also blind?"

Jesus said unto them, "If ye were blind, ye would have no sin: but now
ye say, 'We see:' your sin remaineth."


THE GOOD SHEPHERD.

"Verily, verily, I say unto you, He that entereth not by the door into
the fold of the sheep, but climbeth up some other way, the same is a
thief and a robber. But he that entereth in by the door is the
shepherd of the sheep. To him the porter openeth; and the sheep hear
his voice: and he calleth his own sheep by name, and leadeth them out.
When he hath put forth all his own, he goeth before them, and the
sheep follow him: for they know his voice. And a stranger will they
not follow, but will flee from him: for they know not the voice of
strangers."

This parable spake Jesus unto them: but they understood not what
things they were which he spake unto them.

Jesus therefore said unto them again, "Verily, verily, I say unto
you, I am the door of the sheep. All that came before me are thieves
and robbers: but the sheep did not hear them. I am the door; by me if
any man enter in, he shall be saved, and shall go in and go out, and
shall find pasture. The thief cometh not, but that he may steal, and
kill, and destroy: I came that they may have life, and may have it
abundantly. I am the good shepherd: the good shepherd layeth down his
life for the sheep. He that is a hireling, and not a shepherd, whose
own the sheep are not, beholdeth the wolf coming, and leaveth the
sheep, and fleeth, and the wolf snatcheth them, and scattereth them;
he fleeth because he is a hireling, and careth not for the sheep. I am
the good shepherd; and I know mine own, and mine own know me, even as
the Father knoweth me, and I know the Father; and I lay down my life
for the sheep. And other sheep I have, which are not of this fold:
them also I must bring, and they shall hear my voice: and they shall
become one flock, one shepherd. Therefore doth the Father love me,
because I lay down my life, that I may take it again. No one taketh it
away from me, but I lay it down of myself. I have power to lay it
down, and I have power to take it again. This commandment received I
from my Father."

There arose a division again among the Jews because of these words.
And many of them said, "He hath a demon, and is mad; why hear ye him?"

Others said, "These are not the sayings of one possessed with a demon.
Can a demon open the eyes of the blind?"


JESUS AT THE FEAST OF DEDICATION.

And it was the feast of the dedication at Jerusalem; it was winter;
and Jesus was walking in the temple, in Solomon's porch. The Jews
therefore came round about him, and said unto him, "How long dost thou
hold us in suspense? If thou art the Christ, tell us plainly."

Jesus answered them, "I told you, and ye believe not; the works that I
do in my Father's name, these bear witness of me. But ye believe not,
because ye are not of my sheep. My sheep hear my voice, and I know
them, and they follow me: and I give unto them eternal life; and they
shall never perish, and no one shall snatch them out of my hand. My
Father, who hath given them unto me, is greater than all; and no one
is able to snatch them out of the Father's hand. I and the Father are
one."

The Jews took up stones again to stone him.

Jesus answered them, "Many good works have I showed you from the
Father; for which of those works do ye stone me?"

The Jews answered him, "For a good work we stone thee not, but for
blasphemy; and because that thou, being a man, makest thyself God."

Jesus answered them, "Is it not written in your law, 'I said, Ye are
gods?' If he called them gods, unto whom the word of God came (and the
scripture cannot be broken), say ye of him, whom the Father sanctified
and sent into the world, 'Thou blasphemest;' because I said, 'I am the
Son of God?' If I do not the works of my Father, believe me not. But
if I do them, though ye believe not me, believe the works: that ye may
know and understand that the Father is in me, and I in the Father."

They sought again to take him: and he went forth out of their hand.




RENEWED MINISTRY IN PEREA


JESUS AND THE PHARISEES.

And he went away again beyond the Jordan into the place where John was
at the first baptizing; and there he abode. And many came unto him;
and they said, "John indeed did no sign: but all things whatsoever
John spake of this man were true." And many believed on him there.

Now a Pharisee asketh him to dine with him: and he went in, and sat
down to meat. And when the Pharisee saw it, he marvelled that he had
not first bathed himself before dinner.

And the Lord said unto him, "Now ye the Pharisees cleanse the outside
of the cup and of the platter; but your inward part is full of
extortion and wickedness. Ye foolish ones, did not he that made the
outside make the inside also? But give for alms those things which are
within; and behold, all things are clean unto you."

And when he was come out from thence, the scribes and the Pharisees
began to press upon him vehemently, and to provoke him to speak of
many things; laying wait for him, to catch something out of his mouth.

In the meantime, when the many thousands of the multitude were
gathered together, insomuch that they trod one upon another, he began
to say unto his disciples first of all, "Beware ye of the leaven of
the Pharisees, which is hypocrisy. But there is nothing covered up,
that shall not be revealed; and hid, that shall not be known."


WARNING AGAINST COVETOUSNESS.

And one out of the multitude said unto him, "Teacher, bid my brother
divide the inheritance with me."

But he said unto him, "Man, who made me a judge or a divider over
you?"

And he said unto them, "Take heed and keep yourselves from all
covetousness: for a man's life consisteth not in the abundance of the
things which he possesseth."

And he spake a parable unto them, saying, "The ground of a certain
rich man brought forth plentifully; and he reasoned within himself,
saying, 'What shall I do, because I have not where to bestow my
fruits?' And he said, 'This will I do: I will pull down my barns, and
build greater; and there will I bestow all my grain and my goods. And
I will say to my soul, "Soul, thou hast much goods laid up for many
years; take thine ease, eat, drink, be merry."' But God said unto him,
'Thou foolish one, this night is thy soul required of thee: and the
things which thou hast prepared, whose shall they be?' So is he that
layeth up treasure for himself, and is not rich toward God."


THE FALL OF THE TOWER.

Now there were some present at that very season who told him of the
Galilaeans, whose blood Pilate had mingled with their sacrifices. And
he answered and said unto them, "Think ye that these Galilaeans were
sinners above all the Galilaeans, because they have suffered these
things? I tell you, Nay: but, except ye repent, ye shall all in like
manner perish. Or those eighteen, upon whom the tower in Siloam fell,
and killed them, think ye that they were offenders above all the men
that dwell in Jerusalem? I tell you, Nay: but, except ye repent, ye
shall all likewise perish."

And he spake this parable: "A certain man had a fig tree planted in
his vineyard; and he came seeking fruit thereon, and found none. And
he said unto the vinedresser, 'Behold, these three years I come
seeking fruit on this fig tree, and find none: cut it down; why doth
it also cumber the ground.' And he answering saith unto him, 'Lord,
let it alone this year also, till I shall dig about it, and dung it:
and if it bear fruit thenceforth, well; but if not, thou shalt cut it
down.'"


THE USES OF THE SABBATH.

And he was teaching in one of the synagogues on the sabbath day. And
behold, a woman that had a spirit of infirmity eighteen years; and she
was bowed together, and could in no wise lift herself up. And when
Jesus saw her, he called her, and said to her, "Woman, thou art loosed
from thine infirmity."

And he laid his hands upon her: and immediately she was made straight,
and glorified God.

And the ruler of the synagogue, being moved with indignation because
Jesus had healed on the sabbath, answered and said to the multitude,
"There are six days in which men ought to work: in them therefore come
and be healed, and not on the day of the sabbath."

But the Lord answered him and said, "Ye hypocrites, doth not each one
of you on the sabbath loose his ox or his ass from the stall, and lead
him away to watering? And ought not this woman, being a daughter of
Abraham, whom Satan had bound, lo, these eighteen years, to have been
loosed from this bond on the day of the sabbath?"

And as he said these things, all his adversaries were put to shame:
and all the multitude rejoiced for all the glorious things that were
done by him.


A QUESTION OF SALVATION.

And he went on his way through cities and villages, teaching, and
journeying on unto Jerusalem. And one said unto him, "Lord, are they
few that are saved?"

And he said unto them, "Strive to enter in by the narrow door: for
many, I say unto you, shall seek to enter in, and shall not be able.
When once the master of the house is risen up, and hath shut to the
door, and ye begin to stand without and to knock at the door, saying,
'Lord, open to us,' and he shall answer and say to you, 'I know you
not whence ye are'; then shall ye begin to say, 'We did eat and drink
in thy presence, and thou didst teach in our streets'; and he shall
say, 'I tell you, I know not whence ye are; depart from me, all ye
workers of iniquity.' There shall be the weeping and the gnashing of
teeth, when ye shall see Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, and all the
prophets, in the kingdom of God, and yourselves cast forth without.
And they shall come from the east and west, and from the north and
south, and shall sit down in the kingdom of God. And behold, there are
last who shall be first, and there are first who shall be last."


A MESSAGE TO HEROD.

In that very hour there came certain Pharisees, saying to him, "Get
thee out, and go hence: for Herod would fain kill thee."

And he said unto them, "Go and say to that fox, 'Behold, I cast out
demons and perform cures to-day and to-morrow, and the third day I am
perfected.' Nevertheless I must go on my way to-day and to-morrow and
the day following: for it cannot be that a prophet perish out of
Jerusalem."


THE OX IN THE PIT.

And it came to pass, when he went into the house of one of the rulers
of the Pharisees on a sabbath to eat bread, that they were watching
him. And behold, there was before him a certain man that had the
dropsy. And Jesus answering spake unto the lawyers and Pharisees,
saying, "Is it lawful to heal on the sabbath, or not?"

But they held their peace. And he took him, and healed him, and let
him go.

And he said unto them, "Which of you shall have an ass or an ox fallen
into a well, and will not straightway draw him up on a sabbath day?"
And they could not answer again unto these things.


THE CHIEF PLACES AT THE FEAST.

And he spake a parable unto those that were bidden, when he marked how
they chose out the chief seats; saying unto them, "When thou art
bidden of any man to a marriage feast, sit not down in the chief seat;
lest haply a more honorable man than thou be bidden of him, and he
that bade thee and him shall come and say to thee, 'Give this man
place'; and then thou shalt begin with shame to take the lowest place.
But when thou art bidden, go and sit down in the lowest place; that
when he that hath bidden thee cometh, he may say to thee, 'Friend, go
up higher'; then shalt thou have glory in the presence of all that sit
at meat with thee. For every one that exalteth himself shall be
humbled: and he that humbleth himself shall be exalted."

And he said to him also that had bidden him, "When thou makest a
dinner or a supper, call not thy friends, nor thy brethren, nor thy
kinsmen, nor rich neighbors; lest haply they also bid thee again, and
a recompense be made thee. But when thou makest a feast, bid the poor,
the maimed, the lame, the blind: and thou shalt be blessed; because
they have not wherewith to recompense thee: for thou shalt be
recompensed in the resurrection of the just.


THE SLIGHTED INVITATION.

And when one of them that sat at meat with him heard these things, he
said unto him, "Blessed is he that shall eat bread in the kingdom of
God."

But he said unto him, "A certain man made a great supper; and he bade
many: and he sent forth his servant at supper time to say to them that
were bidden, 'Come; for all things are now ready.' And they all with
one consent began to make excuse. The first said unto him, 'I have
bought a field, and I must needs go out and see it; I pray thee have
me excused.' And another said, 'I have bought five yoke of oxen, and I
go to prove them; I pray thee have me excused.' And another said, 'I
have married a wife, and therefore I cannot come.' And the servant
came, and told his lord these things. Then the master of the house,
being angry, said to his servant, 'Go out quickly into the streets and
lanes of the city, and bring in hither the poor and maimed and blind
and lame.' And the servant said, 'Lord, what thou didst command is
done, and yet there is room.' And the lord said unto the servant, 'Go
out into the highways and hedges, and constrain them to come in, that
my house may be filled. For I say unto you, that none of those men
that were bidden shall taste of my supper.'"


COUNTING THE COST.

Now there went with him great multitudes: and he turned, and said unto
them, "If any man cometh unto me, and hateth not his own father, and
mother, and wife, and children, and brethren, and sisters, yea, and
his own life also, he cannot be my disciple. Whosoever doth not bear
his own cross, and come after me, cannot be my disciple. For which of
you, desiring to build a tower, doth not first sit down and count the
cost, whether he have wherewith to complete it? Lest haply, when he
hath laid a foundation, and is not able to finish, all that behold
begin to mock him, saying, 'This man began to build, and was not able
to finish.' Or what king, as he goeth to encounter another king in
war, will not sit down first and take counsel whether he is able with
ten thousand to meet him that cometh against him with twenty thousand?
Or else, while the other is yet a great way off, he sendeth an
ambassage, and asketh conditions of peace. So therefore whosoever he
be of you that renounceth not all that he hath, he cannot be my
disciple. Salt therefore is good: but if even the salt have lost its
savor, wherewith shall it be seasoned? It is fit neither for the land
nor for the dunghill: men cast it out. He that hath ears to hear, let
him hear."


THE NINETY AND NINE.

Now all the publicans and sinners were drawing near unto him to hear
him. And both the Pharisees and the scribes murmured, saying, "This
man receiveth sinners, and eateth with them."

And he spake unto them this parable, saying, "What man of you, having
a hundred sheep, and having lost one of them, doth not leave the
ninety and nine in the wilderness, and go after that which is lost,
until he find it? And when he hath found it, he layeth it on his
shoulders, rejoicing. And when he cometh home, he calleth together his
friends and his neighbors, saying unto them, 'Rejoice with me, for I
have found my sheep which was lost.' I say unto you, that even so
there shall be joy in heaven over one sinner that repenteth, more than
over ninety and nine righteous persons, who need no repentance.


THE LOST COIN.

"Or what woman having ten pieces of silver, if she lose one piece,
doth not light a lamp, and sweep the house, and seek diligently until
she find it? And when she hath found it, she calleth together her
friends and neighbors, saying, 'Rejoice with me, for I have found the
piece which I had lost.' Even so, I say unto you, there is joy in the
presence of the angels of God over one sinner that repenteth."


THE PRODIGAL SON.

And he said, "A certain man had two sons: and the younger of them said
to his father, 'Father, give me the portion of thy substance that
falleth to me.' And he divided unto them his living. And not many days
after, the younger son gathered all together and took his journey into
a far country; and there he wasted his substance with riotous living.
And when he had spent all, there arose a mighty famine in that
country; and he began to be in want. And he went and joined himself to
one of the citizens of that country; and he sent him into his fields
to feed swine. And he would fain have filled his belly with the husks
that the swine did eat: and no man gave unto him. But when he came to
himself he said, 'How many hired servants of my father's have bread
enough and to spare, and I perish here with hunger! I will arise and
go to my father, and will say unto him, Father, I have sinned against
heaven, and in thy sight: I am no more worthy to be called thy son:
make me as one of thy hired servants.' And he arose, and came to his
father. But while he was yet afar off, his father saw him, and was
moved with compassion, and ran, and fell on his neck, and kissed him.
And the son said unto him, 'Father, I have sinned against heaven, and
in thy sight: I am no more worthy to be called thy son.' But the
father said to his servants, 'Bring forth quickly the best robe, and
put it on him; and put a ring on his hand, and shoes on his feet: and
bring the fatted calf, and kill it, and let us eat, and make merry:
for this my son was dead, and is alive again; he was lost, and is
found.' And they began to be merry. Now his elder son was in the
field: and as he came and drew nigh to the house, he heard music and
dancing. And he called to him one of the servants, and inquired what
these things might be. And he said unto him, 'Thy brother is come; and
thy father hath killed the fatted calf, because he hath received him
safe and sound.' But he was angry, and would not go in: and his father
came out, and entreated him. But he answered and said to his father,
'Lo, these many years do I serve thee, and I never transgressed a
commandment of thine; and yet thou never gavest me a kid, that I might
make merry with my friends; but when this thy son came, who hath
devoured thy living with harlots, thou killedst for him the fatted
calf.' And he said unto him, 'Son, thou art ever with me, and all that
is mine is thine. But it was meet to make merry and be glad: for this
thy brother was dead, and is alive again; and was lost, and is
found.'"


THE UNJUST STEWARD.

And he said also unto the disciples, "There was a certain rich man,
who had a steward; and the same was accused unto him that he was
wasting his goods. And he called him, and said unto him, 'What is this
that I hear of thee? render the account of thy stewardship; for thou
canst be no longer steward' And the steward said within himself, 'What
shall I do, seeing that my lord taketh away the stewardship from me? I
have not strength to dig; to beg I am ashamed. I am resolved what to
do, that, when I am put out of the stewardship, they may receive me
into their houses.' And calling to him each one of his lord's debtors,
he said to the first, 'How much owest thou unto my lord?' And he said,
'A hundred measures of oil.' And he said unto him, 'Take thy bond, and
sit down quickly and write fifty.' Then said he to another, 'And how
much owest thou?' And he said, 'A hundred measures of wheat.' He saith
unto him, 'Take thy bond, and write fourscore.' And his lord commended
the unrighteous steward because he had done wisely: for the sons of
this world are for their own generation wiser than the sons of the
light. And I say unto you, Make to yourselves friends by means of the
mammon of unrighteousness; that, when it shall fail, they may receive
you into the eternal tabernacles. He that is faithful in a very little
is faithful also in much: and he that is unrighteous in a very little
is unrighteous also in much. If therefore ye have not been faithful in
the unrighteous mammon, who will commit to your trust the true riches?
And if ye have not been faithful in that which is another's, who will
give you that which is your own? No servant can serve two masters: for
either he will hate the one, and love the other; or else he will hold
to one, and despise the other. Ye cannot serve God and mammon."


A PARABLE TO THE LOVERS OF MONEY.

And the Pharisees, who were lovers of money, heard all these things;
and they scoffed at him.

And he said unto them, "Ye are they that justify yourselves in the
sight of men; but God knoweth your hearts: for that which is exalted
among men is an abomination in the sight of God.

"Now there was a certain rich man, and he was clothed in purple and
fine linen, faring sumptuously every day: and a certain beggar named
Lazarus was laid at his gate, full of sores, and desiring to be fed
with the crumbs that fell from the rich man's table; yea, even the
dogs came and licked his sores. And it came to pass, that the beggar
died, and that he was carried away by the angels into Abraham's bosom:
and the rich man also died, and was buried. And in Hades he lifted up
his eyes, being in torments, and seeth Abraham afar off, and Lazarus
in his bosom. And he cried and said, 'Father Abraham, have mercy on
me, and send Lazarus, that he may dip the tip of his finger in water,
and cool my tongue; for I am in anguish in this flame.' But Abraham
said, 'Son, remember that thou in thy lifetime receivedst thy good
things, and Lazarus in like manner evil things; but now he is
comforted, and thou art in anguish. And besides all this, between us
and you there is a great gulf fixed, that they that would pass from
hence to you may not be able, and that none may cross over from thence
to us.' And he said, 'I pray thee therefore, father, that thou
wouldest send him to my father's house; for I have five brethren; that
he may testify unto them, lest they also come into this place of
torment.' But Abraham saith, 'They have Moses and the prophets; let
them hear them.' And he said, 'Nay, father Abraham: but if one go to
them from the dead, they will repent.' And he said unto him, 'If they
hear not Moses and the prophets, neither will they be persuaded, if
one rise from the dead.'"


"INCREASE OUR FAITH."

And the apostles said unto the Lord, "Increase our faith."

And the Lord said. "If ye had faith as a grain of mustard seed, ye
would say unto this sycamine tree, 'Be thou rooted up, and be thou
planted in the sea'; and it would obey you. But who is there of you,
having a servant plowing or keeping sheep, that will say unto him,
when he is come in from the field. 'Come straightway and sit down to
meat'; and will not rather say unto him, 'Make ready wherewith I may
sup, and gird thyself, and serve me, till I have eaten and drunken;
and afterward thou shalt eat and drink?' Doth he thank the servant
because he did the things that were commanded? Even so ye also, when
ye shall have done all the things that are commanded you, say, 'We are
unprofitable servants; we have done that which it was our duty to
do.'"




NEAR JERUSALEM--THE PLOT TO KILL HIM.


THE RAISING OF LAZARUS.

Now a certain man was sick, Lazarus of Bethany, of the village of Mary
and her sister Martha. And it was that Mary who anointed the Lord with
ointment, and wiped his feet with her hair, whose brother Lazarus was
sick.

The sisters therefore sent unto him, saying, "Lord, behold, he whom
thou lovest is sick."

But when Jesus heard it, he said, "This sickness is not unto death,
but for the glory of God, that the son of God may be glorified
thereby."

Now Jesus loved Martha, and her sister, and Lazarus. When therefore he
heard that he was sick, he abode at that time two days in the place
where he was.

Then after this he saith to the disciples, "Let us go into Judaea
again."

The disciples say unto him, "Rabbi, the Jews were but now seeking to
stone thee: and goest thou thither again?"

Jesus answered, "Are there not twelve hours in the day? If a man walk
in the day, he stumbleth not, because he seeth the light of this
world. But if a man walk in the night, he stumbleth, because the light
is not in him."

These things spake he: and after this he saith unto them. "Our friend
Lazarus is fallen asleep; but I go, that I may awake him out of
sleep."

The disciples therefore said unto him, "Lord, if he is fallen asleep,
he will recover."

Now Jesus had spoken of his death: but they thought that he spake of
taking rest in sleep.

Then Jesus therefore said unto them plainly, "Lazarus is dead. And I
am glad for your sakes that I was not there, to the intent ye may
believe; nevertheless let us go unto him."

Thomas therefore, who is called Didymus, said unto his
fellow-disciples, "Let us also go, that we may die with him."

So when Jesus came, he found that he had been in the tomb four days
already.

Now Bethany was nigh unto Jerusalem, about fifteen furlongs off; and
many of the Jews had come to Martha and Mary, to console them
concerning their brother.

Martha therefore, when she heard that Jesus was coming, went and met
him: but Mary still sat in the house. Martha therefore said unto
Jesus, "Lord, if thou hadst been here, my brother had not died. And
even now I know that, whatsoever thou shalt ask of God, God will give
thee."

Jesus saith unto her, "Thy brother shall rise again."

Martha saith unto him, "I know that he shall rise again in the
resurrection at the last day."

Jesus said unto her, "I am the resurrection, and the life: he that
believeth on me, though he die, yet shall he live; and whosoever
liveth and believeth on me shall never die. Believest thou this?"

She saith unto him, "Yea, Lord. I have believed that thou art the
Christ, the Son of God, even he that cometh into the world."

And when she had said this, she went away, and called Mary her sister
secretly, saying, "The Teacher is here, and calleth thee."

And she, when she heard it, arose quickly, and went unto him. (Now
Jesus was not yet come into the village, but was still in the place
where Martha met him.) The Jews then who were with her in the house,
and were consoling her, when they saw Mary, that she rose up quickly
and went out, followed her, supposing that she was going unto the tomb
to weep there.

Mary therefore, when she came where Jesus was, and saw him, fell down
at his feet, saying unto him. "Lord, if thou hadst been here, my
brother had not died."

When Jesus therefore saw her weeping, and the Jews also weeping who
came with her, he groaned in the spirit, and was troubled, and said,
"Where have ye laid him?"

They say unto him, "Lord, come and see."

Jesus wept.

The Jews therefore said, "Behold how he loved him!" But some of them
said, "Could not this man, who has opened the eyes of him that was
blind, have caused that this man also should not die?"

Jesus therefore again groaning in himself cometh to the tomb. Now it
was a cave, and a stone lay against it. Jesus saith, "Take ye away the
stone."

Martha, the sister of him that was dead, saith unto him, "Lord, by
this time the body decayeth; for he hath been dead four days."

Jesus saith unto her, "Said I not unto thee, that, if thou believedst,
thou shouldest see the glory of God?"

So they took away the stone. And Jesus lifted up his eyes, and said,
"Father, I thank thee that thou heardest me. And I knew that thou
hearest me always: but because of the multitude that standeth around I
said it, that they may believe that thou didst send me."

And when he had thus spoken, he cried with a loud voice, "Lazarus,
come forth."

He that was dead came forth, bound hand and foot with grave-clothes;
and his face was bound about with a napkin. Jesus saith unto them,
"Loose him, and let him go."

Many therefore of the Jews, who came to Mary and beheld that which he
did, believed on him. But some of them went away to the Pharisees, and
told them the things which Jesus had done.


THE DECISION OF THE COUNCIL.

The chief priests therefore and the Pharisees gathered a council, and
said, "What do we? for this man doeth many signs. If we let him thus
alone, all men will believe on him: and the Romans will come and take
away both our place and our nation."

But a certain one of them, Caiaphas, being high priest that year, said
unto them, "Ye know nothing at all, nor do ye take account that it is
expedient for you that one man should die for the people, and that the
whole nation perish not."

Now this he said not of himself: but being high priest that year, he
prophesied that Jesus should die for the nation; and not for the
nation only, but that he might also gather together into one the
children of God that are scattered abroad.

So from that day forth they took counsel that they might put him to
death.




HIS WITHDRAWAL TO EPHRAIM


THE COMING OF THE KINGDOM.

Jesus therefore walked no more openly among the Jews, but departed
thence into the country near to the wilderness, into a city called
Ephraim; and there he tarried with the disciples.

And being asked by the Pharisees, when the kingdom of God cometh, he
answered them and said, "The kingdom of God cometh not with
observation: neither shall they say, 'Lo, here!' or, 'There!' for lo,
the kingdom of God is within you."

And he said unto the disciples, "The days will come, when ye shall
desire to see one of the days of the Son of man, and ye shall not see
it. And they shall say to you, 'Lo, there!' 'Lo, here!' go not away,
nor follow after them; for as the lightning, when it lighteneth out of
the one part under the heaven, shineth unto the other part under
heaven; so shall the Son of man be in his day. But first must he
suffer many things and be rejected of this generation.

"And as it came to pass in the days of Noah, even so shall it be also
in the days of the Son of man. They ate, they drank, they married,
they were given in marriage, until the day that Noah entered into the
ark, and the flood came, and destroyed them all. Likewise even as it
came to pass in the days of Lot; they ate, they drank, they bought,
they sold, they planted, they builded; but in the day that Lot went
out from Sodom it rained fire and brimstone from heaven, and destroyed
them all: after the same manner shall it be in the day that the Son of
man is revealed. In that day, he that shall be on the housetop, and
his goods in the house, let him not go down to take them away; and let
him that is in the field likewise not return back. Remember Lot's
wife. Whosoever shall seek to gain his life shall lose it; but
whosoever shall lose his life shall preserve it."


THE UNJUST JUDGE.

And he spake a parable unto them to the end that they ought always to
pray, and not to faint; saying, "There was in a city a judge, who
feared not God, and regarded not man: and there was a widow in that
city: and she came oft unto him, saying, 'Avenge me of mine
adversary.' And he would not for a while: but afterward he said within
himself, 'Though I fear not God, nor regard man; yet because this
widow troubleth me, I will avenge her, lest she wear me out by her
continual coming.'" And the Lord said, "Hear what the unrighteous
judge saith. And shall not God avenge his elect, that cry to him day
and night, and yet he is longsuffering over them? I say unto you, that
he will avenge them speedily. Nevertheless, when the Son of man
cometh, shall he find faith on the earth?"


THE PHARISEE AND THE PUBLICAN.

And he spake also this parable unto certain who trusted in themselves
that they were righteous, and set all others at nought: "Two men went
up into the temple to pray; the one a Pharisee, and the other a
publican. The Pharisee stood and prayed thus with himself, 'God, I
thank thee, that I am not as the rest of men, extortioners, unjust,
adulterers, or even as this publican. I fast twice in the week; I give
tithes of all that I get.' But the publican, standing afar off, would
not lift up so much as his eyes unto heaven, but smote his breast,
saying, 'God, be thou merciful to me a sinner.' I say unto you, This
man went down to his house justified rather than the other: for every
one that exalteth himself shall be humbled; but he that humbleth
himself shall be exalted."


CONCERNING DIVORCE.

And there came unto him Pharisees, trying him, and saying, "Is it
lawful for a man to put away his wife for every cause?"

And he answered and said, "Have ye not read, that he who made them
from the beginning made them, male and female, and said, 'For this
cause shall a man leave his father and mother, and shall cleave to his
wife; and the two shall become one flesh?' So that they are no more
two, but one flesh. What therefore God hath joined together, let not
man put asunder."

They say unto him, "Why then did Moses command to give a bill of
divorcement, and to put her away?"

He saith unto them, "Moses for your hardness of heart suffered you to
put away your wives: but from the beginning it hath not been so. And I
say unto you, Whosoever shall put away his wife, except for
fornication, and shall marry another, committeth adultery: and he that
marrieth her when she is put away committeth adultery."

The disciples say unto him, "If the case of the man is so with his
wife, it is not expedient to marry."

But he said unto them, "Not all men can receive this saying, but they
to whom it is given. For there are eunuchs, that were so born from
their mother's womb: and there are eunuchs, that were made eunuchs by
men: and there are eunuchs, that made themselves eunuchs for the
kingdom of heaven's sake. He that is able to receive it, let him
receive it."


JESUS AND THE CHILDREN.

And they were bringing unto him little children, that he should touch
them: and the disciples rebuked them. But when Jesus saw it, he was
moved with indignation, and said unto them, "Suffer the little
children to come unto me; forbid them not: for to such belongeth the
kingdom of God. Verily I say unto you, Whosoever shall not receive the
kingdom of God as a little child, he shall in no wise enter therein."

And he took them in his arms, and blessed them, laying his hands upon
them.


THE RICH YOUNG RULER.

And behold, as he was going forth into the way, a certain ruler ran to
him, and kneeled to him, and asked him, "Good Teacher, what good thing
shall I do that I may have eternal life?"

And he said unto him, "Why askest thou me concerning that which is
good? None is good, save one, even God: but if thou wouldest enter
into life, keep the commandments."

He saith unto him, "Which?"

And Jesus said, "Thou shalt not kill, Thou shalt not commit adultery,
Thou shalt not steal, Thou shalt not bear false witness, Honor thy
father and thy mother; and, Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself."

The young ruler saith unto him, "All these things have I observed from
my youth up; what lack I yet?"

And Jesus, looking upon him, loved him, and said unto him, "One thing
thou lackest yet: if thou wouldest be perfect, go, sell that which
thou hast, and give to the poor, and thou shalt have treasure in
heaven: and come, follow me."

But when the young man heard the saying, his countenance fell, and he
went away sorrowful; for he was one that had great possessions.

And Jesus said unto his disciples, "Verily I say unto you, It is hard
for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of heaven." And the disciples
were amazed at his words. But Jesus answered again and said unto them,
"Children, how hard it is for them that trust in riches to enter into
the kingdom of God! It is easier for a camel to go through a needle's
eye, than for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of God."

And when the disciples heard it, they were astonished exceedingly,
saying, "Who then can be saved?"

And Jesus looking upon them said to them, "With men this is
impossible: but with God all things are possible."

Then answered Peter and said unto him, "Lo, we have left all, and
followed thee; what then shall we have?"

And Jesus said unto them, "Verily I say unto you, that ye who have
followed me, in the regeneration when the Son of man shall sit on the
throne of his glory, ye also shall sit upon twelve thrones, judging
the twelve tribes of Israel. And every one that hath left houses, or
brethren, or sisters, or father, or mother, or children, or lands, for
my name's sake, shall receive a hundredfold now in this time, houses,
and brethren, and sisters, and mothers, and children, and lands, with
persecutions, and in the world to come shall inherit eternal life. But
many shall be last that are first; and first that are last.


THE PARABLE OF THE VINEYARD.

"For the kingdom of heaven is like unto a man that was a householder,
who went out early in the morning to hire laborers into his vineyard.
And when he had agreed with the laborers for a shilling a day, he
sent them into his vineyard. And he went out about the third hour, and
saw others standing in the market-place idle; and to them he said, 'Go
ye also into the vineyard, and whatsoever is right I will give you.'
And they went their way. Again he went out about the sixth and the
ninth hour, and did likewise. And about the eleventh hour he went out,
and found others standing; and he saith unto them, 'Why stand ye here
all the day idle?' They say unto him, 'Because no man hath hired us.'
He saith unto them, 'Go ye also into the vineyard.' And when even was
come, the lord of the vineyard saith unto his steward, 'Call the
laborers and pay them their hire, beginning from the last unto the
first.' And when they came that were hired about the eleventh hour,
they received every man a shilling. And when the first came, they
supposed that they would receive more; and they likewise received
every man a shilling. And when they received it, they murmured against
the householder, saying, 'These last have spent but one hour, and thou
hast made them equal unto us, who have borne the burden of the day and
the scorching heat.' But he answered and said to one of them, 'Friend,
I do thee no wrong: didst not thou agree with me for a shilling? Take
up that which is thine, and go thy way; it is my will to give unto
this last, even as unto thee. Is it not lawful for me to do what I
will with mine own? or is thine eye evil, because I am good?' So the
last shall be first, and the first last."




THE LAST JOURNEY TO JERUSALEM


THE SHADOW OF THE CROSS.

And they were on the way, going up to Jerusalem; and Jesus was going
before them: and they were amazed; and they that followed were afraid.
And he took again the twelve, and began to tell them the things that
were to happen unto him, saying, "Behold, we go up to Jerusalem; and
all the things that are written by the prophets shall be accomplished
unto the Son of man; and he shall be delivered unto the chief priests
and the scribes; and they shall condemn him to death, and shall
deliver him unto the Gentiles: and they shall mock him, and shall spit
upon him, and shall scourge him, and shall kill him; and after three
days he shall rise again."

And they understood none of these things: and this saying was hid from
them: and they perceived not the things that were said.


THE SONS OF THUNDER.

Then came to him the mother of the sons of Zebedee with her sons James
and John, worshipping him, and asking a certain thing of him.

And he said unto her, "What wouldest thou?"

She saith unto him, "Command that these my two sons may sit, one on
thy right hand, and one on thy left hand, in thy kingdom."

But Jesus answered and said, "Ye know not what ye ask. Are ye able to
drink the cup that I am about to drink? or to be baptized with the
baptism that I am baptized with?"

And they said unto him, "We are able."

And Jesus said unto them, "The cup that I drink ye shall drink; and
with the baptism that I am baptized withal shall ye be baptized: but
to sit on my right hand or on my left hand is not mine to give; but it
is for them for whom it hath been prepared of my Father."

And when the ten heard it, they began to be moved with indignation
concerning James and John.

And Jesus called them to him, and saith unto them, "Ye know that they
who are accounted to rule over the Gentiles lord it over them; and
their great ones exercise authority over them. But it is not so among
you: but whosoever would become great among you, shall be your
minister; and whosoever would be first among you, shall be servant of
all. Even as the Son of man also came not to be ministered unto, but
to minister, and to give his life a ransom for many."


THE BLIND MAN OF JERICHO.

And they come to Jericho: and as they went out from Jericho, with his
disciples and a great multitude, the son of Timaeus, Bartimaeus, a blind
beggar, was sitting by the wayside, begging. And hearing the multitude
going by, he inquired what this meant, and they told him that Jesus of
Nazareth passeth by. And when he heard that it was Jesus the Nazarene,
he began to cry out and say, "Jesus, thou son of David, have mercy on
me."

And Jesus stood still, and said, "Call ye him."

And they call the blind man, saying unto him, "Be of good cheer: rise,
he calleth thee." And he, casting away his garment, sprang up, and
came to Jesus.

And Jesus answered him, and said, "What wilt thou that I should do
unto thee?"

And the blind man said unto him, "Rabboni, that I may receive my
sight."

And Jesus said unto him, "Go thy way; thy faith hath made thee
whole."

And straightway he received his sight, and followed him in the way,
glorifying God. And all the people, when they saw it, gave praise unto
God.


THE VISIT TO ZACCHAEUS.

And he entered and was passing through Jericho. And behold, a man
called by name Zacchaeus; and he was a chief publican, and he was rich.
And he sought to see Jesus who he was; and could not for the crowd,
because he was little of stature. And he ran on before, and climbed up
into a sycamore tree to see him: for he was to pass that way.

And when Jesus came to the place, he looked up, and said unto him,
"Zacchaeus, make haste, and come down; for to-day I must abide at thy
house."

And he made haste, and came down, and received him joyfully.

And when they saw it, they all murmured, saying, "He is gone in to
lodge with a man that is a sinner."

And Zacchaeus stood, and said unto the Lord, "Behold, Lord, the half of
my goods I give to the poor; and if I have wrongfully exacted aught of
any man, I restore fourfold."

And Jesus said unto him, "To-day is salvation come to this house,
forasmuch as he also is a son of Abraham. For the Son of man came to
seek and to save that which was lost."


THE PARABLE OF THE POUNDS.

And as they heard these things, he added and spake a parable, because
he was nigh to Jerusalem, and because they supposed that the kingdom
of God was immediately to appear. He said therefore, "A certain
nobleman went into a far country, to receive for himself a kingdom,
and to return. And he called ten servants of his, and gave them ten
pounds, and said unto them, 'Trade ye herewith till I come.' But his
citizens hated him, and sent an ambassage after him, saying, 'We will
not that this man reign over us.'

"And it came to pass, when he was come back again, having received the
kingdom, that he commanded these servants, unto whom he had given the
money, to be called to him, that he might know what they had gained by
trading. And the first came before him, saying, 'Lord, thy pound hath
made ten pounds more.' And he said unto him, 'Well done, thou good
servant: because thou wast found faithful in a very little, have thou
authority over ten cities.' And the second came, saying, 'Thy pound,
Lord, hath made five pounds.' And he said unto him also, 'Be thou also
over five cities.' And another came, saying, 'Lord, behold, here is
thy pound, which I kept laid up in a napkin: for I feared thee,
because thou art an austere man: thou takest up that which thou
layedst not down, and reapest that which thou didst not sow.' He saith
unto him, 'Out of thine own mouth will I judge thee, thou wicked
servant. Thou knewest that I am an austere man, taking up that which I
laid not down, and reaping that which I did not sow; then wherefore
gavest thou not my money into the bank, and I at my coming should have
required it with interest?' And he said unto them that stood by, 'Take
away from him the pound, and give it unto him that hath the ten
pounds.' And they said unto him, 'Lord, he hath ten pounds.' 'I say
unto you, that unto every one that hath shall be given; but from him
that hath not, even that which he hath shall be taken away from him.
But these mine enemies, that would not that I should reign over them,
bring hither, and slay them before me.'"

And when he had thus spoken, he went on before, going up to Jerusalem.


GOING UP TO JERUSALEM.

Now the passover of the Jews was at hand: and many went up to
Jerusalem out of the country before the passover, to purify
themselves. They sought therefore for Jesus, and spake one with
another, as they stood in the temple, "What think ye? That he will not
come to the feast?"

Now the chief priests and the Pharisees had given commandment, that,
if any man knew where he was, he should show it, that they might take
him.


THE FEAST AT BETHANY.

Jesus therefore six days before the passover came to Bethany, where
Lazarus was, whom Jesus raised from the dead. So they made him a
supper there in the house of Simon the leper; and Martha served: but
Lazarus was one of them that sat at meat with him. Mary therefore took
a pound of ointment of pure nard, very precious, and anointed the feet
of Jesus, and wiped his feet with her hair; and the house was filled
with the odor of the ointment.

But Judas Iscariot, one of his disciples, that should betray him,
saith, "Why was not this ointment sold for three hundred shillings,
and given to the poor?"

Now this he said, not because he cared for the poor; but because he
was a thief, and having the bag took away what was put therein.

Jesus therefore said, "Suffer her to keep it against the day of my
burying. For the poor ye have always with you; but me ye have not
always. She hath done what she could; she hath anointed my body
beforehand for the burying. And verily I say unto you, Wheresoever
the gospel shall be preached throughout the whole world, that also
which this woman hath done shall be spoken of for a memorial of her."

The common people therefore of the Jews learned that he was there: and
they came, not for Jesus' sake only, but that they might see Lazarus
also, whom he had raised from the dead. But the chief priests took
counsel that they might put Lazarus also to death; because that by
reason of him many of the Jews went away, and believed on Jesus.




=HIS LAST WEEK=

       *       *       *       *       *

PALM SUNDAY--THE DAY OF TRIUMPH


THE TRIUMPHAL ENTRY.

On the morrow when they drew nigh unto Jerusalem, unto Bethphage and
Bethany, at the mount of Olives, he sendeth two of his disciples, and
saith unto them, "Go your way into the village that is over against
you: and straightway as ye enter into it, ye shall find a colt tied,
whereon no man ever yet sat; loose him, and bring him. And if any one
say unto you, 'Why do ye this?' say ye, 'The Lord hath need of him';
and straightway he will send him back hither."

Now this is come to pass, that it might be fulfilled, which was spoken
through the prophet, saying,

    "Tell ye the daughter of Zion,
    Behold, thy King cometh unto thee,
    Meek, and riding upon an ass,
    And upon a colt the foal of an ass."

And they went away, and found a colt tied at the door without in the
open street: and they loose him. And certain of them that stood there
said unto them, "What do ye, loosing the colt?" And they said unto
them even as Jesus had said: and they let them go. And they bring the
colt unto Jesus, and cast on him their garments; and he sat upon him.

And the most part of the multitude spread their garments upon the way;
and others branches, which they had cut from the fields. And as he was
drawing nigh, even at the descent of the Mount of Olives, the whole
multitude of the disciples began to rejoice and praise God with a loud
voice for all the mighty works which they had seen. And they that went
before, and they that followed, cried, "Hosanna to the Son of David;
Blessed is he that cometh in the name of the Lord; Blessed is the
kingdom that cometh, the kingdom of our father David: Hosanna in the
highest."

These things understood not his disciples at the first: but when Jesus
was glorified, then remembered they that these things were written of
him, and that they had done these things unto him.

The multitude, therefore, that was with him when he called Lazarus out
of the tomb, and raised him from the dead, bare witness. For this
cause also the multitude went and met him, for that they heard that he
had done this sign.

And some of the Pharisees from the multitude said unto him, "Teacher,
rebuke thy disciples."

And he answered and said, "I tell you that, if these shall hold their
peace, the stones will cry out."

And when he drew nigh, he saw the city and wept over it, saying, "If
thou hadst known in this day, even thou, the things which belong unto
peace! but now they are hid from thine eyes. For the days shall come
upon thee, when thine enemies shall cast up a bank about thee, and
compass thee round, and keep thee in on every side, and shall dash
thee to the ground, and thy children within thee: and they shall not
leave in thee one stone upon another; because thou knewest not the
time of thy visitation."

And when he was come into Jerusalem, all the city was stirred, saying,
"Who is this?"

And the multitudes said, "This is the prophet, Jesus, from Nazareth of
Galilee."

The Pharisees therefore said among themselves, "Behold, how ye prevail
nothing; lo, the world is gone after him."

And he entered into Jerusalem, into the temple; and when he had looked
round about upon all things, it being now eventide, he went out unto
Bethany with the twelve.




MONDAY--THE DAY OF AUTHORITY


THE CURSING OF THE FIG TREE.

And on the morrow, when they were come out from Bethany, he hungered.
And seeing a fig tree afar off having leaves, he came, if haply he
might find anything thereon: and when he came to it, he found nothing
but leaves; for it was not the season of figs. And he answered and
said unto it, "No man eat fruit from thee henceforward for ever."

And his disciples heard it.


THE CLEANSING OF THE TEMPLE.

And they come to Jerusalem: and he entered into the temple, and began
to cast out them that sold and them that bought in the temple, and
overthrew the tables of the money-changers, and the seats of them that
sold the doves: and he would not suffer that any man should carry a
vessel through the temple. And he taught, and said unto them, "Is it
not written, 'My house shall be called a house of prayer for all the
nations?' but ye have made it a den of robbers?"

And the blind and the lame came to him in the temple; and he healed
them. But when the chief priests and the scribes saw the wonderful
things that he did, and the children that were crying in the temple
and saying, "Hosanna to the son of David": they were moved with
indignation, and said unto him, "Hearest thou what these are saying?"

And Jesus saith unto them, "Yea: did ye never read, 'Out of the mouth
of babes and sucklings thou hast perfected praise'?"

And the chief priests and the scribes and the principal men of the
people sought to destroy him: and they could not find what they might
do; for the people all hung upon him, listening.

And he left them, and went forth out of the city to Bethany, and
lodged there.




TUESDAY--THE DAY OF CONTROVERSY


THE LESSON FROM THE WITHERED FIG TREE.

And as they passed by in the morning, they saw the fig tree withered
away from the roots. And Peter calling to remembrance saith unto him,
"Rabbi, behold the fig tree which thou cursedst is withered away."

And Jesus answering saith unto them, "Have faith in God. Verily I say
unto you, Whosoever shall say unto this mountain, 'Be thou taken up
and cast into the sea'; and shall not doubt in his heart, but shall
believe that what he saith cometh to pass; he shall have it. Therefore
I say unto you, All things whatsoever ye pray and ask for, believe
that ye receive them, and ye shall have them. And whensoever ye stand
praying, forgive, if ye have aught against any one; that your Father
also who is in heaven may forgive you your trespasses."


THE CHALLENGE OF CHRIST'S AUTHORITY.

And they came again to Jerusalem. And all the people came early in the
morning to him in the temple to hear him. And as he was teaching the
people in the temple, and preaching the gospel, there came upon him
the chief priests and the scribes with the elders; and they spake,
saying unto him, "Tell us: By what authority doest thou these things?
or who is he that gave thee this authority?"

And Jesus answered, and said unto them, "I also will ask you one
question, which if ye tell me, I likewise will tell you by what
authority I do these things. The baptism of John, whence was it? from
heaven or from men?"

And they reasoned with themselves, saying, "If we shall say, 'From
heaven'; he will say unto us, 'Why did ye not believe him?' But if we
shall say, 'From men'; all the people will stone us: for they are
persuaded that John was a prophet."

And they answered Jesus, and said, "We know not."

And Jesus said unto them, "Neither tell I you by what authority I do
these things."


THREE WARNING PARABLES.


THE TWO SONS.

"But what think ye? A man had two sons; and he came to the first, and
said, 'Son, go work to-day in the vineyard.' And he answered and said,
'I will not': but afterward he repented himself, and went. And he came
to the second, and said likewise. And he answered and said, 'I go,
sir': and went not. Which of the two did the will of his father?"

They say, "The first."

Jesus saith unto them, "Verily I say unto you, that the publicans and
the harlots go into the kingdom of God before you. For John came unto
you in the way of righteousness, and ye believed him not; but the
publicans and the harlots believed him: and ye, when ye saw it, did
not even repent yourselves afterward that ye might believe him."


THE WICKED HUSBANDMEN.

"Hear another parable: There was a man who was a householder, who
planted a vineyard, and set a hedge about it, and digged a winepress
in it, and built a tower, and let it out to husbandmen, and went into
another country. And when the season of the fruits drew near, he sent
his servants to the husbandmen, to receive his fruits. And the
husbandmen took his servants, and beat one, and killed another, and
stoned another. Again, he sent other servants more than the first: and
they did unto them in like manner. But afterward he sent unto them his
son, saying, 'They will reverence my son.' But the husbandmen, when
they saw the son, said among themselves, 'This is the heir; come, let
us kill him, and take his inheritance.' And they took him, and cast
him forth out of the vineyard, and killed him. When therefore the lord
of the vineyard shall come, what will he do unto those husbandmen?"

They say unto him, "He will miserably destroy those miserable men, and
will let out the vineyard unto other husbandmen, who shall render him
the fruits in their seasons."

Jesus saith unto them, "Did ye never read in the scriptures,

    'The stone which the builders rejected,
    The same was made the head of the corner;
    This was from the Lord,
    And it is marvellous in our eyes'?

"Therefore say I unto you, The kingdom of God shall be taken away from
you, and shall be given to a nation bringing forth the fruits thereof.
And he that falleth on this stone shall be broken to pieces; but on
whomsoever it shall fall, it will scatter him as dust."

And when the chief priests and the Pharisees heard his parables, they
perceived that he spake of them. And when they sought to lay hold on
him, they feared the multitudes, because they took him for a prophet.


THE MARRIAGE OF THE KING'S SON.

And Jesus answered and spake again in parables unto them, saying, "The
kingdom of heaven is likened unto a certain king, who made a marriage
feast for his son, and sent forth his servants to call them that were
bidden to the marriage feast: and they would not come. Again he sent
forth other servants, saying, Tell them that are bidden, 'Behold, I
have made ready my dinner; my oxen and my fatlings are killed, and all
things are ready; come to the marriage feast.' But they made light of
it, and went their ways, one to his own farm, another to his
merchandise; and the rest laid hold on his servants, and treated them
shamefully, and killed them. But the king was wroth; and he sent his
armies, and destroyed those murderers, and burned their city. Then
saith he to his servants, 'The wedding is ready, but they that were
bidden were not worthy. Go ye therefore unto the partings of the
highways, and as many as ye shall find, bid to the marriage feast.'
And those servants went out into the highways, and gathered together
all as many as they found, both bad and good; and the wedding was
filled with guests. But when the king came in to behold the guests, he
saw there a man who had not on a wedding-garment: and he saith unto
him, 'Friend, how earnest thou in hither not having a
wedding-garment?' And he was speechless. Then the king said to the
servants, 'Bind him hand and foot and cast him out into the outer
darkness'; there shall be the weeping and the gnashing of teeth. For
many are called, but few chosen."


THREE HOSTILE QUESTIONS ASKED OF JESUS.


TRIBUTE TO CAESAR.

Then went the Pharisees, and took counsel how they might ensnare him
in his talk so as to deliver him up to the rule and to the authority
of the governor. And they send to him their disciples, with the
Herodians, saying, "Teacher, we know that thou art true, and teachest
the way of God in truth, and carest not for any one: for thou
regardest not the person of men. Tell us therefore, What thinkest
thou? Is it lawful to give tribute unto Caesar, or not?"

But Jesus perceived their craftiness, and said, "Why make ye trial of
me, ye hypocrites? Show me the tribute money."

And they brought unto him a denarius. And he saith unto them, "Whose
is this image and superscription?"

They say unto him, "Caesar's."

Then he saith unto them, "Render therefore unto Caesar the things that
are Caesar's; and unto God the things that are God's."

And when they heard it, they marvelled, and left him, and went away.


THE QUESTION OF THE RESURRECTION.

And there came to him certain of the Sadducees, they that say that
there is no resurrection; and they asked him, saying, "Teacher, Moses
wrote unto us, that if a man's brother die, having a wife, and he be
childless, his brother should take the wife, and raise up seed unto
his brother. There were therefore seven brethren: and the first took a
wife, and died childless; and the second; and the third took her; and
likewise the seven also left no children, and died. Afterward the
woman also died. In the resurrection therefore whose wife of them
shall she be? for the seven had her to wife."

And Jesus said unto them, "Ye do err, not knowing the scriptures, nor
the power of God. The sons of this world marry, and are given in
marriage: but they that are accounted worthy to attain to that world,
and the resurrection from the dead, neither marry, nor are given in
marriage: for neither can they die any more: for they are equal unto
the angels; and are sons of God, being sons of the resurrection. But
that the dead are raised, even Moses showed, in the place concerning
the Bush, when he calleth the Lord the God of Abraham, and the God of
Isaac, and the God of Jacob. Now he is not the God of the dead, but of
the living: for all live unto him."

And when the multitudes heard it, they were astonished at his
teaching.


THE GREATEST COMMANDMENT.

And one of the scribes came, and heard them questioning together, and
knowing that he had answered them well, asked him, "What commandment
is the first of all?"

Jesus answered, "The first is, 'Hear, O Israel: The Lord our God, the
Lord is one: and thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart,
and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind, and with all thy
strength.' The second is this, 'Thou shalt love thy neighbor as
thyself.' There is none other commandment greater than these."

And the scribe said unto him, "Of a truth, Teacher, thou hast well
said that he is one: and there is none other but he: and to love him
with all the heart, and with all the understanding and with all the
strength, and to love his neighbor as himself, is much more than all
whole burnt-offerings and sacrifices."

And when Jesus saw that he answered discreetly, he said unto him,
"Thou art not far from the kingdom of God."


THE UNANSWERABLE QUESTION OF JESUS.

Now while the Pharisees were gathered together Jesus asked them a
question, saying, "What think ye of the Christ? whose son is he?"

They say unto him, "The son of David."

He saith unto them, "How then doth David in the Spirit call him Lord,
saying,

    'The Lord said unto my Lord,
    Sit thou on my right hand,
    Till I put thine enemies underneath thy feet'?

If David then calleth him Lord, how is he his son?"

And no one was able to answer him a word, neither durst any man from
that day forth ask him any more questions.

And the common people heard him gladly.


DISCOURSE OF JESUS AGAINST THE SCRIBES AND PHARISEES.

Then spake Jesus to the multitudes and to his disciples, saying, "The
scribes and the Pharisees sit on Moses' seat: all things therefore
whatsoever they bid you, these do and observe: but do not ye after
their works; for they say, and do not. Yea, they bind heavy burdens
and grievous to be borne, and lay them on men's shoulders; but they
themselves will not move them with their finger. But all their works
they do to be seen of men: for they make broad their phylacteries, and
enlarge the borders of their garments, and love the chief place at
feasts, and the chief seats in the synagogues, and the salutations in
the marketplaces, and to be called of men, 'Rabbi.' But be not ye
called 'Rabbi,' for one is your teacher, and all ye are brethren. And
call no man your father on the earth: for one is your Father, even he
who is in heaven. Neither be ye called masters: for one is your
master, even the Christ. But he that is greatest among you shall be
your servant. And whosoever shall exalt himself shall be humbled: and
whosoever shall humble himself shall be exalted.

"But woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! because ye shut
the kingdom of heaven against men: for ye enter not in yourselves,
neither suffer ye them that are entering in to enter.

"Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye compass sea
and land to make one proselyte; and when he is become so, ye make him
twofold more a son of hell than yourselves.

"Woe unto you, ye blind guides, that say, 'Whosoever shall swear by
the temple, it is nothing; but whosoever shall swear by the gold of
the temple, he is a debtor.' Ye fools and blind: for which is greater,
the gold, or the temple that hath sanctified the gold? And, 'Whosoever
shall swear by the altar, it is nothing; but whosoever shall swear by
the gift that is upon it, he is a debtor.' Ye blind: for which is
greater, the gift, or the altar that sanctifieth the gift? He
therefore that sweareth by the altar, sweareth by it, and by all
things thereon. And he that sweareth by the temple, sweareth by it,
and by him that dwelleth therein. And he that sweareth by the heaven,
sweareth by the throne of God, and by him that sitteth thereon.

"Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye tithe mint
and anise and cummin, and have left undone the weightier matters of
the law, justice, and mercy, and faith: but these ye ought to have
done, and not to have left the other undone. Ye blind guides that
strain out the gnat, and swallow the camel!

"Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye cleanse the
outside of the cup and of the platter, but within they are full from
extortion and excess. Thou blind Pharisee, cleanse first the inside of
the cup and of the platter, that the outside thereof may become clean
also.

"Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye are like unto
whited sepulchres, which outwardly appear beautiful, but inwardly are
full of dead men's bones, and of all uncleanness. Even so ye also
outwardly appear righteous unto men, but inwardly ye are full of
hypocrisy and iniquity.

"Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye build the
sepulchres of the prophets, and garnish the tombs of the righteous,
and say, 'If we had been in the days of our fathers, we should not
have been partakers with them in the blood of the prophets.' Wherefore
ye witness to yourselves, that ye are sons of them that slew the
prophets. Fill ye up then the measure of your fathers. Ye serpents, ye
offspring of vipers, how shall ye escape the judgment of hell?
Therefore, behold, I send unto you prophets, and wise men, and
scribes: some of them shall ye kill and crucify; and some of them
shall ye scourge in your synagogues, and persecute from city to city:
that upon you may come all the righteous blood shed on the earth, from
the blood of Abel the righteous unto the blood of Zachariah son of
Barachiah, whom ye slew between the sanctuary and the altar. Verily I
say unto you, All these things shall come upon this generation.

"O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, that killeth the prophets, and stoneth them
that are sent unto her! how often would I have gathered thy children
together, even as a hen gathereth her chickens under her wings, and ye
would not! Behold, your house is left unto you desolate. For I say
unto you, Ye shall not see me henceforth, till ye shall say, 'Blessed
is he that cometh in the name of the Lord.'"


THE WIDOW'S TWO MITES.

And he sat down over against the treasury, and beheld how the
multitude cast money into the treasury: and many that were rich cast
in much. And there came a poor widow, and she cast in two mites, which
make a farthing. And he called unto him his disciples, and said unto
them, "Verily, I say unto you, This poor widow cast in more than all
they that are casting into the treasury: for they all did cast in of
their superfluity; but she of her want did cast in all that she had,
even all her living."


THE GENTILES SEEK JESUS.

Now there were certain Greeks among those that went up to worship at
the feast: these therefore came to Philip, who was of Bethsaida of
Galilee, and asked him, saying, "Sir, we would see Jesus."

Philip cometh and telleth Andrew: Andrew cometh, and Philip, and they
tell Jesus.

And Jesus answereth them, saying, "The hour is come, that the Son of
man should be glorified. Verily, verily, I say unto you, Except a
grain of wheat fall into the earth and die, it abideth by itself
alone; but if it die, it beareth much fruit. He that loveth his life
loseth it: and he that hateth his life in this world shall keep it
unto life eternal. If any man serve me, let him follow me: and where I
am, there shall also my servant be: if any man serve me, him will the
Father honor. Now is my soul troubled; and what shall I say? Father,
save me from this hour. But for this cause came I unto this hour.
Father, glorify thy name."

There came therefore a voice out of heaven, saying, "I have both
glorified it, and will glorify it again."

The multitude, therefore, that stood by, and heard it, said that it
had thundered: others said, "An angel hath spoken to him."

Jesus answered and said, "This voice hath not come for my sake, but
for your sakes. Now is the judgment of this world: now shall the
prince of this world be cast out. And I, if I be lifted up from the
earth, will draw all men unto myself."

But this he said, signifying by what manner of death he should die.

The multitude therefore answered him, "We have heard out of the law
that the Christ abideth forever; and how sayest thou, 'The Son of man
must be lifted up'? who is this Son of man?"

Jesus therefore said unto them, "Yet a little while is the light among
you. Walk while ye have the light, that darkness overtake you not; and
he that walketh in the darkness knoweth not whither he goeth. While ye
have the light, believe on the light, that ye may become sons of
light."

These things spake Jesus, and he departed and hid himself from them.


THE JEWS REJECT JESUS.

But though he had done so many signs before them, yet they believed
not on him: that the word of Isaiah the prophet might be fulfilled,
which he spake,

    "Lord, who hath believed our report?
    And to whom hath the arm of the Lord been revealed?"

For this cause they could not believe, for that Isaiah said again.

    "He hath blinded their eyes, and he hardened their heart;
    Lest they should see with their eyes, and perceive with their
        heart,
    And should turn,
    And I should heal them."

These things said Isaiah, because he saw his glory; and he spake of
him. Nevertheless even of the rulers many believed on him; but because
of the Pharisees they did not confess it, lest they should be put out
of the synagogue; for they loved the glory that is of men more than
the glory that is of God.

And Jesus cried and said, "He that believeth on me, believeth not on
me, but on him that sent me. And he that beholdeth me beholdeth him
that sent me. I am come a light into the world, that whosoever
believeth on me may not abide in the darkness. And if any man hear my
sayings, and keep them not, I judge him not: for I came not to judge
the world, but to save the world. He that rejecteth me, and receiveth
not my sayings, hath one that judgeth him: the word that I spake, the
same shall judge him in the last day. For I spake not from myself; but
the Father that sent me, he hath given me a commandment, what I should
say, and what I should speak. And I know that his commandment is life
eternal; the things therefore which I speak, even as the Father hath
said unto me, so I speak."


DISCOURSE CONCERNING THE FUTURE.

And Jesus went out from the temple, and was going on his way; and his
disciples came to him to show him the buildings of the temple.

But he answered and said unto them, "See ye not all these things?
Verily I say unto you, There shall not be left here one stone upon
another, that shall not be thrown down."

And as he sat on the mount of Olives over against the temple, Peter
and James and John and Andrew asked him privately, "Tell us, when
shall these things be? and what shall be the sign when these things
are all about to be accomplished?"

And Jesus began to say unto them, "Take heed that no man lead you
astray. Many shall come in my name, saying, 'I am he,' and shall lead
many astray. And when ye shall hear of wars and rumors of wars, be not
troubled: these things must needs come to pass; but the end is not
yet. For nation shall rise against nation, and kingdom against
kingdom; there shall be earthquakes in divers places; there shall be
famines: these things are the beginning of the travail.

"But take ye heed to yourselves: for they shall deliver you up to
councils; and in synagogues shall ye be beaten; and before governors
and kings shall ye stand for my sake, for a testimony unto them. And
the gospel must first be preached unto all the nations. And when they
lead you to judgment, and deliver you up, be not anxious beforehand
what ye shall speak; but whatsoever shall be given you in that hour,
that speak ye; for it is not ye that speak, but the Holy Spirit. But
ye shall be delivered up even by parents, and brethren, and kinsfolk,
and friends: and some of you shall they cause to be put to death. And
ye shall be hated of all men for my name's sake.

"And then shall many stumble, and shall deliver up one another, and
shall hate one another. And many false prophets shall arise, and shall
lead many astray. And because iniquity shall be multiplied, the love
of the many shall wax cold. But he that endureth to the end, the same
shall be saved.

"But when ye see Jerusalem compassed with armies, then know that her
desolation is at hand. Then let them that are in Judaea flee unto the
mountains: let him that is on the housetop not go down to take out the
things that are in his house: and let him that is in the field not
return back to take his cloak. For these are days of vengeance, that
all things which are written may be fulfilled.

"But woe unto them that are with child and to them that give suck in
those days! And pray ye that your flight be not in the winter, neither
on a Sabbath: for then shall be great tribulation, such as hath not
been from the beginning of the world until now, no, nor ever shall be.
And except those days had been shortened, no flesh would have been
saved: but for the elect's sake those days shall be shortened. Then if
any man shall say unto you, 'Lo, here is the Christ,' or, 'Here,'
believe it not. For there shall arise false Christs, and false
prophets, and shall show great signs and wonders; so as to lead
astray, if possible, even the elect. But take ye heed: behold, I have
told you all things beforehand. If, therefore, they shall say unto
you, 'Behold, he is in the wilderness,' go not forth: 'Behold, he is
in the inner chambers,' believe it not. For as the lightning cometh
forth from the east and is seen even unto the west, so shall be the
coming of the Son of man. Wheresoever the carcase is, there will the
eagles be gathered together.

"But immediately after the tribulation of those days the sun shall be
darkened, and the moon shall not give her light, and the stars shall
fall from heaven, and the powers of the heavens shall be shaken: and
then shall appear the sign of the Son of man in heaven: and then
shall all the tribes of the earth mourn, and they shall see the Son of
man coming on the clouds of heaven with power and great glory. And he
shall send forth his angels with a great sound of a trumpet, and shall
gather together his elect from the four winds, from the uttermost part
of the earth to the uttermost part of heaven.

"Now from the fig tree learn her parable: when her branch is now
become tender, and putteth forth its leaves, ye know that the summer
is nigh; even so ye also, when ye see all these things, know ye that
he is nigh, even at the doors. Verily I say unto you, This generation
shall not pass away till all these things be accomplished. Heaven and
earth shall pass away, but my words shall not pass away. But of that
day and hour knoweth no one, not even the angels of heaven, neither
the Son, but the Father only.

"But take heed to yourselves, lest haply your hearts be overcharged
with surfeiting, and drunkenness, and cares of this life, and that day
come on you suddenly as a snare; for so shall it come upon all them
that dwell on the face of all the earth. But watch ye at every season,
making supplication, that ye may prevail to escape all these things
that shall come to pass, and to stand before the Son of man.

"And as were the days of Noah, so shall be the coming of the Son of
man. For as in those days which were before the flood they were eating
and drinking, marrying and giving in marriage, until the day that Noah
entered into the ark, and they knew not until the flood came, and took
them all away; so shall be the coming of the Son of man. Then shall
two men be in the field; one is taken, and one is left; two women
shall be grinding at the mill: one is taken, and one is left. Watch
therefore: for ye know not on what day your Lord cometh.

"But know this, that if the master of the house had known in what
watch the thief was coming, he would have watched, and would not have
suffered his house to be broken through. Therefore be ye also ready;
for in an hour that ye think not the Son of man cometh.

"Take ye heed, watch and pray: for ye know not when the time is. It is
as when a man, sojourning in another country, having left his house,
and given authority to his servants, to each one his work, commanded
also the porter to watch. Watch therefore: for ye know not when the
lord of the house cometh, whether at even, or at midnight, or at
cockcrowing, or in the morning; lest coming suddenly he find you
sleeping. And what I say unto you I say unto all, Watch.

"Who then is the faithful and wise servant, whom the lord hath set
over his household, to give them their food in due season? Blessed is
that servant, whom his lord when he cometh shall find so doing. Verily
I say unto you, that he will set him over all that he hath. But if
that evil servant shall say in his heart, 'My lord tarrieth;' and
shall begin to beat his fellow-servants, and shall eat and drink with
the drunken; the lord of that servant shall come in a day when he
expecteth not, and in an hour when he knoweth not, and shall cut him
asunder, and appoint his portion with the hypocrites: there shall be
the weeping and the gnashing of teeth."


THREE LESSONS TO THE DISCIPLES.


THE PARABLE OF THE TEN VIRGINS.

"Then shall the kingdom of heaven be likened unto ten virgins, who
took their lamps and went forth to meet the bridegroom. And five of
them were foolish, and five were wise. For the foolish, when they took
their lamps, took no oil with them: but the wise took oil in their
vessels with their lamps. Now while the bridegroom tarried, they all
slumbered and slept. But at midnight there is a cry, 'Behold, the
bridegroom! Come ye forth to meet him.' Then all those virgins arose,
and trimmed their lamps. And the foolish said unto the wise, 'Give us
of your oil; for our lamps are going out.' But the wise answered,
saying, 'Peradventure there will not be enough for us and you: go ye
rather to them that sell, and buy for yourselves.'

"And while they went away to buy, the bridegroom came; and they that
were ready went in with him to the marriage feast: and the door was
shut. Afterward came also the other virgins, saying, 'Lord, Lord, open
to us.' But he answered and said, 'Verily I say unto you, I know you
not.'

"Watch therefore, for ye know not the day nor the hour.


THE PARABLE OF THE TALENTS.

"For it is as when a man, going into another country, called his own
servants, and delivered unto them his goods. And unto one he gave five
talents, to another two, to another one; to each according to his
several ability; and he went on his journey. Straightway he that
received the five talents went and traded with them, and made other
five talents. In like manner he also that received the two gained
other two. But he that received the one went away and digged in the
earth, and hid his lord's money.

"Now after a long time the lord of these servants cometh, and maketh a
reckoning with them. And he that received the five talents came and
brought other five talents, saying, 'Lord, thou deliveredst unto me
five talents: lo, I have gained other five talents.' His lord said
unto him, 'Well done, good and faithful servant: thou hast been
faithful over a few things, I will set thee over many things; enter
thou into the joy of thy lord.'

"And he also that received the two talents came and said, 'Lord, thou
deliveredst unto me two talents: lo, I have gained other two talents.'

"His lord said unto him, 'Well done, good and faithful servant: thou
hast been faithful over a few things, I will set thee over many
things; enter thou into the joy of thy lord.'

"And he also that had received the one talent came and said, 'Lord, I
knew thee that thou art a hard man, reaping where thou didst not sow,
and gathering where thou didst not scatter; and I was afraid, and went
away and hid thy talent in the earth: lo, thou hast thine own.'

"But his lord answered and said unto him, 'Thou wicked and slothful
servant, thou knewest that I reap where I sowed not, and gather where
I did not scatter; thou oughtest therefore to have put my money to the
bankers, and at my coming I should have received back mine own with
interest. Take ye away therefore the talent from him, and give it unto
him that hath the ten talents. For unto every one that hath shall be
given, and he shall have abundance; but from him that hath not, even
that which he hath shall be taken away. And cast ye out the
unprofitable servant into the outer darkness: there shall be the
weeping and the gnashing of teeth.'


THE JUDGMENT SCENE.

"But when the Son of man shall come in his glory, and all the angels
with him, then shall he sit on the throne of his glory: and before
him shall be gathered all the nations: and he shall separate them one
from another, as the shepherd separateth the sheep from the goats; and
he shall set the sheep on his right hand, but the goats on the left.
Then shall the King say unto them on his right hand, 'Come, ye blessed
of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation
of the world: for I was hungry, and ye gave me to eat; I was thirsty,
and ye gave me drink; I was a stranger, and ye took me in; naked, and
ye clothed me; I was sick, and ye visited me; I was in prison, and ye
came unto me.'

"Then shall the righteous answer him, saying, 'Lord, when saw we thee
hungry, and fed thee? or athirst, and gave thee drink? And when saw we
thee a stranger, and took thee in? or naked, and clothed thee? And
when saw we thee sick, or in prison, and came unto thee?' And the King
shall answer and say unto them, 'Verily I say unto you, Inasmuch as ye
did it unto one of these my children, even these least, ye did it unto
me.'

"Then shall he say also unto them on the left hand, 'Depart from me,
ye cursed, into the eternal fire which is prepared for the devil and
his angels: for I was hungry, and ye did not give me to eat; I was
thirsty, and ye gave me no drink; I was a stranger, and ye took me not
in; naked, and ye clothed me not; sick, and in prison, and ye visited
me not.' Then shall they also answer, saying, 'Lord, when saw we thee
hungry, or athirst, or a stranger, or naked, or sick, or in prison,
and did not minister unto thee?' Then shall he answer them, saying,
'Verily I say unto you, Inasmuch as ye did it not unto one of these
least, ye did it not unto me.' And these shall go away into eternal
punishment: but the righteous into eternal life."


THE CONSPIRACY AGAINST JESUS.

And it came to pass, when Jesus had finished all these words, he said
unto his disciples, "Ye know that after two days the passover cometh,
and the Son of man is delivered up to be crucified."

Then were gathered together the chief priests, the elders of the
people, unto the court of the high priest, who was called Caiaphas;
and they took counsel together that they might take Jesus by subtlety,
and kill him. But they said, "Not during the feast, lest a tumult
arise among the people."

And Satan entered into Judas, who was called Iscariot, being of the
number of the twelve. And he went away and communed with the chief
priests and captains, how he might deliver him unto them. And they
were glad, and they weighed unto him thirty pieces of silver. And from
that time he sought opportunity to deliver him unto them in the
absence of the multitude.




WEDNESDAY--THE DAY OF RETIREMENT


[There is no record of the events of this day. Jesus spent it in
retirement, almost certainly in the home of his friends at Bethany.]




THURSDAY--THE DAY OF FELLOWSHIP


PREPARATION FOR THE PASSOVER.

And on the first day of unleavened bread, when they sacrificed the
passover, his disciples say unto him, "Where wilt thou that we go and
make ready that thou mayest eat the passover?"

And he sendeth two of his disciples, and saith unto them, "Go into the
city, and there shall meet you a man bearing a pitcher of water;
follow him; and wheresoever he shall enter in, say to the master of
the house, 'The Teacher saith, My time is at hand. Where is my
guest-chamber, where I shall eat the passover with my disciples?' And
he will himself show you a large upper room furnished and ready: and
there make ready for us."

And the disciples went forth, and came into the city, and found as he
had said unto them: and they made ready the passover.


STRIFE AMONG THE DISCIPLES.

And when it was evening he cometh with the twelve. And there arose
also a contention among them, which of them was accounted to be
greatest. And he said unto them, "The kings of the Gentiles have
lordship over them; and they that have authority over them are called
Benefactors. But ye shall not be so: but he that is the greater among
you, let him become as the younger: and he that is chief, as he that
doth serve. For which is greater, he that sitteth at meat, or he that
serveth? Is not he that sitteth at meat? But I am in the midst of you
as he that serveth. But ye are they that have continued with me in my
temptations; and I appoint unto you a kingdom, even as my Father
appointed unto me, that ye may eat and drink at my table in my
kingdom; and ye shall sit on thrones judging the twelve tribes of
Israel."


JESUS WASHING THE DISCIPLES' FEET.

Now before the feast of the passover, Jesus knowing that his hour was
come that he should depart out of this world unto the Father, having
loved his own that were in the world, he loved them unto the end.

And during supper, the devil having already put into the heart of
Judas Iscariot, Simon's son, to betray him, Jesus, knowing that the
Father had given all things into his hands, and that he came forth
from God, and goeth unto God, riseth from supper, and layeth aside his
garments; and he took a towel, and girded himself. Then he poureth
water into the basin, and began to wash the disciples' feet, and to
wipe them with the towel wherewith he was girded.

So he cometh to Simon Peter. He saith unto him, "Lord, dost thou wash
my feet?"

Jesus answered and said unto him, "What I do thou knowest not now; but
thou shall understand hereafter."

Peter saith unto him, "Thou shalt never wash my feet."

Jesus answered him, "If I wash thee not, thou hast no part with me."

Simon Peter saith unto him, "Lord, not my feet only, but also my hands
and my head."

Jesus saith to him, "He that is bathed needeth not save to wash his
feet, but is clean every whit: and ye are clean, but not all." For he
knew him that should betray him; therefore said he, "Ye are not all
clean."

So when he had washed their feet, and taken his garments, and sat
down again, he said unto them, "Know ye what I have done to you? Ye
call me Teacher, and Lord: and ye say well; for so I am. If I then,
the Lord and the Teacher, have washed your feet, ye also ought to wash
one another's feet. For I have given you an example, that ye also
should do as I have done to you. Verily, verily, I say unto you, A
servant is not greater than his lord; neither one that is sent greater
than he that sent him. If ye know these things, blessed are ye if ye
do them.

"I speak not of you all: I know whom I have chosen: but that the
scripture may be fulfilled, He that eateth my bread lifted up his heel
against me. From henceforth I tell you before it come to pass, that,
when it is come to pass, ye may believe that I am he. Verily, verily,
I say unto you, He that receiveth whomsoever I send receiveth me; and
he that receiveth me receiveth him that sent me."


THE BETRAYER POINTED OUT.

When Jesus had thus said, he was troubled in the spirit, and
testified, and said, "Verily, verily, I say unto you, that one of you
shall betray me."

The disciples looked one on another, doubting of whom he spake. And
they were exceeding sorrowful, and began to say unto him every one,
"Is it I, Lord?"

And he answered and said, "He that dipped his hand with me in the
dish, the same shall betray me. The Son of man goeth, even as it is
written of him: but woe unto that man through whom the Son of man is
betrayed! Good were it for that man if he had not been born."

And Judas, who betrayed him, answered and said, "Is it I, Rabbi?"

He saith unto him, "Thou hast said."

There was at the table reclining in Jesus' bosom one of his disciples,
whom Jesus loved. Simon Peter therefore beckoneth to him, and saith
unto him, "Tell us who it is of whom he speaketh."

He leaning back, as he was, on Jesus' breast, saith unto him, "Lord,
who is it?"

Jesus therefore answereth, "He it is, for whom I shall dip the sop,
and give it him."

So when he had dipped the sop, he taketh and giveth it to Judas, the
son of Simon Iscariot. And after the sop, then entered Satan into him.

Jesus therefore saith unto him, "What thou doest, do quickly."

Now no man at the table knew for what intent he spake this unto him.
For some thought because Judas had the bag, that Jesus said unto him,
"Buy what things we have need of for the feast," or that he should
give something to the poor. He then having received the sop went out
straightway: and it was night.

When therefore he was gone out, Jesus saith, "Now is the Son of man
glorified, and God is glorified in him; and God shall glorify him in
himself, and straightway shall he glorify him."


THE LORD'S SUPPER.

And he said unto them, "With desire I have desired to eat this
passover with you before I suffer: for I say unto you, I shall not eat
it until it be fulfilled in the Kingdom of God."

And he took bread, and when he had given thanks, he brake it, and gave
to them, saying, "This is my body; which is given for you; this do in
remembrance of me."

And he took a cup, in like manner after supper, and gave thanks, and
gave to them, saying, "Drink ye all of it; for this is my blood of the
new covenant, which is poured out for you, for many, unto remission of
sins. Take this and divide it among yourselves; for I say unto you, I
shall not drink from henceforth of the fruit of the vine, until the
Kingdom of God shall come."


THE FAREWELL CONVERSATION.

"Little children, yet a little while I am with you. Ye shall seek me:
and as I said unto the Jews, 'Whither I go, ye cannot come,' so now I
say unto you. A new commandment I give unto you, that ye love one
another; even as I have loved you, that ye also love one another. By
this shall all men know that ye are my disciples, if ye have love one
to another."

Simon Peter saith unto him, "Lord, whither goest thou?"

Jesus answered, "Whither I go, thou canst not follow me now; but thou
shalt follow afterwards."

And Jesus saith unto them, "All ye shall be offended: for it is
written, I will smite the shepherd, and the sheep shall be scattered
abroad. Howbeit, after I am raised up, I will go before you into
Galilee."

But Peter said unto him, "Although all shall be offended, yet will not
I."

And Jesus saith unto him, "Verily I say unto thee, that thou to-day,
even this night, before the cock crow twice, shalt deny me thrice.
Simon, Simon, behold Satan asked to have you, that he might sift you
as wheat: but I make supplication for thee, that thy faith fail not:
and do thou, when once thou hast turned again, establish thy
brethren."

But he spake vehemently, "If I must die with thee, I will not deny
thee." And in like manner also said they all.

       *       *       *       *       *

And he said unto them, "When I sent you forth without purse, and
wallet, and shoes, lacked ye anything?"

And they said, "Nothing."

And he said unto them, "But now, he that hath a purse, let him take
it, and likewise a wallet; and he that hath none, let him sell his
cloak, and buy a sword. For I say unto you, that this which is written
must be fulfilled in me, 'And he was reckoned with transgressors': for
that which concerneth me hath fulfillment."

And they said, "Lord, behold, here are two swords."

And he said unto them, "It is enough."

       *       *       *       *       *

"Let not your heart be troubled; believe in God, believe also in me.
In my Father's house are many mansions; if it were not so, I would
have told you; for I go to prepare a place for you. And if I go and
prepare a place for you, I come again, and will receive you unto
myself; that where I am, there ye may be also. And whither I go, ye
know the way."

Thomas saith unto him, "Lord, we know not whither thou goest; how know
we the way?"

Jesus saith unto him, "I am the way, and the truth, and the life: no
one cometh unto the Father, but by me. If ye had known me, ye would
have known my Father also: from henceforth ye know him, and have seen
him."

Philip saith unto him, "Lord, show us the Father, and it sufficeth
us."

Jesus saith unto him, "Have I been so long time with you, and dost
thou not know me, Philip? He that hath seen me hath seen the Father:
how sayest thou, 'Show us the Father?' Believest thou not that I am
in the Father, and the Father in me? The words that I say unto you I
speak not from myself: but the Father abiding in me doeth his works.
Believe me that I am in the Father, and the Father in me: or else
believe me for the very works' sake. Verily, verily, I say unto you,
He that believeth on me, the works that I do shall he do also: and
greater works than these shall he do; because I go unto the Father.
And whatsoever ye shall ask in my name, that will I do, that the
Father may be glorified in the Son. If ye shall ask anything in my
name, that will I do. If ye love me, ye will keep my commandments. And
I will pray the Father, and he shall give you another Comforter, that
he may be with you for ever, even the Spirit of truth: whom the world
cannot receive; for it beholdeth him not, neither knoweth him: ye know
him, for he abideth with you, and shall be in you. I will not leave
you desolate: I come unto you.

"Yet a little while, and the world beholdeth me no more; but ye behold
me: because I live, ye shall live also. In that day ye shall know that
I am in my Father, and ye in me, and I in you. He that hath my
commandments, and keepeth them, he it is that loveth me: and he that
loveth me shall be loved of my Father, and I will love him, and will
manifest myself unto him."

Judas (not Iscariot) saith unto him, "Lord, what is come to pass that
thou wilt manifest thyself unto us, and not unto the world?"

Jesus answered and said unto him, "If a man love me, he will keep my
word: and my Father will love him, and we will come unto him, and make
our abode with him. He that loveth me not keepeth not my words: and
the word which ye hear is not mine, but the Father's who sent me.

"These things have I spoken unto you, while yet abiding with you. But
the Comforter, even the Holy Spirit, whom the Father will send in my
name, he shall teach you all things, and bring to your remembrance all
that I said unto you. Peace I leave with you; my peace I give unto
you: not as the world giveth, give I unto you. Let not your heart be
troubled, neither let it be fearful. Ye heard how I said to you, I go
away, and I come unto you. If ye loved me, ye would have rejoiced,
because I go unto the Father: for the Father is greater than I.

"And now I have told you before it come to pass, that, when it is come
to pass, ye may believe. I will no more speak much with you, for the
prince of the world cometh: and he hath nothing in me; but that the
world may know that I love the Father, and as the Father gave me
commandment, even so I do."

       *       *       *       *       *

"I am the true vine, and my Father is the husbandman. Every branch in
me that beareth not fruit, he taketh it away: and every branch that
beareth fruit, he cleanseth it, that it may bear more fruit. Already
ye are clean because of the word which I have spoken unto you. Abide
in me, and I in you. As the branch cannot bear fruit of itself, except
it abide in the vine; so neither can ye, except ye abide in me. I am
the vine, ye are the branches: He that abideth in me, and I in him,
the same beareth much fruit: for apart from me ye can do nothing. If a
man abide not in me, he is cast forth as a branch, and is withered;
and they gather them, and cast them into the fire, and they are
burned. If ye abide in me, and my words abide in you, ask whatsoever
ye will, and it shall be done unto you. Herein is my Father glorified,
that ye bear much fruit: and so shall ye be my disciples. Even as the
Father hath loved me, I also have loved you: abide ye in my love. If
ye keep my commandments, ye shall abide in my love; even as I have
kept my Father's commandments, and abide in his love.

"These things have I spoken unto you, that my joy may be in you, and
that your joy may be made full. This is my commandment, that ye love
one another, even as I have loved you. Greater love hath no man than
this, that a man lay down his life for his friends. Ye are my friends,
if ye do the things which I command you. No longer do I call you
servants; for the servant knoweth not what his lord doeth: but I have
called you friends; for all things that I heard from my Father I have
made known unto you. Ye did not choose me, but I chose you, and
appointed you, that ye should go and bear fruit, and that your fruit
should abide: that whatsoever ye shall ask of the Father in my name,
he may give it you. These things I command you, that ye may love one
another. If the world hated you, ye know that it hath hated me before
it hated you. If ye were of the world, the world would love its own:
but because ye are not of the world, but I chose you out of the world,
therefore the world hateth you. Remember the word that I said unto
you, A servant is not greater than his lord. If they persecuted me,
they will also persecute you; if they kept my word, they will keep
yours also. But all these things will they do unto you for my name's
sake, because they know not him that sent me. If I had not come and
spoken unto them, they had not had sin: but now they have no excuse
for their sin. He that hateth me hateth my Father also. If I had not
done among them the works which none other did, they had not had sin:
but now have they both seen and hated me and my Father. But this
cometh to pass, that the word may be fulfilled that is written in
their law, 'They hated me without a cause.' But when the Comforter is
come, whom I will send unto you from the Father, even the Spirit of
truth, which proceedeth from the Father, he shall bear witness of me:
and ye also bear witness, because ye have been with me from the
beginning.

"These things have I spoken unto you, that ye should not be caused to
stumble. They shall put you out of the synagogues: yea, the hour
cometh, that whosoever killeth you shall think that he offereth
service unto God. And these things will they do, because they have not
known the Father, nor me. But these things have I spoken unto you,
that when their hour is come, ye may remember them, how that I told
you. And these things I said not unto you from the beginning, because
I was with you. But now I go unto him that sent me; and none of you
asketh me, 'Whither goest thou?' But because I have spoken these
things unto you, sorrow hath filled your heart. Nevertheless I tell
you the truth: It is expedient for you that I go away; for if I go not
away, the Comforter will not come unto you; but if I go, I will send
him unto you. And he, when he is come, will convict the world in
respect of sin, and of righteousness, and of judgment: of sin, because
they believe not on me; of righteousness, because I go to the Father,
and ye behold me no more; of judgment, because the prince of this
world hath been judged. I have yet many things to say unto you, but ye
cannot bear them now. Howbeit when he, the Spirit of truth, is come,
he shall guide you into all the truth: for he shall not speak from
himself; but what things soever he shall hear, these shall he speak:
and he shall declare unto you the things that are to come. He shall
glorify me: for he shall take of mine, and shall declare it unto you.
All things whatsoever the Father hath are mine: therefore said I, that
he taketh; of mine, and shall declare it unto you. A little while, and
ye behold me no more; and again a little while, and ye shall see me."

Some of his disciples therefore said one to another. "What is this
that he saith unto us, 'A little while, and ye behold me not; and
again a little while, and ye shall see me': and 'Because I go to the
Father'?"

They said therefore, "What is this that he saith, 'A little while'?
We know not what he saith."

Jesus perceived that they were desirous to ask him, and he said unto
them, "Do ye inquire among yourselves concerning this, that I said, 'A
little while, and ye behold me not, and again a little while, and ye
shall see me?' Verily, verily, I say unto you, that ye shall weep and
lament, but the world shall rejoice: ye shall be sorrowful, but your
sorrow shall be turned into joy. A woman when she is in travail hath
sorrow, because her hour is come: but when she is delivered of the
child she remembereth no more the anguish, for the joy that a man is
born into the world. And ye therefore now have sorrow: but I will see
you again, and your heart shall rejoice, and your joy no one taketh
away from you. And in that day ye shall ask me no question. Verily,
verily, I say unto you, If ye shall ask anything of the Father, he
will give it you in my name. Hitherto have ye asked nothing in my
name: ask, and ye shall receive, that your joy may be made full.

"These things have I spoken unto you in dark sayings: the hour cometh,
when I shall no more speak unto you in dark sayings, but shall tell
you plainly of the Father. In that day ye shall ask in my name: and I
say not unto you, that I will pray the Father for you; for the Father
himself loveth you, because ye have loved me, and have believed that I
came forth from the Father. I came out from the Father, and am come
into the world; again, I leave the world, and go unto the Father."

His disciples say, "Lo, now speakest thou plainly, and speakest no
dark saying. Now know we that thou knowest all things, and needest not
that any man should ask thee: by this we believe that thou camest
forth from God."

Jesus answered them, "Do ye now believe? Behold, the hour cometh, yea,
is come, that ye shall be scattered, every man to his own, and shall
leave me alone: and yet I am not alone, because the Father is with me.
These things have I spoken unto you, that in me ye may have peace. In
the world ye have tribulation: but be of good cheer: I have overcome
the world."


THE INTERCESSORY PRAYER.

These things spake Jesus; and lifting up his eyes to heaven, he said,
"Father, the hour is come; glorify thy Son, that the Son may glorify
thee: even as thou gavest him authority over all flesh, that to all
whom thou hast given him, he should give eternal life. And this is
life eternal, that they should know thee the only true God, and him
whom thou didst send, even Jesus Christ. I glorified thee on the
earth, having accomplished the work which thou hast given me to do.
And now, Father, glorify thou me with thine own self with the glory
which I had with thee before the world was. I manifested thy name unto
the men whom thou gavest me out of the world: thine they were, and
thou gavest them to me; and they have kept thy word. Now they know
that all things whatsoever thou hast given me are from thee: for the
words which thou gavest me I have given unto them; and they received
them, and knew of a truth that I came forth from thee, and they
believed that thou didst send me. I pray for them: I pray not for the
world, but for those whom thou hast given me; for they are thine: and
all things that are mine are thine, and thine are mine; and I am
glorified in them. And I am no more in the world, and these are in the
world, and I come to thee. Holy Father, keep them in thy name which
thou hast given me, that they may be one, even as we are. While I was
with them, I kept them in thy name which thou hast given me; and I
guarded them, and not one of them perished, but the son of perdition;
that the scripture might be fulfilled. But now I come to thee; and
these things I speak in the world, that they may have my joy made full
in themselves. I have given them thy word, and the world hated them,
because they are not of the world, even as I am not of the world. I
pray not that thou shouldest take them from the world, but that thou
shouldst keep them from the evil one. They are not of the world, even
as I am not of the world. Sanctify them in the truth: thy word is
truth. As thou didst send me into the world, even so sent I them into
the world. And for their sakes I sanctify myself, that they themselves
also may be sanctified in truth. Neither for these only do I pray, but
for them also that believe on me through their word; that they may all
be one; even as thou, Father, art in me, and I in thee, that they also
may be in us: that the world may believe that thou didst send me. And
the glory which thou hast given me I have given unto them; that they
may be one, even as we are one; I in them, and thou in me, that they
may be perfected into one; that the world may know that thou didst
send me, and lovedst them, even as thou lovedst me. Father, I desire
that they also whom thou hast given me be with me where I am, that
they may behold my glory, which thou hast given me: for thou lovedst
me before the foundation of the world. O righteous Father, the world
knew thee not, but I knew thee; and these knew that thou didst send
me; and I made known unto them thy name, and will make it known; that
the love wherewith thou lovedst me may be in them, and I in them."

And when they had sung a hymn, they went out into the mount of Olives.




FRIDAY--THE DAY OF SUFFERING


THE AGONY IN GETHSEMANE.

And they come unto a place which was named Gethsemane: and he saith
unto his disciples, "Sit ye here, while I pray."

And he taketh with him Peter and James and John, and began to be
greatly amazed, and sore troubled. And he saith unto them, "My soul is
exceeding sorrowful, even unto death: abide ye here, and watch."

And he went forward a little, and fell on the ground, and prayed that,
if it were possible, the hour might pass away from him.

And he said, "Abba, Father, all things are possible unto thee; remove
this cup from me: howbeit not what I will, but what thou wilt."

And there appeared unto him an angel from heaven, strengthening him.

And being in an agony, he prayed more earnestly; and his sweat became
as it were great drops of blood falling down upon the ground.

And when he rose up from his prayer, he came unto the disciples, and
found them sleeping for sorrow, and said unto Peter, "Simon, sleepest
thou? Couldest thou not watch one hour? Watch and pray, that ye enter
not into temptation: the spirit indeed is willing, but the flesh is
weak."

Again a second time he went away, and prayed, saying, "My Father, if
this cannot pass away, except I drink it, thy will be done."

And he came again and found them sleeping, for their eyes were heavy.
And he left them again, and went away, and prayed a third time,
saying the same words.

Then cometh he to the disciples, and saith unto them, "Sleep on now,
and take your rest: behold, the hour is at hand, and the Son of man is
betrayed into the hands of sinners.

"Arise, let us be going: behold, he is at hand that betrayeth me."


THE BETRAYAL AND ARREST.

And straightway, while he yet spake, cometh Judas, one of the twelve,
and with him a multitude with swords and staves, from the chief
priests and the scribes and the elders.

Now he that betrayed him had given them a token, saying, "Whomsoever I
shall kiss, that is he; take him, and lead him away safely." And when
he was come, straightway he came to him, and saith, "Rabbi," and
kissed him.

But Jesus said unto him, "Judas, betrayest thou the Son of man with a
kiss?"

Jesus, therefore, knowing all the things that were coming upon him,
went forth, and saith unto them. "Whom seek ye?"

They answered him, "Jesus of Nazareth."

Jesus saith unto them. "I am he."

And Judas also, who betrayed him, was standing with them. When
therefore he said unto them, "I am he," they went backward, and fell
to the ground.

Again therefore he asked them, "Whom seek ye?"

And they said, "Jesus of Nazareth."

Jesus answered, "I told you that I am he; if therefore ye seek me, let
these go their way": that the word might be fulfilled which he spake,
"Of those whom thou hast given me I lost not one."

And when they that were about him saw what would follow, they said,
"Lord, shall we smite with the sword?"

Simon Peter therefore having a sword drew it, and struck the high
priest's servant, and cut off his right ear. Now the servant's name
was Malchus.

But Jesus answered and said, "Suffer ye them thus far." And he touched
his ear, and healed him.

Then saith Jesus unto Peter, "Put up again thy sword into its place:
for all they that take the sword shall perish with the sword. Or
thinkest thou that I cannot beseech my Father and he shall even now
send me more than twelve legions of angels? How then should the
scriptures be fulfilled, that thus it must be? The cup which the
Father hath given me, shall I not drink it?"

And Jesus said unto the chief priest's and captains of the temple, and
elders, that were come against him, "Are ye come out, as against a
robber, with swords and staves? When I was daily with you in the
temple, ye stretched not forth your hands against me: but this is your
hour, and the power of darkness."

Then all the disciples left him, and fled.

And a certain young man followed with him, having a linen cloth cast
about him, over his naked body; and they lay hold on him; but he left
the linen cloth, and fled naked.


THE TRIAL BEFORE THE JEWISH AUTHORITIES.

So the band and the chief captain, and the officers of the Jews,
seized Jesus and bound him, and led him to Annas first; for he was
father in law to Caiaphas, who was high priest that year. Now Caiaphas
was he that gave counsel to the Jews, that it was expedient that one
man should die for the people.

And Simon Peter followed Jesus, and so did another disciple. Now that
disciple was known unto the high priest, and entered in with Jesus
into the court of the high priest; but Peter was standing at the door
without. So the other disciple, who was known unto the high priest,
went out and spake unto her that kept the door, and brought in Peter.

The maid therefore that kept the door saith unto Peter, "Art thou also
one of this man's disciples?"

He saith, "I am not."

Now the servants and the officers were standing there, having made a
fire of coals; for it was cold; and they were warming themselves; and
Peter also was with them standing and warming himself.

The high priest therefore asked Jesus of his disciples, and of his
teaching. Jesus answered him, "I have spoken openly to the world; I
ever taught in synagogues, and in the temple, where all the Jews come
together; and in secret spake I nothing. Why askest thou me? Ask them
that have heard me, what I spake unto them: behold, these know the
things which I said."

And when he had said this, one of the officers standing by struck
Jesus with his hand, saying, "Answerest thou the high priest so?"

Jesus answered him, "If I have spoken evil, bear witness of the evil;
but if well, why smitest thou me?"

Annas therefore sent him bound unto Caiaphas the high priest.

Now the chief priests and the whole council sought witness against
Jesus to put him to death; and found it not. For many bare false
witness against him, and their witness agreed not together. And there
stood up certain, and bare false witness against him, saying, "We
heard him say, I will destroy this temple that is made with hands,
and in three days I will build another made without hands." And not
even so did their witness agree together.

And the high priest stood up in the midst, and asked Jesus, saying,
"Answerest thou nothing? What is it which these witness against thee?"

But he held his peace, and answered nothing.

And the high priest said unto him, "I adjure thee by the living God,
that thou tell us whether thou art the Christ, the Son of God."

And Jesus said, "I am: and ye shall see the Son of man sitting at the
right hand of Power, and coming with the clouds of heaven."

And the high priest rent his clothes, and saith, "What further need
have we of witnesses? Ye have heard the blasphemy: what think ye?"

And they all condemned him to be worthy of death.

Then did they spit in his face and buffet him. And they blindfolded
him and smote him with the palms of their hands, saying, "Prophesy
unto us, thou Christ: who is he that struck thee?"


THE DENIAL OF PETER.

And as Peter was beneath in the court, there cometh one of the maids
of the high priest; and seeing Peter warming himself, she looked upon
him, and saith, "Thou also wast with the Nazarene, even Jesus."

But he denied, saying, "I neither know nor understand what thou
sayest," and he went out into the porch; and the cock crew.

And after a little while they that stood by came and said to Peter,
"Of a truth thou also art one of them; for thy speech maketh thee
known."

Then began he to curse and to swear, "I know not the man." And
straightway the cock crew.

And the Lord turned, and looked upon Peter. And Peter remembered the
word of the Lord, how that he said unto him, "Before the cock crow
twice thou shalt deny me thrice."

And he went out, and wept bitterly.

       *       *       *       *       *

And straightway in the morning the chief priests with the elders and
scribes, and the whole council, held a consultation, and bound Jesus,
and carried him away, and delivered him up to Pilate, the governor.


THE REMORSE OF JUDAS.

Then Judas, who betrayed him, when he saw that he was condemned,
repented himself, and brought back the thirty pieces of silver to the
chief priests and elders, saying, "I have sinned in that I betrayed
innocent blood."

But they said, "What is that to us? See thou to it."

And he cast down the pieces of silver into the sanctuary, and
departed; and he went away and hanged himself.

And the chief priests took the pieces of silver, and said, "It is not
lawful to put them into the treasury, since it is the price of blood."
And they took counsel, and bought with them the potter's field, to
bury strangers in. Wherefore that field was called, "The field of
blood," unto this day.

Then was fulfilled that which was spoken through Jeremiah the prophet,
saying, "And they took the thirty pieces of silver, the price of him
that was priced, whom certain of the children of Israel did price; and
they gave them for the potter's field, as the Lord appointed me."


THE TRIAL BEFORE PILATE.

They lead Jesus therefore from Caiaphas into the Praetorium: and it was
early; and they themselves entered not into the Praetorium, that they
might not be defiled, but might eat the passover. Pilate therefore
went out unto them, and saith, "What accusation bring ye against this
man?"

They answered and said unto him, "If this man were not an evil-doer,
we should not have delivered him up unto thee."

Pilate therefore said unto them, "Take him yourselves, and judge him
according to your law."

The Jews said unto him, "It is not lawful for us to put any man to
death": that the word of Jesus might be fulfilled, which he spake,
signifying by what manner of death he should die.

And they began to accuse him, saying, "We found this man perverting
our nation, and forbidding to give tribute to Caesar, and saying that
he himself is Christ a king."

And when he was accused by the chief priests and elders, he answered
nothing. Then saith Pilate unto him, "Hearest thou not how many things
they witness against thee?" And he gave him no answer, not even to one
word: insomuch that the governor marvelled greatly.

Pilate therefore entered again into the Praetorium, and called Jesus,
and said unto him, "Art thou the King of the Jews?"

Jesus answered, "Sayest thou this of thyself, or did others tell it
thee concerning me?"

Pilate answered, "Am I a Jew? Thine own nation and the chief priests
delivered thee unto me: what hast thou done?"

Jesus answered, "My kingdom is not of this world: if my kingdom were
of this world, then would my servants fight, that I should not be
delivered to the Jews; but now is my kingdom not from hence."

Pilate therefore said unto him, "Art thou a king then?"

Jesus answered, "Thou sayest that I am a king. To this end have I been
born, and to this end am I come into the world, that I should bear
witness unto the truth. Every one that is of the truth heareth my
voice."

Pilate saith unto him, "What is truth?"

And when he had said this, he went out again unto the Jews, and saith
unto them, "I find no crime in him."

But they were the more urgent, saying, "He stirreth up the people,
teaching throughout all Judaea, and beginning from Galilee, even unto
this place."

But when Pilate heard it, he asked whether the man were a Galilaean.
And when he knew that he was of Herod's jurisdiction, he sent him unto
Herod, who himself also was at Jerusalem in these days.


JESUS BEFORE HEROD.

Now when Herod saw Jesus, he was exceeding glad; for he was of a long
time desirous to see him, because he had heard concerning him; and he
hoped to see some miracle done by him. And he questioned him in many
words; but he answered him nothing. And the chief priests and the
scribes stood, vehemently accusing him. And Herod with his soldiers
set him at nought, and mocked him, and arraying him in gorgeous
apparel sent him back to Pilate.

And Herod and Pilate became friends with each other that very day: for
before they were at enmity between themselves.


THE TRIAL BEFORE PILATE RESUMED.

And Pilate called together the chief priests and the rulers and the
people, and said unto them, "Ye brought unto me this man, as one that
perverteth the people: and behold, I, having examined him before you,
found no fault in this man touching those things whereof ye accuse
him: no, nor yet Herod: for he sent him back unto us; and behold,
nothing worthy of death hath been done by him. I will therefore
chastise him, and release him."

Now at the feast the governor was wont to release unto the multitude
one prisoner, whom they would. And they had then a notable prisoner,
called Barabbas, lying bound with them that had made insurrection, men
who in the insurrection had committed murder. And the multitude went
up and began to ask him to do as he was wont to do unto them.

And Pilate answered them, saying, "Will ye that I release unto you the
King of the Jews?" For he perceived that for envy the chief priests
had delivered him up.

Now the chief priests and the elders persuaded the multitudes that
they should ask for Barabbas, and destroy Jesus.

But the governor answered and said unto them, "Which of the two will
ye that I release unto you?"

And they said, "Barabbas."

Pilate saith unto them, "What then shall I do unto Jesus who is called
Christ?"

They all say, "Let him be crucified."

And he said unto them a third time, "Why, what evil hath this man
done? I have found no cause of death in him: I will therefore chastise
and release him."

Then Pilate therefore took Jesus, and scourged him.

And the soldiers led him away within the court, which is the
Praetorium; and they call together the whole band.

And they stripped him, and arrayed him in a purple garment. And they
platted a crown of thorns and put it upon his head, and a reed in his
right hand; and they kneeled down before him, and mocked him, saying:
"Hail, King of the Jews!" and they struck him with their hands. And
they spat upon him, and took the reed and smote him upon the head.

And Pilate went out again, and saith unto them, "Behold, I bring him
out to you, that ye may know that I find no crime in him."

Jesus therefore came out, wearing the crown of thorns and the purple
garment. And Pilate saith unto them, "Behold, the man!"

When therefore the chief priests and the officers saw him, they cried
out, saying, "Crucify him, crucify him!"

Pilate saith unto them, "Take him yourselves, and crucify him: for I
find no crime in him."

The Jews answered him, "We have a law, and by that law he ought to
die, because he made himself the Son of God."

When Pilate therefore heard this saying, he was the more afraid; and
he entered into the Praetorium again, and saith unto Jesus, "Whence art
thou?"

But Jesus gave him no answer.

Pilate therefore saith unto him, "Speakest thou not unto me? Knowest
thou not that I have power to release thee, and have power to crucify
thee?"

Jesus answered him, "Thou wouldest have no power against me, except it
were given thee from above: therefore he that delivered me unto thee
hath greater sin."

Upon this Pilate sought to release him: but the Jews cried out,
saying, "If thou release this man, thou art not Caesar's friend: every
one that maketh himself a king speaketh against Caesar."

When Pilate therefore heard these words, he brought Jesus out, and sat
down on the judgment-seat at a place called The Pavement, but in
Hebrew, Gabbatha.

And while he was sitting on the judgment-seat, his wife sent unto him,
saying, "Have thou nothing to do with that righteous man; for I have
suffered many things this day in a dream because of him."

Now it was the Preparation of the passover: it was about the sixth
hour. And he saith unto the Jews, "Behold, your King."

They therefore cried out, "Away with him, away with him, crucify him!"

Pilate saith unto them, "Shall I crucify your King?"

The chief priests answered, "We have no king but Caesar."

So when Pilate saw that he prevailed nothing, but rather that a tumult
was arising, he took water, and washed his hands before the multitude,
saying, "I am innocent of the blood of this righteous man; see ye to
it."

And all the people answered and said, "His blood be on us, and on our
children."

And they were urgent with loud voices asking that he might be
crucified. And their voices prevailed.

And Pilate, wishing to content the multitude, gave sentence that what
they asked for should be done. And he released unto them Barabbas, him
that for insurrection and murder had been cast into prison, whom they
asked for; but Jesus he delivered up to their will.

And when they had mocked him, they took off from him the robe, and put
on him his garments, and led him away to crucify him.


THE SORROWFUL WAY.

They took Jesus therefore: and he went out, bearing the cross for
himself.

And as they came out, they laid hold upon one Simon of Cyrene, the
father of Alexander and Rufus, who was passing by, coming from the
country; him they compelled to go with them, and laid on him the
cross, that he might bear it after Jesus.

And there followed him a great multitude of the people, and of women
who bewailed and lamented him.

But Jesus turning unto them said, "Daughters of Jerusalem, weep not
for me, but weep for yourselves, and for your children. For behold,
the days are coming, in which they shall say, 'Blessed are the barren,
and the wombs that never bare, and the breasts that never gave suck.'
Then shall they begin to say to the mountains, 'Fall on us;' and to
the hills, 'Cover us.' For if they do these things in the green tree,
what shall be done in the dry?"

And there were also two others, malefactors, led with him to be put to
death.


THE CRUCIFIXION.

And when they were come unto a place called Golgotha, that is to say,
The place of a skull, they gave him wine to drink mingled with gall:
and when he had tasted it, he would not drink.

There they crucified him, and the malefactors, one on the right hand
and the other on the left.

And Jesus said, "Father, forgive them; for they know not what they
do."

And Pilate wrote a title also, and put it on the cross. And there was
written:

    JESUS OF NAZARETH, THE KING OF THE JEWS.

This title therefore read many of the Jews, for the place where Jesus
was crucified was nigh to the city; and it was written in Hebrew, and
in Latin, and in Greek.

The chief priests of the Jews therefore said to Pilate, "Write not,
'The King of the Jews,' but that he said, 'I am King of the Jews.'"

Pilate answered, "What I have written I have written."

The soldiers therefore, when they had crucified Jesus, took his
garments and made four parts, to every soldier a part; and also the
coat: now the coat was without seam, woven from the top throughout.
They said therefore one to another, "Let us not rend it, but cast lots
for it, whose it shall be": that the scripture might be fulfilled,
which saith,

    "They parted my garments among them,
    And upon my vesture did they cast lots."

These things therefore the soldiers did; and they sat and watched him
there.

And the people stood beholding.

And they that passed by railed on him, wagging their heads, and
saying, "Thou that destroyest the temple, and buildest it in three
days, save thyself: if thou art the Son of God, come down from the
cross."

In like manner also, the chief priests mocking him, with the scribes
and elders, said, "He saved others; himself he cannot save. Let the
Christ, the King of Israel, now come down from the cross, that we may
see and believe. He trusteth on God; let him deliver him now, if he
desireth him: for he said, I am the Son of God."

And one of the malefactors that were hanged railed on him, saying,
"Art not thou the Christ? Save thyself and us."

But the other answered, and rebuking him said, "Dost thou not even
fear God, seeing thou art in the same condemnation? And we indeed
justly; for we receive the due reward of our deeds: but this man hath
done nothing amiss." And he said, "Jesus, remember me when thou comest
in thy kingdom."

And he said unto him, "Verily I say unto thee, To-day shalt thou be
with me in Paradise."

But there were standing by the cross of Jesus his mother, and his
mother's sister, Mary the wife of Clopas, and Mary Magdalene. When
Jesus therefore saw his mother, and the disciple standing by whom he
loved, he saith unto his mother, "Woman, behold thy son!"

Then saith he to the disciple, "Behold, thy mother!"

And from that hour the disciple took her unto his own home.

And when the sixth hour was come, there was darkness over the whole
land until the ninth hour. And at the ninth hour Jesus cried with a
loud voice, "Eloi, Eloi, lama sabachthani?" which is, being
interpreted. "My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me."

And some of them that stood by, when they heard it, said, "Behold, he
calleth Elijah."

After this, Jesus, knowing that all things are now finished, that the
scripture might be accomplished, saith, "I thirst."

There was set there a vessel full of vinegar: so they put a sponge
full of the vinegar upon hyssop, and brought it to his mouth. When
Jesus therefore had received the vinegar, he said, "It is finished."

And Jesus, crying with a loud voice, said, "Father, into thy hands I
commend my spirit," and having said this, he gave up the ghost.

And behold, the veil of the temple was rent in two from the top to
the bottom; and the earth did quake; and the rocks were rent; and the
tombs were opened; and many bodies of the saints that had fallen
asleep were raised; and coming forth out of the tombs after his
resurrection they entered into the holy city and appeared unto many.

Now the centurion, and they that were with him watching Jesus, when
they saw the earthquake, and the things that were done, feared
exceedingly, saying, "Truly this was the Son of God."

And all the multitudes that came together to this sight, when they
beheld the things that were done, returned smiting their breasts. And
many women were there beholding from afar, who had followed Jesus from
Galilee, ministering unto him; among whom was Mary Magdalene, and Mary
the mother of James and Joses, and the mother of the sons of Zebedee.

The Jews therefore, because it was the Preparation, that the bodies
should not remain on the cross upon the sabbath (for the day of that
sabbath was a high day), asked of Pilate that their legs might be
broken and that they might be taken away.

The soldiers therefore came, and brake the legs of the first, and of
the other that was crucified with him: but when they came to Jesus,
and saw that he was dead already, they brake not his legs: howbeit one
of the soldiers with a spear pierced his side, and straightway there
came out blood and water. And he that hath seen hath borne witness,
and his witness is true: and he knoweth that he saith true, that ye
also may believe. For these things came to pass, that the scripture
might be fulfilled, "A bone of him shall not be broken." And again
another scripture saith, "They shall look on him whom they pierced."


THE BURIAL.

And after these things, when even was come, there came a rich man from
Arimathaea, named Joseph, a councillor of honorable estate, a disciple
of Jesus, but secretly for fear of the Jews; and he boldly went in
unto Pilate and asked for the body of Jesus. And Pilate marvelled if
he were already dead: and calling unto him the centurion, he asked him
whether he had been any while dead. And when he learned it of the
centurion, he granted the corpse to Joseph.

He came therefore, and took away his body. And there came also
Nicodemus, he who at the first came to him by night, bringing a
mixture of myrrh and aloes, about a hundred pounds. So they took the
body of Jesus, and bound it in linen cloths with the spices, as the
custom of the Jews is to bury.

Now in the place where he was crucified there was a garden: and in the
garden a new tomb wherein was never man yet laid. There then because
of the Jews' Preparation (for the tomb was nigh at hand), they laid
Jesus; and rolled a stone against the door of the tomb.

And Mary Magdalene and Mary the mother of Jesus beheld the tomb, and
how his body was laid. And they returned, and prepared spices and
ointments.




SATURDAY--THE DAY OF SILENCE AND SORROW


THE WATCH AT THE TOMB.

Now on the morrow, which is the day after the Preparation, the chief
priests and the Pharisees were gathered together unto Pilate, saying,
"Sir, we remember that that deceiver said while he was yet alive,
'After three days I rise again.' Command therefore that the sepulchre
be made sure until the third day, lest haply his disciples come and
steal him away, and say unto the people, 'He is risen from the dead,'
and the last error will be worse than the first."

Pilate said unto them, "Ye have a guard: go, make it as sure as ye
can."

So they went, and made the sepulchre sure, sealing the stone, the
guard being with them.




=HIS RESURRECTION=

       *       *       *       *       *

SUNDAY--THE DAY OF RESURRECTION


THE EARTHQUAKE.

And behold, there was a great earthquake; for an angel of the Lord
descended from heaven, and came and rolled away the stone, and sat
upon it. His appearance was as lightning, and his raiment white as
snow: and for fear of him the watchers did quake, and became as dead
men.


THE EMPTY TOMB.

Now on the first day of the week cometh Mary Magdalene early, while it
was yet dark, unto the tomb, and seeth the stone taken away from the
tomb. She runneth therefore, and cometh to Simon Peter, and to the
other disciple whom Jesus loved, and saith unto them, "They have taken
away the Lord out of the tomb, and we know not where they have laid
him."

Peter therefore went forth, and the other disciple, and they went
toward the tomb. And they ran both together: and the other disciple
outran Peter, and came first to the tomb; and stooping and looking in,
he seeth the linen cloths lying; yet entered he not in.

Simon Peter therefore also cometh, following him, and entered into the
tomb; and he beholdeth the linen cloths lying, and the napkin, that
was upon his head, not lying with the linen cloths, but rolled up in a
place by itself. Then entered in therefore the other disciple also,
who came first to the tomb, and he saw, and believed. For as yet they
knew not the scripture, that he must rise again from the dead. So the
disciples went away again unto their own home.


THE APPEARANCE TO MARY.

But Mary was standing without at the tomb weeping: so, as she wept,
she stooped and looked into the tomb; and she beholdeth two angels in
white sitting, one at the head, and one at the feet, where the body of
Jesus had lain. And they say unto her, "Woman, why weepest thou?"

She saith unto them, "Because they have taken away my Lord, and I know
not where they have laid him."

When she had thus said, she turned herself back, and beholdeth Jesus
standing, and knew not that it was Jesus.

Jesus saith unto her, "Woman, why weepest thou? Whom seekest thou?"

She, supposing him to be the gardener, saith unto him, "Sir, if thou
hast borne him hence, tell me where thou hast laid him, and I will
take him away."

Jesus saith unto her, "Mary."

She turneth herself, and saith unto him in Hebrew, "Rabboni"; which is
to say, "Teacher."

Jesus saith to her, "Touch me not; for I am not yet ascended unto the
Father: but go unto my brethren, and say to them, 'I ascend unto my
Father, and your Father, and my God and your God.'"

Mary Magdalene cometh and telleth the disciples, "I have seen the
Lord"; and that he had said these things unto her.


THE APPEARANCE TO THE WOMEN.

And the women which had come with him out of Galilee came unto the
tomb, bringing the spices which they had prepared. And they were
saying among themselves, "Who shall roll us away the stone from the
door of the tomb?" and looking up, they see that the stone is rolled
back: for it was exceeding great. And entering into the tomb, they saw
a young man sitting on the right side arrayed in a white robe; and
they were amazed. And he saith unto them, "Be not amazed: ye seek
Jesus, the Nazarene, who hath been crucified: he is risen; he is not
here: behold, the place where they laid him! But go, tell his
disciples and Peter, 'He goeth before you into Galilee: there shall ye
see him, as he said unto you.'"

And they departed quickly from the tomb with fear and great joy, and
ran to bring his disciples word.

And behold, Jesus met them, saying, "All hail." And they came and took
hold of his feet, and worshipped him.

Then saith Jesus unto them, "Fear not: go tell my brethren that they
depart into Galilee, and there shall they see me."


REPORT OF THE WATCH.

Now while they were going, behold, some of the guard came into the
city, and told unto the chief priests all the things that were come to
pass. And when they were assembled with the elders, and had taken
counsel, they gave much money unto the soldiers, saying, "Say ye, 'His
disciples came by night, and stole him away while we slept.' And if
this come to the governor's ears, we will persuade him, and rid you of
care."

So they took the money and did as they were taught: and this saying
was spread abroad among the Jews, and continueth until this day.


THE APPEARANCE AT EMMAUS.

And behold, two of them were going that very day to a village named
Emmaus, which was three-score furlongs from Jerusalem. And they
communed with each other of all these things which had happened.

And it came to pass, while they communed and questioned together, that
Jesus himself drew near, and went with them. But their eyes were
holden that they should not know him.

And he said unto them, "What communications are these that ye have one
with another, as ye walk?"

And they stood still, looking sad. And one of them, named Cleopas,
answering, said unto him, "Dost thou alone sojourn in Jerusalem and
not know the things which are come to pass there in these days?"

And he said unto them, "What things?"

And they said unto him, "The things concerning Jesus the Nazarene, who
was a prophet mighty in deed and word before God, and all the people:
and how the chief priests and our rulers delivered him up to be
condemned to death, and crucified him. But we hoped that it was he who
should redeem Israel. Yea, and besides all this, it is now the third
day since these things came to pass. Moreover, certain women of our
company amazed us, having been early at the tomb; and when they found
not his body, they came, saying, that they had also seen a vision of
angels, who said that he was alive. And certain of them that were with
us went to the tomb, and found it even so as the women had said: but
him they saw not."

And he said unto them, "O foolish men, and slow of heart to believe in
all that the prophets have spoken! Behooved it not the Christ to
suffer these things, and to enter into his glory?"

And beginning from Moses and from all the prophets, he interpreted to
them in all the scriptures the things concerning himself.

And they drew nigh unto the village, whither they were going: and he
made as though he would go further. And they constrained him, saying,
"Abide with us; for it is toward evening, and the day is now far
spent."

And he went in to abide with them. And it came to pass, when he had
sat down with them to meat, he took the bread and blessed; and
breaking it, he gave to them. And their eyes were opened, and they
knew him; and he vanished out of their sight.

And they said one to another, "Was not our heart burning within us,
while he spake to us in the way, while he opened to us the
scriptures?"

And they rose up that very hour, and returned to Jerusalem, and found
the eleven gathered together, and them that were with them, saying,
"The Lord is risen indeed, and hath appeared to Simon." And they
rehearsed the things that happened in the way, and how he was known of
them in the breaking of the bread.


THE APPEARANCE TO THE DISCIPLES.

When therefore it was evening, on that day, the first day of the week,
and when the doors were shut where the disciples were, for fear of the
Jews, Jesus came and stood in the midst and saith unto them, "Peace be
unto you."

But they were terrified and affrighted, and supposed that they beheld
a spirit. And he said unto them, "Why are ye troubled? and wherefore
do questionings arise in your heart? See my hands and my feet, that it
is I myself: handle me, and see; for a spirit hath not flesh and
bones, as ye behold me having."

And when he had said this, he showed them his hands and his feet.

And while they still disbelieved for joy, and wondered, he said unto
them, "Have ye here anything to eat?"

And they gave him a piece of a broiled fish. And he took it, and ate
before them.

Jesus therefore said to them again, "Peace be unto you: as the Father
hath sent me, even so send I you." And when he had said this, he
breathed on them, and saith unto them, "Receive ye the Holy Spirit:
whose soever sins ye forgive, they are forgiven unto them; whose
soever sins ye retain, they are retained."




AFTER THE RESURRECTION DAY


THE APPEARANCE TO THE DISCIPLES AND TO THOMAS.

But Thomas, one of the twelve, called Didymus, was not with them when
Jesus came. The other disciples therefore said unto him, "We have seen
the Lord."

But he said unto them, "Except I shall see in his hands the print of
the nails, and put my finger into the print of the nails, and put my
hand into his side, I will not believe."

And after eight days again his disciples were within, and Thomas with
them. Jesus cometh, the doors being shut, and stood in the midst, and
said, "Peace be unto you."

Then saith he to Thomas, "Reach hither thy finger, and see my hands;
and reach hither thy hand, and put it into my side: and be not
faithless, but believing."

Thomas answered and said unto him, "My Lord and my God."

Jesus saith unto him, "Because thou hast seen me, thou hast believed:
blessed are they that have not seen, and yet have believed."


THE APPEARANCE TO THE SEVEN BY THE SEA.

After these things Jesus manifested himself again to the disciples at
the sea of Tiberias; and he manifested himself on this wise. There
were together Simon Peter, and Thomas called Didymus and Nathanael of
Cana in Galilee, and the sons of Zebedee, and two other of his
disciples.

Simon Peter saith unto them, "I go a fishing."

They say unto him, "We also come with thee."

They went forth, and entered into the boat; and that night they took
nothing. But when day was now breaking, Jesus stood on the beach: yet
the disciples knew not that it was Jesus.

Jesus therefore saith unto them, "Children, have ye aught to eat?"

They answered him, "No."

And he said unto them, "Cast the net on the right side of the boat,
and ye shall find."

They cast therefore, and now they were not able to draw it for the
multitude of fishes.

That disciple therefore whom Jesus loved saith unto Peter, "It is the
Lord". So when Simon Peter heard that it was the Lord, he girt his
coat about him (for he was naked), and cast himself into the sea.

But the other disciples came in the little boat (for they were not far
from the land, but about two hundred cubits off), dragging the net
full of fishes.

So when they got out upon the land, they see a fire of coals there,
and fish laid thereon, and bread. Jesus saith unto them, "Bring of the
fish which ye have now taken."

Simon Peter therefore went up, and drew the net to land, full of great
fishes, a hundred and fifty and three; and for all there were so many,
the net was not rent.

Jesus saith unto them, "Come and break your fast."

And none of the disciples durst inquire of him, "Who art thou?"
knowing that it was the Lord.

Jesus cometh, and taketh the bread, and giveth them, and the fish
likewise.

This is now the third time that Jesus was manifested to the disciples,
after that he was risen from the dead.

So when they had broken their fast, Jesus saith to Simon Peter,
"Simon, son of John, lovest thou me more than these?"

He saith unto him, "Yea, Lord; thou knowest that I love thee."

He saith unto him, "Feed my lambs."

He saith unto him again a second time, "Simon, son of John, lovest
thou me?"

He saith unto him, "Yea, Lord, thou knowest that I love thee."

He saith unto him, "Tend my sheep."

He saith unto him the third time, "Simon, son of John, lovest thou
me?"

Peter was grieved because he said unto him the third time, "Lovest
thou me?" And he said unto him, "Lord, thou knowest all things; thou
knowest that I love thee."

Jesus saith unto him, "Feed my sheep. Verily, verily, I say unto thee,
When thou wast young, thou girdedst thyself, and walkedst whither thou
wouldest; but when thou shalt be old, thou shalt stretch forth thy
hands, and another shall gird thee, and carry thee whither thou
wouldest not."

Now this he spake, signifying by what manner of death he should
glorify God. And when he had spoken this, he saith unto him, "Follow
me."

Peter, turning about, seeth the disciple whom Jesus loved following;
who also leaned back on his breast at the supper, and said, "Lord, who
is he that betrayeth thee?" Peter therefore seeing him saith to Jesus,
"Lord, and what shall this man do?"

Jesus saith unto him, "If I will that he tarry till I come, what is
that to thee? Follow thou me."

This saying therefore went forth among the brethren, that that
disciple should not die: yet Jesus said not unto him, that he should
not die, but, "If I will that he tarry till I come, what is that to
thee?"


THE APPEARANCE TO THE ELEVEN ON THE MOUNTAIN.

The eleven disciples went into Galilee, unto the mountain where Jesus
had appointed them. And when they saw him, they worshipped him; but
some doubted. And Jesus came to them and spake unto them, saying, "All
authority hath been given unto me in heaven and on earth. Go ye
therefore, and make disciples of all the nations, baptizing them in
the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit: teaching
them to observe all things whatsoever I commanded you: and lo, I am
with you always, even unto the end of the world."


THE LAST APPEARANCE AND ASCENSION.

And he said unto them, "These are my words which I spake unto you,
while I was yet with you, that all things must needs be fulfilled,
which are written in the law of Moses, and the prophets, and the
psalms, concerning me."

Then opened he their mind, that they might understand the scriptures;
and he said unto them, "Thus it is written, that the Christ should
suffer, and rise again from the dead the third day; and that
repentance and remission of sins should be preached in his name unto
all the nations, beginning from Jerusalem. Ye are witnesses of these
things. And behold, I send forth the promise of my Father upon you:
but tarry ye in the city, until ye be clothed with power from on
high."

And he led them out until they were over against Bethany: and he
lifted up his hands, and blessed them.

And it came to pass, while he blessed them, he parted from them, and
was carried up into heaven. And they worshipped him, and returned to
Jerusalem with great joy: and were continually in the temple,
blessing God.

       *       *       *       *       *

MANY OTHER SIGNS THEREFORE DID JESUS IN THE PRESENCE OF THE DISCIPLES
WHICH ARE NOT WRITTEN IN THIS BOOK, BUT THESE ARE WRITTEN, THAT YE MAY
BELIEVE THAT JESUS IS THE CHRIST, THE SON OF GOD; AND THAT BELIEVING
YE MAY HAVE LIFE IN HIS NAME.









End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of His Life
by William E. Barton, Theodore G. Soares, Sydney Strong

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HIS LIFE ***

***** This file should be named 16184.txt or 16184.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/6/1/8/16184/

Produced by Diane Monico and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net.


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
