The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Story of the 6th Battalion, The Durham
Light Infantry, by Unknown

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Story of the 6th Battalion, The Durham Light Infantry
       France, April 1915-November 1918

Author: Unknown

Editor: R.B. Ainsworth

Release Date: September 5, 2005 [EBook #16660]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE STORY OF THE 6TH ***




Produced by Irma Spehar, Christine D and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net.
Produced from page images provided by Internet
Archive/Canadian Libraries








                      THE STORY

                 OF THE 6TH BATTALION

                   THE DURHAM LIGHT

                       INFANTRY


        France, _April_ 1915--_November_ 1918


                       EDITED BY

               CAPT. R.B. AINSWORTH, M.C.




                        LONDON
                THE ST. CATHERINE PRESS
                 STAMFORD STREET, S.E.
                         1919




CONTENTS.


                                                                 PAGE

FOREWORD                                                         7

CHAPTER I.
THE "SALIENT"                                                    9

CHAPTER II.
ARMENTIERES AND THE RETURN TO THE "SALIENT"                      20

CHAPTER III.
THE SOMME                                                        25

CHAPTER IV.
ARRAS                                                            35

CHAPTER V.
RETURN TO THE "SALIENT"                                          41

CHAPTER VI.
THE SOMME, THE LYS AND THE AISNE                                 45

APPENDICES.

OFFICERS KILLED OR DIED, COMMANDING OFFICERS, DECORATIONS, ETC.  57




FOREWORD.


During one of the short periods of training in 1917, it was suggested
that lectures should be delivered to the troops on the history of their
battalions in France. Accordingly Capt. G. Kirkhouse, then Assistant
Adjutant, set to work to collect material for this purpose. Owing to
there being no officers, and very few men, who had served continuously
with the Battalion since April, 1915, the task was not easy, and it was
found impossible to complete the information in time for a lecture before
the Battalion returned to the line. The material was carefully preserved,
however, and was the only portion of the records which survived the
disaster of the 27th May, 1918. As soon as time permitted, the task was
continued, but owing to there being very few survivors of earlier days,
many details have probably escaped notice. Imperfect and incomplete as
the story is, however, it is hoped that the details related will serve to
recall other incidents, both pleasant and unpleasant, to those members of
the Battalion who have been fortunate enough to survive.

It is regretted that it has not been found practicable to include a
chapter on the inner life of the Battalion which centred round the
characters of some of its members. So many names occur to one's mind that
a chapter would be inadequate to mention all, and the exclusion of any
would have involved an invidious and unjustifiable selection.

                                                              R.B.A.

_July, 1919._




CHAPTER I.

THE "SALIENT."

_First Phase._


The end of March, 1915, found the 50th (Northumbrian) Division of the
Territorial Force awaiting orders to proceed overseas. The infantry of
the Division consisted of the 149th Infantry Brigade (4th, 5th, 6th and
7th Battalions Northumberland Fusiliers), the 150th Infantry Brigade (4th
Battalion East Yorkshire Regiment, 4th and 5th Battalions Yorkshire
Regiment, and 5th Battalion The Durham Light Infantry), and the 151st
Infantry Brigade (6th, 7th, 8th and 9th Battalions The Durham Light
Infantry). Early in April, when the 6th Battalion The Durham Light
Infantry were in billets at Gateshead, the orders arrived and on the 10th
April Capt. F. Walton proceeded to Havre to make arrangements for the
arrival of the transport section. The first detachment of men to leave
Gateshead consisted of the transport and machine-gun sections which,
under Major J.E. Hawdon, Second in Command, and Lieut. H.T. Bircham,
Transport Officer, entrained at the Cattle Market, Newcastle, on the 17th
April for Southampton, _en route_ for Havre.

Two days later the remainder of the Battalion entrained at the Central
Station, Newcastle, with the following officers: Lieut.-Col. H.C. Watson
in command, Capt. J.W. Jeffreys, Adjutant; Major W.M. Mackay, Medical
Officer; Capt. A.P. Cummins, commanding A Company; Major S.E. Badcock,
commanding B Company; Capt. W.H.D. Devey, commanding C Company; and Capt.
J. Townend, commanding D Company. Arriving at Folkestone the same day,
the Battalion embarked for Boulogne, where it arrived about midnight and
marched up to Ostrohove Camp.

The following day it entrained at Pont de Briques Station, on the train
which brought the transport and machine-gun sections from Havre. The
complete battalion detrained at Cassel, and after marching all night
arrived in billets at Hardifort at 5 a.m. on the 21st April.

On the 23rd April orders were received to march at very short notice to
Steenvoorde, where the whole of the 151st Infantry Brigade, commanded at
this time by Brig.-General Martin, was assembled in a field at the
eastern end of the town. During the remainder of the day the men were
allowed to rest. At dusk two battalions of the Brigade, the 7th and 9th
Battalions, marched off in fighting order. The other two Battalions (the
6th and 8th) proceeded by 'buses through Poperinghe to Vlamertinghe,
where they took over a hut camp recently vacated by the 9th Royal Scots.

It was now evident that the lessons which the Battalion had learnt during
its long period of training were very soon to be put into practice. The
24th April was spent in testing rifles and making final preparations for
action, and in the evening an order arrived from the Brigade to get ready
to move quickly. This order was given out and within half an hour the
Battalion was on the pave road, marching towards Ypres. It entered the
town as night settled on it. At this date the town was not ruined and the
results of the shelling were hardly noticeable. As the Battalion was
passing the Cloth Hall a shell came screaming faintly towards it, and,
passing over, burst with a dull roar in the city a quarter of a mile
away. There had been no talking in the ranks nor any sound except the
beat of ammunition boots on the pave, but when this shell screamed
overhead and burst, ejaculation in the good old Durham tongue could be
heard passing cheerily up the length of the column. Two or three more
shells passed over, but none burst near the Battalion.

Reaching the top of the hill to the east of the city and leaving the
white walls of Potijze Chateau on the left, the Battalion turned off the
road and filed into the G.H.Q. line, a Battalion of the Shropshire Light
Infantry climbing out to make room. This trench was of the breastwork
type, and a novelty to the men whose idea of a trench was a ditch below
the ground level. The dispositions of the Battalion were as follows: A
Company were on the south side of the Potijze road and the remainder on
the north side, with B Company on the right, D Company in the centre, and
C Company on the left. The machine-gun section was with D Company.
Transport lines were established just behind the Chateau near to a
Canadian Battery. The position was unfortunate, for the section came
under heavy shell fire and had several men and horses hit.

Sunday, the 25th April, was the first day spent by the Battalion in the
trenches. There was a considerable amount of shelling, but fortunately
the Battalion in the trenches did not suffer. In the evening, as it got
dark, the Battalion moved out of the trench and, forming up on the road
which it had left the previous night, marched in fours for about a mile
to Velorenhoek village, which was then almost intact. There the Battalion
came under the orders of the 85th Infantry Brigade, and halted. All ranks
slept for some hours on the roadside, or in the fields, gardens or
cottages close to the road. Before dawn the Brigadier ordered the
Battalion to vacate the village, and the column moved a few hundred yards
up the road to the east. Here the Companies left the road and the men
improved with their entrenching tools the little cover in the form of
ditches and trenches which was to be found, and then lay down. Throughout
this and the succeeding days the men were in marching order with full
packs. The transport moved back to Potijze Wood, except the ration
limbers, which went back to Poperinghe.

About 10 a.m. on the 26th word was passed for the Commanding Officer and
Adjutant, who accordingly reported to the Brigadier of the 85th Brigade.
He was standing on the north side of the road on a little rising ground
from which there was a view for a mile or two to the eastward. He gave
the following order verbally: "The Germans have broken through our line
and are advancing south-west. The Durham Light Infantry (6th Battalion)
will advance and take up positions between Zonnebeke level crossing and
Hill 37." He described the position of the crossing, later known as
Devil's Crossing, by pointing out the direction and stated that the hill
with a few trees on it to the E.N.E. was Hill 37. He further stated that
the Shropshire Light Infantry would be on the right and that
Lieut.-Colonel Bridgford, of that Regiment, would be in command of the
6th Battalion.

Orders were accordingly issued to Company Commanders verbally by the
Adjutant as follows: The Battalion is to occupy the line between Hill 37,
which can be seen on the left front, and Zonnebeke crossing, which lies
on the road. Captain Cummins's Company (A) will march on the crossing
and Captain Townend's Company (D) on Hill 37. Major Badcock's Company
(B) and Captain Devey's Company (C) will divide the space between.
Advance in artillery formation, take advantage of the cover afforded by
the ground, and each Company Commander should accompany one of his rear
Platoons. When Companies had gained suitable positions on this line they
were to deploy and attack by fire any bodies of the enemy who might
attempt to cross their front. The whole operation was under direct
observation by enemy balloons, and as soon as the Companies moved an
intense barrage was put down. B Company, on the right, however, had a
comparatively good time and suffered very few casualties, whilst No. 5
Platoon, under Lieut. A.B. Hare, had none at all, and reached Zonnebeke
Crossing in safety. The remaining Companies got the full effect of the
barrage, which included gas shells, and lost direction towards the left.
Capt. W.H.D. Devey, commanding C Company, was wounded, Capt. J. Monkhouse
killed, and 2nd Lieut. H.H. Nicholson wounded. As a result of the loss of
direction a gap was formed, and A Company were pushed forward to fill it.
In spite of heavy casualties the line was maintained, and continued to
advance, firing all the time on the enemy, who could be seen from the new
positions. It was not till they had advanced a considerable distance that
the officers and men found that there was another line of British troops
ahead of them, holding out in shell-holes, on hillsides, etc.

When this was discovered, Lieut. T.B. Heslop, with No. 11 Platoon and
part of No. 9 Platoon, joined the London Rifle Brigade; 2nd Lieut. R.V.
Hare, with No. 10 Platoon, joined a Battalion of the Shropshire Light
Infantry, and 2nd Lieut. G. Angus, with the remainder of No. 9 Platoon,
took up a position in support on the hill. By this time A and D Companies
were in the forward positions. As already described, A Company had moved
up to fill the gap between B and C Companies, and D Company had also
moved to the assistance of C Company. As a result, the men of all
Companies were mixed together, and it is difficult to say how they were
distributed, but A Company seem to have been in two parts, one with D
Company and one next to B Company. The former passed over Hill 37 and
eventually joined the London Rifle Brigade in some ditches which formed
the front line. There they suffered many casualties. Amongst others,
Major S.E. Badcock and 2nd Lieut. Kynoch were killed and Capt. F. Walton
and 2nd Lieut. G. Kirkhouse were wounded. As soon as the advance had
commenced, the Adjutant, Capt. J.W. Jeffreys, had galloped through the
barrage to find Zonnebeke crossing. Having shown it to the Company on the
right flank he proceeded along the line and found a Platoon of D Company
under 2nd Lieut. Lyon digging themselves in. A little further along
another Platoon was found, and whilst showing them the line he was
heavily fired on. After returning to Brigade Headquarters for a fresh
horse he went to Hill 37 and there heard of D Company from some men of
the Rifle Brigade. Before dusk all formed parties had got into touch with
Battalion Headquarters, which were at Zevencote barn, beside Zonnebeke
level crossing.

About 4 p.m. Lt.-Col. Bridgford, who was in command of all troops in this
sector, issued orders for an attack to be made to clear the enemy from
the Fortuin-Passchendaele Road. The attack was to be made by two
Companies of the Shropshire Light Infantry, with the 7th Durham Light
Infantry in support and the 6th in reserve. The attacking troops were to
pass through the front line and establish a new line on the road when
captured. A conference of officers was held, and it was ascertained that
the men available for the attack were as follows:--No. 3 Platoon under
2nd Lieut. Blenkinsop, Nos. 5, 7 and 8 Platoons, under Capt. T. Welch,
with Lieuts. A.B. Hare and H.C.W. Haythornthwaite; No. 9 Platoon under
2nd Lieut. G. Angus, and about forty men of D Company under Capt. J.
Townend and 2nd Lieut. P.H.B. Lyon.

The Battalion, which was lying in a trench near the road, began to
advance about 7 or 8 p.m., moving in artillery formation and following
the 7th Durham Light Infantry towards the ridge to the north of
Zonnebeke.

On reaching the ridge, which was found unoccupied, the 7th Battalion
moved off to Zonnebeke and the 6th Battalion was ordered to send three
Companies to the support of the Hampshire Regiment on Gravenstafel Ridge
further to the north.

In accordance with the orders issued by Lt.-Col. Hicks, commanding the
Hampshires, B Company, who were about 90 strong, left the remainder of
the Battalion, who were now at Hicks' Farm and moved to reinforce 2nd
Lieut. Ball of the Royal Fusiliers (28th Div.), who, with 100 men, was
holding a position on the Gravenstafel Ridge. This position consisted of
a much battered breastwork, of which only isolated portions offered any
cover. The remainder of the Battalion was then divided. C Company were
sent to garrison a strong point near a neighbouring farm, leaving No. 9
Platoon, under 2nd Lieut. G. Angus, to form a ration party. A Company was
held in reserve in isolated trenches. Battalion Headquarters and D
Company moved back to Zevencote barn, where the Company occupied some
trenches.

On the night of the 27th April, A Company with about twenty men of D
Company were sent to fill a gap between the Hampshires and the
Shropshires, where they dug themselves in. The following day Capt. A.P.
Cummins and Capt. D. Park were seriously wounded by a sniper firing from
behind their line, and 2nd Lieut. Blenkinsop took over command till the
arrival at night of Lieut. R.V. Hare. C.S.M. Lancaster of A Company was
also badly wounded.

The men on the left of B Company, under Lieut. H.C.W. Haythornthwaite
during these days, were in very close touch with the enemy, being
separated from them in the same trench by a block about ten yards wide.
They were the first of the Battalion to use rifle grenades, which were
taken up to them by a party of the Buffs. On the night of the 28th April
No. 6 Platoon was sent up to join the Company, but it was found that they
could not be accommodated in the trench and they returned to Battalion
Headquarters. All through this period the Company was existing under very
difficult conditions. The evacuation of wounded was almost impossible,
and Corpl. Hardy did excellent work in establishing an aid post and
attending to wounded for four days and nights. He was subsequently
mentioned in dispatches for this good work. Their only rations were taken
up on the night of the 28th by a party of No. 9 Platoon under Corpl.
Hall, and water was collected from shell holes in empty ammunition boxes.

Whilst in the front line, both A and B Companies were constantly under
fire from trench mortars ("sausages") and snipers, some of whom were
firing from the rear. Several of the posts held by B Company were blown
in, and in one, occupied by Sergt. Bennison and ten men, all were hit
except Ptes. Walters and Fenwick. In another post the shelter was blown
in and several men wounded and buried. Pte. Robinson, the only man not
hit, crossed the open to the next post, but was unable to obtain
assistance. He thereupon went back, and under constant fire, dug out
several men. For this action he was awarded the D.C.M. and Croix de
Guerre.

The machine-gun section was in action on the 26th April, and for his good
work in handling them Lieut. W.P. Gill was awarded the Military Cross.
After being withdrawn on the night of the 26th the guns were kept in
reserve at Battalion Headquarters.

During the whole of the four days the Battalion was in the line, parties
from D Company under 2nd Lieut. G. Angus did good work in distributing
rations, which were brought up from Poperinghe to Zonnebeke Crossing by
limber. The exact location of the different parties was doubtful, and the
absence of roads, tracks or landmarks made the delivery of rations to the
men a very unpleasant task.

On the 30th April came news of relief. A Company were relieved at night
by the 1st Battalion Northumberland Fusiliers and moved back to the
Convent near Velorenhoek. B Company had further unpleasant experiences.
Their relief by a Battalion of the Royal Fusiliers took place nearly at
dawn, and it was impossible to get further than Hicks' Farm before it was
too light to move. They were accordingly put into a barn and some
trenches for the day, being still only about 300 yards from the enemy,
whose aeroplanes were very active directing fire on to the position. This
fire was fairly successful, and the barn was hit and set on fire and
Lieut. A.B. Hare wounded. The men showed excellent discipline on this
occasion and stood fast till led out to occupy a neighbouring trench. At
night the Company rejoined the rest of the Battalion at the Convent,
where the whole were accommodated in trenches near the road.

In addition to the honours already mentioned the following were
subsequently awarded for work during this period:--Capt. T. Welch
received the Military Cross for his work with B Company on Gravenstafel
Ridge, being the first officer in the Brigade to win the decoration;
R.S.M. G. Perry, who had been doing excellent work for the Battalion
since mobilization, was granted the D.C.M. for his work in organising
ration parties; and C.S.M.s McNair and Bousfield (afterwards commanding
15th D.L.I.) also received the D.C.M. for gallantry after casualties to
officers. Others, who did excellent work, but received no decoration,
were Lieut. W.F.E. Badcock, Signalling Officer, and his Sergeant, H.
Elliott; Sergts. Linsley and Wallace, of B Company; Pte. Newton of A
Company, and Pte. Hall of C Company.

The casualties had been fairly heavy, and included fifteen officers,
amongst whom was Lieut.-Col. H.C. Watson, who left the Battalion sick on
the 28th April. Capt. J.W. Jeffreys had assumed command with Lieut. R.V.
Hare as Adjutant.


_Second Phase._

On the 30th April the enemy delivered another attack, using gas. This
fell mainly on the Irish Regiment, but the 6th Battalion in reserve
occupied battle positions, and collected many men who were driven back by
the gas. At night the Battalion marched back to huts in Brielen Wood,
where it rested for 24 hours. Leaving there, it marched to St.
Jansterbiezen, where it was inspected on the morning of the 2nd May by
Sir John French, who thanked the men for their good work and praised
especially A and B Companies. On the 8th May a draft of officers joined
the Battalion, and the following day a move was made back to Brielen
Woods. Here the Battalion, living in bivouacs, was in Divisional reserve
for one day. The transport and Q.M. Stores moved into a field near
Poperinghe.

After this short rest the Battalion learnt that it was to return to the
scene of its first experiences. On the 10th May it marched to Potijze and
occupied the G.H.Q. line near the railway and some dug-outs in the
cutting south-east of Ypres. Here the men were shelled at intervals,
particularly on the 13th, and spent the nights on working parties. It was
whilst in this area that the new gas respirators, consisting of a pad of
cotton wool and a strip of muslin, were issued on a scale of one to every
twelve men. On the 19th May Major W.E. Taylor, York and Lancaster
Regiment, arrived and took over command from Capt. Jeffreys. Two days
later the Battalion was relieved by the East Surrey Regiment, and
returned to Brielen huts.

During the next few days the artillery fire increased considerably on
both sides, and just before dawn on Whit Monday, the 24th May, the
Germans launched their gas attack. The gas cloud drifted towards Brielen
and the men were roused and moved about half a mile from the camp to
which they returned for breakfast and to prepare to move into action. The
morning had turned out bright and fine when they paraded and marched off
to Potijze. In those days the road leading out of Ypres eastwards was
still marked by leafy trees, and as the Battalion marched along it,
trees, branches and leaves were lying about, brought down by the heavy
fire. Arriving at the wood, which was being heavily shelled, the men were
put into ditches and half-dug trenches. Later in the day packs were
collected, and in the lighter "Fighting Order" the men manned the G.H.Q.
line in front of the wood, being in reserve to the 3rd Battalion
Middlesex Regiment, who were under orders to deliver a counter-attack.
Whilst taking up this position Major Taylor was wounded and 2nd Lieut.
J.M. Hare killed, and Capt. Jeffreys again assumed command. The
counter-attack was cancelled and the Battalion moved back to dug-outs on
the Menin Road, where it stayed all the next day.

On the night of the 25th May the whole Battalion paraded as a working
party to dig a front line trench to fill a gap caused by the German
attack. The right of this trench was on the railway cutting, the enemy
being on the other side of the cutting. The men worked magnificently and
finished the task in less than two hours. As soon as it was completed the
new trench was occupied by a Battalion of the Buffs. After two more
nights spent on working parties the men were relieved and marched back to
bivouacs in Brielen Wood. On the 2nd June orders were received to move
further back, and they marched through Poperinghe to a field on the south
of the town, where they spent the night and the next day, moving again on
the 4th to bivouacs at Ouderdom.

The organisation of the Battalion was now to undergo a change which did
not meet with universal approval amongst its members. On the 8th June it
was amalgamated with the 8th Durham Light Infantry, the new Battalion
being constituted as follows: Lieut.-Col. J. Turnbull, V.D. (8th D.L.I.)
in command; Capt. G.A. Stevens (Royal Fusiliers), Adjutant; A Company
(8th D.L.I.), Capt. T.A. Bradford; B Company (A and B Companies of 6th
D.L.I.), Lieut. W.P. Gill; C Company (6th D.L.I.), Lieut. T.B. Heslop; D
Company (6th D.L.I.), Capt. F.H. Livesay; Machine-gun section, 2nd Lieut.
R.A. Howe (6th D.L.I.); transport section, Lieut. Ramsay (8th D.L.I.);
Quartermaster, Lieut. W.M. Hope (6th D.L.I.). All supernumerary staff
were sent to the base at Harfleur. At the same time the 7th Battalion
became Divisional Pioneers and the 5th Battalion Loyal North Lancashire
Regiment joined the 151st Brigade.

On the evening of the 11th June the new Battalion marched by Companies to
dug-outs in the grounds of Kruisstraat Chateau, south of Ypres. The
following day the march was resumed _via_ the Lille gate and Maple Copse
to Sanctuary Wood, where the Battalion was lent to the 149th Infantry
Brigade to provide working parties for the improvement of the Hooge
defences. It was during this move that the transport, on the 14th June,
had its worst experience of the famous Hell Fire Corner, where it was
shelled and a water cart was completely destroyed.

Wednesday, the 16th June, had been chosen for an attack on Hill 60 by the
3rd Division, the 50th Division being ordered to co-operate by making a
demonstration. At 2.30 a.m. the Battalion moved into the support
trenches, twenty minutes before the bombardment commenced. At 4.15 a.m.
the 3rd Division assaulted, and their apparent success which could be
seen from the rear was greeted with much enthusiasm by the men. About two
hours later a message was received from a commanding officer in Zouave
Wood that he was about to attack north-east of Hooge. Accordingly, two
Companies under Major Hawdon were sent in support, the others being
assembled ready to follow. The attack was cancelled, however, and at 7.30
a.m. the Battalion re-assembled in its original trenches. At night it
moved up and relieved the 7th Northumberland Fusiliers in the Hooge
defences. The disposition of Companies was as follows: B Company, under
Lieut. Gill, were in "B9" trench. A Company, under Capt. Bradford, in
"H13" and "H14" trenches; C Company, under Lieut. Heslop, in the Hooge
Chateau stables; and D Company, under Capt. Livesay, in support in "H16"
trench. The trenches, especially those occupied by B Company, had been
much battered, and a considerable amount of work had to be done on them
during the night. At this time the Chateau and stables were still
standing, and though C Company were in occupation of the stables, the
Germans held the Chateau, from the windows of which their snipers were
able to give considerable trouble.

The following day was marked by considerable shelling, and at night a
successful bombing enterprise was led against a sap head. For two days
the position remained unchanged, the Battalion being engaged in repairing
the trenches and carrying up rations and ammunition, till on the night of
the 18th it was relieved by a Company of the 7th Northumberland Fusiliers
and a Battalion of the Wiltshire Regiment, and went to F. hutments south
of Vlamertinghe.

This concluded the Battalion's first tour in the "Salient."




CHAPTER II.

ARMENTIERES AND THE RETURN TO THE "SALIENT."

_First Phase._


On Sunday, the 20th June, the Battalion marched off from Vlamertinghe at
8.30 a.m. through Ouderdom and Locre to Dranoutre, where it went into
bivouacs at Corunna Farm, being now in the II Corps commanded by Sir
Charles Ferguson, who inspected and addressed the men the following day.
In the evening, after their inspection, they moved up to the front line
and took over the trenches from "E1" to the barricade on the
Kemmel-Wytschaete Road--a quiet sector except for trouble from snipers.

A few days after taking over, an interesting incident occurred. A notice
board was put up in the German trenches bearing the words "Lemberg is
taken." It was accompanied by cheering and the lighting of flares, to
which the front line Companies replied by rapid fire in the direction of
the board. The same day (23rd June) work was started on the mines, which
were eventually blown up in the successful attack on the Wytschaete Ridge
in June, 1917. Apart from this, nothing of interest occurred beyond the
usual reliefs till the middle of July. An announcement which aroused
considerable delight was made on the 15th July to the effect that leave
to England was to be granted, two officers and three other ranks being
allowed to be away at a time for periods of six and four days
respectively.

On the 16th July the Battalion was relieved and moved from Kemmel at 7.30
p.m. proceeding via Dranoutre and Bailleul to Armentieres, where it
arrived at 1 a.m. the next morning and went into billets at the Blue
factory. The following night it moved up to relieve Battalions of the
Royal Scots and Monmouths. B Company under Lieut. R.V. Hare, took over
"67" trench, C Company under Lieut. T.B. Heslop, "68" trench, A Company
under Capt. Ritson (8th D.L.I.), "69" trench, and D Company under Capt.
Livesay, Lille Post. The sector proved to be very quiet and the trenches
exceptionally good. It is interesting to note that about this time the
training of bombers was organised, and 2nd Lieut. P.H.B. Lyon of the
Battalion was appointed first Brigade Bombing Officer.

The men were now beginning to realize that their first taste of
conditions in France was not typical of the whole front, and that war had
its more pleasant side. After the "Salient," the Armentieres trenches
were a picnic, and though there is little of historic interest to record
concerning the tour, it formed the subject of many conversations and
jests when harder times followed. Many times, probably, in the
water-logged shell holes of Passchendaele in 1918 was it recalled how
once at Armentieres even the duck boards were cleaned daily and men were
crimed for throwing matches on them. It is not forgotten either how the
Battalion Band first came into being at Houplines.

On the 11th August, the 6th and 8th Battalions once more assumed a
separate identity. Major Borrett, D.S.O., the King's Own, took over
command of the 6th Battalion with Capt. Jeffreys once more as Adjutant.
Four days later Major Borrett left and handed over the command to Capt.
Jeffreys, 2nd Lieut. P.H.B. Lyon becoming Adjutant. On this
re-organization the Companies of the Battalion became known as W, X, Y,
and Z. About the same time the 5th Battalion Loyal North Lancashire
Regiment left the Brigade, and was replaced by the 5th Battalion Border
Regiment.

Early in September, some excitement was caused by the rumour that the
"Mushroom," a circular trench in the Battalion sector, was mined and
likely to be blown up. Bombers of W Company patrolled it and slept in it
for six nights without result. On the 25th September the heavy firing at
Loos caused a little anxiety. The day after this the Battalion sector was
slightly altered by the taking over of the Houplines trenches from the
12th Division. A little more excitement than usual occurred on 13th
October, when a demonstration was made by the artillery and the throwing
of smoke bombs.

The tour ended on the 10th November, when the Battalion was relieved and
marched to billets at La Creche, near Bailleul, where it stayed for a
month enjoying its first rest since embarkation.


_Second Phase._

Early in December it was known that the next tour was to be once more in
the "Salient." On the 17th December the Battalion entrained at
Steenwercke for Poperinghe, from where it marched to Dickebusch huts,
which are always remembered as being built on islands in a sea of mud.
The following night another march via Kruisstraat and Zillebeke brought
the men to Maple Copse where they relieved the 11th Royal Scots (9th
Division). The trenches were found to consist of holes and ditches which
were worked on till they were quite good and dry. It was here that
arrangements were first made for the prevention of trench feet.

Sunday, the 19th December, was marked by a German gas attack north of
Hooge, but the Battalion was not involved. The following day the
artillery activity continued, and Lieut.-Col. Jeffreys was wounded whilst
going round a new piece of the line which had been taken over from the
Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders. Major G.A. Stevens (8th D.L.I.) took
over command, and the following day Capt. R.B. Bradford (afterwards
Brig.-Gen. Bradford, V.C.) joined as Adjutant. An unusual occurrence took
place on the 22nd December, when two Russians, who had been prisoners in
Germany and had been working behind the line, escaped and came into the
trenches in the Battalion sector. On Christmas Day the Battalion was out
of the line and in the huts at Dickebusch. Capt. Bradford left on the
31st December to join the 7th Battalion, and was succeeded as Adjutant by
2nd Lieut. C.E. Yaldwyn.

On New Year's morning the Battalion had its first experience of a really
heavy British bombardment of the enemy's trenches. The bombardment was so
intense that it was possible to find one's way about Sanctuary Wood by
the light of the gun flashes. The only other incident of importance in
the first month of 1916 was the departure of the machine-gun section
which, under 2nd Lieut. L. Brock, was sent to form part of the Brigade
Machine Gun Company. To replace the guns, the first Lewis Guns were
issued and put under the command of 2nd Lieut. J.P. Moffitt. It was also
about this time that the Battalion journal, _The Whizz-Bang_, came into
existence, edited and run by 2nd Lieut. Yaldwyn. Its illustrations by
Lieut. Catford and articles were much appreciated, but, unfortunately,
its publication ceased in November of the same year.

Throughout January and February there were local artillery combats which
terminated with the capture of Hill 60 and "The Bluff." On the 1st March
there was a demonstration at 5 p.m., which consisted of artillery and
infantry fire and cheering as if for an attack. The following morning at
4.32 a.m. the 3rd Division attacked and captured International and New
Year trenches and "The Bean" with over 200 prisoners. On the 18th March,
the Battalion was relieved and moved to Poperinghe by train from Ypres.
Four days later it returned again by train and took over the recently
captured Bluff trenches from the 10th Royal Welsh Fusiliers (3rd
Division). These trenches were round the edge of the Bluff crater and
were in a very bad condition due to the rain and heavy shelling, and were
littered with remnants of German equipment and their dead. X Company were
on the right in New Year trench supported by Y Company in Gordon Post. W
Company were in the centre in "The Loop," and Z Company on the left in
"The Bean."

On the 27th March, at 4.15 a.m., the 3rd Division on the right attacked
at St. Eloi, and during the attack the Medical Officer (Capt. White) and
a party of stretcher bearers rendered valuable assistance. A few days
later (2nd April) the Battalion was relieved by the Canadians, who had
suffered heavily from shell fire in coming up, and moved again to
Dickebusch, where there was a stay of two days before moving South to
Scottish Lines at Westoutre and La Clyte.

A week later, on the 8th April, the Battalion was again in the line, this
time relieving the 7th Battalion Shropshire Light Infantry in trenches N
and O, in front of Wytschaete, with back area at La Clyte. These trenches
were of the breastwork type. About this time there was a good deal of
fighting on the left, where the Germans were trying to retake the St.
Eloi craters.

On the 24th April the Battalion was relieved and marched to rest billets
at Berthen. These billets were found to be farms scattered over a large
area. A few days after arrival, Lieut.-Col. Jeffreys, D.S.O., returned
and took over command from Lieut.-Col. Stevens, who went as Brigade Major
to a Canadian Brigade. Early on the morning of the 30th the Battalion
was roused by the news of a gas attack, but after standing to till
daylight it was not required to move. A week later, 2nd Lieut. G.
Kirkhouse was appointed Adjutant in place of 2nd Lieut. Yaldwyn, and on
the 8th May the Battalion returned to La Clyte for four days working
parties. The only other incidents of importance during May were an
inspection by Sir Douglas Haig and the farewell inspection and address on
the 16th by Brig.-Gen. Shea prior to his departure to take over command
of the 30th Division. He was succeeded by Brig.-Gen. Westmorland.

On the 28th May the Battalion returned to the trenches it had left a
month before, and on the 2nd June the men were able to watch the German
attack between Hill 60 and Hooge and the Canadian counter-attacks on the
following day. Lieut. Ebsworth, M.C., D.C.M., East Lancashire Regt.,
joined as Adjutant on the 7th June. During this tour the first Battalion
raid was made by men of Y Company under 2nd Lieut. H.C. Annett and 2nd
Lieut. J.F.G. Aubin, who was Battalion Bombing Officer. The party
consisted of 24 men, including two bombing squads, and had as its object
identification of the enemy on the immediate front. The night of the 6th
June was chosen and the party went out as arranged. In No Man's Land they
met a large enemy wiring party and their object was not attained. Three
nights later, however, a German was captured, and again on the 12th the
raiding party went out, this time with the object of killing Boches. They
entered the enemy trench, and after doing considerable damage with bombs
and rifles, returned without casualty.

Apart from these incidents the sector was on the whole quiet, except for
a certain amount of sniping. The principal feature was the daily enemy
bombardment with trench mortars, which lasted from one to three hours,
and was on occasions very heavy. The front line, however, was thinly held
and very few casualties resulted. After receiving two drafts of 190 and
110 men respectively the Battalion was relieved on 7th August by the 7th
Battalion King's Own and moved to its old billets at Berthen.

This ended the second phase of its war history, and a few days later it
moved South to the Somme area.




CHAPTER III.

THE SOMME.

_First Phase._


On the 10th August, 1916, the Battalion entrained at Godewaersvelde, and
detraining at Candas, marched to Heuzecourt and spent four days resting.
The 15th, 16th and 17th were spent in marching through Vignacourt and
Villers Bocage to Baizieux, where the men bivouaced in the wood. Here two
accidents occurred. Major F. Walton, Second in Command, and Lieut.
Ebsworth, M.C., Adjutant, were thrown from their horses and sustained
broken limbs. 2nd Lieut. Kirkhouse resumed duties as Adjutant.

Nearly a month was spent in the wood, the time being devoted to training
in the new wave formation for the coming offensive. It was about this
time that distinguishing marks were adopted in the Division and the
Battalion began to wear the red diamonds which came to be regarded with
almost as much pride as the cap badge, and continued to be worn as long
as the Battalion existed as a unit in France. On the 6th September
Brig.-Gen. N.J.G. Cameron took over command of the Brigade. Four days
later the Battalion moved to bivouacs in Becourt Wood, and there the
final preparations were made for action, and amid the growing violence of
the artillery preparation it moved again on the 14th September to Shelter
Wood.

Zero for the second phase of the Somme battle was 6.20 a.m. on the 15th
September. The 149th and 150th Infantry Brigades were then in the front
line between High Wood and Martinpuich with the 151st Brigade in reserve.
At zero the Battalion moved from Shelter Wood by way of Sausage Valley to
an old German trench at the south-west corner of Mametz Wood. About noon
a further forward move was made, Y and Z Companies to the northern edge
of the wood, and W and X Companies to a position a little further forward
between Mametz and Bazentin-le-Petit Woods. So far the Battalion had
escaped shell fire, and the men were much interested in prisoners who
were being escorted to the rear. About 11 a.m. a message was received
that the 47th Division had failed to take High Wood, and that the two
Brigades of the 50th Division had secured their objectives. Later came a
message that the 47th Division had taken High Wood at the second attempt.

Rations arrived about 5 p.m., and whilst they were being distributed
Lieut.-Col. Jeffreys returned from Brigade Headquarters with orders to
move up at once. Accordingly the Battalion paraded and marched up the
road to the Quarry at Bazentin-le-Petit. By this time the area was full
of movement. Guns, ammunition, ration wagons and troops were everywhere
moving up after the advance.

After a conference at Brigade Headquarters orders were again issued for a
move, and at 9 p.m. the Battalion in fours, led by the Commanding Officer
and a guide from the Northumberland Fusiliers moved from the Quarry with
orders to attack from Eye and Clarke's trenches at 9.30 p.m. The attack
was to be made in four waves, with the 9th Durham Light Infantry, who had
been in position all the afternoon, on the right, the 6th in the centre,
and the 5th Border Regiment on the left. Unfortunately the guide lost his
way, and after unnecessary wandering the head of the Battalion arrived in
Clarke's trench, at the junction with Bethel sap, at 9.15 p.m. After
considerable difficulty, owing to ignorance of the ground, the Companies
got into position. W Company, under Capt. J. Cook, was on the left of the
first wave, and X Company, under Capt. W.F.E. Badcock, on the right, with
Z (left) and Y (right) in support. Just as they got into Clarke's trench
2nd Lieut. Annett, commanding Y Company, was killed, and 2nd Lieut. B.J.
Harvey, though wounded, took command.

At the time appointed for the attack the 5th Border Regiment could not be
located, so the 6th and 9th Durham Light Infantry, after waiting about an
hour, advanced. Crossing Hook trench, which had been the enemy front line
in the morning and was now held by remnants of the 149th Brigade, they
moved down the slope towards Starfish and Prue trenches, the first
objective. They were met by a certain amount of machine-gun and rifle
fire, and had a few casualties, including Capt. Badcock, who was wounded.
The 6th Battalion continued to advance, however, until completely
checked by machine-gun fire, and then took cover in ditches and shell
holes. It was then discovered that there was a considerable gap on the
right, but by moving men in that direction touch was regained with the
9th Battalion.

About 3.30 a.m. on the 16th the Commanding Officer took up Z Company to
reinforce the front line, and the 5th Border Regiment also moved up at
the same time. The whole line was then pushed forward and straightened.
Battalion Headquarters remained in Clarke's trench.

Further orders were received to attack again at 9.15 a.m., but they never
readied the Companies, and nothing happened. Things were fairly quiet
during the day, and at night a shallow communication trench was dug over
the ridge and attempts made to improve the forward positions. Efforts
were also made to collect the Battalion into Companies, but on the 17th
the only parties under the control of Headquarters were half of W
Company, under Capt. Cook, part of X Company, under Lieut. Harriss, a
Platoon of Z Company, under Lieut. W.B. Hansell, and Y Company, in
reserve in a sunken road, under 2nd Lieuts. McVicker and Richardson. It
was known that other isolated groups were in positions in the front line.
One of these was organised for defence under orders of Private B.
McLinden of X Company, who subsequently received the Military Medal.

The chief obstacle to a further advance was an enemy strong point called
the Crescent. Accordingly a party was organised to attack it, consisting
of two bombing squads, one each from the 6th and 8th Battalions under 2nd
Lieut. J.F.G. Aubin, now Brigade Bombing Officer. Leaving by way of
Crescent Alley at 6 p.m., they met with considerable shell fire and were
disorganised. Re-forming, however, they went out again with the same
result. The shelling proved to be the preliminary to an attack on the
150th Brigade, which was beaten off, Y Company being used to assist their
neighbours with Lewis guns.

The following day (18th) was misty, and it was thought that the Germans
were evacuating Starfish trench. An attack was therefore ordered to
occupy it. This attack was made by the 6th Battalion on the left and the
9th on the right, each providing 100 men. 2nd Lieut. W. Little, with 50
men of W Company, composed the Battalion's front line, and 2nd Lieut.
W.F. Charlton, with 50 of Z Company, the supporting line. A few men of
other Companies were also mixed with these two lines. Shortly after
starting they came under heavy machine-gun fire and had a number of
casualties, including 2nd Lieut. Charlton, who was killed. Some of the
party returned to their line during the day and others at night. All who
had been near the enemy trench reported it to be strongly held.

During the morning Y Company were sent up to relieve W, X and Z Companies
in the front line. Owing to the trenches being very muddy after rain, and
at all places very shallow, this was a difficult operation. To add to the
difficulty the 8th Battalion began to arrive to relieve the Battalion
before the Company relief was complete. However, they at last got out and
moved back to 6th Avenue East and the intermediate line, where two days
were spent in cleaning up. Here Lieut. Ebsworth rejoined as Adjutant, and
the officers and men who had been left at the transport lines also came
up.

On the 20th September, the Battalion moved further back to shelter in
Mametz Wood, where a draft of 50 men from the 2/6th Battalion, Essex
Regiment, joined. After four days' rest it again went forward to the
intermediate line. The same day Major Wilkinson, of the 149th Machine Gun
Company, joined as second in command. The following night the whole
Battalion turned out to dig a jumping-off trench. Lieut.-Col. Jeffreys
took them as far as the Battalion Headquarters of the 5th Durham Light
Infantry from where Lieut. Ebsworth and a guide led them to the position.
The guide lost his way, and after wandering about nearly all night, the
Battalion returned without doing any work.

On the 26th September Lieut.-Col. Jeffreys left the Battalion to proceed
to England for three months' rest, and Major Wilkinson took over command.
The following day a move was made to Hook trench, where the men lived in
small shelters and provided working parties at nights. This trench was on
the sky line, and as a result received considerable attention from the
enemy gunners. To prevent casualties, and also to provide more room, two
Companies were pushed forward on the 28th to Starfish trench. From these
positions, in the afternoon, the Battalion relieved the 9th Battalion in
the front line. The relief was observed, and the communication trench
shelled. The disposition of Companies was, from right to left: Y, Z, W,
X, each Company having two Platoons in the front line (North Durham
Street) and two Platoons in the support line (South Durham Street). At
night they occupied battle positions, and extended the trench they
occupied by 150 to 300 yards. The 9th Battalion was in support in
Crescent Alley. On the left were the 5th Border Regiment, and on the
right the 47th Division, but it was not possible to get into touch with
the flanks during the night. The Company Commanders were now W Company,
2nd Lieut. Barnett; X Company, 2nd Lieut. Lean; Y Company, Lieut.
Catford; and Z Company, Capt. Peberdy. By dawn all preparations,
including the alteration of watches to winter time, were completed for
the attack, which had been ordered for the 1st October.

The preliminary bombardment commenced at 7 a.m. and continued till zero
(3.15 p.m.), when it changed to a barrage. Unfortunately there were some
casualties from shells falling short, the total casualties for the day
being about 40, including the Commanding Officer wounded. Lieut.-Col.
R.B. Bradford, now commanding the 9th Battalion, asked for and was given
permission to take command of the two Battalions, and for his subsequent
work that day was awarded the V.C. He arrived at Battalion Headquarters
at zero, and at once went up to the front line.

The attack commenced at 3.15 p.m., but, partly on account of the failure
of the 47th Division on the right, and partly owing to the wire not being
properly cut, the attackers were held up by machine-gun fire and suffered
heavy casualties. After considerable fighting with bombs and rifles three
Lewis gun teams of X Company, under 2nd Lieut. T. Little and 2nd Lieut.
C.L. Tyerman, and one team of W Company under 2nd Lieut. Barnett,
succeeded in getting a footing in the first objective. These organised
the position and carried on bombing attacks, 2nd Lieut. Little being
killed. During these operations Lieut.-Col. Bradford arrived on the
scene, and immediately took charge of the situation, and under his
direction and leadership the whole of the first objective was gained. A
Company of the 9th Battalion then came up, and using the new position as
a starting point, advanced and took the final objective after dark.

About dusk a counter-attack was attempted by the enemy on the right
front. Advancing in extended order, about twenty of the enemy were
challenged, and they all cheered, shouting "Hooray." As they showed no
further friendly signs they were fired on and driven off. During the
night a further counter-attack developed from the valley on the right,
but this also was repulsed.

The following day, by organised bombing, the whole of the final objective
was captured and held, and communication trenches were dug back to North
Durham Street.

The casualties during the two days had been very heavy, and included
amongst the officers, in addition to those already mentioned, 2nd Lieut.
Peacock, killed, and 2nd Lieut. Lean, Capt. Peberdy, Lieut. Cotching, 2nd
Lieut. Barnett and 2nd Lieut. Appleby wounded. Amongst the decorations
gained were Military Medals awarded to Corporal Dixon and Privates
Rushforth and Atkinson, all signallers, and Private Turnbull of Y
Company. Good work was also done by Sergeants Gowland and Winslow.

On the night of the 2nd October Lieut.-Col. Bradford handed over the
command of the Battalion to Lieut. Ebsworth, and it was relieved by the
7th Northumberland Fusiliers the night after. Owing to the mud the relief
did not commence until 4 a.m., and it was almost dawn before the
Battalion reached Headquarters, from where it was led by Lieut. Ebsworth
to Starfish trench. Here it was joined by R.S.M. Perry and the C.S.M.'s
and a draft which had been used as a carrying party. The officers left
were Lieut. Ebsworth, 2nd Lieut. Kirkhouse, Adjutant; 2nd Lieut. K.B.
Stuart, Signalling Officer, and 2nd Lieut. Tyerman; the Medical Officer,
Capt. J.G. Hill, arrived later.

After a short rest the Battalion marched back to bivouacs in Becourt Wood
for one night.


_Second Phase._

On the 4th October, the Battalion moved back to tents in Henencourt Wood,
where drafts arrived, and remained for three weeks, reorganising and
training. The Company Commanders were now:--W Company, 2nd Lieut. A.S.
Tate; X Company, 2nd Lieut. J.H.F. Ludgate; Y Company, 2nd Lieut. R.H.
Stewart; and Z Company, 2nd Lieut. C.L. Tyerman.

At the end of this period, on the 23rd October, the Battalion left the
Wood and marched back to Becourt, where two days were spent in tents. On
the 25th October the men were on the move again over familiar ground and
soon found themselves in tents just outside Mametz Wood. After a week
spent on working parties they moved up to the front line, W Company, now
under 2nd Lieut. R.H. Wharrier, being in front in Snag trench and the
other three Companies in close support in the Flers line. On the night of
Saturday, the 4th November, X, Y and Z Companies took over the front line
in preparation for an attack on the Butte de Warlencourt on the Sunday
morning. Zero had been fixed for 9.15 a.m. and the relief was not
complete, owing to the extremely bad state of the trenches, till 9 a.m.
The Battalion was disposed for the attack with X Company on the right, Y
in the centre, Z on the left and W in support, with the 9th Battalion on
the left flank and the 8th on the right. This fateful day, 5th November,
proved to be the most disastrous the Battalion had yet passed through.
The enemy position was exceptionally strong, the trenches from which the
attack started were so muddy that several men were drowned in them, and
the time for preparation was so short that the attack broke down almost
as soon as it had started. The casualties were very heavy, and included
amongst the officers 2nd Lieut. K.B. Stuart, 2nd Lieut. Fell, 2nd Lieut.
A.S. Ritson, 2nd Lieut. S. Robson, 2nd Lieut. T.F. Applegarth, and 2nd
Lieut. G.W. Robson, all killed, and all the remaining Company officers,
except 2nd Lieut. Wharrier, wounded. Amongst the honours awarded were the
M.C. to 2nd Lieut. Wharrier and the Military Medal to L.-Cpl. H.
Cruddace, who was also promoted to be sergeant. A monument was afterwards
erected on the Butte to the memory of those of the Battalion who fell on
this day.

On the following night the Battalion was relieved by the 5th Battalion
and went back to Mametz Wood, where it stayed till the end of the month
supplying working parties daily. Several new officers joined here,
including Lieut.-Col. H.M. Allen, Black Watch, who took over command;
Lieut. (now Major) Ebsworth becoming Second in Command.

Towards the end of the month came rumours of a rest, and on the 30th the
Battalion marched off once more to Becourt, where it was this time
accommodated in huts. After a night there it marched back to billets at
Warloy, where it stayed during the whole of December, training and
resting. The rest was thoroughly enjoyed by all ranks. On Christmas Day
sports were held which included a mounted officers' race won by Lieut.
H.T. Bircham, M.C., transport officer.

On New Year's Day the Battalion was on its way back to the line. The
first day's march took it to billets in Albert, the billets being
partially destroyed houses. The following day the march was resumed to a
hut camp near the quarry at Bazentin-le-Petit, well known to the few
remaining survivors of the 15th September. After a few days in this camp,
troubled only by an occasional shell, a move was made into High Wood West
camp, a cheerless place consisting of black tarpaulin huts. From this and
a similar camp across the valley (High Wood East) the Battalion did two
tours in the front line at Factory Corner, where the line consisted of
more or less isolated posts. The support line, where a few days were
spent, was just in front of Flers. During these tours the weather was
exceedingly cold and the men suffered considerably, both in the line and
in the camp. There was also a considerable amount of shell fire. Parties
carrying up rations and pushing trolleys up the light railway from
Clarke's Dump had several casualties, and on one occasion the camp was
hit and all the signallers who had been left out of the line for training
became casualties. In the line itself the only outstanding incident
happened to a patrol which found itself surrounded one night, but
succeeded in getting back safely. Towards the end of the month came
rumours of relief, and on the 24th January the Division was relieved by
the 1st Australian Division. The Battalion came out to a new hut camp on
the Beaver Road, between the Bazentin and Mametz Woods. The next day it
marched to Becourt Camp, the air being full of rumours as to the future.

It soon became known, however, that the Division was moving south to take
over a section of the line hitherto held by the French, still in the
Somme area, just south of Peronne. From Becourt the Battalion continued
its march to Ribemont. The march was uneventful except for the fact that
the two rear Companies took a wrong turning, and after a roundabout
journey arrived late at the halting place for dinner. At Ribemont it
stayed for about three weeks, during which training was carried out, the
men being accommodated in barns. Col. Allen was still in command with
Lieut. T.J. Arnott (Gordon Highlanders) as Adjutant. There was little of
interest during this period and, on the whole, everybody was pleased when
the move was resumed to huts at Hamel. After a few days there the
Battalion marched to billets at Proyart, where Lieut.-Col. J.W. Jeffreys,
D.S.O., returned and took over command. Again, in three or four days it
marched to Foucaucourt, where it was in Divisional Reserve. This village,
which had at one time been in the front line system, was practically
nothing but ruins and the Battalion was accommodated in a large camp of
French huts, fitted with wire beds, each hut holding about 150 men. Here,
final preparations were made for the line, which was visited by officers
who reported that the trenches were dry and in good condition. It was
very frosty weather at this time, but unfortunately before the Battalion
moved up a thaw had set in. The relief of the 5th Yorkshire Regiment will
never be forgotten by those of the Battalion who took part in it.
Following on the methods adopted by the French the relief took place
through very long communication trenches, running from Estrees through
Berny to the line in front of Misery. These trenches, as a result of the
thaw, were everywhere knee deep in mud and usually waist deep, and men
arrived in the line without boots and in a few cases without trousers,
having lost them in the mud. The experiences of X Company were perhaps
the worst. Leaving camp at about 5 p.m., then 130 strong, they were met
by guides, who lost their way, and eventually arrived in the front line
at dawn, having lost over 100 men stuck in the mud. The relief was not
reported complete till 4 p.m. the next day. The front line trenches were
worse if possible than the communication trenches, and the days that
followed were most unpleasant. There was very little cover from enemy
snipers, who were pretty active, and there were several casualties from
fishtail trench mortars. One night was marked by a very intense "strafe"
for a short time with rifle grenades and trench mortars. It afterwards
appeared that this was the enemy's parting shot, for soon after the
Division was relieved the enemy's extensive retirement on this sector
took place. After two tours in the front line, one in support in trenches
round Berny, and one in reserve at Foucaucourt, the Battalion was
relieved early in March by the 2/5th South Staffordshire Regiment (59th
Division), who had just come from Ireland and had not previously seen any
fighting in France. On relief the Battalion returned to Foucaucourt.

Towards the end of the tour Lieut.-Col. Jeffreys left the Battalion for
a few days in hospital, during which time Major Little, of the 5th Border
Regiment, and Major Crouch of the 9th Durham Light Infantry, both held
command. He returned, however, when the Battalion came out of the line.

This ended the tour in the Somme region, but the Battalion did not leave
the area till the end of the month, the period being spent in huts at
Morcourt, where an energetic programme of training and sports was carried
out. The principal feature of the sports was the success of members of
the Battalion, including Sergt. Young and Ptes. Nimney and Moody in the
Brigade and Divisional boxing contests. Although there were no
outstanding incidents to record of this training, Morcourt seems to mark
one of those turning points in the history of the Battalion from which
all subsequent events date. So many small things occurred there that it
was remarked by later comers that it appeared to them that the Morcourt
training must have lasted for months. One event, however, can be pointed
to as a turning point. On the 25th March, Lieut.-Col. Jeffreys, who had
never fully recovered from the wounds received in Sanctuary Wood, was
ordered to return to England on account of ill-health, and handed over
command to Major W.D. Carswell Hunt, M.C., of the 7th Durham Light
Infantry. Colonel Jeffreys' personal influence and fighting qualities,
strongly reflected even in his absence in those officers who had received
their early training under him, had been largely responsible for the
reputation and the success of the Battalion during its first two years of
fighting and his departure was greatly regretted by all ranks.

A few days after he left, the Battalion was on the move to take part in
the battle which was about to begin at Arras.




CHAPTER IV.

ARRAS.

_First Phase._


From Morcourt the Battalion moved by motor 'buses through Amiens to
Talmas preparatory to a long trek on foot. The first two nights were
spent at Wargnies and Havernas. Here a famous Church Parade was held, at
which the Commanding Officer, in the absence of a Chaplain, preached his
first and, as it proved, his last sermon. From there the Battalion
marched to Longuevillette and then to Vacquerie-le-Bourcq, spending a
night at each place. About this time Lieut. Arnott left the Battalion and
Lieut. G.D.R. Dobson (7th Durham Light Infantry) became Adjutant. The
next day Blangerval and Blangermont were reached and a short stay made,
half the Battalion being accommodated in each village. From here Major
Hunt went up by car to see the forward area and died of heart failure on
the journey. He was brought back to St. Pol, where he was buried in the
cemetery, representatives of several battalions forming the funeral
procession. Major A. Ebsworth, M.C., took over command.

When the march was resumed the direction was changed, and, moving
eastwards, billets were reached at Neuville-au-Cornet. Rumours were now
spreading of the forthcoming battle and a further march to
Villers-sur-Simon left no doubt that the Battalion would be involved.
These were the last billets occupied by the men, the next portion of the
trek bringing them to huts at Montenescourt, about six miles due west of
Arras. Here Lieut.-Col. F.W. Robson, D.S.O. (5th Yorkshire Regiment)
arrived to take over the command, which he held for nearly a year.

On the evening of the 11th April, in a blinding snowstorm, the Battalion
moved forward to the fight. Marching through Arras, they came to the
caves at Ronville. These caves were like nothing seen before. Excavated
by Spanish prisoners in the middle ages to provide stone for the building
of the city, they extended over an enormous area, and were capable of
holding thousands of men. The sensation of finding oneself in this huge
underground town, complete with electric light and water supply, after
stumbling down a long, uneven stairway, will not be forgotten by those
who survive.

After one night here, the caves had to be evacuated next morning to make
room for more troops coming up. The Germans had now been driven back as
far as Wancourt, which was captured the previous day. On leaving the
caves, cellars in Ronville village were occupied. No sooner were the men
in, however, than orders were received to move further forward. The
Battalion paraded on the road leading to Beaurains, which was crowded
with vehicles and men, and marched off in the afternoon. After their
experiences of trench warfare the sight of open, rolling country, the
scene of yesterday's fighting, was very strange and, to some,
invigorating. Passing through the ruins of Beaurains and Neuville
Vitasse, the route turned across country towards Wancourt, and about dusk
the Battalion reached a sunken road, where it halted. Owing to a delay in
the arrival of the Lewis gun limbers, the Lewis gunners were behind the
rest of the Battalion, and some difficulty was experienced by them in
locating the sunken road. Up to this point there had been no firing or
signs of activity. After a conference of Commanding Officers a relief of
the 14th Division was arranged. W, X and Y Companies moved a little
further up and occupied Niger and Nepal trenches, which were some
distance behind the front line, and Z Company were sent to dig a trench a
little further forward near Wancourt cemetery. Here they remained for the
day. At night detailed orders were received for an attack at dawn, the
Battalion's frontage being near Wancourt Tower.

At 1 a.m. on the 14th April the men moved to the assembly position in the
dry bed of the Cojeul River, with the 8th Battalion in support and 5th
Border Regiment in reserve, the 9th Battalion being already in a line
just south of Guemappe. The original orders had now been considerably
altered, and zero hour arrived before fresh orders had been circulated to
the Companies. The result was that at 4.30 a.m., after moving in file
from the assembly position to a bank, some 200 yards in front, the
Battalion advanced under a barrage in four waves of Companies, W being
front and Z in rear, with no orders except a rough indication of the
direction.

As they advanced they were met by very heavy machine-gun fire from the
front and from Guemappe in their left rear. W and X Companies reached the
ridge 500 yards from the starting point, and passing down the other side,
were not seen again during the day. Y and Z Companies also reached the
ridge, but could get no further. Later they were joined by the 8th
Battalion, which was also held up.

The fighting then died down, but apart from one brief message from X
Company no trace could be found of the two front Companies, and the
casualties in the remaining two were very heavy. To add to the confusion,
the 56th Division on the right had lost direction, and men of the London
Regiment were everywhere mixed with those of the 50th Division.

At dusk orders were received that the line on the ridge would be taken
over by the London Rifle Brigade. As soon as the light permitted search
was made for W and X Companies. Eventually the remnants consisting of 4
officers and about 20 men were discovered. Having reached a small system
of trenches, they had organised their defence and successfully beaten off
determined attempts to surround them. About 80 men were finally assembled
after the relief, and more joined the Battalion during the next few days,
but the casualties amounted to over 200, or more than 50 per cent, of the
total fighting strength. The officers killed were Capt. Brock, Lieut.
Richardson, and 2nd Lieuts. Greener, Payne and Newton, whilst many were
wounded. Capts. R.S. Johnson and H. Walton, commanding W and X Companies,
were subsequently awarded the Military Cross, and Corporal Betts the
D.C.M. and Croix de Guerre.

After burying as many bodies as could be recovered, the remnants of the
Battalion moved back to dug-outs in the Hindenburg Line on Telegraph
Hill, which were reached, after a roundabout march, at dawn.

From these dug-outs the Battalion returned next day to the caves at
Ronville, where it was re-organised and re-equipped ready for further
action. After four days' rest it again moved up, on the 21st April, this
time to dug-outs in the trench system known as "The Harp," the Q.M.
Stores remaining in Arras, where on the 22nd April Lieut. Lewis, acting
Q.M., was killed by a shell. In "The Harp" fighting stores were issued,
as the Battalion was to be in reserve for the attack on the 23rd April.
At zero hour, just at dawn on that date, St. George's Day, the
bombardment commenced, and the sight of the gun flashes against the red
sky as the Battalion moved forward will not readily be forgotten. After
two halts in sunken roads orders were received to occupy Niger trench
once more, but by this time the fighting had died down. Although
constantly on the alert, no further orders were received, and after two
nights there, the Battalion was relieved by the 14th Division and
returned to Telegraph Hill. One night was spent there, and the following
day, the 27th, it entrained at Arras for Mondicourt, from where it
marched to billets at Humbercourt, arriving about 3 a.m.

Here a few days were spent resting and training, and on the 1st May a
march was ordered to Berles-au-Bois, which was found to be a village of
ruins without inhabitants. After one night there the Battalion marched to
Riviere-Grosville, where the billets were quite good. Here Lieut. G.D.R.
Dobson went to hospital, and Lieut. R.B. Ainsworth became Adjutant. Two
or three days were spent there, and on the 3rd May a return was made to
Humbercourt. Here very pleasant days were spent in training, particularly
those on the range at Lucheux Forest, where elaborate field firing
schemes were carried out.

After about a fortnight there the Battalion was ordered up in reserve for
an attack by the 33rd Division and marched to Monchy-au-Bois, where the
accommodation was found to consist of an open field in which was a trench
line and much wire. Shelters were erected of ground sheets, and a few
tents obtained, and in these the men lived for five days, training being
continued. Their services were not required in the line, however, and
they marched back to Laherliere. Here a long stay was expected, but the
following day the journey was resumed to Souastre, where the Battalion
spent perhaps the most enjoyable month in its history. The men were
accommodated in a hut camp built round a large parade and sports ground.
As a result of easy training, plenty of recreation and fine weather, the
_moral_ of the men reached a very high level.


_Second Phase._

On the 15th June the Battalion returned to hold the line which it had
helped to gain in April. Leaving Souastre, it marched to support at a
camp near Henin-sur-Cojeul. There was practically no accommodation here
and ground sheets had to be used as shelters. The following day it
relieved the 10th Battalion Essex Regiment in the front line, just south
of the Cojeul River Valley, opposite Cherisy. After four days in this
sector it went out to Divisional reserve near Boisleux-au-Mont, where, on
the 27th June, it was visited by Col. the Hon. W.L. Vane, the Honorary
Colonel of the Battalion. A regular system of reliefs, which lasted for
three months, now commenced. Under this system the Battalion had two
periods of four days in the front line and one in support at Henin or
Neuville Vitasse, followed by eight days in reserve in camp near
Mercatel. The weather was good on the whole, and the trenches in
excellent condition. The enemy was only moderately active and there were
very few casualties. One of the Battalion areas in this sector was the
bank from which the attack started on the 14th April, and whilst there a
cross was erected to the memory of those who fell on that day.

As a result of their long stay here, the men became very familiar with
the whole area, and their experiences in the communication trenches,
Foster Avenue, Shikar Lane, Kestrel Avenue, Avenue Trench and others were
talked of for long after. Neither did they forget Lone Sap, from which
the enemy captured two of their comrades, Cable Trench, which was raided
by a party under 2nd Lieut. B.R. Leatherbarrow, Concrete Trench, the
Hindenburg Line, the caves in Marliere Village, which on one occasion
produced some interesting souvenirs left by the Boches, and many other
localities.

Apart from minor raids and counter-raids, the only outstanding incident
was the double raid of the 15th September. This operation was carried out
by the 9th Durham Light Infantry in the afternoon and repeated by the 8th
Durham Light Infantry in the evening. The Battalion was holding the
sector immediately on the right of the raiders, and its function was to
draw the enemy's attention and fire by the exhibition of dummy figures
and a dummy tank, which were later on view at the United Services Museum
in Whitehall. 2nd Lieut. Leatherbarrow was in charge of these dummies,
assisted by Sergeant P. Finn, who was awarded the Military Medal for his
work.

Other decorations earned during this period were Military Medals awarded
to Corporal Nesbitt and Private Allison of X Company for digging out a
man buried by shell fire, under very dangerous conditions.

Apart from good work in the line not only in patrolling, etc., but also
in improving the trenches till they were probably as good as any on the
whole front, considerable work was done on the erection of reserve camps
and horse standings. It was with some regret therefore that when at
Northumberland Lines, a very comfortable hut camp near Mercatel, the men
heard that they were to leave the area before the winter.

Early in October they marched to a canvas camp at Gomiecourt, just off
the main Bapaume road, and stayed there a short time training. The
arrival of representatives from Divisions in the "Salient," to instruct
in the methods adopted in the recent successful fighting there, left no
doubts as to the next move.




CHAPTER V.

RETURN TO THE "SALIENT."


About the end of October the Battalion marched one night to Bapaume,
where it entrained for Esquelbecq, north-west of Cassel. On detraining it
marched to billets at Eringhem for two nights. From there the march was
continued to Arneke, and there the men were told that a short stay would
be made, but early the next day orders were received to march to Proven,
just inside the Belgian frontier. On the road, however, fresh orders were
received, and the latter part of the journey, from Wormhoudt, was done by
train.

On arrival at Proven the Battalion occupied Piddington Camp on the
Poperinghe road, and incidentally, renewed the acquaintance of Belgian
mud. After one night there it moved for the next night to bivouacs known
as Sarawak Camp, in the woods north of Poperinghe. This will probably be
remembered as one of the dirtiest camps ever occupied. The last stage of
the journey eastwards was done by train from Proven to Boesinghe.
Arriving at the latter place in the morning, the men proceeded to Hulls
Farm Camp close by, on the Ypres road. This camp was occupied, however,
by the 4th Battalion Northumberland Fusiliers, which was moving up in the
afternoon to take part in an attack along the Ypres-Staden railway north
of Poelcapelle. Whilst lying in an open field waiting to occupy the camp
a visit was received from a squadron of Gotha bombing planes, and about
20 casualties were suffered. About 5 p.m. the camp was taken over. Here
the Battalion remained for three days, and had considerable experience of
Hun aeroplane bombs, fortunately without further casualties.
Exceptionally large working parties were demanded on each of the three
nights, and their experiences were perhaps worse than those of the tour
in the line which was to follow.

The third battle of Ypres was still in progress at this time, and
Passchendaele had not yet been taken. On the front between the railway
and Houthulst Forest, due north of Poelcapelle, the 149th Infantry
Brigade had attacked and advanced the line slightly. A further attack by
battalions of the 150th Brigade had partially failed, and about the
beginning of November the battalion moved up to occupy the left sector
of the line which was just inside the forest.

The journey up to the front line was far from pleasant. After crossing
the canal it consisted of a six-mile walk along a duck-board track across
one of the most devastated areas on the whole front, and to add to the
difficulties, the enemy's artillery was very active. Owing to lack of
roads for the transport, each man carried four days' rations. The
position consisted of a series of water-logged shell holes, which were
troubled considerably by low-flying aeroplanes. Battalion headquarters
were in a pill-box known as Egypt House, which received very assiduous
attention from the Boche gunners.

As it had been decided to make no further attack on this sector, though
an improved position was desired, the nights were spent in pushing
forward the posts as far as possible under cover of darkness. This was
done very successfully, and the battalion line was advanced during the
tour by 200 yards with very few casualties. Several decorations were
obtained for this work including the Bar to the Military Cross to Capt.
J.F.G. Aubin, M.C., commanding Y Company; and the Military Cross to Capt.
P.H.B. Lyon, commanding X Company. Sergts. Britton and Cruddace were
awarded Bars to the Military Medal.

After four days in the line, orders were received to move back to the
neighbourhood of the canal for two days and then return. In view of the
dangerous nature of reliefs, however, an alteration was asked for and
obtained, and the Battalion completed its tour of six days. On relief by
the 9th Battalion, it moved to Marsouin Farm Camp, near Pilkem, and spent
a very unpleasant morning under fire from high velocity shells.
Fortunately there were no casualties, and in the afternoon after the
relief it again moved to a camp at Elverdinghe for a few nights.

From there it entrained to Watten, and marched to billets at Houlle. Here
a very enjoyable month was spent. The maltery, where W and X Companies
were billeted, was one of the best billets they had been in for some
time. The great feature of this month's training was the sports. After
winning the Brigade Football and Cross Country Cups, the battalion won a
great triumph by obtaining the Divisional Cross Country Shield. This was
given to the unit which had the largest proportion of its ration strength
over the course in a certain time. The percentage obtained, 64 per cent.,
reflected the high state of efficiency to which the Battalion had now
attained. For this high standard, a large amount of credit was due to
R.S.M. G. Perry, D.C.M., who was unfortunately compelled by ill-health to
leave the Battalion at Houlle, and subsequently went home, after nearly
three years' active service. At his best on the parade ground and in his
lectures on the history of his Regiment, his influence continued to be
felt long after his departure, especially as he was succeeded by one whom
he had trained in soldiering, C.S.M. J. Taylor, of X Company.

During the first week in December the visit of officers to the line
disclosed the new sector to be taken over, which included Passchendaele
village, recently captured by the Canadians. A few days later the
Battalion entrained at Watten for Brandhoek, where it spent a short time
in a hut camp in Divisional reserve. From there it marched up through
Ypres to a camp just west of Potijze Wood, the scene of its first action
in April, 1915. After two days there a further move was made to the
forward area, into a number of shelters known as the Seine area. The next
step was to the front line, which consisted of a series of shell hole
positions on the Passchendaele Ridge. Not only were these uncomfortably
wet, but they were very difficult to locate in the dark, and many will
remember the trouble experienced in selecting the routes from the heap of
debris of what had once been the village church. Battalion Headquarters
were in a German pill-box known as Hamburg. Four days were spent in the
front line, and the Battalion then went to Divisional reserve again at
Brandhoek. After another tour in the line, it again moved to Brandhoek on
Christmas Day, and there completed the 24 days which entitled it to a
similar period of rest and training. The whole tour had been without any
exciting incidents, and casualties were small, in spite of persistent
shelling which made the duck-board tracks (H, K, R.A.M.C., tracks, etc.)
very unpleasant. The Christmas at Brandhoek was thoroughly enjoyed by the
men. On Boxing Day a Christmas dinner was provided, consisting of
turkeys, puddings, port wine, beer, etc., the orderly work being done by
the N.C.O.'s, and the carving by the officers. A visit was paid to the
Battalion here by the Corps Commander (Lieut-Gen. Sir Aylmer
Hunter-Weston), who congratulated the men on their appearance and bearing
immediately after an uncomfortable trench tour.

From Brandhoek the Battalion moved by 'bus to the Steenvoorde area,
where it was accommodated in very scattered billets for about ten days,
during which it was training and resting. It then entrained at Eecke for
Wizernes, near St. Omer, and marched to billets at Acquin. A stay of
about a fortnight there was occupied in the use of an exceptionally good
training area. A return was then made to the former front line, and
detraining again at Brandhoek, the Battalion went this time to another
hut camp known as Toronto. A similar system of reliefs as before was
carried out and the tour was divided up into short periods at Brandhoek,
St. Jean, and the Passchendaele sector. The line was somewhat quieter
than on the previous occasion. The route to and from the trenches was now
a new track called Judah track, a stretch of about three miles, which
reflected great credit on the Pioneer Battalions. From Brandhoek to St.
Jean and the return journeys were usually done by 'bus or light railway.
The tour ended with a night in the cellars in the town of Ypres, and from
there the Battalion marched to Ypres station and entrained to Wizernes
again, and so to billets in St. Martin-au-Laert, a suburb of St. Omer.
These billets were very good, and the advantage of being near a town was
fully appreciated. The story of the Battalion would not be complete
without a reference to the band, which, under the direction of Sergt.
T.O. Hann, M.M., had reached a very high standard, and was second to none
in the Division. With the buglers, whose smart appearance attracted much
attention, a selection of music was played in the town daily at
"Retreat." At this time, also, the Battalion concert party, the "Red
Diamonds," trained by Capt. Cardew and Capt. Lyon, provided several very
good entertainments.

It was now March, and the great enemy offensive on the Somme was
expected. After three weeks, the rest was abruptly terminated by orders
to entrain for Amiens, and about the second week in March the Battalion
marched off from St. Martin, and entrained at Arques. At this time it was
perhaps as efficient as any on the Western front, having had few
casualties during the past year, and also having had a large proportion
of rest and training. The officers knew their men both in and out of the
line, and it was confidently expected that in the coming active
operations great credit would be earned--but the overwhelming disasters
of the next three months were never anticipated.




CHAPTER VI.

THE SOMME, THE LYS AND THE AISNE.

_First Phase._


On detraining at Longeau, the Battalion marched to billets in Corbie,
where it stayed for one night. The following day it moved to the south of
the main Amiens-Peronne road to Marcelcave, and was then in Fifth Army
Reserve. Here, for about a fortnight the finishing touches were put to
the training. Included in the programme were the final stages of the Army
Rifle Association competition, in which No. 6 Platoon were defeated by a
Platoon of the 8th Durham Light Infantry in the final of the Brigade
contest. The officers were taken up to certain areas near Peronne, where
the Battalion might have to deliver counter-attacks in the event of a
German success. About the middle of March rumours of the impending attack
became more numerous, and the intelligence reports containing prisoners'
statements, etc., were not reassuring. At last, the date of the attack,
the 21st March, became fairly certain, and the drum fire heard in the
distance on that day was not unexpected.

Orders were issued during the morning for a "stand-to" in readiness to
move at very short notice, and about 3.45 p.m. instructions were received
to entrain at Gouzeaucourt. In less than an hour the Battalion was on the
march, the transport moving at the same time by road. After a short
journey it detrained in the pitch dark at Brie, where Lewis guns, etc.,
were placed on lorries, the orders being to move into billets near
Peronne. Whilst waiting for guides, however, a staff officer of the
Division arrived with fresh orders. Instead of proceeding to billets the
Battalion was to move straight into the fight. The Lewis guns were
removed from the lorries and replaced by blankets, and the Battalion
marched off in the direction of Tincourt. Just to the south of that
village and in front of Beuzy a reserve system of partially dug trenches,
known as the Green Line, was at once occupied. This line was the next
defence system behind the Brown Line, where the 66th and other Divisions
had been overwhelmed in the morning. On the morning of the 22nd March the
men watched with interest tanks moving up to counter-attack, but on the
whole things were quiet. In the afternoon the shelling became heavier,
and in the distance large massed bodies of the enemy could be seen. The
first contact occurred when a German scout was wounded and captured by a
patrol. Orders were then received that the line was to be held at all
costs. The apparent strength of the position, however, inspired
confidence, and it was not till towards dusk that the first serious
casualties occurred.

About 9 p.m. further orders were received to withdraw to a ridge in the
rear, in front of Cardigny. The movement was successfully carried out in
the dark, and at dawn the new position was reconnoitred and the
dispositions completed. At 7 a.m. the startling orders were received that
the Fifth Army was about to withdraw to the west of the Somme, and
detailed instructions as to the rearguard action were issued. The
Battalion was to cover the retirement of the 5th Durham Light Infantry,
which would in turn cover a further withdrawal. Accordingly the village
of Cardigny was occupied with a view to a temporary stand. No sooner was
this done than the enemy were on the outskirts and their snipers and
machine guns were giving considerable trouble. The position soon became
untenable, and permission was obtained to withdraw. This was done without
loss, largely owing to the courage of Y Company, who, under Capt. J.F.G.
Aubin, M.C., formed the rearguard to the Battalion.

The next line of defence was a trench system on a ridge near Le Mesnil,
which overlooked the Somme to the rear. Here things were quiet, though it
was known that the enemy was working round the flanks, through Peronne on
the left and Le Mesnil on the right. There was still a considerable
amount of transport on the east of the river, and it was expected that a
fight would follow to allow this to get away. After about two hours,
however, orders came to cross the river by the Eterpigny footbridge. A
route was taken across country towards this bridge, but there being no
gap through the marshes and undergrowth, the Battalion was forced to turn
aside through Le Mesnil village and, incidentally, to pass under a light
shrapnel barrage. It was not known that the village was in the enemy's
hands, but as soon as Z Company, who were leading, had reached the far
side, the remaining Companies were attacked. Again Y Company
distinguished itself, as did W and X Companies. They at once deployed,
and though driven towards the marshes, successfully checked the enemy and
eventually followed Z Company over the partially destroyed footbridge,
about 300 yards long, with the loss of only two officers, Lieut. D.F.
Charlton (killed) and 2nd Lieut. A. Dobson (prisoner), and about 20 men.
For his action Capt. J.F.G. Aubin, M.C., was awarded the D.S.O.

When all the Companies had been assembled on the west of the river a line
was formed, along with the remnants of another Division, overlooking the
marshes. By this time the day's fighting had died down, and things
remained fairly quiet throughout the night.

Early on the following morning, the 24th March, orders were received to
withdraw the Battalion to Foucaucourt. The Companies were therefore
assembled on the road and marched back by the main Amiens-Peronne road to
an old prisoners of war camp near Foucaucourt village. Further orders
awaited them there to be ready to move up again, and in about two hours
they were again marching eastwards. About 8 p.m. they were again in
position, in reserve, in a line north-east of Estrees.

The next morning the Battalion was hurriedly assembled and moved to
Genermont, south of the main road, coming under the orders of the General
Commanding the 8th Division. The situation here appeared to be very
serious, as the enemy was advancing rapidly. Without any very definite
orders the Battalion moved in artillery formation towards Marchelepot,
but before reaching it the 8th Division, who were holding the line, had
retired to the railway behind the village. Gaps along the line of the
railway were accordingly filled by W and Z Companies, but it soon became
necessary to put in Y Company also. No further developments occurred till
about 5 p.m., when Y Company on the right found that the 24th Division on
their right was withdrawing to Chaulnes ridge. A defensive flank was
formed, and X Company moved to the north-east of Hyencourt to deliver a
counter-attack if necessary. For a couple of hours the prospect looked
very black, but the enemy did not press his advantage, and about 7 p.m.
orders were received to withdraw the Battalion to a line of old trenches
south-east of Pressoire. Here a quiet night was spent, with only a few
casualties from shell fire.

About 9 a.m. the next day the enemy renewed his attacks and a hurried
withdrawal of the whole of the 8th Division was ordered. The instructions
which reached the Battalion were somewhat confused, but along with the
Battalions of the 24th Infantry Brigade they moved from the trenches in
artillery formation, and passing through the ruins of Lihons--which was
under observation, and consequently was heavily shelled as the men passed
through it--continued the withdrawal almost to Rosieres. About a mile
south-east of that village a line was formed, but no further attack took
place. In this position the Battalion had the 2nd Northants on its left
and a Labour Battalion on its right.

At 9.30 a.m. the next day (the 27th) the Labour Battalion withdrew and
forced the two forward Companies of the Battalion to do the same. A
counter-attack was delivered, however, and the line restored by the end
of the day. The enemy renewed his attacks on the following morning, and
the 24th Division on the right retired to Warvillers. Y Company then
moved to Vrely to cover the withdrawal of the remainder of the Battalion
to a line near Caix. It was during these operations that Lieut.-Col. F.W.
Robson, D.S.O., was killed. He had commanded the Battalion for nearly a
year, and could truly claim that he had realised his ambition of making
it one of the finest in France. The best type of the Territorial officer,
his death was a personal loss to every officer and man who served under
him. The same day Capt. H. Walton, M.C., commanding Z Company, was also
killed.

The three Companies in the Caix valley occupied a wired trench facing
Rosieres, and were told that the troops in front would retire and occupy
the line with them. Instead, however, these troops passed through them,
and the whole line fell back to the wood south-east of Caix. Here the
remains of the Battalion were re-organised, and going forward again,
re-occupied the Caix line. For this action Capt. G.E. Cardew and 2nd
Lieut. R. Wilson received the Military Cross.

It was found impossible to hold the line much longer, and about 4 p.m.
the Battalion withdrew along the Beaucourt road and received verbal
instructions to move to Moreuil. The cooks, storemen, buglers, etc., who
had been left behind when the Battalion had moved up on the 21st March,
and had since been in action as part of a composite battalion, had been
collected by Major T.B. Heslop, and with some stragglers were now at
Ailly-sur-Noye. These were ordered up to the line on the 29th and moved
to Demuin Wood, where they arrived after having marched 30 kilometres
over congested roads during the previous 20 hours. They remained in the
area for several days, and had a very strenuous time with several
casualties. After this party had moved up, stragglers were collected by
Capt. Aubin at Boves, and these, with the transport, moved by stages to
Saleux, passing large numbers of French troops moving up to check the
advance. At Saleux the remnants of the Division, except the details who
were still in the line, were re-organised in case of emergency, and
eventually entrained to Rue and marched to billets at Vron. Here Major
Heslop and his party rejoined. These billets were not far from the coast,
and it was expected that after the strenuous fortnight there would be a
short rest. This was not to be, however, but, as an alternative, rumour
suggested a tour of duty in an easy part of the line. This appeared to be
confirmed when after two days the Battalion moved by 'bus to the Bethune
area.


_Second Phase._

On debussing just west of Bethune, the Battalion marched through the town
to billets at Beuvry, which was about four miles behind one of the
quietest sectors on the British front. Here a draft of about 400 men
arrived, and preparations were being made for a relief of the 55th
Division near La Bassee. These arrangements, however, were not carried
out, and after a few days the Battalion moved by a short railway journey
to Estaires, where it occupied billets in the town, all the
officers--except the Commanding Officer, Adjutant, Transport Officer and
Capt. Cardew--being in one billet, the Convent. At this time Estaires,
though a very short distance behind the line, was a flourishing town.

After a quiet day and night, alarming rumours of the second German
offensive spread, and the next night there was a "stand-to." The day
following, the officers and a few N.C.O.'s reconnoitred a line of posts
in support which were to be occupied in the event of an attack, and in
the evening instructions were received for a relief of the Portuguese
Division, which was holding the line, the relief to take place the night
after (9th April).

On the night of the 8th April, there was another "stand-to," and at 4
a.m. the threatened attack commenced with a heavy bombardment of the
town. One of the first shells burst in the Convent, and all the occupants
with two exceptions became casualties. The men, however, got out of their
billets in safety, and the highest praise is due to the N.C.O.'s, who
gave valuable assistance to the three surviving Company Officers in
getting the Battalion into its battle positions in the Cockshy, Marais
East and West, and Drumiez posts. Amongst the officers killed in the
Convent were Capt. G. Kirkhouse, Capt. J.F.G. Aubin, D.S.O., M.C., and
Lieut. C.L. Tyerman, all of whom had seen much service with the
Battalion.

The morning was misty, and beyond the fact that the Portuguese were being
driven back in confusion, nothing definite could be ascertained as to the
situation. The first reports which reached the Commanding Officer (Major
T.B. Heslop) were to the effect that three Companies (W, X and Z) had
been completely overwhelmed, and that two of his three Company Officers,
Capt. Cardew (killed) and 2nd Lieut. Railton (prisoner) were casualties.
The remainder of the Battalion, however, under Lieut. A.N. Brown, held
its ground till the afternoon, when it was forced to withdraw to the
railway near La Gorgue.

At dusk, orders were received to cross the river Lawe and to hold the
Western bank. This withdrawal was successful, and the opportunity was
taken to reorganise the Battalion, which was divided into two companies,
one under Lieut. Brown, with Sergt. P. Finn, M.M., and Sergt. Field; and
the other under C.S.M. T. Sordy, M.C., with Sergts. Bell and Cooper. The
strength of the Battalion was now barely 100, and when touch had been
established on the flanks it was found that it was holding a frontage of
about 2,000 yards.

Assistance was therefore asked for, and a company of the Corps Cyclists
and a company of the 7th Durham Light Infantry were attached. The latter
were sent to fill a gap on the right flank between the Battalion and a
Battalion of the Black Watch (51st Division). It was now about 10 a.m. on
the 10th April, and the enemy had renewed his attack and gained a footing
in Lestrem. From this, however, he was driven by the 7th Durham Light
Infantry company, but further to the south he had pressed back the
Highlanders.

Orders were then received to withdraw in a N.W. direction to the line of
the Lys canal, the company of 7th Durham Light Infantry being moved over
to the left flank to fill a gap which had been caused by the readjustment
of their line by the 5th Durham Light Infantry. Meanwhile, the 8th Durham
Light Infantry, which was in rear, was ordered up to occupy the line
between the right flank of the Battalion and the 51st Division.

The new position was being fairly well held when it was reported that the
5th Durham Light Infantry on the left had been forced to retire. Both
flanks being now uncertain, the Battalion was withdrawn towards Merville,
under very heavy machine-gun fire. A stand was made on the outskirts of
the town, but before night the fighting was taking place in the streets
of the town.

The next day the retirement continued towards the Foret de Nieppe, and a
line was taken up near Le Sart. By this time the strength of the
Battalion was very small, and with the remnants of the 8th Durham Light
Infantry, a composite battalion was formed under Lieut.-Col. P. Kirkup,
M.C. Eventually, all were withdrawn from the fighting, and moved to the
grounds of La Motte Chateau, where they came under very heavy shell fire
for a short time. For a few days longer they remained on the western edge
of the Forest and provided working parties on new trenches in the forest
itself on a line in front of the Rue des Morts. At the end of this time
they were taken out to billets at Cohem, near Wittes, where they remained
for about a week reorganising and cleaning. Here Lieut.-Col. F. Walton,
M.C., returned and took over command of the Battalion from Major T.B.
Heslop, who was subsequently awarded the D.S.O. for his services whilst
in command. Other honours gained in the Lys battle were the Military
Cross by Lieut. A.N. Brown, the bar to the Military Cross by C.S.M. T.
Sordy, M.C., the D.C.M. by Sergt. P. Finn, and Military Medals by Sergts.
Bell and Cooper.

Having now shared in two great battles within a month, a rest was
confidently expected, and very soon orders were received to move by 'bus
to Lapugnoy, near Bethune, to entrain for an unknown destination, though
rumour suggested somewhere near Paris.


_Third Phase._

After a twenty-four hours' journey, the Battalion detrained at Serzy, and
marched to a hut camp at Arcis-le-Ponsart. Maps were scarce, but it was
found that this village was somewhere east of Soissons, and that the
nearest part of the line was the famous Chemin des Dames. The men of the
Division were the first British troops to visit these parts, and the
limited knowledge of the French language which they had found sufficient
in Belgium and the North was found to be useless. Other Divisions were
expected to come South, but for a short time the 50th occupied the unique
position of being the only British troops in the Sixth French Army.

In the camp at Arcis-le-Ponsart were all the battalions of the 151st
Brigade, and the ceremony of Brigade guard mounting was revived. This
took place daily in the centre of the village with the massed buglers and
bands. On the occasion of a visit of the French Army Commander to
Divisional Headquarters, a guard was provided at very short notice by the
Battalion, and was complimented on its smart appearance and bearing. It
may be mentioned that the bugler of this guard carried the silver bugle
presented to the Battalion in 1861 by the ladies of Coundon.

It was generally understood that the tour on this sector, which was one
of the quietest in the line, was to be a period of rest and training
prior to a return to the fighting further north. Accordingly, the days at
Arcis were devoted to training, mostly in field work. The men whose
training was not up to standard, including a certain number who had
recently been transferred from the Inland Water Transport section of the
Royal Engineers, were detached for separate instruction, and eventually
went to form a Divisional School.

After about three weeks' training, during which an epidemic of influenza
visited the camp, the Battalion marched to billets in Glennes, a small
village near the Aisne. Here final preparations were made for the line,
and after a few days it moved up to relieve a battalion of the 73rd
French Infantry Regiment in the woods immediately east of the Craonne
Plateau.

The relief was very interesting. Arriving in the woods in the dark, the
men were led by French guides by bewildering tracks and trenches to the
front line. When daylight came, the support companies found themselves
amidst green trees, very different surroundings from those they had
previously known as the forward area. To add to the general comfort there
were practically no indications that the war was still on. The shelling
consisted at the most of half-a-dozen explosions daily, and generally
there was "nothing doing." The rations came up to Battalion Headquarters
by train, and the carrying parties lost their terrors.

After four days the Battalion moved out to the support area, which
consisted of billets in the deserted village of Chaudardes. Here concerts
were organised, there was bathing in the Aisne Canal, the band played
selections in the centre of the village, and it was even possible to do a
certain amount of training when the enemy's observation balloons were not
up.

The four days in support being finished, a return was made to the line,
this time on the right sub-sector, with the 8th Durham Light Infantry on
the left. The conditions were still good, and everything pointed to this
being a rest sector for the enemy also.

Nothing unusual occurred till the evening of the 26th May, when a message
was received to the effect that a prisoner had stated that after a
three-hours' bombardment the enemy was going to attack at 4 a.m. on the
27th. Observers also reported that towards dusk the roads behind the
enemy's line were black with troops. The situation appeared to be so
improbable that it was difficult to regard it as serious. The necessary
precautions were taken, however; reserves of ammunition were sent
forward, surplus personnel were sent down to the transport lines, and
everybody warned to be on the alert.

Promptly at 1 a.m. on the 27th the barrage came down, and it was such as
had never been experienced by the Battalion before. The enemy flooded the
whole area to a depth of about 3,000 yards with high explosive, shrapnel,
and gas shells. Even the stores and transport, as was afterwards
disclosed, were shelled out of Muscourt, which was many miles back, south
of the Aisne.

Communication with the forward companies was maintained by telephone, and
an occasional runner, and at 4.50 a.m. a message was received at
Headquarters from the front line stating that the enemy had attacked in
force and had overwhelmed the forward posts. An enemy tank was also
reported to be tearing up the wire. The next information came from Capt.
Lyon who, finding his Company (X) had been wiped out, reported at
Battalion Headquarters that the enemy was advancing rapidly. The reserve
company (Z), under Capt. R. Green, M.C., were in position close to
Headquarters, and they reported the enemy on top of them, with machine
guns behind their right flank and bombers behind their left.

It was then decided to move Headquarters further to the rear, and it was
afterwards discovered that at this time parties of the enemy were
actually well in rear of the position.

After moving down the communication trench for about 500 yards,
Lieut.-Col. Walton, with the Adjutant and Signalling Officer, and Capt.
Lyon, collected all the available men, about forty of the Battalion, and
searched for the best place to make a stand. They were still under the
barrage, and the smoke made matters very difficult. Presently the 5th
Durham Light Infantry came up the trench to take up an allotted position,
which they found to be already taken by the enemy. They moved off to the
right of the main trench, however, and the forty men under Capt. Lyon
joined them.

A message was then received by the Commanding Officer telling him to
report at Brigade Headquarters. On arrival, however, the dug-outs were
found to be unoccupied. Enemy machine guns were now firing from the rear,
and it was realised that apart from about half-a-dozen orderlies who
formed the remains of the Headquarters personnel, the Battalion had been
practically annihilated.

In his search for the Brigadier, who, it afterwards transpired, had been
killed, Lieut.-Col. Walton arrived at the bridge at Concevreux. Here he
found a few men of the 8th Durham Light Infantry and the 5th
Northumberland Fusiliers, with whom the bridge was held till the
afternoon. Unfortunately, none of the Battalion joined this party from
the front, and for the next two or three days the two Commanding Officers
of the 6th and 8th Durham Light Infantry found themselves in command of
various bodies of men of other battalions.

Meanwhile those of the Battalion who were at the transport lines when the
battle started had been collected on the road from Muscourt to Romain
under Major T.B. Heslop, D.S.O., and placed under the orders of the
G.O.C. 74th Brigade. Whilst on the road they could see enemy troops and
guns on the far side of the Aisne valley and later saw these guns being
fired point blank at them. Various positions were taken up during the
day, the party being in close contact with the enemy and suffering many
casualties. On the 29th these details, which had rejoined the transport,
were ordered to move from Villers Argon to Baslieux-sous-Chatillon, but
before reaching the latter place, every available man was again collected
to form part of a Company under Major Heslop, representing the remnants
of the 151st Brigade in a Battalion to which each Brigade of the Division
contributed one Company. After a night in Quisles Chateau this Battalion
moved towards Ville-en-Tardenois to support the 74th Brigade. The enemy's
position was uncertain and the 151st Brigade Company were ordered to act
as advance guard and to seize the high ground north and east of Romigny.
This was done, but the enemy attacked in force, with the result that the
Company were driven to a position south of the village which they held
till reinforcements arrived.

Eventually, the remnants of the Division, except the Composite Battalion,
were assembled at Vert-la-Gravelle, south of the Marne, when a Composite
Brigade was formed, consisting of a weak Battalion from each of the
original Brigades. This Brigade, after about a week spent in
reorganisation, moved up to Chaumuzy and the Bois de Courton, where it
did good work in a counter-attack on the Bligny ridge. Meanwhile, the
transport and stores moved back to Broyes, near Sezanne, where they were
eventually joined by the members of the Composite Battalion. For actions
during the whole of the operations, the Military Cross was awarded to
Capt. A.B. Hare, Lieut. T. Rushworth, 2nd Lieut. J. Woodhead, and R.S.M.
J. Taylor. The last named was wounded and was succeeded by C.S.M. T.
Sordy, M.C. The Military Medal was awarded to Sergt. Malone, L.-Cpl.
Ripley and Pte. Dinsley, and the French Croix de Guerre to Corpl. Nield.

At Broyes still another Composite Battalion was formed from the Brigade
in case of emergency, and though orders were received to proceed into the
line, they were cancelled.

Then came the news that owing to the military demands, the 50th Division
was to be broken up. Nothing definite, however, could be ascertained, and
early in June the remnants entrained at Sezanne for the Abbeville area.
On detraining at Longpre they marched to billets at Caumont, where orders
were received that the battalions were to be reduced to the strength of
Training Cadres (10 officers and 50 other ranks). After a few days they
marched to Warcheville, from where the surplus men (about 120) were sent
to the Base. It may be mentioned that the total casualties in the
Battalion during the months of March, April and May had been 60 officers
and over 1,200 other ranks.

In a few more days the Battalion, now a Training Cadre, moved by 'bus to
a camp just outside Dieppe, and there a month was spent awaiting further
orders. The time was spent in the training of the N.C.O.'s who were to be
instructors on special subjects, and in visits to the town. The band had
been lent to the 50th Division, which had been filled up by new
battalions from Salonica and was able to play selections in the camp, and
on one occasion in the town.

At the end of the month's stay, about the middle of August, it was
announced that the battalions were not to be disbanded, but retained for
training purposes. A few days later the Cadres of the 5th, 6th and 8th
Durham Light Infantry moved by train to Rouen, where they were to build a
camp and start a new institution, that of instructing reinforcement
officers at the Base in tactical schemes. The officers of the Cadres
therefore began the latter work, whilst the N.C.O.'s and men worked, or
superintended the work on the new camp. In this somewhat monotonous way
two months dragged on, during which, in the temporary absence on sick
leave of Lieut.-Col. Walton, Lieut.-Col. Montgomerie, M.C., of the
Norfolk Regiment, was in command. The band still remained with the
Battalion and after the Armistice was granted permission to play on the
Joan of Arc statue, being the first British band to do so. They also had
the unique experience of playing "Blaydon Races" in Rouen Cathedral.

About the middle of October came rumours of the splitting up of the
Cadres, and on the 18th October Lieut.-Col. Walton was ordered to proceed
to take command of the 18th Durham Light Infantry. He was succeeded by
Lieut.-Col. A.L. MacMillan of the Seaforth Highlanders, who commanded,
however, for only a few days, for on the 6th November the Battalion was
demobilised, and within a few days the personnel had been scattered to
various battalions all over France.

So within a few days of the Armistice, ended the career of the 6th Durham
Light Infantry in France, after three and a half years of good work which
had made for it, right up to the end, a reputation which bore not a
single stain, and which on more than one occasion had caused it to be
held up as an example of the efficiency of the Territorial Force to which
it had the great honour to belong.




APPENDICES.


APPENDIX I.

OFFICERS KILLED OR DIED.

Major S.E. Badcock                   }
Capt. T.J. Monkhouse                 }26th April, 1915.
2nd Lieut. C.S. Kynoch               }
2nd Lieut. J.M. Hare                  24th May, 1915.
2nd Lieut. G.C. Robertson             21st July, 1915.
2nd Lieut. L.M. Peberdy               22nd Dec., 1915.
2nd Lieut. L. Meyer                   11th June, 1916.
2nd Lieut. R.J. Harris                16th June, 1916.
2nd Lieut. J.C. Miller                27th July, 1916.
2nd Lieut. H.C. Annett                15th Sept., 1916.
2nd Lieut. N.F. Charlton              18th Sept., 1916.
2nd Lieut. W. Little                  1st Oct., 1916.
2nd Lieut. D.R. Peacock               2nd Oct., 1916.
2nd Lieut. C.H.B. Catford[A]          5th Oct., 1916.
2nd Lieut. G.W. Robson               }
2nd Lieut. A.S. Ritson               }
2nd Lieut. S. Robson                 }5th Nov., 1916.
2nd Lieut. T.F. Applegarth           }
2nd Lieut. K.B. Stuart               }
2nd Lieut. H. Fell                   }
Major W.D. Carswell Hunt, M.C.[B]     5th April, 1917.
Capt. A.L. Brock                     }
Lieut. W.H. Richardson               }
2nd Lieut. J.W. Payne                }14th April, 1917.
2nd Lieut. H. Greener                }
2nd Lieut. W.L. Newton               }
2nd Lieut. D.D.R. Lewis[A]            22nd April, 1917.
Lieut. D.F. Charlton                  24th March, 1918.
2nd Lieut. T. Sharkey                }
2nd Lieut. A.R. Burn                 }26th March, 1918.
Capt. H. Walton, M.C.                }
Lieut. T.J. Burton[A]                }27th March, 1918.
Lieut.-Col. F.W. Robson, D.S.O.      }
2nd Lieut. A.A. Horwood               28th March, 1918.
Capt. J.F.G. Aubin, D.S.O., M.C.     }
Capt. G.E. Cardew, M.C.              }
Capt. G. Kirkhouse                   }
Capt. Mackenzie (R.A.M.C.)[A]        }9th April, 1918.
Lieut. C.L. Tyerman                  }
Lieut. D.B. Scott                    }
2nd Lieut. R.A. Wilson, M.C.         }
2nd Lieut. F. Shirtliffe             }
Capt. W.B. Hansell                   }27th May, 1918.
Capt. A.N. Brown, M.C.               }
2nd Lieut. J.C. Garritt.              30th May, 1918.

[Footnote A: Died of wounds.]

[Footnote B: Died.]


APPENDIX II.

(_The ranks shown are the highest held by the respective officers during
their service in France_.)

COMMANDING OFFICERS.

Lieut.-Col. H.C. Watson               19th April-28th April, 1915.
Lieut.-Col. J.W. Jeffreys, D.S.O.     28th April-19th May, 1915.
Major W.E. Taylor (York and           19th May-24th May, 1915.
  Lancaster Regt.).
Lieut.-Col. J.W. Jeffreys, D.S.O.     24th May-11th Aug., 1915.[C]
Brig.-Gen. O.C. Borrett, C.M.G.,      11th Aug.-15th Aug., 1915.
  D.S.O. (King's Own Regt.).
Lieut.-Col. J.W. Jeffreys, D.S.O.     15th Aug.-19th Dec., 1915.
Brig.-Gen. G.A. Stevens, C.M.G.,      19th Dec., 1915-27th April, 1916.
  D.S.O. (Royal Fusiliers).
Lieut.-Col. J.W. Jeffreys, D.S.O.     27th April,-23rd Sept., 1916.
Major G.E. Wilkinson, M.C.            23rd Sept.-1st Oct., 1916.
  (Northumberland Fusiliers).
Brig.-Gen. R.B. Bradford, V.C.,       1st Oct.-2nd Oct., 1916.
  M.C.
Lieut.-Col. A. Ebsworth, M.C.,        2nd Oct.-6th Nov., 1916.
  D.C.M. (East Lancashire Regt.).
Lieut.-Col. H.M. Allen, C.M.G.,       6th Nov., 1916-Feb., 1917.
  D.S.O. (Black Watch).
Lieut.-Col. J.W. Jeffreys, D.S.O.     Feb.-25th March, 1917.
(During this period the command was held for short intervals by
Lieut.-Col. W.B. Little, D.S.O., M.C. (East Lancashire Regt.), and
Lieut.-Col. E. Crouch, D.S.O., D.C.M. during the temporary absence in
hospital of Lieut.-Col. Jeffreys.)
Major W.D. Carswell Hunt. M.C.        25th March-5th April, 1917.
Lieut.-Col. A. Ebsworth, M.C.,        5th April-11th April, 1917.
  D.C.M.
Lieut.-Col. F.W. Robson, D.S.O.,      11th April, 1917-27th Mar., 1918.
  (Yorkshire Regt.).
Lieut.-Col. T.B. Heslop, D.S.O.       27th March-April, 1918.
Lieut.-Col. F. Walton, M.C.           April-18th Oct., 1918.
(During this period the command was held for a few days by Lieut.-Col.
E.W. Montgomerie, M.C. (Norfolk Regt.), during the temporary absence of
Lieut.-Col. Walton.)
Lieut.-Col. A.L. MacMillan (Seaforth  18th Oct.-6th Nov., 1918.
  Highlanders).


ADJUTANTS.

Lieut.-Col. J.W. Jeffreys, D.S.O.     19th April-28th April, 1915.
Lieut. R.V. Hare                      28th April-19th May, 1915.
Lieut.-Col. J.W. Jeffreys, D.S.O.     19th May-24th May, 1915.
Capt. P.H.B. Lyon, M.C.               24th May-20th Dec., 1915.[C]
Brig.-Gen. R.B. Bradford, V.C.,       20th Dec.-31st Dec., 1915.
  M.C.
Lieut. C.E.G. Yaldwyn                 31st Dec., 1915-May, 1916.
Capt. G. Kirkhouse                    May-20th Sept., 1916.
Lieut.-Col. A. Ebsworth, M.C.,        20th Sept.-2nd Oct., 1916
  D.C.M.
Capt. G. Kirkhouse                    2nd Oct.-10th Nov., 1916.
Lieut. T.J. Arnott (Gordon            10th Nov., 1916-5th April, 1917.
  Highlanders)
Major G.D.R. Dobson, M.C.             5th April-3rd May, 1917.
Capt. R.B. Ainsworth, M.C.            3rd May, 1917-6th Nov., 1918.


QUARTERMASTER.

Capt. W.M. Hope, M.C.                 19th April, 1915-6th Nov., 1918.
(With short interval when wounded in 1918.)


TRANSPORT OFFICER.

Lieut. H.T. Bircham, M.C.             19th April, 1915-June, 1918.[C]

[Footnote C: With interval from 8th June-11th Aug., 1915 during the
amalgamation of the 6th and 8th Battalions.]


APPENDIX III

(_The ranks shown are the highest held by the respective officers during
their service in France_.)

DECORATIONS WON BY OFFICERS SERVING WITH THE BATTALION.

D.S.O.

Lieut.-Col. J.W. Jeffreys.
Lieut.-Col. T.B. Heslop.
Capt. J.F.G. Aubin.

M.C. & BAR.
Capt. J.F.G. Aubin.

M.C.

Lieut.-Col. F. Walton.
Capt. T. Welch.
Capt. R.H. Wharrier.
Capt. H. Walton
Capt. R.S. Johnson.
Capt. R.B. Ainsworth.
Capt. P.H.B. Lyon
Capt. W.M. Hope
Capt. G.E. Cardew.
Capt. A.N. Brown.
Capt. T. Rushworth.
Capt. A.B. Hare.
Lieut. W.P. Gill.
Lieut. G.R. Angus.
Lieut. B.J. Harvey.
Lieut. H.T. Bircham.
2nd Lieut. R.A. Wilson.
2nd Lieut. J. Woodhead.

The V.C. was won by Brig.-Genl. R.B. Bradford whilst in command of the
6th and 9th Battalions.




THE ARDEN PRESS

[Illustration]

W.H. SMITH & SON
STAMFORD STREET
LONDON: S.E.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Story of the 6th Battalion, The
Durham Light Infantry, by Unknown

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE STORY OF THE 6TH ***

***** This file should be named 16660.txt or 16660.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/6/6/6/16660/

Produced by Irma Spehar, Christine D and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net.
Produced from page images provided by Internet
Archive/Canadian Libraries


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

*** END: FULL LICENSE ***

