The Project Gutenberg eBook, Under Sealed Orders, by H. A. Cody


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net





Title: Under Sealed Orders


Author: H. A. Cody



Release Date: September 17, 2005  [eBook #16714]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK UNDER SEALED ORDERS***


E-text prepared by Al Haines



UNDER SEALED ORDERS

by

H. A. CODY

Author of
The Frontiersman, The Long Patrol, The Chief of the Ranges, etc.

NEW YORK
GROSSET & DUNLAP
PUBLISHERS
GEORGE H. DORAN COMPANY

1917







To all "Spuds," successful or unsuccessful; to all "Fools," wise or
unwise; and to all of "The Devil's Poor," not forgetting authors, this
book is sympathetically dedicated.







CONTENTS


CHAPTER

      I.  THE LURE OF FALLING WATER
     II.  TO THE LOWEST BIDDER
    III.  ONE, AT LEAST, RINGS TRUE
     IV.  A LITTLE CABIN
      V.  UNMASKED
     VI.  OUT OF BONDAGE
    VII.  AT THE CLOSE OF A DAY
   VIII.  THE SHADOW OF MYSTERY
     IX.  UNITED FORCES
      X.  WHEN DREAMS COME TRUE
     XI.  CURIOSITY AND ANXIETY
    XII.  PYRAMID ROCK
   XIII.  THE DISTURBING LETTER
    XIV.  SUBTLE INFLUENCE
     XV.  THE "CUT OFF"
    XVI.  CHRISTMAS EVE
   XVII.  THE NIGHT SUMMONS
  XVIII.  THE WILD NOR'EASTER
    XIX.  DEVELOPMENTS
     XX.  BUSINESS DETAILS
    XXI.  HARNESSED POWER
   XXII.  IN THE PATH OF DESTRUCTION
  XXIII.  RESCUED
   XXIV.  GATHERING CLOUDS
    XXV.  MYSTERY
   XXVI.  UNDER SUSPICION
  XXVII.  IN THE TOILS
 XXVIII.  LIGHT BREAKS
   XXIX.  LOIS GOES TO THE CITY
    XXX.  A STRANGE COMMISSION
   XXXI.  PAPER NUMBER TWO
  XXXII.  THE TABLES TURNED
 XXXIII.  THE REAL HAVEN




UNDER SEALED ORDERS


CHAPTER I

THE LURE OF FALLING WATER

It was evening and a late April wind was whipping down the valley.  It
swayed the tops of the tall pine and spruce trees as they shouldered up
from the swift brook below.  It tossed into driving spray the water of
Break Neck Falls where it leaped one hundred feet below with a
thundering roar and swirl.  It tossed as well the thin grey hair, long
beard, and thread-bare clothes of an old man standing upon a large rock
which towered high above the stream.

The entire scene was wild and made weird by the approach of night.  But
the old man did not seem to notice anything except the falling of the
waters.  His eyes glowed with an intense light as he kept them fixed
upon the leaping and swirling columns below.  His face was like the
face of a lover turned toward the object of his affection.

For some time the man stood there drinking in the scene before him.
Then he took a step forward which brought him perilously near the edge
of the steep rock.  His lips moved though no sound could be heard for
the tumult of the falls which was rending the air.  What connection had
such a man with his surroundings?  No boor or clown was he, for the
simple dignity of face and manner marked him as one of Nature's true
gentlemen.

It was almost dark when he at last reluctantly left the rock and
entered the thick woods where a trail led away from the falls.  Along
this he moved with the unerring instinct of one who had travelled it
often and was sure of his bearings.  But ever and anon he paused to
listen to the sound of the falling waters which followed him like the
voice of a loved one urging him to return.

"Yes, you want me," he at length cried, as he once more paused.  "I
hear your voice calling, and I know its meaning.  Others need you, too,
but they do not know it.  You have been calling to them for years, but
they have not understood your language.  It was left for me to listen
and take heed.  They will some day, and then you will show your power.
I can see what you will do, beautiful falls, and the changes which will
come to this fair land when your luring voice is heeded."

He stood for awhile as if entranced after uttering these mystic words.
Then he continued on his way and night wrapped more closely about him
her dark mantle.  He had to walk very cautiously now for the trail was
rough, and there were sharp stones and roots ready to strike his feet
and trip him up.

At length the trail ended and he reached the smooth surface of the
broad highway.  Along this he sped with the quick elastic step of one
who has seen a vision.  The fire of a great idea was burning fiercely
within him which caused him to take no heed to his surroundings.

He had not gone far, however, ere some strong impulse caused him to
pause again and listen to that fascinating sound of falling waters far
off in the distance.  It was on an elevation in the road where he
stopped, and here the shadows which enwrapped the forest were not so
heavy.  The lingering light of departing day was still in the west and
touched this part of the highway with its faint glow.  It brought out
into clear relief the silhouette of the old man as he stood there with
his right hand placed to his ear so as not to miss the least sound
drifting down the valley.

So intent was he upon what he heard that he did not notice the sounds
of approaching footsteps, so when a man stopped a few yards away and
watched him curiously, he was completely unaware of his presence.
"Ring on, sweet waters," he cried.  "Your voice follows me no matter
how far I go.  I alone can understand your language, and know what you
are saying.  All are deaf but me.  They hear but do not know your
meaning."  He ceased, and again listened for a few seconds.

A strange half-mocking laugh startled him, and caused him to look
quickly around.  Seeing that he was observed, he was about to hurry
away, when a man stepped forward.

"Pardon me," he began.  "I did not mean to offend you.  But your words
seem so strange, that I could not help laughing."

"And were you listening to the voice?" the old man eagerly asked.  "Do
the falling waters speak to you as they do to me?  Is that why you are
here?"

"Yes, I hear them," was the reply.  "But they do not bring any special
message to my mind."

"And they do not tell you of power, of the wonderful things they are
ready and willing to do when men will heed what they are saying?"

"No, I can't say that they do.  They make a noise up there among the
trees, but I do not know what they are saying."

"Strange, strange," and the old man placed his hand to his forehead.
"You are like all the rest, then.  You hear but you do not understand."

"What do you hear?" the newcomer asked, thinking that he was talking to
a weak-minded creature.

"I hear great things, which will be for the welfare of the whole
community.  The waters tell me what they will do.  They will make life
worth living.  They will give light and power to the people all along
the river and revolutionise their daily tasks.  Instead of hard labour
by the sweat of the brow, the waters will do the work.  People will be
happy, and have time for the beautiful things of life.  Grinding toil
and sorrow will be banished forever."

"Umph!  So that is what you hear, eh?  What is the good of hearing such
a voice, if you have no power to make it come true?"

"But the people will hear and understand," the old man insisted.  "I am
telling them about it."

"Yes, I know you are, and they think you are a fool for your efforts.
They laugh at you, and call you crazy."

"But they will come to see that I am right.  They, too, will hear the
voice, and then they will not be able to resist its pleadings."

"If you had the money they would listen to you, for that is the only
voice people will heed to-day.  If you came here with an abundance of
gold, people would hear anything you asked them to in the falls up
yonder.  But because you are poor, like myself, your ideas will have no
more weight with them than the lightest feather.  Back your visions
with money and people will crowd around you, and you will be heeded.
But try to get along without money, and, bah! you are a fool."

Scarcely had these words left his lips ere a raucous honk up the road
startled him.  Then an auto with blazing lights leaped out of the
night.  The old man was standing right in its way, unconscious of his
danger.  Almost instinctively two strong hands clutched him and hurled
him into the ditch as the car swept past.  Shouts of merriment sounded
forth upon the night air from the occupants of the car.  The fright
they had given the two by the side of the road evidently gave them much
amusement.  Their laughter caused the rescuer to straighten suddenly
up, and clutch the old man fiercely by the arm.

"Did you hear them?" he asked, and his voice was filled with suppressed
emotion.

"Yes," was the reply.  "They are only thoughtless youths having a good
time, I suppose."

"It's just what money does, though.  I know who they are, for I caught
a glimpse of them as they sped past.  It's money that talks with them;
that is the only voice they hear.  They will ride over the less
fortunate, and crush them down as worms beneath their feet.  They have
been doing it for ages, and look upon it as their right.  What do they
care about the meaning of the falling waters when they are always
listening to the voice of money.  Curse them.  Why should they revel
and sport with ill-got gains, when honest men can hardly get enough to
keep breath in their bodies."

The young man was standing erect now on the side of the road.  His
companion shrank away somewhat fearful lest he should turn upon him and
smite him.

"You seem to have suffered," he at length remarked.  "You appear to be
annoyed at people who have money."

"And why shouldn't I?" was the savage reply.  "Haven't I suffered at
their hands, young as I am?  Haven't I been scorned by them to the
limit of all endurance?  Haven't they made a mock of me for years,
calling me names behind my back?  And why?  Just because I happen to be
poor, and have tried honestly to make my way in life.  But there,
enough of this.  What's the use of talking about such things?  It will
do no more good than the voice of the waters which you are continually
hearing."

Along the road the two walked in deep silence.  The old man found it
hard to keep up with his companion, and he was at last forced to fall
behind.  Soon he was alone, and then his thoughts went once more back
to the falls, and the glorious vision which was in his mind.

It was only when he reached a small building by the side of the road
that he stopped.  Pushing open the door, he entered.  All was dark and
silent within.  The strange loneliness of the place would have smitten
any one else with the feeling of dread.  But the old man never seemed
to mind it.  Fumbling in his vest pocket, he found a match.  This he
struck and lighted a tallow dip which was stuck into a rude
candle-stick upon a bare wooden table.  One glance at the room revealed
by the dim light showed its desolate bareness.  Besides the table there
were two small benches and a wash-stand, containing a granite-iron
basin.  A small broken-down stove stood at one end of the room, by the
side of which was a couch.  Not a scrap of mat or rug adorned the
floor.  There were no blinds or curtains to the cheerless, windows, and
not a picture adorned the walls.

But the old man did not notice the desolation of the place.  It was
quite evident that he was beyond the influence of earthly surroundings
for the moment.  Going at once to the couch, he brought forth a roll of
paper hidden away beneath the pillow.  Carrying this over to the table,
he sat down upon one of the benches and spread the paper out before
him.  By the light of the candle it was easy for him to study the
carefully-made lines upon the large sheet.  Eagerly he scanned the
drawings, and then placing the forefinger of his right hand upon one
central point, he moved it along one line extending farther than the
rest until it stopped at a small square in which was the word "City."
This action gave him much satisfaction and a pleased expression lighted
up his face.  "Power, power," he murmured.  "Ay, quicker than thought,
and bright as the sun shining in its strength.  Great, wonderful! and
yet they do not realise it.  But they shall know, and understand."

Along the other lines he also ran his finger, pausing at the end of
each where was marked "Town," "Village," or "Settlement."  He talked
continually as he did so, but it was all about "glory" and "power."
Over and over again he repeated these words, now in a soft low voice,
and again in a loud triumphant manner.

At length he rose from the bench, crossed the room, opened the door,
and stepped outside.  Not a star was to be seen, and the wind was
stronger than ever.  It was keen, piercing.  But the man heeded neither
the one nor the other.  He was listening intently, and the faint sound
of Break Neck Falls drifting in from the distance was to him the
sweetest of music.

And as he stood there a sudden change took place.  His dead drooped,
and he leaned against the side of the building for support.  A shiver
shook his body, and as he turned and entered the house his steps were
slow, and he half-stumbled across the threshold.  He looked at the
wood-box behind the stove, but there was not a stick in it.  He next
opened the door of the little cupboard near by, but not a scrap of food
was there.  Almost mechanically he thrust his hand into his pocket and
brought forth a purse.  This he opened, but there was nothing inside.
Half-dazed he stood there in the centre of the room.  Then he glanced
toward the paper with the drawings lying upon the table, and as he did
so a peculiar light of comprehension shone in his eyes.




CHAPTER II

TO THE LOWEST BIDDER

There was an unusually large number of people gathered in front of
Thomas Marshall's store one morning about the last of May.  Women were
there as well as men, and all were talking and laughing in a most
pleasant way.  The cause of this excitement was explained by a notice
tacked on the store door.


"The Board, Lodging, and Clothing of David Findley, Pauper, will be let
to the lowest bidder for a period of one year, on Wednesday, May 30th
inst., at Thomas Marshall's store, Chutes Corner, at 10 o'clock A. M.

  "Signed

  "J. B. FLETCHER
   T. S. TITUS
   O. R. MITCHELL
   _Overseers of Poor_."


This notice had been posted there for about two weeks, and had
attracted the attention of all the people in the parish.  It was out of
the ordinary for such a sale to take place at this season of the year.
Hitherto, it had occurred at the last of December.  But this was an
exceptional case, and one in which all were keenly interested.

"I hear he is stark crazy," Mrs. Munson was saying to a neighbour,
Peter McQueen, "and that he has a funny notion in his head."

"Should say so," McQueen replied.  "Any man who has lived as he has for
months must be pretty well off his base.  Why, he didn't have a scrap
of food in the house when he was found by Jim Trask one morning the
last of April.  Jim has been keeping him ever since."

"Isn't he able to work?" Mrs. Munson inquired.

"Seems not.  I guess he's a scholar or something like that, and did
some book-keeping in the city until he drifted this way.  He must have
had a little money to live as long as he has.  He's always been a
mystery to me."

"And to everybody else, I guess."

"Yes, so it appears.  But it's a great pity that we've got to be
burdened with the likes of him.  Our taxes are heavy enough now without
having to take care of this strange pauper.  We've got too many on our
hands already for our good."

"But do you know anything about that queer notion of his, Pete?" Mrs.
Munson asked.

"Ho, ho, I've heard about it, and I guess it's true all right.  He's in
love with Break Neck Falls, and makes regular trips there every day,
and sometimes at night.  Jim followed him once, and saw him standing
upon that high rock right by the falls.  He kept waving his hands and
shouting to the water, though Jim could not make out what he was
saying.  He has some writing on a piece of paper which he keeps very
close.  He has told, though, that his plan will do wonderful things for
the city and the whole surrounding country.  He once said that we don't
know what a valuable thing we have right in our midst.  I guess we've
lived here longer than he has, and should know a thing or two.  It is
not necessary for a half-cracked old man to come and tell us of our
possessions.  But, say, here he is now, coming along in Jim Trask's
farm waggon."

As the team drew near, all eyes were turned in its direction, for the
first glimpse of "Crazy David," as he was generally called.  There was
no difficulty about seeing him for he was sitting by Jim's side on the
rough board seat.  He looked much older and careworn than the night he
had awakened from his dream, and found his wood-box, cupboard, and
pocket-book empty.  He had sat huddled on the seat for most of the way
up the road, but when near the store he lifted his eyes and fixed them
curiously upon the people before him.  There was something pathetically
appealing in the expression upon his face.  He seemed like a man trying
to recall something to his mind.  He appeared strangely out of place in
that rough farm waggon.  Even his almost ragged clothes could not hide
the dignity of his bearing as he straightened himself up and tried to
assume the appearance of a gentleman.  The people saw this effort on
his part, and several wondered and spoke about it afterwards.

At first the old man did not seem to realise the purpose of the
gathering.  But when he saw the auctioneer mount a box alongside of him
and call for bids, the truth of the entire situation dawned upon him.
He was to be sold as a pauper to the lowest bidder, so he heard the
auctioneer say.  For an instant a deep feeling of anger stirred within
his bosom, and he lifted his head as if to say something.  But seeing
the eyes of all fixed upon him, he desisted.

"What am I offered for the keep of this old man?" the auctioneer cried.
"The lowest bid gets him."

"Two hundred dollars," came from a man not far off.

"Two hundred dollars!" and the auctioneer turned fiercely upon him.
"You're out for a bargain, Joe Tippits.  Why, he's worth that to any
man for a year's work.  He'll be able to do many an odd job.  Come, you
can do better than that."

"One seventy-five," came from another.

"Too much," the auctioneer cried.  "The parish can't stand that."

"One fifty, then."

"That's better, Joe.  Try again.  You're a long way off yet."

"I'll take the critter fer one hundred dollars, and not a cent less."

At these emphatic words all turned and stared hard at the speaker.  A
perceptible shiver passed through the bystanders, while several
muttered protests were heard.

"Oh, I hope he won't get him, anyway," Mrs. Munson whispered to a
neighbour.  "Jim Goban isn't a fit man to look after a snake, and if he
gets Crazy David in his clutches may God have mercy upon the poor old
man."

"One hundred dollars I am offered," again the voice of the
auctioneer rang out.  "Can any one do better than that?  One
hundred dollars.  Going at one hundred dollars.  I shan't dwell.
One--hundred--dollars--and--sold to Jim Goban for one hundred dollars."

This inhuman traffic did not seriously affect the people who had
gathered for the auction.  When it was over, they quickly dispersed, to
discuss with one another about the life Jim Goban would lead Crazy
David.  It was an incident of only a passing moment, and mattered
little more to them than if it had been a horse or a cow which had been
sold instead of a poor feeble old man.

It was the custom which had been going on for years, and it was the
only way they could see out of the difficult problem of dealing with
paupers.

When Jim Goban reached home with his purchase, dinner was ready.  There
were five young Gobans who stared curiously upon David as he took his
seat at the table.  Mrs. Goban was a thin-face, tired looking woman who
deferred to her husband in everything.  There was nothing else for her
to do, as she had found out shortly after their marriage what a brute
he was.

David was pleased at the presence of the children and he often turned
his eyes upon them.

"Nice children," he at length remarked, speaking for the first time
since his arrival.

"So ye think they're nice, do ye?" Jim queried, leaning over and
looking the old man in the eyes.

"Why, yes," David replied, shrinking back somewhat from the coarse
face.  "All children are nice to me, but yours are especially fine
ones.  What nice hair they have, and such beautiful eyes.  I suppose
the oldest go to school."

"Naw.  They never saw the inside of a school house."

"You don't say so!" and David looked his astonishment.  "Surely there
must be a school near here."

"Oh, yes, there's a school all right, but they've never gone.  I don't
set any store by eddication.  What good is it to any one, I'd like to
know?  Will it help a man to hoe a row of pertaters, or a woman to bake
bread?  Now, look at me.  I've no eddication, an' yit I've got a good
place here, an' a bank account.  You've got eddication, so I
understand, an' what good is it to you?  I'm one of the biggest
tax-payers in the parish, an' you, why yer nothing but a pauper, the
Devil's Poor."

At this cruel reminder David shrank back as from a blow, and never
uttered another word during the rest of the meal.  The iron was
entering into his soul, and he was beginning to understand something of
the ignominy he was to endure at this house.

"Now look here," Jim began when they were through with dinner, "I've a
big pile of wood out there in the yard, an' I want ye to tote it into
the wood-house an' pile it up.  I'll show ye where to put it.  I'm
gittin' mighty little fer yer keep, an' I expect ye to git a hustle on
to help pay fer yer grub an' washin'."

"Don't be too hard on him, Jim," Mrs. Goban remarked.  "He doesn't look
very strong."

"Don't ye worry, Kitty, I'll attend to that.  I know a wrinkle or two."

David was accordingly taken to the wood-house and Jim explained to him
how and where he was to pile the wood.  "Ye needn't kill yerself," he
told him in conclusion.  "But I want ye to keep busy, fer when that
job's through I've got something else on hand.  Ye can sit down when ye
feel a little tired, but don't sit too long or too often, see?"

For about half an hour David worked patiently at the wood, piling it as
neatly as possible.  The work was not hard, and he was quite satisfied
with his task.  He was alone, anyway, and could think about his beloved
falls.  His hands, however, were soft, and ere long they were bruised
and bleeding from the rough sticks.  At length a sharp splinter entered
his finger, and he sat down upon a stick to pull it out.  In trying to
do this, it broke off leaving a portion deeply embedded in the flesh,
which caused him considerable pain.  Not knowing what to do, he sat
looking upon the finger in a dejected manner.

"What's the matter?  You seem to be in trouble."

At these words David looked quickly around, and saw a young girl
standing by his side.  Though her dress was old and worn, her face was
bright, and her eyes sparkled with interest.

"Here, let me take that splinter out," she ordered, as she sat down by
his side, and drawing forth a needle, began to probe into the flesh.
"There, I've got it!" she cried in triumph.  "My! it's a monster.
You'll have to be more careful after this.  You should have gloves."

"Thank you very much," David replied.  "To whom am I indebted for this
kindness?"

"Oh, I'm Betty Bean, that's all."

"And you live here?"

"No.  I'm just dying here."

"Dying!" David exclaimed in surprise.  "Why, you don't look like a
dying person."

"Maybe I don't, but I am.  I'm just staying here because I have to.  My
mother's a widow, and I want to earn some money to help her, and as
this was the only place I could get I had to take it."

"So you do not like it, then?"

"Who would like any place where there is such a brute as Jim Goban?
My, I'm sorry for you.  To think of any man getting into his clutches."

"But surely I won't be any worse off than you are."

"I'm not so sure about that.  You see, I'm about boss here, and do and
say just what I like."

"How's that?"

"Well, I'm the only person Jim can get to work here.  All the girls for
miles around know what kind of a creature he is, and they wouldn't come
for any amount of money.  They're scared to death of him.  But I'm not,
and I tell him right to his face what I think of him, and the way he
treats his poor wife.  He would like to horsewhip me, but he knows that
if I leave no one else would come in my place.  But I'm glad now that I
am here so I can look after you."

"Look after me!"

"Yes.  I guess you'll need me all right.  I know who you are, and I'm
sorry for you.  I'm going to stand between you and Jim Goban.  He's
scared to death of me, for I'm the only one who dares give him a
tongue-lashing, and I do it whenever it is necessary, which is quite
often."

"You're a brave girl," and David looked with admiration upon the slight
form by his side.  "How old are you?"

"Fifteen last March.  But one's age is nothing.  I've done a woman's
work ever since I was ten.  I stand up for my rights now, though.  When
I first came here Jim was bound that I should work all the time.  But
at last I told him that I was going to have every Saturday afternoon
off, especially in summer, so I could go home or out upon the river.
Can you row?" she suddenly asked.

"A little," was the reply.

"That's good.  Now, look, I'm going to take you out in the boat next
Saturday, and you're going to meet somebody there you'll like."

"Somebody I like," David repeated.  "Who is it?"

"It's a woman, that's who it is.  But I'm not going to tell you her
name.  She only came here last week, and she is so fond of the water,
and spends so much time upon it.  Oh, you'll like her when you see her.
She's a beauty, with such lovely eyes and dark hair.  And she's not a
bit stuck up, either.  She just talks in a friendly way, and makes you
feel easy all over.  There, now, I guess you'd better pile some more
wood.  I have a bit of work to do, and when I'm through I'll come out
and give you a hand.  I like to be with you.  I know we're going to be
friends."

The girl rose, and was about to leave.  She paused, however, and looked
inquiringly into the old man's face.

"Do you smoke?" she asked.

Into David's eyes came an eager expression, which Betty was not slow to
see.

"I know you do," she cried, "but you have no tobacco."

"I have a pipe," and David fumbled into a pocket of his coat.  "But I
haven't had a smoke for weeks, because----"

"I know, I know," the girl hastily replied.  "I'll get you some in a
jiffy."

She was gone only a short time when she returned, and handed David half
a fig of tobacco.

"There, take that," she said.  "It's a piece Jim left on the kitchen
window-sill."

"But is it right for me to take it?" David asked.

"Sure it's right.  Didn't Jim agree to feed and lodge you for one year?
You can't live without tobacco.  It's a part of your food, see?  If Jim
says anything about it, I'll soon settle him."

"You are a good girl," David returned, as with trembling hands he
hastily whittled off a few slices of tobacco with an old knife, and
filled his pipe.  "This will put new life into me.  I can never repay
you for your kindness."




CHAPTER III

ONE, AT LEAST, RINGS TRUE

With the small boat pulled well upon the beach, Lois Sinclair stood for
a few moments looking out over the water.  Her eyes were fixed upon a
little boat in the distance containing two people, an old man and a
young girl.  The wind, which was steadily increasing, tossed her wavy,
luxuriant hair over her brow, while several tresses fell across her
cheeks, flushed by the recent rowing.  She knew that she should be
home, for supper would be waiting and her father would be impatient.
But she hesitated.  Her thoughts were out there on the water where she
loved to be.  The twang of the wind as it swept through the trees along
the shore, and the beat of the surf upon the gravelly beach were music
sweet to her ears.

At length, with one more lingering glance out upon the river, she
turned and walked along a path leading from the shore.  She moved
slowly, for she was not at all anxious to reach the house situated
about two hundred yards beyond.  And yet it was an attractive house,
well-built, and cosy in appearance, designed both for summer and winter
use.  A spacious verandah swept the front and ends, over which
clambered a luxuriant growth of wild grape vines.  Large trees of ash,
elm, and maple spread their expansive branches over the well-kept lawn,
providing an excellent shade when the sun was hot.  Altogether, it was
a most delightful spot to spend the summer months away from the smoke
and confusion of the city.

The place, however, did not altogether appeal to Lois Sinclair.  If she
had needed rest, the situation would have been ideal.  But it was
activity she desired, and not luxurious ease such as so many crave,
especially two young men lolling on the verandah awaiting her coming.
Even though one was her brother, she could not restrain a feeling of
contempt as she looked upon their white faces, soft hands, and
immaculate clothes.  Why should men, she asked herself, be so ready and
willing to give themselves completely up to effeminate habits when
their blood was hot within them, and the great Open was calling them
with such a strong insistent voice?

The young woman's arrival brought one of the young men to his feet,
with the offer of a hammock.

"Please do not trouble yourself," she told him.  "I must hurry and get
ready for dinner.  I know that father is very angry with me."

"He is not the only one who is angry, I can assure you," Sammie Dingle
remarked.  "We have been furious with you for leaving us this afternoon
when we needed your company so much in the car.  I cannot understand
how you can enjoy yourself alone out on the river in that nasty boat."

"No, I suppose you cannot," Lois replied, and so infatuated was Sammie
with the young woman that he did not notice the slightest sarcasm in
her words.

"Hurry up, Lois," her brother ordered, "I'm almost starved.  Dad's got
it in for you."

"All right, Dick," was her reply.  "I shall be down in a few minutes.
Why did you wait for me?  You had better go to dinner at once, if you
are so hungry."

It took Lois but a short time upstairs, and when she came down she
found the three men in the dining-room.  Her father was in one of his
surly moods, and this she could tell at the first glance.  He was a
short man, somewhat stout, and pompous both in appearance and manner.
Fortunate it was that his only daughter had inherited none of his
qualities, but was more like her mother, whose memory she cherished
with undying affection.  Since her death home had been more of a prison
to her than anything else.  Neither her father nor her only brother had
understood her, and she was forced to depend more and more upon her own
reliant self.

"What kept you so late, Lois?" her father asked as soon as she had
taken her place at the table.  "You know very well that I do not like
to wait for dinner."

"I am very sorry, father," was the reply, "but I became so greatly
interested in an old man and a girl out on the river that I had no idea
how time was passing."

"Who were they, Lois?" her brother enquired.

"What new creatures have you picked up now?  You haven't run out of
homeless cats and dogs, have you?"

The colour mounted to Lois' temples at these words, for it was not the
first time she had been sneered at for her tenderness of heart for all
suffering creatures.  With difficulty she restrained an angry reply,
and went on calmly with her dinner.

"Come, Lois," Sammie urged, "never mind Dick.  He must have his little
joke, don't you know.  He was only in fun."

"A joke with a sharp thorn in it isn't much fun," and Lois looked
Sammie full in the eyes.  "One might do far worse than take an interest
in such people as I met this afternoon out upon the river.  They
appealed to me very much and I am not ashamed to confess it.  The man
is a perfect gentleman, while the girl is so pretty, and full of life
and fun."

"What's her name?" Dick asked.  "I'm getting quite excited over her."

"She's Betty Bean, so she told me, and the old man is David Findley."

"What, Crazy David, that miserable pauper?" Mr. Sinclair asked.  "And
you call such a creature a gentleman?"

"Certainly, and why not?  His face is so beautiful, and his whole
manner shows that he has moved much in refined society."

"Ho, ho, that's a good one," and Dick leaned back in his chair and
laughed aloud.  "Crazy David a gentleman, with a beautiful face, and
refined manners!  Think of that, dad."

"Lois evidently doesn't know that Crazy David is a pauper, the Devil's
Poor, and was sold to Jim Goban to board and lodge for a year.  He went
pretty low, so I understand."

At these words an expression of surprise came into Lois' eyes, mingled
with indignation.  She looked keenly into her father's face, thinking
that he must be merely joking.

"I can hardly believe that what you say is true," she at length
remarked.  "I did not know that such things were carried on in a
Christian community.  Is it possible that an old man such as that was
sold like a cow or a horse to the lowest bidder!"

"Well, what else could have been done with him, then?"

"Wasn't there any one in the whole parish, willing to take care of him?"

"H'm, I guess people have all they can do to look after themselves
without being burdened with a half-cracked creature such as that.  It
was the best thing they could do.  It would not be fair for one person
to have the entire expense of keeping him, so by this method all have a
share in his support."

"But I call it degrading," Lois insisted, "not only to the old man
himself, but to the people living here.  He seems such a gentleman,
that I was drawn to him this afternoon."

"Going to take him under your wing, eh?" Dick bantered.  "He'll be as
interesting as your other protege, I assure you.  By the way, I saw him
this afternoon, and he looked his part all right, ho, ho," and Dick
laughed as he gulped down his tea.

"Who's that, Dick?" Mr. Sinclair inquired.

"Oh, Lois knows," was the reply.  "She can tell you all about 'Spuds'
as well as I can, and maybe better."

"Why should I know?" his sister asked, somewhat sharply.  "I only met
him once, and that was years ago."

"But you always take his part, though, so he seems to be somewhat under
your care."

"And why shouldn't I?  He deserves great credit for what he has done,
and it is very unbecoming of you to make fun of him."

"I wish you could have seen him this afternoon, though," and Dick
glanced across the table at Sammie.  "We were speeding along in the car
when we saw him hoeing potatoes in a field by the road.  His clothes
were all soiled, his sleeves rolled up, and he looked like a regular
bushman.  I called out to him as we sped past, and you should have seen
the expression on his face when he saw us.  It was like a thunder
cloud.  I guess he felt pretty well cut up at being caught at such
work, ha, ha."

"Whom are you talking about, anyway?" Mr. Sinclair demanded.  "What's
all this about 'Spuds,' I'd like to know?"

"Oh, it's only that country chap we met several years ago, don't you
remember?" Dick explained.  "His real name, I believe, is Jasper
Randall, though we have always called him Spuds, because he was digging
potatoes when we first met him."

"You don't mean that big overgrown boy who helped us to carry Lois home
the day she sprained her ankle at Daltan Creek?"

"The very same, dad.  And you remember what fun we had at the way he
sat and drank his tea out of the saucer?"

"But I didn't."  Lois spoke sharply, while a flush mantled her cheeks.

"Oh, no, you didn't make fun," Dick laughed.  "You were mad through and
through, and gave us a good solid lecture afterwards."

Lois made no reply, so while the men talked, she let her mind dwell
upon that scene of years ago.  She saw again the lank awkward lad who
was so concerned about her accident.  While helping to carry her home,
he had been much at his ease, and his eyes glowed with a sympathetic
light.  But when once in the house, his natural shyness had come upon
him, and he did not know what to do with himself in the presence of
strangers.  One thing stood out above everything else, and that was his
look of indignant defiance when Dick laughed because he drank his tea
out of the saucer.  She liked the way he had straightened himself
suddenly up, while his eyes flashed with a peculiar light.  The next
that she heard of him was several years later when he entered college
in Dick's year.  Then every time her brother had come home he had such
stories to tell her about Spuds.  And so he was now living near working
on a farm.  Why did he not go home? she asked herself.  She wondered
also what he looked like now.  Was he lank and awkward as when she saw
him?  She longed to ask Dick several questions, but desisted, knowing
that it would be to little purpose.  Her brother would only make fun of
him, and she would be sure to get angry.

When supper was over, the men sauntered out upon the verandah for a
smoke.  Lois went, too, but sat somewhat apart with a piece of
needlework in her hands.  She preferred to be alone that she might
think.  She thought first of old David, and his pitiable condition.
What could she do to help him? she asked herself.  It was not right
that he should be kept as a pauper while there were several people in
the parish who could provide for him without the least trouble.  Her
father was one of them, and she was determined to speak to him just as
soon as she could.

From old David it was only natural that her mind should turn to Jasper
Randall.  She recalled his animated face the day her ankle had been
sprained.  He was but a big overgrown boy then, and she had just
graduated from school.  She had never forgotten him, and had followed
his career while at college as well as she could from what her brother
told her.  And so he was now working on a farm nearby.  A longing came
upon her to see him, and to learn if he had changed much since that day
years ago.  As she glanced toward her brother and Sammie, so effeminate
in their manner, and dressed with such scrupulous care, a feeling of
contempt smote her.  They disdained honest toil, and would scorn to
soil their soft white hands with manual labor.  But over there was a
young man toil-worn, and no doubt sunburnt, clad in rough clothes
earning his living by the sweat of his brow.  Such a person appealed to
her.  He would form an interesting study, if nothing else.  There must
be some connection between that potato patch and the college, she told
herself, and she was determined to find out what it was.

As she thus sat and worked, her thoughts keeping time to her fingers,
Sammie came and took a seat by her side.  She glanced quickly up, with
a shade of annoyance on her face.  They were alone on the verandah, for
her father and Dick were nowhere to be seen.

"You are very quiet this evening, Lois," the young man began.  "I have
been watching you for the last half hour, and you never looked our way
once, nor took any interest in what we were saying.  You are not
offended, are you?"

"Offended!  At what?" Lois asked as she let her needlework fall upon
her lap.

"At me.  Have I done anything to annoy you?"

"I wasn't thinking about you at all, Sammie," and Lois looked him full
in the eyes.  "My mind was upon more important things."

"And you don't consider me important?" the young man demanded, visibly
embarrassed.

"Why should I?  What have you done that you should be considered
important?"

"But my father is rich, and we belong to a good old family.  I am a
gentleman, and that should count for much."

"So you seem to think," was the somewhat sarcastic reply.  "I do not
for a moment deny that such things are valuable, but they count for
very little in my estimation of a true man.  He must prove his worth in
the battle of life, and show to the world that he is something apart
from how much money his father may have or his family history.  Now
what have you done that I should consider you important?"

"Nothing at present, Lois, for I am not through college yet.  But I am
going to do great things some day, and then you will change your
opinion of me."

"I hope so," and Lois gave a sigh as she picked up her work.

"You don't believe what I say?" and Sammie reddened.

"Not until I see you settle down to something definite.  You do not
know how to work, and how, then, can you expect to succeed?"

"But you would not want to see me working like Spuds, for instance,
would you?"

"And why not?  He is not afraid to soil his hands at honest labor.  Why
he is doing so I do not know, but there must be some good reason."

"Oh, I know.  He wants money to help him to finish his college course.
He left very suddenly, so I understand.  Of course, he was not in our
set, and so I know very little about him.  He studied hard, and kept
much to himself, so he has always been somewhat of a mystery.  But say,
Lois, never mind talking about him.  I want to ask you something, for I
am going away to-morrow."

"What is it, Sammie?" and again Lois laid down her work.  She had an
idea what he wanted to say, though it did not affect her in the least.

"I--I want to s-say," the young man stammered, "that you are the
o-only----"

Sammie was suddenly arrested in his protestation of love by Dick's
voice at the door.

"Say, come inside," he called.  "It's beginning to rain, and it's
spoiled my ride this evening.  It's going to be confounded dull
to-night, so give us some music, Lois, to liven things up a bit."

With an amused smile, his sister willingly obeyed.  Sammie followed her
into the house, mentally cursing Dick for his untimely interruption.




CHAPTER IV

A LITTLE CABIN

Betty and old David had a great afternoon out upon the water in the
small row-boat.  They were delighted with Lois, and after she had left
them they watched her until she disappeared within the house.

"Isn't she wonderful!" Betty exclaimed, as she at length picked up the
oars which had been lying unused in the bottom of the boat.

"Who is she, anyway?" her companion asked, for it was evident that he
was as much lost in admiration as was the girl.

"Oh, she's Miss Sinclair, Lois, they call her, and her father is very
rich.  He is president, or something like that, of the street railway
and the electric light company in the city.  Ma knows all about him,
and she has told me a whole lot.  He was very poor once, so she says.
He's awful mean and stuck up and won't have anything to do with the
people he knew when he was young.  But his daughter isn't a bit like
him.  She takes after her mother, so I understand, who was a very fine
woman."

"Does Mr. Sinclair live here all the time?" David inquired.  "I never
heard of him before."

"Oh, no.  He has a big house in the city.  He only bought this place
last summer.  Lois has never been here before.  She came two weeks ago
and I think she is going to stay till fall.  I hope she does, anyway.
Won't it be great to have her here, so we can meet her and talk to her
every Saturday afternoon?"

"She seems to be a very fine young woman," David assented.

"Indeed she is, and she's a nurse, too.  She's been away training in
some hospital for several years, and has just got through."

"Why should she want to be a nurse?" David asked.  "If her father has
plenty of money why should his daughter want to earn her own living?"

"It's because she's so independent, that's why.  She believes every one
should earn her own living, and I guess she's right."

A pained expression suddenly overspread the old man's face at these
words.  But so engrossed was Betty with her own thoughts that she
noticed nothing amiss.

"I am going to be a nurse some day," the girl continued.  "Just as soon
as I am old enough I am going to enter a hospital.  Then when I get
through I can earn so much money and be such a help at home.  And I'm
going to help you, too," she added as an afterthought.

"No, child, that will not be necessary then," David replied.  "I shall
have plenty of money of my own by the time you are a nurse.  I shall be
manager of the biggest company the country has ever known, for it
cannot be long now before people realise how wonderful is the scheme I
have worked out.  They have been very slow to see, but I am sure that a
great change is soon to take place."

"But you might be sick, though," the girl insisted, "and will need me
to nurse you.  I won't charge you anything, for I shall gladly do it
for nothing because it will be you."

"Oh, I wouldn't let you do it for nothing," was the reply.  "I shall
pay you well and make up for all your kindness to me now when I am so
poor."

In this manner the two sat and talked.  Happy were they for the time,
thinking and planning of the future which looked so bright in their
eyes.  Neither did they notice for a while where they had drifted, for
a stiff wind had risen and was drawing down the creek.  It was Betty
who first realised their situation.

"Oh, look where we are!" she cried, seizing the oars, and placing them
in the row-locks.  "We can never get back against this wind, and the
water is getting rougher all the time.  I believe it is going to rain."

"Let me row," David suggested.  "I should be stronger than you."

"Did you ever row?" the girl asked.

"Only once.  But I think I could do it, though."

"Well, I don't think you could.  You're not nearly as strong as I am."

With that she settled herself to the task of pulling back into the
creek against the wind which was dead ahead.  For some time there was
silence as she toiled steadily at the oars.  Gradually, however, her
strokes became weaker, and she was forced to rest.

"I can't do it," she gasped.  "The wind is too strong."

"What are we to do, then?" David asked.

"Land on that shore over there.  I guess we can reach it all right."

Again seizing the oars, she swung the boat partly around and pointed
for the shore.  It was much easier now, and she made considerable
progress.  The wind increased in strength, and at times the water
dashed over the side of the boat.  To add to their discomfort the rain
began to fall, and by the time the shore was reached their clothes were
wet, and David felt cold.

"Help me pull up the boat," Betty ordered.  "We'll tie it to that tree,
and then we'll look around for some shelter.  There's a raftsman's
cabin not far away, and maybe we can stay there."

With the boat securely fastened, they made their way along the shore
until they came to a path leading up from the water.  Following this
through the bushes, they soon reached an open space, and there before
them appeared a small building covered with tarred paper.

"That's the place," Betty exclaimed, "and I know there is a stove there
for I was in it once.  The raftsmen used it this last spring.  We can
build a fire and dry our clothes before we go home."

Betty was the first to reach the cabin, and as she pushed open the door
she gave a cry of surprise.

"What's the matter?" David inquired, thinking that she had been
frightened.

But Betty did not at once reply.  She stood in the middle of the room,
looking around in a bewildered manner.

"Well I never!" she at length declared.  "Why the place is all fixed
up, and somebody must surely be living here.  Who can it be, for I
never heard a word about it, and I thought that I knew everything that
was going on in this parish.  Just look at that table now, with the
dishes all washed so clean.  And there are books, too," she added, "and
pictures on the wall.  I never knew a man could keep a room so neat."

"How do you know that it is a man?" David asked.  "Perhaps it is a
woman."

"Why, that's easy enough," and Betty looked around the room.  "Don't
you see a man's boots there, his clothes hanging up by the stove, and a
package of tobacco on the window-sill?  I guess it's a man all right."

"Perhaps you are right," David assented.  "You know more about such
things than I do.  Anyway, it's nice to be here out of the storm.  But
do you think the man will mind when he comes back and finds us here?
He might be very angry with us."

"Let him get angry, then," and Betty gave her head a slight toss.  "I
don't care for angry men.  If I can match Jim Goban, I guess I can
handle any man who comes here.  Leave that to me, and don't you worry.
I'm going to do a little exploring, anyway.  I want to see what's in
that other room.  Ah, just what I thought," she continued, when she had
opened the door and entered.  "It's the bed-room, and the bed is not
made.  That shows all right that a man lives here.  A woman would never
think of going away and leaving the bed like that.  I'm going to open
the window and air the room.  Men always keep the windows shut tight,
and the house gets so stuffy.  There, that's better," she panted, as
after some difficulty she forced the window up.  "I'm going to make up
that bed just as soon as I get the fire going."

There was a box full of dry wood behind the stove, and soon she had a
fire burning brightly.  She next partly filled a small kettle with
water and set it upon the stove.

"You had better take off your wet coat," she suggested to David.
"You'll get your death of cold if you keep it on much longer."

"Can't I help you?" the old man inquired, as he stood watching with
admiration the girl's light step and the skilful way she did
everything.  There was a longing in his eyes as well, for he wanted to
be of some use but did not know how.

"Yes, you can help me," and Betty smiled upon him, "by taking that coat
off and sitting down upon that nice cosy place near the stove.  It was
certainly made for comfort, and the man who owns this building must
spend his evenings there.  What a lot of books he has.  He must read a
great deal."

David was only too glad to obey, so after he had taken off his coat and
hung it up back of the stove to dry, he stretched himself at full
length upon the settle.

"This does feel good," and he gave a sigh of relief.

"You're tired, that's what's the trouble with you," Betty replied.
"You shouldn't have a bit of work to do.  You're too old, and you
should have some one to look after you all the time."

"How nice it would be if we could live in a place like this, and not go
back to Jim Goban's.  Would you be willing to take care of me?" David
asked.

"Sure, I would like nothing better.  But, then, there are some things
in the way."

"What are they?"

"Well, you see, there's the question of money.  We haven't any
ourselves, and I don't think any one is likely to drop it at our feet
in a hurry.  And besides, Jim's got you for a year and he wouldn't want
to give you up; he's going to get a lot of work out of you, so he
plans."

"I know that only too well, Betty.  But when I get rich, I mean.  If I
had a little place like this you would look after me, would you not?  I
would pay you well, and we could be so happy."

"Indeed we could.  But you haven't the money yet and we must try to be
as happy as we can in the meantime.  That's what ma says, and she
really does practise it.  So I've got to look after you now when you
can't pay me.  I'm going to see if I can't find something to eat.  The
man who lives here surely doesn't live on air.  He must have some food
in the house."

It did not take Betty long to find the cupboard.  This was nothing more
than a box nailed to the wall, on which a rude door had been fastened.
There were three shelves and on these were a loaf of bread, some cold
meat, potatoes, eggs and cheese.

"Isn't this great!" she exclaimed, as she brought forth what she
needed.  "I can warm up these potatoes, and we shall have a grand
supper."

"I am worrying about the man who owns those things," David remarked.
"He might not mind our using his house, but when it comes to making
free with his provisions, it might be a different matter.  Do you think
it is right for us to touch them?"

"We won't take all," and Betty stood before the table eying the meat
and potatoes.  "We can leave enough for him.  If he is a kind man he
will not mind our taking some of his supper.  How dark it is getting,"
she added.  "I shall light that lamp.  Now, isn't that better," she
continued when this had been accomplished.  "We shall have supper in a
short time."

While Betty busied herself about the stove, David remained stretched
out upon the settle.  Outside, the storm increased in fury, and the
rain heat against the window.  Within, all was snug and warm.  The girl
even hummed softly to herself as she went on with her work.

When supper was ready, Betty spoke to David.  As he made no reply, she
went to his side and, to her surprise, found that he was asleep.  An
expression of tender compassion came into the girl's eyes as she
watched him.  She knew how tired he was and she would not wake him.  It
was better, so she thought, that he should sleep.  Drawing up a chair,
she sat down by his side.  A feeling came to her that it was her duty
to care for this old man who was so helpless.  She could not do much,
but when Betty Bean had once made up her mind it was seldom that she
could be turned from her purpose.




CHAPTER V

UNMASKED

All the morning Jasper Randall was busy hoeing potatoes in the large
field near the main highway.  He liked the work, for he was alone and
could give himself up to thought as he drove the hoe into the yielding
earth.  His task suited him well, and as he tore out innumerable weeds,
slashing down a big one here and another there, he was in reality
overcoming and defeating opponents of the brain.  They were all there
between the rows, and he could see them so plainly.  The lesser ones he
could sweep away at one stroke, but that quitch grass was more
difficult to conquer.  He could cut it off, but its roots would remain
firmly embedded in the ground and would spring forth again.  It was a
nasty, persistent weed.  Little wonder that he attacked it most
fiercely, for it reminded him of the weed of injustice with which he
had been contending for years.  Other enemies, like the smaller weeds,
he could overcome, but injustice, that quitch grass of life, was what
stung him to fury.  Little did Simon Squabbles, the tight old
skin-flint, realise that the lone man working in his potato field was
doing the work of two men that morning, and at the same time slaying a
whole battalion of bitter enemies.  The contest was continued during
the afternoon.  The quitch grass was thicker now, and the struggle
harder.  With savage delight Jasper had just torn out a whole handful
and had shaken it free from its earth as a dog would shake a rat, when
the honk of an auto caused him to look toward the road.  As he did so,
his face underwent a marvellous transformation.  The car was only a few
seconds in passing, but it was sufficient for him to recognise the
occupants, see the amused expression upon their faces, and hear their
salutation of "Spuds," as they sped by.  His strong, supple body
trembled as he leaned for a while upon his hoe and gazed down the road
after the rapidly disappearing car.  He must have remained thus for
several minutes oblivious to everything else.  Neither did he see his
hard taskmaster watching him in the distance.  But when he again
resumed his hoeing he worked more fiercely than ever, and there was
danger at times lest the frail hoe should break beneath his tremendous
strokes.  Up one row and down another he moved all the afternoon.  He
seemed like a giant tearing up the earth, rather than a man performing
a prosaic task.  When toward evening the sky darkened, the wind began
to blow and the rain to fall, he hardly noticed it at first.  Only when
the earth became mucky and stuck constantly to his hoe, did he leave
his work and go across the field toward the barn.  It was time, anyway,
to help with the chores.  He was anxious to get through that he might
go home.  He was glad that it was Saturday, for he would have the next
day free.

It was dark by the time his tasks were done, and then he went to the
house for his week's pay.  He had agreed to work for a dollar and a
half a day, and get his own breakfast and supper at home.  Thus he had
nine dollars coming to him for his week's work.  He was surprised,
therefore, when Simon Squabbles handed him out only eight dollars and
fifty cents.

"There is some mistake here," Jasper remarked as he counted over the
money.  "I want fifty cents more."

"That's all you're goin' to get," Simon replied.  "I saw ye loafin'
this afternoon when ye should have been workin', an' 'no work, no pay'
is my motto."

"Loafing, do you say?" Jasper asked, thinking that he had not heard
aright.

"Sure.  Didn't I see ye leanin' on yer hoe watchin' that car which went
down the road?  An' ye stood there a long time, too."

Into Jasper's eyes leaped an angry fire.  He understood now the man he
had to deal with.  So he had been watching him, and he had taken no
account of the work he had done all day.

"You were spying upon me, eh?" he retorted.  "Didn't you see how I did
the work of two men to-day?"

"All I know is that you were loafin' when I saw ye, an' that was
enough."

"Look here, Simon Squabbles," and Jasper stepped close to his employer,
"if you were not as old as you are, I'd tie you into a bowknot in the
twinkling of an eye.  You're not fit to be called a man, and not
another stroke of work do you get from me.  Keep the fifty cents, if it
will do you any good.  I am trying to make an honest living, but
creatures such as you are the ones who make it almost impossible."

The blood surged through Jasper's veins as he plodded along the muddy
road towards his humble cabin.  The rain beat upon him and soaked his
clothes, but he did not seem to heed it, so filled was his mind with
the contemptible meanness of old Squabbles.  He was in no pleasant
mood, and his hands often clenched hard together as he moved through
the darkness.  What he was to do in the future, he did not know.
Neither did he much care.  A reckless spirit was upon him.  The whole
world was seething with injustice, so he believed.  He had tried to be
honest, to make his way, but he had been foiled at every step.  Why
should he try any longer?  Simon Squabbles prospered through injustice;
Dick Sinclair could ride along in his car, dressed in the height of
fashion, while he had to eke out a precarious living by hoeing
potatoes.  Dick's father had made his money in an unscrupulous manner,
and was held up as a shrewd business man.  Would it not be as well for
him to hurl himself into the game and win out, no matter how?

Thinking thus, he came near his cabin, when a light arrested his
attention.  He stopped short in his tracks and peered through the
darkness.  At first he believed that he must be mistaken.  But no, it
shone steadily before him, and he knew that some one was there.  The
thought made him angry, and he hurried forward, determined to make an
example of the one who had dared to meddle with his property.

Reaching the building, he peered cautiously through the uncurtained
window.  As he did so, his anger suddenly ceased when he beheld the
pathetic scene within, of an old man lying asleep upon the couch and a
young girl patiently watching by his side.  Why they were there he did
not know, though he felt certain that great necessity must have driven
them to take refuge in a strange cabin.  He recognised old David as the
man he had met that night on the road listening to the voice of Break
Neck Falls.  He knew that he had been sold to Jim Goban for one year,
and the transaction had rankled in his soul for days.  The girl he did
not know, but she seemed to him like a ministering angel watching over
the slumber of the sleeping man.  This thought caused him to study her
more intently, for notwithstanding his strength and independence of
mind, he could not forget the pictures he had seen and the stories he
had heard as a child of angels coming to earth on special deeds of
mercy.  He banished this idea, however, in an instant, and even smiled
at his own foolishness as he turned away from the window and moved
around the corner of the cabin.

He was about to push open the door and enter when a sudden notion came
into his mind which caused him to pause.  He stood there with the rain
beating upon him as he thought over the idea.  Then he stepped toward
the door and gave a gentle tap.  In a few seconds Betty stood before
him, peering into the darkness.  The sight of the large man standing
there caused her to start and draw somewhat back.

"Excuse me," Jasper began, "but could you give me shelter?  It is a
rough night and I am wet and hungry.  I am sorry to disturb you, but I
saw the light from the road and knew that some one was living here."

"Come in," the girl at once replied.  "We have a good fire and supper
is all ready, such as it is," and she gave a little laugh as she moved
back into the room.  "We are strangers, too, and I do not know what the
owner will say when he comes back and finds us here."

"Oh, I shall take care of you," Jasper returned.  "He won't make a fuss
when he sees me.  If he does, we'll pitch him out of the door, eh?"

"I guess you could do it all right," and Betty smiled as she looked at
him.  "Mr. David will be so pleased to see you when he wakes.  He likes
good company."

"How do you know I am good company?" Jasper asked.  "Maybe I'm as cross
as two sticks."

"Well, then, you can't stay if you are."

"You couldn't put me out, could you?"

"Couldn't I, though?  I guess you don't know me.  Jim Goban once said
that I could beat the devil with my tongue alone, and I guess Jim ought
to know by this time what I'm like when I get my ginger up.  But you're
not that kind of a man.  I can tell by your eyes that you're all right.
If you're a little cranky now, it's because you're hungry.  As soon as
you get something to eat you'll be as sweet as molasses candy.  Most
men are that way."

The sound of voices woke old David, and sitting suddenly up he looked
inquiringly around the room as if uncertain where he was.

"Don't be afraid, Mr. David," Betty assured him.  "Supper's all ready,
and we have a visitor as hard up as we are to share it with us.  So
come at once and let us get through."

Jasper was greatly amused at the way Betty took full possession of
everything in the place.  There was nothing forward about her, for she
seemed more like a grown-up woman than a girl.  He admired her
confident and buoyant manner, as well as the thoughtful and deferential
way she looked after the old man.  The best on the table was for him
and he had to be served first.  She treated him sometimes as a child,
but more often as a superior being.  He noted the look of reverential
respect in her eyes as she turned them upon him, and he wondered.

During the meal David acted the part of a perfect gentleman.  His
manners could not have been better had he been at a royal banquet
instead of a most humble repast in a rude cabin.  He asked Jasper no
questions but talked merely about his experience upon the river that
afternoon.  He was somewhat anxious lest the owner of the cabin should
return and resent their intrusion.  Jasper endeavoured to allay his
fears, reminding him that no one in his senses would be angry at people
seeking refuge on such a night.

During the meal Betty had been observing Jasper quite closely, and once
the semblance of a twinkle might have been detected in her eyes.  She
made no remark, however, as to what she was thinking, but while the men
smoked when supper was over, she busied herself washing up the few
dishes.

Under the soothing influence of the tobacco David became talkative.  He
was pleased to have so attentive a listener as Jasper, and unfolded to
him his wonderful secret.

"Mr. David is going to be a very rich man some day," Betty remarked, as
she paused in wiping the dishes.

"I am pleased to hear that," Jasper replied.  "Money is the only thing
that counts these days."

"Yes," the girl continued, "he is going to be very rich, and I am going
to look after him.  We shall have such a nice little house and be so
very, very happy."

While Betty was talking, the old man fumbled in an inside pocket and
brought forth several papers.

"See," and he held one of them up so the light of the lamp would fall
upon it, "it is all here.  You can understand my plan much better from
this.  Here is Break Neck Falls, and just below it the plant will be
placed.  From there power will radiate throughout the entire country.
The whole thing is so simple that it is a wonder to me that it has not
been thought of before."

"Isn't it great!" Betty exclaimed, looking over the old man's shoulder.
"And to think that Mr. David worked it all out himself."

As Jasper sat and watched the two animated faces before him, he had not
the heart to say a word that would in any way dampen their enthusiasm.
Nevertheless, it seemed to him so ridiculous that old David's scheme
could ever meet with any success.  How was he to interest people who
had the means to carry his plan into effect?  But if the thought of
doing great things would give him any happiness, he would be the last
one to remove such a hope.

The storm raged outside and the wind beat against the window as the
three sat and talked.  The room was warm and cosy, and Jasper was
pleased to have these two visitors on such a lonely night.  Simon
Squabbles and his meanness he forgot for awhile as he listened to Betty
as she told him of her home life.  It was just what he needed to take
him out of himself, and to make him think of others.  But when the girl
spoke of Lois and how she had been with them that afternoon on the
river, he became doubly interested.

"Oh, you must see her," Betty exclaimed.  "She is the most wonderful
person I ever saw.  Isn't it strange that you have never met her!"

"Why, what chance have I had?" Jasper asked.  "Anyway, she wouldn't
want anything to do with such a rough fellow as I am."

"Indeed she would.  She's not that kind; there's nothing stuckup about
her.  Maybe you'll see her passing some day.  She might call, too, for
she is so friendly."

"Call!  What do you mean?  How could she call upon me if I am miles
away from this place?"

"Oh, but you won't be.  You'll be right here where you have been for
some time."

Into Jasper's eyes came a look of surprise, and he felt his face flush
under the girl's keen scrutiny.

"There, I knew I was right," she laughed in glee.

"You thought you could deceive me, did you?"

"Why, how in the world did you know that I live here?" Jasper asked.
"Did anybody tell you?"

"No, certainly not.  But the Lord didn't give Betty Bean eyes and a
mind for nothing.  Who else would be poking around this place on a
night like this but the owner?  And didn't you know where your dry coat
was when you came in? and your slippers? and your pipe and tobacco?
and----"

"There, there, you have produced evidence enough, and I plead guilty,"
Jasper laughed.  He was greatly amused at the girl's quickness.  "You
are not offended, are you, at the little joke I played upon you?"

"Oh, no, not all.  But next time you do anything like that try it upon
a man.  A woman's eyes are pretty sharp, and it's hard to deceive her.
Mine are, anyway."

David had listened to this conversation and slowly the truth dawned
upon him that the owner of the cabin was before him.

"I wish to apologise, sir," he began, "for our rudeness in entering
your house.  It was only necessity which compelled us to do so, I
assure you, and when I am in a position, I shall recompense you
handsomely for the entertainment to-night."

"Please do not say a word about it," Jasper replied.  "I am very
thankful that you have been able to make use of my humble abode.  I
have enjoyed your company very much.  But I think it is time for us to
retire, as you need rest.  The girl can use that room there, while you
can sleep upon that cot."

"But what about yourself?" David inquired.

"Oh, I shall make a place for myself right by the stove.  I shall be
very comfortable there."

David at first refused to listen to such an arrangement, but Jasper was
determined and claimed a host's privilege of making his guests as
comfortable as possible.  He sat for some time at the little table
after David and Betty had gone to sleep.  He dwelt long and carefully
upon the rude plan the old man had shown him.  The more he studied it,
the more convinced he became that there was a great deal in it after
all.  But it would mean much money, and he sighed as he at length blew
out the light, stretched himself upon the floor, and drew a great coat
over his body.




CHAPTER VI

OUT OF BONDAGE

During the night the storm broke, and the morning was fine and warm.
After breakfast Jasper and David sat on a log outside and smoked.
Betty was busy in the house, washing the dishes and tidying up the
rooms.  She hummed softly to herself as she moved lightly across the
floor.  She was anxious to get through as quickly as possible that she
might take David back to Jim Goban's.  She felt a little uneasy for his
sake as she knew how angry his taskmaster would be with him.  For
herself she did not care.  If Jim said too much, she could leave him at
once.  And yet she did not wish to go, for she felt that she must look
after this old man who was so helpless and depended so much upon her
for protection.

When her work was finished, she joined the men outside.

"It's time we were going, Mr. David," she began.  "The river is calm
now, and it will not be hard rowing back."

"I wish you could stay here all day," Jasper replied.  "I shall feel
very lonely when you go."

"But we shall come to see you again, sir.  It has been so good of you
to keep us.  But Jim Goban will be angry if we do not hurry home.  I
know how he will rage as it is.  The longer we stay the harder it will
be for him," and she pointed to David.

Scarcely had she finished speaking ere a team was heard driving
furiously along the road.

"Oh, it's Jim now!" the girl cried, "and I know he is mad by the way he
is driving.  He's stopping at the gate, too!"

Jim had seen them from the road, and having tied his horse to a tree,
he made his way swiftly along the little path leading to the cabin.  He
was certainly in no pleasant frame of mind, and when he came near he
gave vent to his feelings in coarse, brutal language.

David, rose and advanced to meet the angry man, hoping in some way to
appease his rage, but in this he was mistaken.

"Ye old cuss," Jim shouted, "what do ye mean by runnin' away with that
girl?  Ye look as meek as a lamb but I guess ye're about as near a
devil as they make 'em."

"He didn't run away with me," Betty sharply replied.  "I ran away with
him, that's the way it was, and you needn't get on your high horse, Jim
Goban.  You, yourself, would be the first one to run away with a girl
if you could find one crazy enough to run with you."

"Shet up, ye fool," Jim shouted.  "I didn't ask you to speak."

"I know you didn't," the girl calmly returned, "but that doesn't make
any difference.  This is a free country, isn't it?  We didn't ask you
to come here and make such a fuss, so you can go if you are not
satisfied with our company.  We're quite happy where we are."

"But I'm not goin' without that cuss," and Jim looked savagely at the
old man.  "You kin stay if ye want to with the guy who owns this cabin.
There'll be a nice little story fer the gossips before long, ha, ha."

At these words Jasper started, while his face went white and his hands
clenched together.  He had listened in silence to Jim's tirade, and was
only waiting an opportunity to explain how the old man and the girl
happened to be at his place.  But this pointed reference to him was
more than he could endure.

"What do you mean by that statement?" he asked, taking a quick step
forward.  "Please explain yourself."

"There's nothin' to explain," and Jim gave a coarse laugh.  "The
neighbours will do all the explainin' that is necessary."

"No, that's not the thing.  You made an insinuation, and it's up to you
to explain before you leave.  I have nothing to do with the neighbours;
it's you I am dealing with now.  Yon have insulted this feeble old man,
and uttered words in reference to me and this girl.  I want to know
what you mean."

"I don't have to explain anything," Jim retorted.  "You mind yer own
business, and go to ----"

The oath had hardly left his lips ere Jasper with one lightning blow
hit him squarely between the eyes.  Jim reeled back, and then with a
frightful oath leaped forward.  But he was powerless before Jasper's
superior training and soon he was sprawling upon the ground while his
opponent stood bending over him.

"Had enough, eh?" Jasper asked.  "If you want some more, get up.  I
haven't had half enough yet."

"Leave me alone," Jim mumbled.  "You'll pay up for this.  I'll fix ye."

"What's that you say?" and Jasper stooped lower, "You're going to pay
me back?  Well, then, I might as well fix you now, so you won't be able
to do anything in the future.  I might as well have my satisfaction
when I can get it.  So get up, or I'll knock the life out of your
measley carcass."

Seeing that Jasper was in earnest, Jim scrambled to his feet and barely
dodged the blow rained at his head.

"Fer God's sake, stop!" he yelled.  "I won't do anything to ye.  I
promise on me word of honour."

"And, you'll be good to this old man?" Jasper demanded.

"Yes, yes," and Jim trembled in every limb.  "I'll be good to him if ye
don't hit me agin."

For a few seconds Jasper looked contemptuously upon the creature
cowering before film.  He felt that he was lying, and just as soon as
he was out of his sight he would treat old David in a shameful manner,
and he himself would be helpless to interfere.  What could he do? he
asked himself.  A sudden idea came into his mind.

"What do you get for the keep of this old man?" he asked.

"Only a hundred," was the surly reply.  "Not half enough."

"Well, look here, will you give him to me?  I will take care of him for
nothing."

Into Jim Goban's eyes came a look of surprise mingled with doubt.  The
man must surely be making sport of him, he thought.  Then his natural
cupidity overcame him.  Here was a chance to get clear of the pauper
and at the same time receive money for his keep.  But how would the
overseers of the poor regard such a transaction?

"Will you let me have him?" Jasper again asked.

"Give me twenty-five dollars and he is yours," Jim replied.

"Twenty-five dollars!  No, not a cent.  You will make out of it as it
is; far more than you deserve."

"I can't do it, then," and Jim made as though to go.  "Come on," he
ordered David and Betty.  "Let's git away from here."

"Hold on," and Jasper stepped, up close to him; "if you do not let me
have the old man, I'll lay a charge against you for ill treating him, I
saw enough this morning to satisfy any one.  Let me have him, and you
need have no more worry.  Refuse, and you will regret it."

"But what will the overseers say if I give him up?" Jim whined.

"Oh, that can be easily settled.  If they make a fuss, send them to me.
But I guess they won't bother their heads."

Jim still hesitated.  He longed to get more out of this bargain.

"Hurry up," Jasper demanded.  "What do you say?"

"Oh, take the cuss, then.  I wish ye joy of him.  I'm off now.  Come,
girl, let's git home."

During the whole of this affair Betty had been a most interested and
excited witness.  She was delighted at the thought of David's freedom,
and when Jim at last agreed to part with him she could hardly repress a
cry of joy.  It took her but a second to make up her mind, and she was
ready when Jim spoke to her.

"I'm not going with you," she told him.

"Not goin'!  Why, what d'ye mean?" and Jim looked his astonishment.

"I'm going to stay with Mr. David.  He needs me more than you do.  I'm
going to take him to my own home.  He will be happy there and treated
like a gentleman."

"Ho, ho! so that's the game, eh?  Treat him like a gentleman!  Well, do
as ye like; it's nothin' to me, so I'm off."

They watched him as he strode across the field, unhitched his horse and
drove away.

"There, we're rid of him at last," and Jasper gave a sigh of relief.

"Isn't it great!" Betty exclaimed turning to David.  "To think that you
are going home with me!"

But the old man was looking at Jasper and did not hear the girl's cry
of delight.  In his eyes was an expression of gratitude.  He tried to
speak but words failed him, and tears flowed down his cheeks.  Jasper
was visibly moved, and turned suddenly to Betty.

"You are willing to keep him for awhile?" he asked.

"Yes.  Mother will be so pleased to have him, and I will work hard to
help her."

"Where will you work?  At Jim Goban's?"

"No, I am through there.  But I will get work somewhere.  I will talk
it over with mother.  I think we had better be going now."

Thrusting his hand into his pocket Jasper brought forth several bills.

"Take these," he said, "they are all I can give you now, but you shall
have more later."

"But you need the money yourself," the girl replied.

"Not as much as you will need it.  So say nothing more about it.
Good-bye.  I hope to see you again."

Jasper watched the two as they moved slowly across the field and then
disappeared down the road.  He felt lonely when they were gone, and he
sat for some time in front of the cabin lost in thought.  At times he
called himself a fool for what he had done.  Why should he be burdened
with that old man when he could hardly make his own living?  And
besides, he had no work to do, and had given away his last dollar.  But
notwithstanding all this, a secret feeling of satisfaction stole into
his heart that he had helped old David and had taken him out of Jim
Goban's clutches.

As he sat there the bell of the nearby church rang forth, and he
realised for the first time that it was Sunday morning.  He did not
feel in a mood for attending service.  He needed a long walk to think,
and shake off the spirit of depression that was stealing over him.

Entering the cabin, he prepared a small lunch, and then closing the
door he struck out across the field in the direction of Break Neck
Falls.  He wished to go there to view the scene where David planned to
erect his plant and do such wonderful things.  He smiled grimly to
himself as he thought of the old man's delusion.  Reaching the brow of
the hill just where the trail started from the main road, he paused and
looked down to his left.  He could see clearly Peter Sinclair's house
with the tall trees surrounding it.  Bitter feelings came into his
heart as he stood there.  Over yonder lived a man who had the power to
do so much good in the world.  He could help old David and give him a
comfortable home for the rest of his life.  Why should some men have so
much of this world's goods and others so little?  he asked himself.
Then he thought of Dick, and a contemptuous smile curled his lips.  He
recalled his feelings the previous day when he had watched the car go
by and listened to the salutation of "Spuds."

And standing there his feelings suddenly underwent a marvellous change,
for walking slowly across the field was Lois on her way to church.  She
was some distance away so Jasper was sure that she could not see him.
As in the past so now he was forced to worship her afar off.  It was
not for him, poor and unknown, to draw any closer.  The trees along the
path she walked could bend above her and the bright flowers could smile
up into her face.  But for him there could be no such favours.  He was
half tempted to hasten back to church.  There he could be quite near
and watch her.  He banished this thought, however, as he glanced down
at his own rough clothes and coarse boots.

Jasper watched Lois until she disappeared from view behind a clump of
birch trees.  Then leaving the highway he walked slowly along the trail
leading to the falls.




CHAPTER VII

AT THE CLOSE OF A DAY

High up on the bank of the brook which flows down from Break Neck Falls
Jasper sat leaning against the bole of a large tree.  It was drawing
toward evening and long slanting shadows were falling athwart the
landscape.  It was a hot afternoon and the shade of the old spruce was
refreshing.  By his side was a rough birch fishing rod, and nearby
wrapped up in cool, moist leaves were several fair-sized trout.  Jasper
had not been fishing for pleasure, but merely for food, as his scanty
supply was almost gone.  The fish would serve him for supper and
breakfast.  Beyond that he could not see, for he had not the least idea
what he was to do to earn a living, and at the same time assist old
David.

Though the day was exceptionally fine, Jasper did not enjoy it as at
other times.  His mind was too much occupied with other matters.  All
things seemed to be against him in his struggle to advance.  It had
been the same for years, and now the climax had been reached.  What was
he to do? he had asked himself over and over again during the
afternoon.  Should he give up in despair?  What was the use of trying
any longer?  He had seen young men succeeding in life who had not made
any efforts.  Money and influence had pushed them along.  Dick Sinclair
would soon join their ranks.  He had lived, a life of indolence, and
yet it would be only a short time ere he would be looked upon as a
prominent citizen.  The papers would speak of his ability and write
glowing articles about whatever he did.  Where was the justice of it
all? he questioned.  Did not real worth and effort amount to anything
in life's struggle?

At length, tired with such thoughts, he drew forth from an inside
pocket a small book.  It was well marked and showed constant usage.  It
was a volume of Emerson's Essays, a number of which he knew almost by
heart.  It was only natural that the book should open at the essay on
Self-reliance, for there the pages were most thumb-marked.  His eyes
rested upon the words: "There is a time in every man's education when
he arrives at the conviction that envy is ignorance."  He read on to
the beginning of the next paragraph, "Trust thyself: every heart
vibrates to that iron string."

The book dropped from Jasper's hand and once more he gave himself up to
thought.  He knew how true were those words.  He realised that envy is
ignorance, and it was his duty to rise above it.  Why should he spend
his strength in envying others?  He would conquer and make them envy
him.  Ah, that idea brought a flush to his face.  He would trust
himself, as Emerson said, and some day the very ones who looked down
upon him and spurned him would come to him.  How he was to accomplish
this Jasper had no idea.  But there was comfort in thinking about it,
anyway, and he felt sure that a way would be opened whereby he could
succeed.

He was aroused from his musing by the sound of voices.  Looking quickly
down toward the brook, he saw three people walking along the bank.  He
recognised them at once as Lois, Dick and Sammie.  At first he was
tempted to withdraw farther back among the trees lest he should be
seen.  He abandoned this idea, however, feeling quite certain that he
would not be noticed where he was.  Lois and Sammie were walking
together, while Dick was a short distance ahead.  What they were saying
he could not make out, neither did he care.  He had eyes only for the
young woman, and he noted how beautiful she appeared as she walked with
such an upright graceful swing.  Was she happy in Sammie's company? he
wondered.  She was laughing now, and seemed to be greatly amused at
something her companion was saying.  Jasper noted all this, and then
called himself a fool for imagining that she could ever think of him.
No doubt she had already given her heart to the young man by her side,
so he might as well banish her from his mind at once.  He would go away
and never see her again.

Acting upon this impulse, he was about to move softly among the trees
and disappear.  He had placed his book in his pocket and had reached
for his fish when a cry of terror fell upon his ears.  In an instant he
was on his feet, peering keenly down to see what was the matter.  In a
twinkling he grasped the whole situation.  Just across the brook a wall
of rough rocks shelved upwards to the height of about twenty feet.
Below, the water swirled and dashed over jagged boulders, receiving its
impetus from the falls farther up stream.  The path led along the top,
and in some unaccountable manner Lois had slipped and fallen over the
edge, and had gone swiftly down toward the rushing current below.  She
grasped frantically at everything on which she could lay her hands, and
was only able to arrest her downward descent when a few feet from the
water.  And there she clung with the desperation of despair, while her
two companions stood above half-paralysed with fear, and unable to
assist her.

When Jasper saw Lois go down to what seemed certain destruction, he
sprang forward and leaped down the bank as if shot from a catapult.
Into the brook he recklessly dashed and like a giant forced his way
across the current and around hidden boulders.  At times it seemed as
if he could not keep his feet and that he must be swept away.  But that
picture of the clinging woman nerved him to superhuman efforts, and
slowly but surely he edged his way toward her.  When a few feet from
the base of the rock, he saw Lois relax and slip downward.  Barely had
she touched the water ere Jasper with a mighty effort leaped forward
and caught her in his arms.  Then in an instant they were both swept
away.  Fortunately, Jasper was a strong swimmer, and as they shot
forward he was able to keep Lois' head above water, and work steadily
toward the shore.

By this time Dick and Sammie had so far recovered from their fright
that they were able to hurry down stream, and stand on the edge of the
stream where the bank sloped gently to the water.  Here they stood for
several fearful seconds watching Jasper as he struggled toward them.
They took special care not to wet their feet, but merely reached out
and helped to pull Lois ashore and lay her upon the dry ground.  More
than that they were unable to do, and naturally turned toward Jasper
for help.

"We must get her home at once," the latter remarked, kneeling by the
side of the prostrate woman.  "I am afraid she has been injured by the
fall."

Fortunately, at that instant Lois opened her eyes and fixed them upon
him in a dazed manner.  Then she remembered what had happened, and sat
suddenly up and looked around.

"My, I have given you a great fright," she said.  "It was stupid of me
to trip over that root."

"Are you hurt, Lois?" Dick inquired.

"I am somewhat bruised, that is all.  I think I must have fainted and
let go of the rock.  How did I get here?"

"Oh, Spuds got hold of you and brought you out," Dick explained.

Lois at once turned her eyes upon Jasper who was now standing a few
feet away.  She noticed his drenched clothes, and also that there was
blood upon his forehead.

"You are hurt," she cried.  "You have struck your head."

"It's nothing, I assure you," and Jasper gave a slight laugh.  "I must
have hit it against a rock when we went down, that was all.  It will
soon get better.  Never mind me, I am all right.  But you must get home
at once."

"Yes, come, Lois," and Sammie, speaking for the first time since the
accident, stepped forward.  "We must get you home at once.  Never mind
this fellow; he doesn't matter."

"Indeed he does," Lois emphatically replied.  "He saved my life, and I
can never thank him enough."

"But I would have saved you, Lois.  I was just coming to rescue you
when this fellow, who was spying upon us from the bushes, got to you
first."

Lois never forgot the look on Jasper's face as the jealous Sammie
uttered this insinuation.  He drew himself up to his full height, and
his eyes glowed with a sudden light of anger.  She saw his lips move as
if about to utter words of protest.  Instead, however, he quickly
turned, left them, and walking along the bank for a short distance
reached a fordable place in the brook.  He plunged into the water and
after a brief struggle reached the opposite bank and disappeared among
the trees.

Lois stood and watched him until he was out of sight.  She was faint
and greatly annoyed at Sammie's words.  She knew now what a cad and a
coward he really was, and was not even man enough to give credit to the
one who had rescued her.

"Come, Dick," and she turned to her brother, "let's go home," was the
only remark she made, as she took his arm and walked slowly along the
path leading from the brook.  She took no notice of the crestfallen
Sammie, who trudged along behind wondering what had come over the young
woman that she should act in such a strange manner.

Jasper could not fully understand the strange feeling that had come
over him at Sammie's unjust insinuation.  His first lightning thought
was to knock the fellow down.  Then he wanted to explain, to say that
he had not been spying.  But he knew that if he spoke he might get
excited.  No, it was better for him to leave at once, and let Lois
think whatever she liked.  He had saved her and that was all he cared
for.  But as he moved along through the woods, the few words she had
said and the expression in her eyes acted as balm to his wounded
feelings.  He made up his mind, however, not to be caught in such a way
again.  He would take good care to keep away from the Sinclairs after
that.

Going back to the place where he had left his fish, he picked them up
and started down along the brook.  He wished to get back to his cabin
as quickly as possible that he might change his wet clothes.  He was
hungry as well, and he longed for a couple of the trout he had caught.
He thought much of Lois, and wondered how she was getting along.  He
hoped that she had not been seriously injured and that she would not
catch cold from her plunge into the water.  He could not forget the
feeling that had come over him as he had sprung forward and caught her
as she was falling.  He should remember that sensation for the rest of
his life, no matter what happened.

Having reached the end of the trail, he moved swiftly along the main
highway.  He was almost to his cabin when he saw an auto by the side of
the road.  Something had evidently gone wrong, for two men were
anxiously examining it.  Jasper was about to pass when one of the men
accosted him.

"Excuse me," he began, "but could you tell me if there is a hotel or
any place where we can get supper?  We have been stalled here for some
time, and my chauffeur can't find what is the matter with the car."

"There is no hotel," Jasper replied, "and I know of no people who serve
meals.  But I have a place right near, and you are welcome to such
accommodation as I have.  It is very humble, and I warn you not to
expect much.  I have merely bachelor's quarters, and so am my own
housekeeper."

"Thank you kindly," the man returned, "I am very grateful to you, and
we shall be delighted to go with you, though we do not wish to trouble
you too much.  The trout you have make my mouth water.  You evidently
went in head-first after them," and he smiled as he observed the young
man's wet clothes.

Jasper liked this man, and this impression was increased as they walked
toward the cabin.  He was well spoken, and so gentlemanly in manner
that he found it quite easy to converse with him.  Everything seemed to
interest and please him, especially the cabin.  He called Jasper a
lucky fellow for having such a place where he could live so quietly
away from all bustle and stress of the great outside world.

"It is quiet enough as a rule," Jasper remarked with a laugh, as he
lighted the fire in his little stove after he had changed his wet
clothes for dry ones.

"Have you lived here long?" the stranger inquired, as he stretched
himself out upon the cot.

"Since the middle of May," was the reply.  "But I expect to leave
shortly.  I'm out of a job now, and so must look elsewhere."

"What have you been working at?"

"Oh, anything that turns up."

The stranger was quick to note the almost hopeless tone in Jasper's
voice as he uttered these words, and he studied the young man more
closely.

"Where did you live before you came here?" he asked.

"At college.  I was almost through when reverses came, and so I had to
get out.  I have been trying to earn enough to finish my course, but
everything seems to be against me.  I understand farming and naturally
took to the land in preference to other work."

"What were you studying at college?" the man asked.

"Electrical engineering."

"I see.  But was there not something you could have obtained along that
line?  Surely there must have been some opening."

Jasper made no reply.  There was a reason, but he did not feel inclined
to reveal his secret to a complete stranger, upon such a brief
acquaintance.




CHAPTER VIII

THE SHADOW OF MYSTERY

When supper was over, the stranger lighted a cigar and stretched
himself out upon the cot.

"This is certainly comfort," he remarked, as he watched Jasper clear
away the dishes.  "It is fortunate that we have found such hospitality.
You do not have many such visitors, I suppose.  It must be rather
lonely for you here."

"Not as a rule, though I have been much favoured lately," Jasper
replied with a laugh, and he told how his cabin had been taken
possession of the previous night.

"Well, that was cool, I should say," and the stranger smiled.  "Walked
right in, did they?"

"But I didn't mind, for they were such a queer couple; a feeble old
man, and a bright, smart girl of about sixteen.  It was nice for me to
have them here on such a stormy night.  I would have been very lonely,
otherwise."

"Where are they now?"

"They left this morning.  It is a sad story.  But as they are strangers
to you, it would hardly interest you."

"Indeed it would," was the emphatic reply.  "I am somewhat new to this
country, and would like to find out all I can about the life of the
people, especially in the country districts."

When Jasper had finished washing the dishes, he sat down upon a chair
by the side of the cot, and lighted the cigar his visitor had given
him.  He then related the story of old David and Betty, taking care to
say as little as possible about his own part in the affair.

"And so the old man is at the girl's home now, is he?" the stranger
asked.

"Yes, for a time."

"But what will become of him?"

"I do not know for certain.  I shall try to assist him all I can.  But
he will not go back to Jim Goban's if I can help it.  It is the height
of cruelty for such a refined man to live at a place like that.  I do
not know what the people of this parish were thinking about to allow
him to be put there."

"Has he any relatives?"

"It seems not.  He has been a puzzle to every one since the day he came
here.  He has been the laughing-stock of all the people because of a
peculiar notion of his."

"And what is that?"

"He is in love with Break Neck Falls over there, and talks to it as if
it were a human being.  He believes that the time will come when people
will obtain power and light from the falls, and the entire country will
be greatly benefited."

"So that is why he is called crazy, eh?"

"Yes."

"Is there really a good reason for his idea?  Is there a large
waterfall?"

"Yes.  I have been there several times, and consider it a good place
for a plant.  The old man has curious drawings of his entire plans,
which I shall show you as he left them with me this morning.  He must
have forgotten them in his excitement, as I understand he guards them
very carefully.  People laugh at Crazy David for the jealous way he
protects his treasure."

"Did you say his name is David?" the stranger asked.

"Yes.  David Findley, so I believe.  But he is only known as 'Crazy
David' in this parish."

As Jasper uttered these words, the man lying on the cot rose suddenly
to a sitting position, and looked keenly into the face of the young man
before him as if he would read his innermost thoughts.  With an
apparent effort he checked himself, and with a slight laugh resumed his
former position.

"I got worked up over the hard luck of that old man," he remarked.  "It
is a downright shame that he should be called crazy, and misunderstood.
But, then, that has always been the way.  Men who have done most for
their fellow men have been looked upon with suspicion, and termed fools
or madmen.  May I see his drawings?"

For some time the stranger studied the rude lines old David had made
upon the paper.  Not the slightest mark escaped his notice, and he
plied Jasper with numerous questions most of which the latter was
unable to answer.

"I am fond of studying human nature," the visitor at length
volunteered, as if to explain his remarkable interest in the old man,
"and I must say that this is one of the most interesting cases I have
ever come across.  Here we have an old, poverty-stricken man, somewhat
weak-minded, who has the vision and the enthusiasm of youth, combined
with a child's simplicity.  And he really believes that people of
capital will carry out his ideas, does he?"

"Yes, he is sure of it."

"And he has no doubts as to the final outcome?"

"No."

"This scheme gives him considerable pleasure, I suppose."

"Yes, it is his very life.  It cheers him and buoys him up, and makes
him treat all discomforts as of the present, which will vanish when
once he comes into his own."

"So he expects to get very rich, does he?"

"Oh, yes.  He talks about what he will do when he has money.  It
certainly would be a great pity to take such a hope from him.  I
believe it would kill him at once."

For a long time they talked, and it was late when they went to bed, the
stranger with the chauffeur in the adjoining room, and Jasper upon the
cot.  The latter found it hard to get to sleep, as many thoughts kept
surging through his mind.  He wondered why his visitor should take such
a keen interest in the welfare of old David.  He recalled, too, his
sudden start when David's name was mentioned, and the excuse which had
been given did not altogether satisfy him.

Jasper was awake early next morning, and had the frugal breakfast ready
by the time his two visitors came from their room.  As soon as
breakfast was over, the chauffeur left to look after the car.  The
stranger then pushed back his chair, lighted a cigar, and handed one to
Jasper.

"Please do not trouble about the dishes now," he began in a tone which
somewhat surprised the young man.

"I have been thinking over what you told me last night, and am greatly
impressed by the sad condition of that old man.  You have no work in
view, so I understand?"

"You are right," Jasper replied.

"Well, then," the other continued, "I wish to make a definite
proposition to you on several conditions.  I wish to employ you for one
month, and will give you one hundred and fifty dollars, if that will be
satisfactory."

It was Jasper's turn now to start, and look with astonishment at the
man before him.  Was he in earnest? he asked himself, or was he merely
joking?

"Ah, I see you are astonished," and the stranger smiled, "but I assure
you that I mean what I say, and to prove it, I shall pay you in
advance."

"But what are the conditions?" Jasper stammered.

"They are three," the stranger replied after a slight pause.  "First,
that you are to take special care of that old man.  How you are to do
it I shall explain later.  In the next place you are to ask no
questions as to why I am doing this.  And last of all, you are not to
say who is doing this, neither to the old man nor, in fact, to any one."

For a few seconds Jasper looked at the stranger in a quizzical manner.
He was wondering whether the man was really in his right mind.

"Isn't that a strange proposition to put to one you know so little
about?" he asked.

"In most cases it might be," was the quiet reply.  "But I have good
reasons for what I am doing, and do not think that there will be any
mistake.  Are you willing to enter my employment for a month?"

"Now, that all depends.  I need the money, God knows, but I must
understand more about what is expected of me in connection with the
care of the old man."

"I can easily settle that.  You are first of all to get a good place
for him to live, and, if possible, secure some dependable person to be
his companion who will take a special interest in his welfare.  You are
to keep a detailed account of all expenses, and send the bill to me at
the end of the month.  This address will find me," and he drew forth a
card and handed it to the young man.

There was nothing on the card to reveal to Jasper the identity of the
man who was taking such a remarkable interest in old David.  It simply
told that the stranger's name was Robert Westcote, of 22 Princess
Street, Woldun.

"I think everything is satisfactory now," and Jasper lifted his eyes to
the stranger's face.  "I am not likely to ask any questions, and as to
telling people who you are, there will be no trouble about that.  In
fact, I am not intimate enough with any one here to wish to tell, even
if I desired to do so."

"That is good," Mr. Westcote replied.  "I could not have chosen a
better person for my purpose."

"When do you want me to begin my work?" Jasper asked,

"At once, that is, if you can see your way to do so.  But first of all,
I should like to visit this old man.  I am somewhat curious about him
now that he is under my protection.  How far is he from here?"

"About five miles, I should judge, though I have never been there
myself.  He is at Mrs. Bean's, and she lives on a back road."

"Very well, then, we shall go just as soon as the car is ready, and I
should like for you to go with me."

It took the chauffeur some time to find out what was the matter with
the car, and when the damage was repaired, the three started down the
road at a fast rate.  This was something new to Jasper, and he leaned
back in the comfortable seat and gave himself up to the enjoyment of
the moment.  He need not worry any more for the present about his
living, as he had a cheque for one hundred and fifty dollars safely
stowed away in his pocket.  As to the mystery connected with it all, he
did not feel inclined to bother his head.  In fact, he was becoming
greatly interested, and was now quite anxious to see what the final
outcome would be, and why this stranger had taken such an unusual
interest in an old pauper.

It did not take them long to reach Mrs. Bean's house, where they drew
up before the gate.  It was a small, humble abode, but everything about
the place was scrupulously neat and clean.  Flowers bloomed in front of
the house, while several large trees stood a short distance away.
Under one of these they saw old David sitting in a rocking-chair with
Betty by his side.  She had been reading to him but had laid down her
book to look at the car, which was an unusual thing in that settlement.
Seeing Jasper, she sprang quickly to her feet with a cry of delight,
and hurried toward the road.  Her face was aglow with excitement, and
Mr. Westcote thought that he had never beheld a more perfect picture of
radiant health and beauty.

"This is the young woman I was speaking to you about," Jasper remarked,
as he stepped from the car.

"I am delighted to meet you," and Mr. Westcote held out his hand.  "I
have heard about you, and have been quite anxious to see you.  How are
you making out with your new charge?"

"Great," and a smile wreathed the girl's face.  "He is so happy here,
and likes for me to read to him.  But he is so funny at times, and
interrupts me to ask questions."

"What about?" Mr. Westcote enquired.

"Oh, about Break Neck Falls.  He wants to know if I can hear the water
speaking, and, of course, I always do," she added with a slight laugh.
"He wanted me to go there this morning, but as mother and the boys are
away I could not leave, so I am trying to satisfy him by reading."

"Would your mother be willing to keep him for a time, do you think?"
Jasper asked, "that is, if she were paid enough?"

"I'm afraid not," and the girl's eyes roamed in a thoughtful manner
toward where David was sitting.  "You see, our house is too small, and
there is hardly room enough as it is.  And besides, we are too far away
from the Falls.  Mr. David needs to be quite near so that he can visit
the place whenever he takes the notion, which is quite often.  That is
the only thing which will make him happy."

"Quite right," Mr. Westcote assented.  "He should live as near as
possible.  But may we see your charge?" he asked.

"Certainly," and Betty at once led the way across the field to the big
shady tree.

Old David, seeing them coming, rose to meet them.  He stood very erect
and dignified as Jasper took his hand, and then introduced Mr.
Westcote.  He was visibly embarrassed that he did not have chairs for
all, and offered his own to the stranger.

"Please keep your seat," Mr. Westcote told him.  "I prefer to sit on
the ground.  What a delightful place you have here, sir," and he looked
around upon the scenery.

"It is very beautiful," David assented, "and I can hear the Falls so
plainly, especially at night."

An amused twinkle shone in Betty's eyes as she turned them upon
Jasper's face.  She knew very well that it was impossible to hear the
sound of the falling waters, and that it was purely imagination on his
part.

The stranger, however, did not smile.  In fact, there was an expression
of sadness upon his face as he watched David.  He said very little,
being content to let the others do the talking.  But he observed the
old man very carefully without apparently doing so.  What his thoughts
were he kept to himself, and when he arose to go, he took David's hand
in almost a reverent manner, and looked searchingly into his eyes as if
trying to find something there which he missed.  He hardly spoke a word
on the way back but seemed lost in deep thought.  As Jasper alighted
from the car in front of his cabin, Mr. Westcote laid his right hand
upon his shoulder.

"Take good care of that old man," he said.  "Let nothing interfere with
your watchfulness until you hear from me again.  Get the best place you
can for him, no matter what it costs."

That was all, but the expression upon the stranger's face, and the
impressive manner in which he uttered these words gave Jasper cause for
deep thought during the remainder of the morning.




CHAPTER IX

UNITED FORCES

Jasper was now in a position to give up his entire time to old David's
interests.  No longer need he worry about working on the farm, nor how
he was to obtain his daily food.  He was provided for a month at least,
and he was most anxious now to enter upon the odd task which had been
assigned to him.  Robert Westcote, the stranger, interested him
greatly, and he felt sure that he should hear more about him later.

Having eaten his simple lunch, he started down the road.  The village
of Creekdale was about two miles away, and there he hoped to find a
house suitable for David.  The only man he knew in the place was the
storekeeper, and from him he believed that he could secure some
information, and at the same time get his cheque cashed.

It was a beautiful afternoon, and his heart was lighter than it had
been for many a day.  He walked along with the swing of a man who has a
definite purpose in life, and from whose heart all gloomy thoughts have
been banished.  He did not try to account for this mood.  It was
sufficient for him that in some way a load had been for a time lifted
from his mind.  He would let the future look out for itself, and enjoy
the present as far as it was possible for him to do so.

Reaching a clump of trees, he sat down by the side of the road to rest.
The shade was refreshing, for he was quite warm as he had been walking
fast.  Birds sang in the branches above him, and fanned the air with
their light wings.  Butterflies zigzagged past, and honey-laden bees
sped by like express trains.  He watched them with much interest, and
mused upon their activity.  Each had a special work to do, and was
performing it to the best of its ability.  He was glad now that he was
alive, and had something definite in view.  It was far better than
groping around in a haphazard way looking for work.  Something seemed
to tell him that he was entering upon the trail of a mystery and he was
eager to follow the scent wherever it might lead.  The spirit of
adventure was in his blood, mingled with the nectar of romance.  It had
always been there, inherited from his ancestors.  It was that same
spirit which had caused him to leave the farm and enter college several
years before.  It had always been with him, and was stronger now than
ever.  He would follow the quest to the end, and see what the outcome
would be.

Jasper was about to rise and proceed on his way when, glancing along
the road, he saw Lois coming toward him.  His heart beat fast when he
saw her, and his first impulse was to get away out of sight.  Why
should he meet her? he asked himself.  She had no use for him, and
would not consider it worth while to talk to one of whom her brother
and Sammie Dingle were always making fun.

As he hesitated, Lois drew nearer.  She was walking very slowly as if
in deep thought.  She wore a simple white dress, and a light,
broad-rimmed hat which partly shaded her face.  To Jasper she seemed
the very embodiment of grace and beauty as she moved toward him.  In
her all the charm of the glorious day, of bird and flower seemed to be
combined.  He was lifted out of himself, entranced, and by the time she
was opposite the clump of trees he was standing by the side of the
road, with hat in his hand, confused and abashed.

His sudden appearance startled Lois for an instant.

But when she saw who it was, she smiled, and held out her hand.

"I didn't notice you," she began, "as I was lost in thought.  But I
have wanted to see you to thank you for what you did for me yesterday.
I shudder to think of what would have been the result if you had not
been there.  I hope you were not offended at Sammie's words."

"And you feel none the worse for your fall and wetting?" Jasper
evasively replied.

"Oh, no, I am all right now.  It takes more than that to knock me out.
I was going over this morning to thank you, but----"

She paused, and looked thoughtfully across the fields.

"I know," Jasper hastened to explain.  "You didn't like to come to my
shack.  It is only natural.  It would have given people something to
talk about."

Lois looked at him for an instant and a sudden fire of resentment shone
in her eyes, while her face flushed.

"Do you consider me such a weak person as that?" she demanded.  "Do you
imagine that I care what people might say?  I never let the frills and
shams of life interfere with me when I am in the way of duty."

"Forgive me," Jasper apologised, "if I have offended you.  I spoke
without due thought.  But one hardly knows how to take people these
days, and I am sorry that I judged you wrongly.  I am so glad that you
are not like others."

"We will forget all about it," Lois replied, with a smile.  "Yes, I was
going to see you this morning to thank you, no matter what people might
say, but I was sent for by Mrs. Peterson who lives just back there, and
I have been with her ever since.  She is in great trouble, as her
husband is an invalid, and she has no way of making a living.  She is
thinking of taking in summer boarders, and she wanted to talk to me
about it."

"And what did you advise?" Jasper questioned.

"Nothing," was the emphatic reply.  "It is a difficult problem, and I
do not know what can be done.  In the first place, the house is too
small for more than two or three boarders, and she could not expect to
have them for more than a few weeks at the most in the summer time.  If
she could have them all the year around it would be different.  And
besides, it would be very hard for Mrs. Peterson to look after them.
It takes most of her time caring for her husband, who is quite weak,
and not always very considerate, I am afraid."

As Lois was thus talking, Jasper was doing some serious thinking.  He
was greatly interested in what she told him, not so much about the
Petersons as others he had in mind.  He believed that here was the very
place for old David.

"Do you mind going back with me to see Mrs. Peterson?" he asked.

"Why, no," Lois replied, turning her eyes to his, as if trying to
comprehend why he should wish to meet Mrs. Peterson.  "It will be
better than standing here in the heat."

As they walked slowly along the road Jasper told her about David, how
he and the girl had taken refuge in his cabin, where the old man was at
present, and that he was looking for a suitable place where he could
live.  He said as little as possible about his own share in the matter,
excepting that he had rescued David from Jim Goban and was going to see
that he was well cared for.  He did not say anything about Robert
Westcote, remembering his obligation of silence.

Lois was much interested in what he told her, and her mind was very
busy as she walked along by his side wondering where he was to get the
money to carry out his plan.

"It will cost considerable," she remarked when he was through.  "Do you
think you can manage it?"

"I am quite certain that there will be no trouble," he replied.  "Just
why I am doing this I cannot explain now, but I assure you there will
be no difficulty.  David is to be well provided for, as far as money is
concerned, and he is to have some one to look after him all the time."

"What, at Mrs. Peterson's, if she will take him?" Lois asked in
surprise.

"Yes, that is my idea.  If that girl Betty will come, she will be just
the person."

They had paused now and were standing at the entrance of the lane
leading up to the Peterson's house.  It was a most beautiful spot, with
tall trees lining both sides of the drive-way.  They were on a gentle
elevation with the village of Creekdale on their left but a few rods
away.  It was an interesting collection of snug country-homes of
farmers, river boatmen, and several retired sea captains.  All the
people in Creekdale knew one another's business, and the women could
see what their neighbours were doing, and some could easily talk from
door to door about the events of the day.

It was only natural that Mrs. Raymond should leave her washing-tub long
enough to watch Lois and Jasper as they stood for a few moments by the
side of the road.  She wondered what they were doing there, and her
curiosity was so much aroused when they at length walked up the
drive-way to the Peterson's house that she slipped over next door to
discuss it with Mrs. Markham.

The people of Creekdale often talked about the Petersons, calling them
stuck-up because they mingled but little in the social life of the
place.  "I have lived next door to them for nigh on to ten years," Mrs.
Raymond once confided to a neighbour, "and only once have they been in
my house.  I guess Captain Peterson must have some money laid by, for
he does nothing but work in his garden and look after his hens, cow and
pig."

When, however, the Captain was stricken with partial paralysis and was
unable to work, the belief became general that he certainly did have
considerable money laid away.

The Petersons' house was as neat and cosy as hands could make it.  A
spacious verandah swept the front and south end of the building.  Over
this clambered a luxuriant growth of grape vines.  Here Captain
Peterson was lying in a large invalid's chair, puffing away at a
short-stemmed corn-cob pipe.  He was surprised to see Lois back so
soon, and he looked with curiosity upon Jasper, wondering where he had
come from.

"Couldn't leave us, eh?" he questioned, as he gazed with admiration
upon the bright, animated face before him.

"No, I had to come back," Lois laughingly replied.  "Your company is so
attractive that I could not resist the temptation of bringing another
to enjoy it.  This is Mr. Jasper Randall, Captain Peterson.  He has
come to see you on special business."

"Glad to see you, sir," and the captain reached out his hand.  "Have a
chair; there's one right there.  Do ye smoke?"

"Oh, yes," and Jasper thrust his hand at once into his pocket.  "Do you
mind?" he asked, turning toward Lois.

"Not at all," was the reply.  "But you two smoke to your hearts'
content while I have a chat with Mrs. Peterson.  I suppose she's in the
house, Captain?"

"Yes, in the kitchen.  At least, I heard her there a short time ago."

Lois was absent for about twenty minutes and when she returned the two
men were talking in the most friendly manner.

"This is the first good chat I've had with a man for a long time," the
captain told her.  "He has made me feel better already."

"I hope he hasn't forgotten the object of his visit in listening to
your sea yarns," Lois laughingly replied.

"Tut, tut, girl," and the captain blew a great cloud of smoke into the
air.  "D'ye think that is all I talk about?  We had something just as
interesting to discuss to-day, and so I forgot all about the yarns."

"And so you are willing to take old David and Betty into your house,
are you?"

"Sure.  I'm satisfied if Julia is.  She's in charge of the ship now
since I've lost my sea-legs."

"Mrs. Peterson is delighted at the thought of having them," Lois
replied.  "Here she comes now, and can speak for herself."

Mrs. Peterson was a pleasant-faced little woman who appealed to Jasper
at once.  He felt quite sure that she was just the person to look after
David.  She appeared so motherly and sympathetic that it was easy for
him to talk to her as she showed him the rooms David and Betty could
have.

"Why, you will give them half of the house," Jasper exclaimed.

"Only three rooms." was the reply.  "The old man can sleep downstairs,
and he can have this big room adjoining.  The girl can have a
comfortable room right at the head of the stairs."

Jasper and Lois were both greatly pleased, and as they walked away from
the house they discussed it like two animated children.

"How delighted David will be with the place," Lois remarked.  "He will
be so comfortable there, I feel sure, and Mrs. Peterson will take such
good care of him."

"And he will be able to hear the falls so plainly," Jasper replied.
"He can sit on the verandah or at the window of his room and listen to
the waters as long as he likes.  It is just the place for him."

"How much does Mrs. Peterson want a week for their board?" Lois
enquired.

"I never asked her," was the quiet reply.  "I shall find that out
later, for it is a matter of minor importance."

Lois glanced up quickly into her companion's face.  She longed to know
where the money was to come from.  Surely this man who was working
digging potatoes did not intend to pay the entire amount.  But Jasper
volunteered not the slightest information.  He continued to talk about
David, and his surprise when he learned of what was being done for him.

"I am so grateful for your assistance this afternoon," Jasper told Lois
as they at last paused at the gate leading to the Sinclair house.  "I
started forth uncertain what to do, and behold, everything has turned
out as if by magic."

"I am thankful that I have been of some assistance," was the quiet
reply.  "My mind is greatly relieved, too, for I was much worried about
the Petersons.  Two heads are better than one after all, are they not?"




CHAPTER X

WHEN DREAMS COME TRUE

"Isn't this lovely!" Betty exclaimed, as she stood in the middle of the
large room which had been assigned to David.

It was the second day since their arrival at the Petersons' house, and
their delight at everything was not only amusing to Mrs. Peterson but
somewhat pathetic as well.  She could not account for the girl's
remarkable care of the old man.  She would allow nothing to interfere
with her attention upon him, and she arranged a cosy spot by the big
north window where he could sit and listen to the sound of his beloved
falls.

"You will spoil him," Mrs. Peterson told her once when they were alone
in the kitchen.  "You will make him as helpless as a child.  It is not
good for men to be waited upon too much."

"Are you not afraid of spoiling your husband, then, Mrs. Peterson?"
Betty replied.  "You treat him just like a child."

"Oh, but he is an invalid, and can't help himself.  That is the reason
why I have to wait upon him."

"But Mr. David is a wonder," Betty insisted, "and he must not be
neglected."

There was such an expression of admiration in the girl's eyes that Mrs.
Peterson had not the heart to smile at her enthusiasm.

"In what way is he a wonder?" was all she asked, as she went on with
her work.

"Oh, he has a great thing in his head, which he is thinking about all
the time.  It has to do with the falls, and he has told me a whole lot
about it.  He will be very rich some day, and we are going to have such
a nice house of our own.  You see, I am to be his housekeeper, and
nurse him when he is sick."

It was a great pleasure for Captain Peterson to have David and Betty at
the house.  No longer did he have to sit alone for hours upon the
verandah as he had an audience now to listen to his tales of the sea
and the places he had visited.  David was a good listener and enjoyed
hearing the yarns, although he kept one ear open for the sound of the
falls.  Nothing must interfere with his interest up there.

One afternoon the captain was speaking about England, and mentioned
Liverpool.  David became unusually interested, and even let his pipe go
out as he sat with his eyes fixed intently upon the captain's face.

"You seem to know Liverpool pretty well," he at length remarked, as the
captain paused to re-light his pipe.

"Should say so," was the reply.  "Guess I know about everything there
worth knowing, especially along shipping lines."

"There must be some big firms there, eh?"

"Big!  I should say so.  Why, I could name a dozen right offhand, which
have ships sailing around the world.  Now, there's the Dockett concern,
for instance.  Holy smokes! but they're wealthy.  If I told you the
business they do you wouldn't believe me."

"No?"  David laid his pipe upon the verandah railing.  He had to do it
because his hand was trembling so violently that he could hold it no
longer.

"Indeed you wouldn't," the captain continued, not noticing his
companion's agitation.  "And you should see old Dockett himself, who
owns it all, so I understand."

"What about him?" David asked in a voice scarcely above a whisper.  For
once he had forgotten his beloved falls.

"Ho, ho, I wish you could see him," and the captain leaned back and
laughed as he had not laughed for months.  "He certainly is a queer
one."

"In what way?" David questioned.

"Well, it is hard to explain.  He looks like a bear, and he acts like
one, too.  My, I've heard him get his tongue on men lots of times, and
he is a holy terror.  But he's a great business man, so I believe, and
has made heaps of money."

"What does he do with it?" David asked.

"Piles it up, I guess.  He hasn't a chick to leave it to, so I
understand."

"Hasn't he a wife?"

"No, not when I last heard of him, which was five years ago.  It isn't
likely he's married since then."

David was unusually quiet the rest of the day.  There was a far-away
look in his eyes and nothing interested him, not even the voice of his
falls.  Betty was quite anxious, and confided her trouble to Mrs.
Peterson.

"Do you think he is going to be sick?" she asked.  "Suppose he should
die, what will become of that great thing he has in his head?"

"Oh, I guess he is all right," Mrs. Peterson soothed.  "Perhaps he is
thinking out something else, and will surprise us with some new idea."

"Oh, do you think so?" and the girl's eyes grew big with wonder.
"Won't it be great if he does!"

David was much brighter the next morning and sat for some time out upon
the verandah.  Betty had gone to the office for the mail, as Mrs.
Peterson was too busy about the house.  She did this nearly every day
now, and enjoyed the walk.  The captain was always anxious to get his
daily paper, and sometimes there would be a letter from an old friend.

It was almost noon when Betty arrived.  Her cheeks were flushed more
than usual and she was greatly excited.

"What's up now?" the captain enquired.  "Haven't been scared, have ye?"

"It's a letter for Mr. David!" she replied.  "Just think of that!"

"H'm," and the captain gave a grunt of disgust.  "Is that all.  I
thought maybe ye'd seen a ghost.  Why should a letter so upset you?"

"Oh, but he never got a letter before since I've known him, and it must
be very important."

While the two were talking David rose from his chair and stepped toward
Betty.

"A letter for me?" he asked, in a somewhat doubtful voice.

"Yes, here it is.  You had better open it at once."

The old man took it in his hand and stood studying it for a few
seconds.  Then he slowly opened the envelope, and drew forth the
letter.  As he scanned the contents, his eyes grew suddenly wide with
astonishment and his hands trembled violently.

"Oh, Mr. David, what's the matter?" Betty cried as she observed his
intense excitement.  "Is it some bad news?"

But the old man did not seem to notice her.  He stood there, shaking in
every limb, staring upon the letter.

"Tell me what it is," the girl again demanded.  "I want to know at
once."

This imperious order brought David to his senses, and without a word he
handed her the letter.  Eagerly seizing it, she began to read.  It took
her longer than the old man to make out its meaning, and when the truth
at last dawned upon her mind she gave a glad cry of joy, and her eyes
beamed with delight as she turned them upon his face.

"Oh, isn't it great!" she exclaimed.  "Five thousand dollars for that
thing in your head, Mr. David.  Won't you be rich.  Now we can have a
house of our very own, and I can be your housekeeper!"

"But that isn't all, Betty," David replied.  "I am to be Honorary
President of the company, just think of that.  And they are to carry
out my plans and do just what I wish.  Girl, my dreams are to come true
at last.  I shall live to see my beautiful falls bringing a blessing to
the entire country.  I wonder if people will laugh at me now, and call
me crazy."

It was only natural that intense excitement should reign at the Haven
for the next few hours.  The captain and his wife were greatly
impressed by the good fortune which had come so suddenly to old David.
They could hardly believe it possible, and they had the feeling that
there had been some mistake.  But Betty would not hear of such a thing.
She was sure that it was all true, and it was due to the wonderful
thing that David had in his head.

Dinner was late that day, and they had just finished when Jasper
arrived.  Then out upon the verandah he heard the remarkable story.  It
was Betty who told it, while David and the captain sat smoking near by.
He was shown the letter as well, the cause of all the excitement.
Jasper read it over several times, and then stepping over to David he
grasped his hand.

"Allow me to congratulate you, sir," he began.  "Such good luck does
not come to many in this country.  I am so thankful that your plans are
to be carried out after all."

"And they are to consult me, and carry out my every wish," David
replied.  "It is so stated there," and he pointed to the letter.

The enthusiasm of the old man was so intense and childlike that Jasper
had not the heart to say one word that would in any way dampen his joy.
To him, however, the whole thing was a great puzzle.  Was it a joke, he
wondered, which some people were playing upon this simple-minded man?
A company was mentioned, but its name was not given.  And further, why
should any company be willing to pay five thousand dollars for David's
idea, which was not new?  It had been successfully carried out in other
localities.  Surely a concern which was able to make such a liberal
offer must have full and accurate knowledge about hydro-electric plants
and what they had accomplished in the past.  And why should David be
made Honorary President of the company?  Was Robert Westcote, the
stranger, the cause of it all?  He had not heard from him since the day
of their visit to Mrs. Bean's, and but for the cheque which he had
received he would have been inclined to consider the whole thing as a
hoax.

Jasper kept his thoughts, however, to himself, and sat for some time on
the verandah taking but little part in the conversation.  Betty and the
captain did most of the talking, while David sat near with a happy
expression upon his face.

"When are you thinking of starting housekeeping on your own account?"
the captain enquired.  "You'll be so mighty important now that you
won't want to stay with us any longer."

"Don't you worry, Captain," Betty laughingly replied.  "We're not going
to leave you just yet.  You see, we haven't any house to go to, and it
will take the rest of the summer to make arrangements."

When Jasper left the Haven he walked slowly down the road toward the
post office thinking over carefully all that he had just heard.  Every
day he had been expecting news from Mr. Westcote, giving information as
to what was expected of him.  Hitherto he had been disappointed.  But
to-day he was rewarded when the postmaster, in addition to his daily
paper, handed him out a letter.  Jasper felt that this was the one he
had been looking for, and he hurried out of the building and carted
homeward.  Reaching a shady tree by the side of the road, he sat down
upon the ground and tore open the letter.  A week of thought and
inactivity had made him anxious to know something more of what was
expected of him, and he was quite certain that now the veil was to be
lifted and the mystery partly solved.

The letter was from Robert Westcote, and although it was somewhat brief
it brought him considerable satisfaction.  His eyes kindled with
animation and his pulse quickened as he considered the message he had
just received and meditated upon the possibilities of the future.




CHAPTER XI

CURIOSITY AND ANXIETY

Never in the memory of the oldest inhabitant had Creekdale been so
greatly excited.  How the news first arrived no one could tell.  But
everybody seemed to have heard the rumor at once, and immediately there
was much running to and fro among the villagers.  The store was the
principal place where the men gathered to discuss the report and to
find out what was the latest bit of information.  Men would find some
excuse for leaving their work in the fields in order to drop into the
store during the afternoon lest some choice morsel of news should be
missed.  Every evening they would gather there such as they had never
done before in the summer months.  It was always in the winter that
they made the store their headquarters when work was not so pressing.

It was Andy Forbes, the storekeeper, who made it a point of keeping
abreast of the times.  What he didn't know of the events of the parish
was not considered of any importance.  He had a way of appearing to
know more than he really did.  But concerning this affair at the falls
he was completely blocked.

"The whole thing stumps me," he acknowledged one night, after an
animated discussion had taken place as to the purpose of it all.  "I
can understand about the engineers making the surveys to find out how
much power can be obtained from the falls.  That Light and Power
Company in the city has been playing the hog too long, and robbing the
people.  It is something fierce what they charge.  It is only natural
that an opposition company should be formed to force down the prices.
But the question is, Who is back of this new movement?  and what has
Crazy David to do with it?"

"And so you really think he knows something about at?" Ben Logan
enquired.

"Sure.  I could tell you a number of things but my position as
postmaster compels me to be silent."  This was merely another of Andy's
methods, and it always impressed his hearers in a marked degree.

"But what about that chap who was working for old Squabbles?" Billy
Dexter asked.  "He seems to be mixed up somehow with the affair.  He
spends most of his time now at the falls with the engineers.  I
understand that he was the one who got the Petersons to take in Crazy
David and that girl, Betty Bean."

"Oh, he's a queer one," Sandy Morton replied.  "I met him the other day
on the road and asked him what was going on up at the falls and who
were the men back of the work?  My, you should have seen the look he
gave me.  It was 'Mind your own business,' as plain as if he had said
it in words.  I ought to have knocked him down, for it was a dead
insult."

"Better not try anything like that, Sandy," Ben Logan laughingly gibed.
"He'd wipe up the dust with you in no time, if I'm not much mistaken.
Anyway, he minds his own business, and that's something in his favour."

"I believe he's working for the bunch," the store-keeper volunteered.
"I cashed a cheque of his some time ago, and----  But, there, I must
not let out secrets."

While the people of Creekdale were consumed with curiosity at what was
taking place at the falls, Peter Sinclair was becoming filled with
anxiety, which increased as the days passed into weeks.  Lois found it
harder than ever to get along with him, and she always dreaded his
home-coming every evening from the city.  Occasionally he travelled on
the river steamer, but as a rule Dick drove him to the city in the
morning in the car and brought him back at night.  This was to the
young man's liking, as he found it lonely in the country where he
missed his boon companions.  Lois was glad that this was so as she
could have the days free to follow her own inclinations.  But she was
always careful to have dinner ready when her father and brother
arrived, and to make their home-coming as bright and pleasant as
possible.

Whether Mr. Sinclair appreciated this attention Lois did not know, as
he never made any comment.  At times, he treated her as if she were
merely a housekeeper, and not his own daughter interested in his
welfare.  He ate and slept in the house and spent his Sundays there.
But apart from paying the bills, which, were always light, he left
everything else to his daughter.

The night when the men of Creekdale were talking so earnestly at the
store, Mr. Sinclair was late reaching, home.  Dinner had been waiting
for over an hour, and Lois was reading on the verandah, for it was a
beautiful evening, with not a ripple on the surface of the river.  She
longed to be out there in her little boat where of late she spent so
much of her time.

To almost any one else this home-coming would have been a great
pleasure, especially if the day in the city had been trying.  He would
have found the cool, quiet house with such a daughter waiting to
receive him most comforting.  But with Mr. Sinclair it was altogether
different.  He did not seem to notice the neatly-set dining-room table,
with its snow-white linen and the fragrant flowers so artistically
arranged in the centre.  Neither did he pay any special attention to
Lois, who, clad in a simple white dress, sat at the head of the table.

Lois intuitively realised that there was something out of the ordinary
worrying her father.  He was more silent than ever, and took no part in
the conversation between his son and daughter.  Dick related to Lois
his experience that afternoon with a party of his friends who had
motored over to the Sea Breeze Park, and had luncheon at the Sign of
the Maple.

"It's a dandy place," Dick exclaimed, as he passed his plate for
another helping of roast lamb.  "They certainly do serve things up in
style, and it is no wonder that so many city people go there.  But you
could never guess who came in while we were eating."

"Any one I know?" Lois asked.

"Sure; a special friend of yours," and Dick gave a knowing grin.  "He's
been under your care for years.  I guess you know Spuds all right."

Lois' face flushed at these words, but she looked calmly at her brother.

"What is there remarkable about seeing Mr. Randall at such a place?"
she enquired.  "Why shouldn't he go there as well as you or any one
else?"

"Oh, nothing in that, only I thought maybe you'd be interested."

"So I am in a way, as I thought that Mr. Randall was up at the falls.
He seldom goes to the city, so I understand, but attends strictly to
business."

"I guess he was doing that all right at the Sign of the Maple.  He
seemed to be so busy that he forgot to eat."

"Was he alone?"

"Oh, no.  There was the prettiest girl I ever set eyes on.  I tell you
Spuds is a lucky fellow to know such a beauty.  He's gone up a peg in
my estimation since I saw him with her.  You should have seen her eyes,
especially when she smiled at something her father was saying."

"Her father, did you say?" Lois asked.  It was somewhat of a relief for
her to know that there was a father present and that she was not alone
with Jasper.

"Well, I suppose he was her father," Dick replied, "though I am not
positive.  He was a fine looking man, anyway.  I'd like to get
acquainted with him, for it's worth knowing such a chap who has a
daughter like that.  I wonder how Spuds happened to meet him.  By
jingo! I've got it," and Dick brought his fist down upon the table with
such a bang that the dishes rattled.  "I'll bet you anything that he
has something to do with that Break Neck Falls affair, for old Tim
Parkin, the big lumber merchant, was along, too.  He owns some fine
timber tracts up this way, and no doubt there was a deal on.  That
confounded mysterious company will need a great amount of lumber, if
rumours are correct."

As Dick uttered these words his father looked up.  His interest had
been suddenly aroused, and for the first time he joined in the
conversation.

"Did you say that Tim Parkin was at the Sign of the Maple?" he growled.

"Yes, Dad," the young man replied.  "He was looking bigger and more
prosperous than ever.  He seemed mighty pleased over something."

"Did you near what they were talking about?"

"No, I couldn't make out anything as we were on the opposite side of
the room."

"But you could see the girl, though.  If your ears had been half as
good as your eyes you would have heard what was being said."

"But any one can see much farther than he can hear," Dick protested.
"You surely don't expect the impossible from me, do you?"

"I don't expect anything from you, sir," and Mr. Sinclair glared at his
son.  "I have long since given up expecting.  All you care for is to
have a good time riding around in the car, attending parties, and
looking for the prettiest girls.  If you were as much interested in
business as you are in pleasure you would be of some use to me.  But I
guess you'll have to get a hustle on mighty goon, though, from the look
of things.  I won't be able to indulge you in your idleness much
longer."

"Why, Dad, what do you mean?" Dick enquired.  "You're not going to
throw me overboard, are you?"

"Oh, no, I won't do it.  But there are others who will, or I'm very
much mistaken."

"Who--why?" the young man stammered.  "I don't understand you, Dad."

"I mean that new Light and Power Company which has been formed.  That
is what will do it."

"Oh, is that all?" and Dick breathed a sigh of relief.  "You certainly
did give me a jolt.  I thought you were speaking of something real.
But that company's all a hoax, isn't it?  Tommy Flowers said it was
nothing but a scare to force you to cut your rates.  The whole thing is
so mysterious, so people say, that they consider it a put up job to
force your hand.  Why, the names of the men who form the company are
not even known."

"H'm, that's all that people know about what is going on," Mr. Sinclair
retorted.  "That company is no hoax, mark my word.  It means business
of a most serious nature, and it is getting to work, too.  Don't you
live in a fool's paradise, boy.  If you do, there will be a rude
awakening, and sooner perhaps than you expect."

"What, have you heard anything of late, Dad?" Dick asked.

"Well, I have heard enough, and it is more than hear-say at that.  A
strong company has been formed to utilise the water of Break Neck Falls
for light and power to supply not only the city but the entire country.
The scheme is a big one, almost gigantic, I should say.  And there
seems to be plenty of money back of it, too.  It is an English concern
which has recently opened an office in the city.

"What is the purpose of such a company working here?" Dick questioned.
"One would naturally think that a city much larger than ours would
offer more inducements."

Mr. Sinclair pushed back his chair from the table, and lighted a cigar.

"That is one of the things which puzzles me," he at length replied.
"Why a company with large capital should build a big plant at the falls
to supply light and power in such a limited locality, is more than I
can understand.  I cannot see how it will pay even if it gets full
control."

"Who is in charge of the city office?" Dick asked.

"A man by the name of Westcote.  He is an Englishman, so I believe.  He
seems to have full charge of everything.  He must have been the man you
saw at the Sign of the Maple with Tim Parkin, for he has a daughter
with him, who recently came to the city."

"But what has Spuds to do with the concern, and how did he come to meet
this man Westcote?"

"He is evidently in his employ.  But where he met him I do not know.
Perhaps Lois can tell us," and he glanced around upon his daughter.

Lois suddenly started and looked keenly at her father as if she had not
heard aright.  This was the first time that he had ever hinted at any
interest on her part in Jasper.  A feeling of resentment welled up in
her heart.

"Why should I know?" she enquired, "and what reason have you for asking
me such a question?"

Mr. Sinclair, however, did not deign to make any explanation, but
puffed away at his cigar.  Lois took this as a direct insult and
started to leave the table.  She wished to get away by herself that she
might think it all over.

"And where does old Crazy David come in?" her father asked.  "What
interest has he in that concern?"

"I have not the slightest idea," Lois impatiently replied.  "Why do you
expect me to understand such things?"

"But you should know.  You see that old man every day, and are so
interested in his welfare.  Surely he must have told you something, and
if he did not you should have tried to find out.  Remember, you are my
daughter, and my interest should be your first concern.  Both you and
Dick think that you have no responsibilities in life, and that I will
always provide for you.  If we are not careful that new company will
put us out of business; so you two must do all you can to help me.
Something must be done to cheek that concern and I want you to assist
me.  As it is, I am working in the dark and do not know what to expect
next, or who are the ones working against me.  Is it old David who is
merely acting the part of a fool, or is it that young man who pretended
to be a hired hand, who worked awhile for Simon Squabbles?  There is
something queer about the whole thing, and I am nearly crazy trying to
puzzle it all out."

To these words Lois made no reply.  She quietly left the table and made
her way out of the house and walked down to the shore.  Here she felt
more at home, and the stillness which reigned over land and water
soothed her, bringing a restful peace to her heart and mind.




CHAPTER XII

PYRAMID ROCK

A good home, plenty of well-cooked food, and proper attention did much
for old David.  His strength, and health improved, and although he lost
nothing of his interest in the falls, he was quite content to listen
more to the sound drifting down the valley instead of visiting the
place as often as formerly.  The spot he liked best of all was the cosy
corner on the verandah, just outside the window of his room.  Here the
vines clambered up over the sides, forming a shelter from the burning
sun and a refuge from the wind when the days were cool.

Jasper was a frequent visitor at the Haven, and he was not slow to
notice the change that had come over David.  Hitherto the old man had
been content to listen to the voice of the falls and utter brief and
almost mystic words about what the water would do.  But latterly he had
given greater vent to his thoughts and enlarged upon the plans he had
been revolving in his mind.

It was a beautiful evening not long after Jasper had been at the Sign
of the Maple, that he was sitting with David and Betty in the
accustomed place.  The captain had retired, and Mrs. Peterson was busy
in the kitchen.  Jasper told of the progress that had been made at the
falls and how the engineers had finished their preliminary work, and
had declared the undertaking most feasible.  The definite start of
building would not begin until the next spring, though in the meantime
necessary preparations would be made so that the work could be pushed
forward then as rapidly as possible.  Logs would be needed for building
purposes, and many large poles suitable for carrying the wires to the
city and throughout the country.

"I have been requested to undertake this work," Jasper told them, "and
so will be busy all the fall and winter.  In a few weeks I hope to have
a number of men and teams at work in the woods.  It will be a fine
thing for Creekdale as it will put so much money in circulation by
giving employment to all available men during the winter when as a rule
little is going on, so I understand."

"Oh, won't that be nice," Betty exclaimed, while her eyes danced with
animation.  "My brother will be able to earn money right at home.
Jimmy has been planning to go to the city next winter to earn some
money to help pay off the mortgage on our place.  Mother doesn't want
him to go as he is only sixteen, but he thinks he should be earning
something."

"You have some fine trees on your place, have you not?" Jasper asked in
reply.

"Oh, yes, lots of them.  You see, our farm is part of the old Dinsmore
Manor, and no logs have been cut on it for years as they have not been
worth much.  My father said before he died that they would bring a lot
of money some day, and they would make us rich.  That's why mother has
been holding on to the place and trying to pay off the mortgage.  But
she finds it hard work.  Jimmy works for the neighbours, but Steve and
Dora can't earn anything yet.  I am helping all I can."

"Those trees are very valuable now," Jasper remarked.

"Have you seen them?" Betty asked, in surprise.

"Yes, I have been all over the place, and there are acres of the finest
trees I have ever seen.  We shall need many of them, that is, if your
mother will sell."

"Won't that be great!" and the girl clapped her hands with delight.  "I
know she will sell if she can get a fair price for them."

"There should be no trouble about that, Betty.  Logs are higher than
they have been for years, and those who own them are fortunate.  The
company wants only the best and is willing to pay a good price, so I
believe.  But there is something I would advise your mother to do."

"What is that?"

"Keep a sharp look-out upon those trees.  The city Light and Power
Company, of which Mr. Sinclair is manager and principal owner, has land
right next to yours.  Most of the best trees have been cut there for
poles, and it is only natural that envious eyes should be east upon
your mother's valuable property.  Mr. Sinclair does quite a lumbering
business on his own account, so I understand."

"Oh, do you think that Mr. Sinclair would do anything like that?" Betty
asked in surprise.

"I trust not," was the reply.  "Nevertheless, it is just as well to be
on guard in case something does happen.  You might speak to your mother
about it when you see her."

The next day David and Betty paid a visit to the falls.  They had not
been there for over a week, which was a most unusual thing.  It was a
beautiful afternoon, and a complete harmony seemed to reign everywhere.
David was in excellent spirits and he talked much about the wonderful
improvements which were to come to the country.  He pointed out a
number of the stakes the engineers had driven into the ground, and
explained where the power house would be built.

"A year from now," he told her, "there will be wires running to the
city and all through the country.  The city people will have light for
their houses and power for their machinery at cheap rates.  The farmers
will have electric lights right in their homes and barns; they will
have power to saw their wood, churn their butter, thresh and grind
their grain, besides doing so many other things.  It will make a
wonderful change in the lives of all.  Young people will not want to
leave the farms and go to the city.  It will be a joy for them to
remain, and so much of the drudgery will be taken away."

"Won't that be splendid!" Betty replied.  "How did you ever think of
all those things?  Why, the people didn't know you were thinking so
much about their welfare when you were living all alone, and when they
said you were crazy."

"No, girl, they did not know," and the old man gazed thoughtfully off
into space.  "They believed that I was a fool, and perhaps they had
reason for so thinking.  You see, I was very poor and had no means of
carrying out my plans.  It has always been the way, and why should I
have expected anything different from thousands of others who have
tried to help their fellow men?  But now things have changed, and they
will soon learn that old David was not so crazy after all."

They were seated upon the bank of the stream as they thus talked.  On a
bough of a near-by tree a squirrel was scolding, and off in the
distance several crows were lifting up their raucous voices.  Betty
picked up a stone and tossed it into the water below, and then watched
with interest as it fell with a splash.

"I can throw farther than you, Mr. David," she bantered.  "I can throw
a stone to that big rock over there."

"I haven't thrown a stone in a long time, my child," was the reply.

"Well, try it then," was the command.  "Here is a nice smooth one."

Rising to his feet, David took the stone and with a wide sweep of his
long arm hurled it far down the stream almost to the base of the rock.

"You didn't do it," Betty shouted with delight.  "I can beat that, see
if I can't."

She half turned to pick up another stone when she suddenly paused as
her eyes rested upon a man coming toward them.  It was Peter Sinclair,
and as he drew near and spoke to them, it seemed to Betty that the
atmosphere had changed, and the day was not as fine as it had been but
a few seconds before.  She wanted to get away, for this man's presence
seemed to weigh upon her in an ominous manner.  The reason why she
could not explain.

"Having a nice time here, eh?" Mr. Sinclair remarked, as he sat down
upon the bank.  "That walk has puffed me.  Do you come up here often?"
he asked, turning toward Betty.

"Whenever Mr. David takes the notion," was her reply.  "I always come
with him, and we have such a pleasant time."

"And do you always stop here and spend your time in throwing stones at
that rock?  Are you not wasting your time?"

"We might be doing worse, though," Betty replied, somewhat nettled at
the man's words.  "We might be throwing stones at you or somebody else."

"At me!" and Mr. Sinclair looked surprised.

"Yes, at you.  But perhaps it's safer to throw them at that rock over
there.  It doesn't mind for it knows we're only in fun.  It's a special
friend of mine, and that's why I like to be near it.  You would never
believe that it saved half my father's farm several years ago."

"What, that rock?"

"It certainly did, and I shall never forget what it did for us."

"Tell me about it," and Mr. Sinclair sat down upon the ground.  The
mention of the Bean farm had suddenly aroused his interest, and made
him willing to listen to this country girl's story.

"It was a long time ago," Betty began, "just after my father was
married.  He had bought a piece of land off of the Dinsmore Manor,
about one hundred acres, I think it was.  After he had paid for the
place there was some trouble about the line between him and the man who
had bought another piece of the manor next to him.  They agreed to have
the line run over again.  I don't understand all about it, but, anyway,
when the line was run it cut my father's place almost in two, and he
was afraid he was going to lose all that land where those fine logs are
now.  It was a funny mistake, but it was soon settled."

"What had that rock to do with it?" Mr. Sinclair enquired.

"Oh," and the girl gave a slight laugh.  "I forgot that part.  You see,
the surveyor was to start running the line from the big pyramid rock on
this brook.  It is called that because of its shape.  Father happened
to be away from home the day the line was run and the surveyor started
from another rock farther down the brook, which looks something like
that one over there.  Wasn't it funny?  So you see that is why I am so
fond of that big rock and come here as often as I can to be near my
good friend."

As Betty finished, a peculiar expression might have been detected in
Peter Sinclair's eyes, and for a few seconds he gazed steadily at the
rock before him.  It seemed that the girl's story had greatly
interested him and started him off on a new line of thought.  Just what
it was he kept to himself and with an apparent effort turned his
attention once more to Betty.

"You will not come here as often, I suppose, when the company gets to
work," he remarked.  "Things will be much changed along this brook, and
perhaps your old friend, the rock, may be disturbed."

"You are right, sir," David replied, speaking for the first time.
"There will certainly be marvellous changes all over this country in a
year or two.  You will hardly know the place then."

"That is interesting.  And can you tell me who will perform these
wonders of which you speak so confidently?"

"The falls will do it," and David stretched out his right arm.  "Light
and power will come from there to transform city and country.  Living
will be made far more tolerable in both."

"But who are the men back of all this?" Mr. Sinclair asked.  He felt
sure now that he was on the verge of a new discovery.

"I am the man," and David stood proudly erect.  "It was my plan which
suggested the movement."

"I know all that," and Mr. Sinclair rose impatiently to his feet.  "But
where does the money come from? and, who are the men who form the
company?  That is what I want to know."

"That I cannot tell you, sir.  And why should it matter?  I am
concerned about the improvements and not where the money comes from."

"H'm, that's a queer way to do business," was the disgusted reply.
"Well, I must be off up the brook.  I've wasted too much time already.
Look out for your big rock, little girl, and see that no one disturbs
it."

"Oh, I guess it'll stay there all right," Betty replied with a laugh.
"My friends never leave me."

They stood and watched Mr. Sinclair until the tree hid him from view.

"I don't like that man," and Betty stamped her small foot upon the
ground.  "He makes me feel creepy all over just like I always do when I
see a snake or a rat.  Let's go home."

About an hour after they had left the place, Peter Sinclair drew near,
and stood looking at the big rock across the brook.  Then he walked
along the bank until he came to the smaller rock of which Betty had
spoken.  He next turned his eyes northward and pointed with the
forefinger of his right hand as if tracing an imaginary boundary line.
As he did so a smile of satisfaction lighted his face, and when he left
the brook and started homeward, his step was quicker and more elastic
than it had been for many a day.




CHAPTER XIII

THE DISTURBING LETTER

It took Jasper longer than he had expected to get everything ready for
his fall and winter lumbering operations.  He found it hard to obtain
as many teams as he needed, and greater difficulty still to procure the
right kind of men.  He offered good wages, but the choppers held out
for more.  Although such matters had been left to Jasper, yet he did
not feel inclined to pay such wages as were demanded.  At length,
however, he succeeded in rounding together a band of men upon whom he
felt he could depend, and he hoped in a few days to begin work upon the
building of the cabins for the men and the stables for the horses.

Jasper often mused upon the peculiar situation in which he was placed.
Everything seemed to depend upon him.  The engineers, having made their
surveys, had departed, leaving him in charge.  The buying of the food
supplies devolved upon him, though the bills were sent to the city
office for payment.  He had not seen Robert Westcote since the day he
had luncheon with him at the Sign of the Maple.  He had merely received
specific information as to the various kinds of logs required, their
length and size, as well as the places where they were to be hauled
near the falls.

During these busy days Jasper had seen nothing of Lois.  He knew that
she visited the Haven regularly, and Betty always had a great deal to
tell him about her.  But somehow he had missed meeting her, and every
time he left he felt disappointed, and made his way back to his lonely
cabin which seemed to become more lonely as the days passed.  Sometimes
he would stand on the hill and look down upon the Sinclair house,
hoping that he might catch a glimpse of her who was so much in his
mind.  He would scan the river, thinking he might see her out there.
At length a great longing came upon him to see her before he should go
into the woods.  He knew that in a few weeks at the most she would be
leaving for the city with her father, and then all hope of meeting her
again for months would have to be abandoned.  Somehow he could not bear
the thought of her going.  As long as she was near he could work
better, and her presence in the place was like an inspiration.  He felt
that she knew what he was doing, and took an interest in his welfare.
But in the city she would be far away, and taken up with so many
interests she would have no time to give any thought to him.

All preparations had now been made for the lumbering operations and
work would begin on Monday morning.  Saturday found Jasper with nothing
to do.  He spent the forenoon in packing up his belongings to take with
him into the woods.  They were very few, and one small grip would
contain his scanty library which he could not bear to leave behind.
The next time he went to the city he intended to purchase a number of
books upon which he had set his heart.  He would have the long winter
evenings for reading in the little cabin he was to erect for his own
special use.

About the middle of the afternoon he decided to pay a visit to the
Haven.  He wished to see David and Betty before going away, and learn
how they were making out.  But the hope that he might see Lois was the
real reason why he decided to go.  Several times he had thought of
visiting her at her own home.  But as he had never been there and had
received no invitation, he did not feel inclined to go where perhaps he
was not wanted, and where his presence might be looked upon as an
intrusion.  He often upbraided himself for thinking about her at all.
What hope had he that she would ever deign to look upon him with
favour?  What had he to offer her?  He was poor, and he had no
guarantee that his employment with this mysterious company would be
permanent.  In a few months he might again be seeking for work.

But no matter what resolutions Jasper made he could not banish Lois
from his mind.  It was she who several years before had unconsciously
inspired him to launch out into the world and make something of
himself.  The thought of her had always urged him on when most
depressed and discouraged.  In his darkest hours of gloom he had seen
her eyes filled with sympathy fixed upon him as on that day he had
first met her and had fled disgraced from her father's house.

Such impressions were not easy to banish in an instant, and so as he
knocked at the door of the haven he fervently hoped that Lois might be
there.  But as he entered David's room other interests engaged his
attention.  Hitherto all had been peace there.  The old man was
generally seated by the open window listening to the voice of his
beloved falls.  But now there was a distinct atmosphere of excitement.
Mrs. Bean was there, and her face had a most worried expression.  Betty
had been crying, but seeing Jasper she brushed away her tears and
sprang to her feet.

"Oh, Mr. Jasper," she cried, "isn't it awful!  Have you heard the news?"

"What news?" Jasper asked in surprise, as he took a chair by David's
side.  "I haven't heard anything of special importance."

"It's about Mr. Sinclair, that's who it is.  Just think, he wants to
take all of our logs!"

"Take your logs!"

"Yes, that's what he's going to do.  Mother got a letter from him and
she has just read it to us.  He says there is a mistake about the line
between his place and ours, and that all those fine logs belong to him.
He says he had a new line run last week and that the old line is wrong.
He warns mother not to touch or sell a log there, for if she does he
will sue her."

Betty was excited, and her words rushed forth like a torrent.  For a
few minutes Jasper could hardly believe that he had heard aright.

"Do you mean to tell me," and he turned to Mrs. Bean, "that what your
daughter says is true?  Surely there must be some serious mistake."

"I'm afraid not," was the reply.  "There is the letter, which you can
read for yourself."

It took Jasper but a few seconds to scan the brief note, and when he
was through he sat staring at it as if he had not seen aright.  Was it
possible, he asked himself, that Peter Sinclair was stooping to such a
contemptible piece of business?  And to do it to a widow at that added
to his meanness.  What justification did he have for doing such a
thing? he wondered.

"Was there ever any dispute about the line?" Jasper asked.

"None at all," Mrs. Bean replied.  "A mistake was made years ago just
after we were married.  The surveyor started from the wrong rock up the
brook, and the line then run cut off that part which Mr. Sinclair is
now claiming.  But it was rectified just as soon as my husband came
home, and there has been no trouble since until now."

"Did Mr. Sinclair notify you that he was going to have a new line run?"
Jasper enquired.

"No, I knew nothing about what was taking place until I received that
letter."

"I wonder what suggested such a thing to him?" Jasper mused as if to
himself.  "There must have been something."

"Why, I think I know." Betty exclaimed.  "I do not believe he ever
thought about it until that day he was talking to Mr. David and me up
the brook.  We were near Pyramid Rock, and I told him about the mistake
the surveyor had made years ago in running the line.  He seemed to be
very much interested then.  Maybe that was what started it.  Just
think, it was all my fault.  Oh, if I could only hold my tongue once in
a while how much good it would do."

At that instant a knock sounded upon the door, and when Betty had
opened it Lois entered.  She looked surprised when she saw the visitors
in the room, and at once noticed the worried expression upon Mrs.
Bean's face.

"This must be your special afternoon for receiving company," she
remarked with a smile, as she took David's hand.  "It isn't often you
have Mrs. Bean and Mr. Randall to see you on the same day, is it?"

"Mr. Randall has been here before," was the reply, "but this is the
first time that Mrs. Bean has favoured me with a call.  It was special
business which brought her here to-day."

"You're not going to take Betty away from Mr. David, are you?" Lois
asked, turning to Mrs. Bean.

"Oh, no; it is something far different from that.  It is a very serious
matter, I assure you."

"What, no one ill at home, I hope?"

"No.  The boys were well when I left."

An awkward silence followed, and Lois felt that there was something of
a private nature which these people were discussing, and that she had
interrupted their conversation.

Jasper, who had risen to his feet as Lois entered the room, divined the
thoughts which were passing through her mind, and came to her
assistance.

"Let Miss Sinclair see the letter, Mrs. Bean," he suggested.  "Perhaps
it will explain matters better than we can."

Without a word Mrs. Bean complied with this request, and then leaned
back in her chair with a deep sigh.

Much mystified, Lois ran her eyes over the letter, and as she did so
her face underwent a marvellous transformation.  The sunny expression
departed and the colour faded from her cheeks, leaving them very white.
The words seemed to fascinate her, and for a while she stood staring
upon them.  Then a tremor shook her body, and her right hand closed,
crushing the letter within it.  With a strong effort she regained her
composure and turned toward the widow.

"I cannot understand this," she began.  "I had no idea that my father
would do such a thing.  There must be some mistake.  I shall go now and
think it all over.  Will you come with me, Mr. Randall?  I would like
to speak with you."

Without another word the two left the house and walked slowly down the
lane leading to the road.  Presently Lois stopped and turned to her
companion.

"I am almost heartbroken over what my father has done," she began.  "I
have stood by him, and have tried to shield him all I could, but what
is the use of doing so any longer?"

"Could you not speak to him, and induce him to change his mind?" Jasper
asked.

"I can do nothing.  He has even turned against me.  He believes that I
am his enemy, and that I know more about the affairs of the new company
than I am willing to tell him.  He is becoming more unbearable every
day.  Only last night he told me that I could leave him whenever I
wanted to as he could get along better without me.  He said that he did
not want a traitor in his house.  Oh, it is terrible!  I cannot
understand what has come over him.  He was always hard and
unsympathetic, but never like this."

"And will you go?" Jasper enquired.

"At first I thought I would.  But after thinking it all over very
carefully I have decided to remain with him.  He needs me now more than
ever.  You have no idea what a helpless man he is.  I shudder to think
what would become of him should I leave him at the present time."

"But it might teach him a lesson if you should leave him for a while,"
Jasper urged.  "It is not right that your life should be made so
miserable."

He was looking into her downcast face as he said this.  Her hands were
clasped before her, and how he longed to seize them in his, and tell
her all that was in his heart; how he would look after her and bestow
upon her that love which her father denied her.

"I must not forsake him," was her low reply.  "He is my father, and I
must remain by his side.  I promised my mother that I would.  We shall
leave for the city next week, and I dread the thought of going."

"But you will be able to forget much of your trouble there, will you
not?  Your social life will be so different, and----"

"Don't speak of such a thing," she interrupted.  "You little realise
how I despise so many of the social gatherings held there.  What do
they amount to?  What good do they do?  I enjoy amusements, but I think
people should not make them the sole object in life.  But that seems to
me to be just what so many do.  I want to be of some use in the world,
and I believe the best way to be happy is to help others."

They were walking slowly along as Lois uttered these words.  She spoke
deliberately as if she had considered them carefully, and was not
speaking under the influence of the moment.

"You are right, Miss Sinclair," Jasper replied.  "I, too, have come to
realise that he who thinks only of self finds unhappiness, while he who
forgets self in seeking to help and uplift others will find the
greatest joy."

The tone of certainty in his voice caused Lois to glance up into his
face.  She liked his words, especially as she felt they were real.

"And you were not always like that?" Lois asked.

"Oh, no.  Only recently have I come to view things in a different
light."

"What caused the change?"

"It was old David."

"Old David!  I am surprised to hear you say that.  I had no idea that
he was able to influence any one except Betty Bean."

"He has influenced me as well, though it was all done unconsciously.  I
have been watching him closely for some time, and ever since I have
known him he has been so happy.  Even when he had not a cent and was
sold to the lowest bidder, he did not lose heart.  And why?  Because he
was thinking of others, and what his plans would do for the people both
in the city and in the country.  He was willing to endure poverty and
taunts that those around him might be benefited.  He was misunderstood,
but it made little or no difference to him.  He was happy in the
thought that he was going to do good.  To me he is a wonder, and I
believe I can do no better than endeavour to follow his example and
think less of myself.  When I entered into the employ of this new
company I did it merely for the money I was to get out of it, and a
certain spirit of curiosity as to the outcome.  Now, however, I am
working with a far higher motive.  I begin to see what a benefit this
undertaking will be to the entire community and a blessing to so many,
even though at present they may not realise it."

They had reached the gate leading to the Sinclair house by the time
Jasper had finished.  The colour had returned to Lois' cheeks, and her
eyes were now filled with animation.

"Oh, I am so glad to hear you speak as you do," she replied.  "It
strengthens my own convictions to hear you express yourself that way,
and I feel that I shall bear my part more bravely in the city than
otherwise I would have done."

Jasper's pulse beat quicker at these words.  So she would think of him,
then, in the midst of her active city life.  There was a great comfort
to him in the thought.

"You will return next summer, I suppose," he remarked.  "We shall miss
you very much in the meantime."

"I hope to do so, and it will be something to look forward to.  But you
will surely come to see us when you visit the city.  I shall be so
anxious to hear all the news from Creekdale."

"Nothing would give me greater pleasure," Jasper replied.  "But I do
not expect to leave the woods before spring.  Even if business should
take me to the city, I should not feel like making a social call.  I
should frighten you and your friends who might happen to be with you by
my rough clothes and hard hands.  Oh, no, it would not be proper, so I
had better stay away."

Lois was not slow in detecting the note of bitterness an his voice as
he uttered these words.  She was aggrieved that he should think that
his rough appearance would make any difference to her.  And yet she
understood his feelings.  His sensitiveness would make him most
unwilling to go to a place where he would be looked upon with ridicule,
and at the same time embarrass the ones he happened to visit.

"You need not worry about your appearance when you visit me, Mr.
Randall," and her eyes met his as she spoke.  "I shall think all the
more of you if your hands are rough and your face weather-beaten.  I
shall never be ashamed of the marks of honest toil.  I must go now, but
I shall expect to see you before spring."

To Jasper that was one of the happiest times of his whole life.  He
believed that she was interested in him, while the look in her eyes and
the words she uttered were to him an inspiration during the following
days and weeks of weary work in the woods.




CHAPTER XIV

SUBTLE INFLUENCE

Although Lois preferred to remain in the country, yet she did not waste
her days in repining over her life in the city.  She at once looked
about for opportunities of usefulness.  These she found in St.
Saviour's, the church she attended.  Her musical abilities made her a
welcomed member of the choir.  But she was not satisfied with merely
singing.  She wished to do more, and she soon found an outlet in
assisting the unfortunate ones in the parish.  It was through "The
Helping Hand Society" that she found she could do the most effective
work, and she never tired of going from house to house where her
services were most needed.

Dick often upbraided her for giving so much of her time to Church work,
and said that she should go with him to dances and whist parties.

"I have no interest in such things," she told him over and over again.
"There is too much to be done around us in helping others, to spend all
of one's time upon such gaieties."

"But think what people are saying," her brother protested.  "They call
you unsociable and stuck-up, and it is hard for me to listen to such
things."

Lois laughed at Dick's fears and told him not to worry.  She said that
she was quite able to look after herself, and did not mind what people
were saying so long as she was doing what was right.

When Christmas season came around Lois found herself more busy than
ever.  There were so many baskets to be provided for the needy, and
this year they were going to send a number to poor families out in the
country districts.  It was just when she was in the midst of this work
that Dick asked her to attend a dance with him on Thursday night.

"If you don't go this time I shall never ask you again," he told her.
"It's to be at Mrs. Dingle's, and you know how cut up she will feel if
you refuse her.  Sammie, too, is expecting you, and he will never visit
us again if you do not go."

"But how am I to leave my work, Dick?" Lois questioned.  "We are so
busy every night packing the boxes, which we must get off as soon as
possible.  I am more interested in them than I am in what Mrs. Dingle
and Sammie might think.  They surely know by this time that I do not
care for them."

"Well, come for my sake, then," Dick pleaded.

"That is a better reason why I should go," and Lois smiled upon her
brother.

"And you will go?" Dick was all eagerness now.  "There's to be a jolly
crowd there.  Sammie told me that he has invited a crack-a-jack of an
artist he met at the club.  He is an English chap and has been out here
only a short time.  He puts out some great stuff in the way of
pictures, so I understand.  Then, that Westcote girl is to be there.
My, I'm anxious to meet her.  She is worth while if what I hear about
her is true."

The mention of the Westcote girl gave Lois more interest in the dance
than she had hitherto taken.  She did want to see her as well as Dick,
for she had often thought about her since she had heard that Jasper had
luncheon with her and her father at the Sign of the Maple.  It was
unusual for her to take an interest in a stranger.  But this was
different, and so she decided to accompany her brother.

Mrs. Dingle was delighted to have Lois at her party, principally on her
son's account.  She had chosen her for Sammie from all the eligible
girls she knew, and the idea that Lois might object to becoming Mrs.
Sammie Dingle never once entered her mind.  There were financial
reasons as well, for was not Peter Sinclair manager and chief owner of
the City Light and Power Company?

Lois had not been long in the room, ere she felt herself affected by
some unknown influence.  She could not account for this feeling as she
had never experienced, anything like it before.  Even when on the floor
in the midst of a dreamy waltz, a sense of dread almost overwhelmed
her.  A weight seemed suddenly to press upon her heart, as if some
terrible disaster were near.  Hers was not a mind to be easily
disturbed by such things, and she was not naturally of a superstitious
nature.  She tried to shake off the feeling, but all in vain.  What was
the cause of it? she asked herself over and over again.

That waltz was the longest she had ever experienced; and most thankful
was she when Sammie at last led her off the floor.  As she was about to
sit down she happened to glance to her right, and as she did so her
eyes met those of a man standing not far away.  Intuitively she
realised that there was the source of her strange agitation.  It was
only for an instant that their eyes met, but it was long enough for
Lois to realise that some subtle influence had come upon her which
would affect her whole life.

With as much composure as possible she resumed her seat.  She longed to
be alone that she might think it all over, and endeavour to cast off
the spell which was depressing her.  She tried to reason it out, but
her thoughts were interrupted by Mrs. Dingle who stood suddenly before
her.

"Lois, dear," she heard her say, "I want you to meet my famous guest,
Mr. Sydney Bramshaw, the noted English artist, who has favoured us with
his presence to-night.  I have been waiting this opportunity ever since
you arrived, but could not get you and Sammie separated long enough to
do so until now."

These closing words annoyed Lois and she longed more than ever to leave
the room, especially so when Bramshaw sat down by her side and began to
talk to her in a familiar manner.

"I wanted to meet you as soon as I saw you enter the room," he told
her, "and I almost despaired of obtaining an opportunity."

"Why should you be so anxious to meet me?" Lois replied.  "I am sure
that I have done nothing to merit your special attention."

"Oh, but you are so decidedly superior to the rest, don't you know.  I
am somewhat gifted with a discerning mind, and am able at a glance to
tell the gold from the dross."

If Bramshaw imagined that his companion was susceptible to such
flattery he was greatly mistaken.  His words disgusted Lois, and yet
she must remember that he was Mrs. Dingle's guest and that she must be
agreeable as far as it was possible.

"You are an artist, so I understand," she replied.

"Yes, in a way.  I am fond of observing the beautiful in the common
things of Nature, and placing them upon canvas.  So many go through
life with their eyes shut.  They have eyes but do not see.  With me it
is different, and because of my ability to see and depict the real
things of life, I have received considerable recognition."

"That must give you satisfaction," Lois murmured.

She tried to seem interested, but it was a difficult undertaking.

"It does in a way," and Bramshaw assumed an air of careless
indifference.  He was a little man, and his effort made him seem
ridiculous.  "But, it is so seldom that one meets with kindred spirits,
don't you know.  There are so few who are able to discuss the finer
points of art.  I would not mind in the least enlightening those around
me, but they, as a rule, are so unwilling to listen.  With you,
however, it is different.  You have a trained mind, and that makes such
a vast difference."

Lois was about to make some half-hearted reply, when her eyes rested
upon the face of a girl on the opposite side of the room.  It was the
most beautiful and perfect face she had ever seen, and she wondered who
she was and where she had come from.  She tried to listen to what
Bramshaw was saying and at the same time watch the girl before her.
She was talking to Dick, and she noted the animated expression upon her
face as she smiled at something he was saying.  It must have been about
her for she suddenly turned and their eyes met.  For an instant only
the girl hesitated, and then with a graceful movement swept swiftly
across the room and stood before Lois.

"Pardon me," she began, as she took Lois' hand, "I could not help
coming to you as soon as I saw you.  Your brother was telling me what a
hard time he had to get you away from your Church work to come to the
party.  When I heard that I wanted to meet you at once.  I am Margaret
Westcote, and have been in this country but a short time, and
everything is so new and interesting to me."

"Ducedly tame, I call it," Bramshaw interposed before Lois had time to
say a word.  "I can't for the life of me see what you find congenial in
a land like this, Miss Westcote."

"It all depends upon what you call tame, Mr. Bramshaw," was the
somewhat sarcastic reply.  "If you spend your time thinking only about
yourself it is no wonder you are bored.  I haven't heard of your doing
anything worth while since you came to this city."

"Come, come, Miss Westcote," Bramshaw protested, as he stroked his
silky moustache with the soft white fingers of his right hand.
"Artists, you should realise, are generally misunderstood.  You cannot
judge us according to ordinary standards.  We are often most intensely
busy when we seem to be inactive.  Our apparent idleness is the time
when valuable impressions are being imbibed to be produced later in
masterpieces for the benefit and admiration of the whole world.  It is
utterly impossible for ordinary minds to grasp this, but it is true,
nevertheless."

"I beg your pardon, Mr. Bramshaw," and the girl made him a slight
graceful bow, "I really forgot that you are an artist.  Appearances are
so deceptive, you know.  I shall leave you now to carry on your
imbibing process.  Perhaps Miss Sinclair will come with me, so that you
can have the imbibing time all to yourself.  It would be a pity to
spoil your great masterpiece."

Lois was surprised at Miss Westcote's sarcasm, and, she fully expected
that Bramshaw would be angry.  But he did not appear to mind in the
least.  On the contrary, he smiled all the time she was speaking, as if
her words greatly amused him.  Lois was glad of any excuse to leave
this man whose very presence depressed her in a remarkable manner.
When at last alone with Miss Westcote in an adjoining room, she sank
into a comfortable chair in a cosy corner.  Her face was unusually
pale, and this her companion at once noted.

"You are tired," she sympathetically remarked, taking a seat by her
side.  "You seem to be greatly upset."

"It is that man," Lois replied with considerable emphasis.  "I never
had any one to affect me as he does.  I cannot understand it.  I am not
superstitious, and I have always prided myself upon my self-confidence,
but I cannot account for the feeling that has come over me to-night."

"Oh, that man would upset almost any one," Miss Westcote replied.  "I
can not endure him."

"You do not evidently mind speaking plainly to him," Lois remarked.

"Certainly not.  When I take a dislike to any person I generally say
just what I think, especially to such a cad as that."

"You know something about him, then?"

"All I want to.  He has been trying to get my father to give him the
position of looking after an old man up the river.  Mr. Randall has
been doing it, and Bramshaw wants to have him discharged so he can get
the job.  Just think of that."

"Why should he wish to do that?" Lois asked in great surprise.  "If he
is an artist why should he want to take care of old David?"

"So you know the old man?" Miss Westcote enquired.

"Oh, yes.  And I know Mr. Randall, too.  He is so good to old David."

"I know he would be.  I met him once at the Sign of the Maple with my
father, and he seemed to be so different from most men.  He was so
manly and had such a strong face.  I liked him as soon as I saw him."

"He deserves great credit, Miss Westcote.  He is a self-made man, and
his life has been a hard one.  He has had to struggle against many
obstacles.  But he will win and make a name for himself, I feel quite
sure."

It was impossible for these two to be long alone in such a quiet spot.
Just when the conversation was becoming interesting, they were sought
for by their partners for the next dance, and reluctantly they were
forced to forego the many things they wished to say to each other.




CHAPTER XV

THE "CUT-OFF"

The meeting with Margaret Westcote was a great event in Lois' life.
Hitherto, her lot had been somewhat of a lonely one, with no special
girl friend to share her confidences.  Her interests had always been so
different from others that she was not looked upon by any as a boon
companion.  She often reasoned with them and asked why they should make
selfish pleasure the principal motive of living when they could have
more enjoyment by putting self last and others first.

With Margaret Westcote, however, it was different.  She was after Lois'
own heart, and the two were as one in their interests.  Each supplied
what the other lacked; one her vivaciousness, and the other her
calmness of mind.  Their friendship was not a growth but a fusing at
the first meeting.  They were now very much together, and Margaret took
a keen interest in the work of getting the Christmas supplies ready for
needy families.

Dick was delighted that this beautiful girl was so much at the house,
and for the first time in his life he found Church work most
interesting.  He was always ready to help, but was generally in the
way.  It was quite evident that he was greatly in love with Margaret,
though she on her part treated him as a mere boy and not as a lover.
He could not seem to realise that she was an excellent judge of
character, and preferred men who did things instead of spending their
time in idleness.  Lois understood the girl's feelings, and the truth
began to dawn upon her that Jasper Randall was Margaret's ideal type of
a man.  One who could battle and overcome was the man who appealed to
her.  Whenever Jasper's name was mentioned Margaret's eyes would
sparkle with animation, and she never tired of talking about him and
the struggle he had made in life.

The week before Christmas Lois became more enthusiastic than ever with
the work of getting the boxes ready to be sent to the various families.
She longed to interest her father, and one morning before he left for
his office she asked him if he would not do something for the families
of the men who were working for him in the woods on the old Dinsmore
Manor.  She had never spoken to him about the letter he had written to
Mrs. Bean, feeling sure that it would be of no avail.  But she had
learned through a letter from Betty that the choppers had not yet
crossed the line, and for this Lois was thankful.  Perhaps he did not
intend to take the logs, she reasoned, but had written the letter
during one of his cranky moods, with no intention of putting his threat
into practice.

"Why should we send anything to country families?" her father asked
her.  "They earn good money, and why should we help them?"

"But there are some very poor families," Lois replied, "and I know they
can hardly make a living.  There is Mrs. Bean, for instance.  She
hasn't the bare necessities of life at times, and a present this
Christmas would be a blessing to her."

"I can't help that," Mr. Sinclair angrily retorted.  "It's none of my
business if she is poor.  Where would we be, I'd like to know, if we
handed out to such people?  Why, there are thousands of them."

It was in no happy frame of mind that Mr. Sinclair left the house and
made his way down town.  Reaching his office, he seated himself before
his desk and spread out a somewhat soiled piece of paper.  Over this he
ran his finger until it stopped at a certain mark.  "Camp Number One,"
he muttered.  "Ha, ha! good timber there, and close to the line, too.
Camp Number Two--much nearer the line," and his finger moved over the
paper to another mark.  "Camp Number Three, and over the border into
the enemy's country, ha, ha!  Good for five thousand.  Pine timber,
straight and clean as masts, and thick as hair on a dog's back.  How
they'll squirm, those country clogs, when they see their good logs
floating down the river.  But they're mine.  The new line is right, for
the best surveyor in the Province ran it.  Fifty rods inside the old
one, ha, ha!  I expect they'll make a fuss and put up a big kick.  But
I'll fight them, and then we'll see what money will do."

A knock sounded upon the door, and three men entered with hats in their
hands.

"Mr. Sinclair, I believe," the spokesman began.

"Yes, that's my name, and what can I do for you?" the lumberman replied.

"Well, you see," continued the other, "we've come to the city on
purpose to have a talk with you about that line you had run between
your land and ours."

"Well, and what about it?" snapped Sinclair.

"We've been appointed a committee to inform you that your men are
cutting logs over the line, and are encroaching on the shore lots.
They began day before yesterday."

"What, the men of Camp Number Three?"

"Yes."

"But that timber is mine," Sinclair replied.  "I sent a surveyor there
last summer and he found that the old line was wrong.  A new one was
run which gives me fifty rods off the rear of your shore lots."

"There must be some mistake, Mr. Sinclair," the countryman calmly
returned.  "Our forefathers received their lands as grants from the
Crown after the Revolutionary War.  A line was then run which separated
the shore lots from that portion of land known as the 'Dinsmore Manor,'
and there has been no dispute over it until now."

"Look here!" and Sinclair sprang to his feet.  "I know my business and
attend to it.  You attend to yours.  The new line is right and, by
heavens, I'll stick to it!"

"We are attending to our business," the countryman replied, "and we'll
show you, wealthy though you are, that you can't work any bluff game on
us.  But," and here he lowered his voice, "Mr. Sinclair, we don't want
to quarrel.  We came chiefly to tell you that your men in Camp Number
Three are cutting the logs on the farm of a poor widow with several
children.  If you are a man of any heart you will see that the work is
stopped at once."

"What, cease for a widow and her brood?  Never!  There is the Poor
House--let her go there; and the Orphanage is the place for the kids if
they are not old enough to work.  Such people only injure a settlement,
and you should be glad to be rid of them.  So, gentlemen, as I have
much business on hand, I wish to be alone."

"And you will do nothing to help that poor woman?" the three men asked
as one.

"No, nothing.  Do your best.  If you wish to lose your farms, go ahead.
Good day."

Christmas came on Thursday, and on Tuesday morning Mr. Sinclair
informed Lois that he was going away and would not be back until the
end of the week.  It was during breakfast that he told her this, and
Lois paused in the act of pouring his coffee.

"And you'll not be here for Christmas?" she asked in surprise.

"No.  Christmas means nothing to me.  I intend to visit my camps.  I
should have gone before, as no doubt the men are loafing.  I am going
to surprise them.  They'll never expect to see me at this season of the
year.  The men'll want to take three days off, and I can't allow it.
They always come back unfitted for work after their celebrations.
They'll do nothing of the kind this year if they expect to work for me."

Lois knew only too well how useless it was to try to reason with her
father when he had once made up his mind.  She had learned from bitter
experience in the past that the less she said the better it would be.
Nevertheless, her heart was very sad at the change that had come over
her father.  Never before had he gone away fit Christmas time, and it
was the one day in the year when he was more pleasant than usual.  What
would be the outcome of it all? she wondered.

That very morning as soon as breakfast was over Mr. Sinclair left for
the scenes of his lumbering operations, about fifty miles from the
city.  He travelled with a horse and sleigh, and on the second day he
reached Camp Number Two shortly after the men had finished their
mid-day meal and were starting back to their work.  No sooner had
Sinclair entered the cabin than his eyes fell upon a man lying in one
of the bunks.

"Hello, Stevens," he called to the foreman, "who is this taking life so
easy, when the rest of us are struggling for our daily bread?"

"Oh, that is Robins, one of our best men," was the reply.  "He took
sick this morning, and I would have sent him to the shore at once only
to-morrow will be Christmas Day and I thought he could wait until
to-night when the teams will be going out, and----"

"Going out!  Going out, are they?" Sinclair interrupted.  "And who gave
orders to quit on Christmas Day, I'd like to know?"

"We always quit on that day, sir," Stevens stammered.  "It's been the
custom for years, and I took it for granted----"

"Yes, that's just the trouble.  You take too many things for granted.
But I tell you this, Christmas is all nonsense.  It breaks up the work,
and the hauling season is none too long at the best.  I'll have none of
it.  You'll work or quit, and that's the end of it."

"But what about Robins?" questioned the foreman, whose thoughts were
travelling away to a little group of bright faces anxiously awaiting
his home-coming for a jolly Christmas.

"Isn't there any spare team?" Sinclair asked.

"None to spare, sir.  We've only the bob-sleds, and they're not much
for a sick man to ride on.  But," he added after a pause, "we were
going to fix up something to-night, sir."

"Confound it all!" Sinclair exclaimed.  "What are we going to do?  I
can't afford to let a double team go, and besides, it would mean a loss
of two days.  Let me see.  How far is it to Camp Number Three?"

"Three miles if you go by way of the cut-off, but four if you go
around.  The cut-off hasn't been used much by the teams this winter,
and it is little more than a foot-path."

"How far is it to the cut-off?" Sinclair asked.

"About two miles."

"Well, look here, Stevens.  You drive me to that cut-off, and then get
some one to take that sick fellow out with my rig.  I'll walk the rest
of the way to the camp, and stay there till you come for me."

When the cut-off had been reached, Sinclair started off on a brisk walk
in the keen frosty air.  He even felt quite young and cheerful as he
moved forward.  But the trail was rough, and his coat was very heavy,
so after walking for some time he began to feel weary.

"This is a long trail," he muttered.  "Confound that sick man!  What
business had he getting laid up and causing all this trouble."

Hardly had the words left his mouth before his foot struck the stump of
a small tree, and with a cry of pain he sank upon the snow.  Recovering
himself he tried to walk, but so great was the agony when his right
foot touched the trail that he groaned aloud.




CHAPTER XVI

CHRISTMAS EVE

Peter Sinclair was now in a serious predicament.  Fortune had favoured
him so long that to be thus blocked by a mean little stump was too much
for his excitable nature.  He raged and railed against everything and
everybody in general.  But the tall stately trees were silent witnesses
to his passionate outbursts, and poor sympathisers.  When sober
thoughts at length came to him, he began to realise the seriousness of
his position.  Out of hearing of the camp, on a trail seldom travelled;
a sprained ankle; the short December day closing down, and the unknown
terrors of the lone forest.  The perspiration stood out in beads upon
his forehead as he viewed the situation.

At last he started to limp along the trail, but at every step he
staggered into the snow and fell heavily forward.  He tried to crawl,
but so slow was his progress and so weary did he become that this was
soon abandoned.  And there he lay, thinking as he had never thought
before.  His business was forgotten, and several times he remembered
the sick man lying in the bunk at Camp Number Two.  And all this time
the sun sank lower to rest, and long shadows stole among the great
trees like fearful monsters creeping upon him.  He became cold, too,
and his body shivered, while his teeth chattered incessantly.

When it seemed to him that he had lain there on the snow for hours, he
heard a noise, and looking along the trail he saw a little red dog
bounding straight toward him.  How often had he spurned just such a cur
with his foot, on the city streets, but never did any creature seem so
good to Sinclair as did that lean canine specimen before him.

"Good doggie," he called.  "Come here, doggie."

But the animal remained at a safe distance, barking furiously, at the
same time casting glances back along the trail as if expecting some one
from that quarter.  Soon a sturdy figure appeared in sight with a
rabbit over his shoulder.  He stopped in amazement at the scene before
him, unable to comprehend its meaning.

"Come here, sonny," Sinclair called out, fearing the boy would take
fright and disappear.

But the lad stood perfectly still as if turned to stone.

"For heaven's sake!" Sinclair continued, "come and help a poor stricken
man who can't walk."

At this appeal the boy drew nearer, and seeing that it was only a man
lying in the snow, the startled expression faded from his face.

"What's the matter, and watcher want?" he asked.

"I've sprained my ankle and can't walk," was the reply.  "Is there any
house near?  Can't you bring some one to help me?"

At this the lad became electrified into new life.  His senses returned,
and he grasped the situation in an instant.

"Gee whiz!" he exclaimed.  "Mighty lucky I came to my rabbit snares
to-night instead of t'morrer.  Y'see, that's Christmas Day, and we
don't do no work then."

"Lucky for me you came to-night, my boy," Sinclair replied, and then he
remembered how he had denounced the day but a short time before.  "But
I can't stay in this place all night.  Can't you get somebody to help
me?"

"Y'bet," the boy responded.  "Buck and Bright'll help y'outer this fix.
Jes' wait a minute."

At this he hurried away, and although he was gone not much over half an
hour it seemed to Sinclair like an age before "Haw, Buck!  G'up,
Bright!  Git up thar!" sounded upon his ears.

Presently he beheld the forms of two panting steers, plunging and
wallowing through the snow, each crowding the other in an endeavour to
maintain the firm footing on the narrow trail.  When they caught sight
of the dark object lying before them, they stopped, sniffed the air,
and bolted to the right.  But the boy with considerable skill, the
result of long practice, wheeled them about, and after much shouting
and exertion headed them homeward.

"Hi, thar!" he called to the prostrate man.  "Kin ye manage t'git to
th' sled?  These steers is mighty scart, and I must stan' by an' hold
'em."

With a great effort Sinclair began to crawl slowly along the trail, and
when about exhausted reached the sled.

"Hol' on now," the boy ordered, as he cracked his whip and the steers
started forward.  It was a rough trip, over knolls, striking stumps
here and there, and squeezing between trees, when the sled had to be
freed by much twisting and manoeuvring; but Sinclair thought it the
best ride he had ever taken.

"Mother's lookin' fer y'," remarked the lad, when they had finally
gained the good road.  "She's got the best sofy out, an' was warmin'
things up when I left."

Sinclair made no reply.  He was cold, stiff, and too much exhausted to
enter into conversation.  Not until he was stretched out on the big
cosy sofa in front of the cheerful fire, after his sprained ankle had
been bathed and well rubbed, did he become talkative.

"My good woman," he began, "how can I ever repay you for your great
kindness?"

"Oh, that's nothing," she returned with a cheerful smile.  "I'm so glad
Stephen went to his snares to-night.  It's Christmas Eve, you see, and
though I'm sorry you're hurt, yet it's nice to have some one with me
and the children.  It's very lonely here sometimes, and," she added
after a pause, "he was here last Christmas.  But," she quickly
continued, afraid she had said too much to a stranger, "I hope you feel
more comfortable now, sir."

"Oh, yes," Sinclair replied.  "My foot is quite easy: But would you
mind making me a cup of hot tea?  I feel so chilly, and the tea will do
me a world of good.  It always helps me."

As he uttered these words a change passed over the woman's face, which
Sinclair was not slow to observe.

"Never mind," he hastened to remark.  "I don't wish to trouble you."

"Dear me, sir, it's not that," the woman replied, somewhat confused, as
she sat down upon a splint-bottom chair, and plucked at her apron.
"It's not the trouble I mind; it's something else.  You see, it's
this," she continued, while a flush passed over her care-worn face.
"He left us last February, after one month's illness, and what with the
doctor's bills and funeral expenses it was hard scraping.  We tried our
best to get along, and ploughed and sowed last spring.  But it was a
bad year for us.  The frost destroyed our buckwheat and potatoes when
they were just in blossom; a fine cow died, and the foxes killed our
geese and turkeys.  But we had our logs, and we always felt that we
could fall back on them if the worst came.  Then just as we had made up
our minds to sell a strip to that new Light and Power Company another
blow fell."

"What was that?" Sinclair quickly asked, as a new light dawned upon his
mind.

"It was a letter, sir, that I received from Mr. Sinclair, the manager
of the city Light and Power Company, and who does a big lumbering
business besides.  He told me that a new line had been run by a
surveyor between the shore lots and the old Dinsmore Manor, and that
all of those logs which I had hoped to sell belong to him.  He warned
me not to sell or cut one, as he would prosecute me at once if I did.
His men have already begun work, and I am helpless to stop them.  It is
no use for me to go to law as I have no money, and it takes money to
fight a man like that.  Would you like to see the letter, sir?"

"No, no," Sinclair hastily replied.  "That man is a dev----.  Excuse
me, madam, but I mean he is a hard man."

"Well, you see," the woman continued, "things got so bad that we had to
give up every little luxury, and the few dollars we could make from
eggs and butter went for flour, clothing and taxes.  Tea we found too
expensive, and it was given up.  That is the reason why I can't give
you any to-night, sir.  And the poor children are so disappointed.
Never before were they without presents at Christmas time.  But this
year----"  Here the woman stopped and put her apron to her face.  It
was for only an instant, however, for quickly removing it she
continued: "But gracious me! here I've been bothering you with my long
tale of woe, when you, poor man, have troubles enough of your own.  I
have some fresh bread, butter, milk and preserves, which you shall have
at once," and the little woman bustled away, leaving Sinclair alone
with his thoughts.

"Isn't it about time the mailman was along?" the mother asked that
evening, after the chores had been done, and the children were sitting
quietly in the room for fear of waking the stranger who had fallen
asleep upon the sofa.

"I believe I hear his bells now!" Stephen cried, as he rushed to the
door.  Presently he came running back, his face aglow with excitement.
"A bundle, Mother!" he shouted.  "A big bundle!  Come and help me."

The confusion thus made awakened Sinclair, who opened his eyes just in
time to see a good-sized bundle carried into the room, securely bound
with stout cords.

"There must be some mistake," exclaimed the surprised woman to the
mailman who had entered.

"No, mum," he replied.  "It's yours all right.  I found it at the shore
where a freightin' team left it.  I don't generally carry such things.
But says I to myself, 'That's fer Widder Bean, and she's goin' to have
it to-night if Tim Harking knows anything.'  So thar 'tis.  I must be
off now.  A merry Christmas to ye all," and with that the big-hearted
man hurried away.

"Dear me!" cried Mrs. Bean.  "What can it be, and who could have sent
it?"

"Let's open it, mother," Steve suggested.  "Mebbe we'll find out then."

Together they all set to work, and after much tugging and labour the
knots were loosened and the bundle fell apart.

Then what a sight met their eyes.  Clothes of various sizes and quality
were neatly piled together; complete suits for the boys; dresses for
Betty and Dora, and another for their mother, besides a good supply of
underwear for the whole family.

"Well, bless my heart!" Mrs. Bean exclaimed.  "Who in the world has
done this?  There must be some mis----"

"A doll!" shrieked Dora.

"A knife!" yelled Stephen, as he seized the precious treasure, felt its
keen edge and examined the handle.

Then a paper fluttered out of the bundle and fell on the floor at Mrs.
Bean's feet.  As she picked it up and read the contents, a light broke
over her puzzled face, and her hand trembled.

"What's the matter, Mother?" Jimmy asked, noting her agitation.

"Nothing, my boy," she replied.  "Only I'm so overcome at the good Lord
giving us such kind friends on this Christmas Eve.  This is such a
lovely letter from Miss Sinclair, and she says that all these things
are from the Helping Hand Society of St. Saviour's Church.  Isn't it
good of them?"

A groan from the sofa startled her.

"Is your ankle worse, sir?" she enquired, going to the side of the
afflicted man.

"Y-y-es," Sinclair replied; "but I feel better now.  I didn't mean to
disturb you."

"And look here!" Stephen cried, who had at length reached the bottom of
the bundle.  "Well, I declare!  Two packages of Red Rose tea!  Hurrah!
Now we kin have some fer Christmas."

"And you, poor man," she said turning to Sinclair, "shall have a good
strong cup just as soon as I can make it.  It seems to me I must be
dreaming," and the excited woman bustled off to the kitchen.

"Fool! fool!" Sinclair mused to himself as he sipped the delicious
beverage.  "I thought such gifts went only to rogues and lazy rascals.
I was wrong.  And yet, some of that tea has reached one of the biggest
fools and rogues in the whole country, and that is Peter Sinclair."

"And now, children," said Mrs. Bean, when the excitement of the evening
had somewhat subsided, "it's getting late.  Let's have a Christmas
hymn, and then Dora must go to bed.  You don't mind, sir, I hope.  We
always sing several hymns on Christmas eve, and last year he was here
to start them, for he had a good voice."

"Oh, no," Sinclair replied.  "I don't mind, so go ahead."

The mother started and all joined in; and as the words of "Hark the
Herald Angels Sing" floated forth, old memories came drifting into the
mind of the silent listener on the sofa.  He forgot for a time his
surroundings and saw only the little parish church, of his boyhood
days, decked with fresh bright evergreens, and heard the choir singing
the familiar carols.  Several faces stood forth in clear relief; his
parents', honest and careworn; his rector's, transfigured with a holy
light; and one, fresh and fair, encircled by a wreath of light-brown
tresses.

He came to himself with a start, thinking the choir was singing "Glory
to the New-Born King," when it was only the little group at his side
finishing their hymn.  Tears were stealing down his cheeks, which he
quickly brushed away, lest his emotion should be observed.

That night, when the house was quiet, Sinclair drew forth a small
note-book and wrote a few lines to the foreman of Camp Number Three.
"Send word to the other camps as quickly as possible, and tell the men
they need not come back till next Monday."  He then brought forth a
thin book and made out a cheque for no small amount, payable to Mrs.
Bean on account.

Little did Peter Sinclair realise that the letter written to the
foreman would never reach its destination, and that months would pass
before the cheque would be presented for payment.




CHAPTER XVII

THE NIGHT SUMMONS

All through the fall and winter Jasper had been very busy.  The
planning of the work, the overseeing of the men and ordering the
supplies rested upon him alone.  He felt the responsibility, and he was
determined that as far as he was concerned the company should not be
disappointed in the amount of logs cut and hauled to the large "brow"
near the falls.  He left the woods only when it was absolutely
necessary for him to do so.  Several times he was tempted to drive to
the city when new supplies were needed instead of ordering them over
the telephone from Creekdale.  He longed to see Lois, even for a few
minutes.  Such a visit, no matter how brief, would be an inspiration to
him in his arduous work.  But he had always resisted the temptation,
however, and had remained firmly at his post.  His desire to see her
and to listen to her voice was great.  But he dreaded the idea of
presenting himself at her home when she might have company, and he
would feel so much out of place in their presence.  It might embarrass
Lois as well, so he reasoned, and it would be better for him not to go.

As Christmas drew near the men began to talk much about going home.
Jasper listened to them but took no part in the conversation.  All of
the men had homes to go to.  Most of them were married, and were
looking forward with eagerness to the holiday with their families.  But
to Jasper the season brought little joy.  No one was expecting him, and
no face would brighten at his home-coming.  There was only one place
where he longed to go, and one person he desired to see.  If he could
but feel that her eyes would sparkle and her heart beat with joy at his
presence, he would not have hesitated a moment.  But he was not sure,
and so he decided to remain in camp and keep watch over the supplies
while the rest went home.  If Christmas Day should be fine, he planned
to pay a visit to old David in the afternoon.  He might hear something
about Lois from the Petersons, so he thought, and that would be some
comfort.

Jasper lived in a small snug log cabin which he had built for his own
special use.  He wished to be alone as much as possible each night that
he might think over the work for the next day, and also have quietness
for reading.  He had supplied himself with a number of books, and these
were placed on a small shelf fastened to the wall.  So long had he been
denied the privilege of good literature that he now came to the feast
like a starving man.  Hitherto, his mind had craved only solid works of
the masters.  But of late he had turned his attention more to books of
romance, for in them he could find more heart satisfaction than in the
others.  How he revelled in the outstanding characters of Dickens,
Scott, Thackeray and Kingsley.  But it remained for Charles Reed to
completely captivate him in "The Cloister and the Hearth."

He was reading it this Christmas Eve as he lay stretched out upon his
cot.  The lamp was at his head and the camp stove was sending out its
genial heat.  It was a scene of peace and comfort.  But Jasper thought
nothing of his surroundings as he lay there, for he was lost in the
tragic story of Gerard and Margaret.  Nothing had ever moved him as
much as the sad tale of these two unfortunate lovers.  His disengaged
right hand often clenched hard as he read of the contemptible ones who
plotted to separate them.  But how Margaret appealed to him.  What
strength of character was hers, and how true and unselfish was her love
through long, trying years.

At length, laying aside the book, he began to meditate upon what he
would do under like circumstances, if Lois' love for him were as deep
as that of Margaret for Gerard.  He blamed Gerard for what he
considered weakness on his part.  Why did he not arouse himself and
throw off the shackles which bound him?  What right had any Church to
separate two loving ones, and make their young lives so miserable?

While thus musing Jasper fell asleep.  He was awakened by a loud
rapping upon the door.  With no idea what time it was he sprang to his
feet, hurried across the room and threw open the door.  As he did so he
saw a young lad standing before him.  His face was flushed and he was
panting heavily as if from a long run.

"Hello!  Who are you?  And what do you want here at this time of the
night?" Jasper demanded.

"I'm Steve Bean, Betty's brother," the boy replied as he stepped
briskly into the cabin.  "My, that was a hard run!" he added.  "I left
home jist a quarter to twelve an' I don't think I've been over twenty
minutes comin'."

"Is it that late?" Jasper asked in surprise, as he drew forth his
watch.  "Why, it's half-past twelve!  I didn't think I was asleep that
long.  But, say, boy, what do you want at this time of the night?"

"I want ye to go fer the doctor as quick as ye can."

"Go for the doctor!" Jasper gasped.  "Who's sick?  Your mother?"

"Oh, no; she's all right.  But there's a man at our place who is pretty
bad, I guess.  I found him last night on that old cut-off when I was
visitin' my snares.  He had a sprained ankle, an' couldn't walk.  I got
the steers and toted him to our place.  Guess he got a bad cold while
he was layin' there in the snow, fer he took awful sick in the night
with chills, an' ma's afraid he'll die.  She kept Jimmy to help her an'
sent me to git you to fetch the doctor."

"But why didn't you get one of your nearby neighbours to go?" Jasper
enquired.  "You have lost valuable time already."

"H'm, I guess you don't know our neighbours.  They're kind enough an'
would do all they could.  But their horses are about as slow as oxen.
So ma says, 'Steve, you jist hustle fer Mr. Jasper.  He's got a horse
that goes like a streak of lightin'.  He'll go all right when ye tell
him you're Betty's brother.'  So I took the short-cut through the
woods, an' here I am.  Will ye go?"

"Sure," Jasper replied as he reached for his coat and hat.  "But who is
that man?  And where did he come from?"

"I don't know; never saw him before.  He's quite oldish, though."

"Didn't your mother ask him what he was doing there alone in the woods?"

"No; she didn't like to ask him.  She thought maybe he was goin' to
Camp Number Three, which is not far from our house, an' on our land,
too."

Jasper paused in the act of lighting the lantern and looked into
Steve's face.

"Why, didn't you go there for help?" he asked.

"What! go to them skunks fer help?" and the boy clenched his fists.
"Never!  They're stealin' our logs an' we can't do nothin'.  De'ye
think we'd ask old Pete Sinclair's men to do anything fer us?  We'd die
first.  Jimmy an' me's been waitin' fer some time fer old Pete to come
our way.  An' when he does----"  Steve's clenched right fist shooting
out straight before him supplied his lack of suitable words to express
the depth of his feelings.

An idea suddenly flashed into Jasper's mind with a startling intensity.

"What does that man look like?" he demanded in a voice which surprised
the boy.

"Oh, he's somewhat oldish, as I told ye; rather thick-set; has a heavy
moustache, an' looks as if he has always had plenty of good things to
eat.  I don't know as I can tell ye much more about him."

Jasper had blown out the lamp and opened the door before Steve had
finished speaking.  He was now very impatient to be away.  There was
only one man, he felt quite sure, who would be prowling along that
lonely trail on a Christmas Eve, and that man would be Peter Sinclair.
It was of Lois he thought and not the sick man as he hurried to the
stable, harnessed Pedro, and made him fast to the sleigh.

"You go back home, Steve," he ordered, "and tell your mother that I
have gone for the doctor."

Pedro did not like the idea of being taken out of his warm stable at
such an hour of the night.  But when once upon the firm road he gave
his noble head a toss and sped along at a fast clip.  He had not been
driven much of late and was in excellent form.  It was a clear
star-light night, with not a breath of wind astir.  Jasper not only
enjoyed the ride in the bracing air behind such a fast horse, but the
feeling that he was doing it for Lois' sake filled him with
satisfaction.  How he longed to speed straight to her with the message.
But, no, that would not do.  Her father, he believed, was in need and
must be cared for first.

It took him somewhat over an hour to reach the doctor's house and to
arouse him from sleep.  The latter was in no enviable frame of mind
when he had admitted Jasper and learned the object of his visit.

"Confound it all!" he growled.  "What do people mean by getting sick in
the night!  Why don't they take the day for it!  But I don't see how I
can go now.  My horse threw a shoe coming home last night, and I
wouldn't think of putting her on the road without being properly shod."

"I'll drive you there," Jasper replied, "and bring you back as well.
But we must have you to-night, and at once.  If he is the man I think
he is, you will not regret going."

"Who is he?  Any one I know?" the doctor queried, now somewhat
interested.

"Yes, you know him.  But I shall not mention his name until I am
certain.  Will you come?"

"Oh, yes, I suppose so," the doctor replied as he moved wearily away to
get ready for the journey.  "I have had so many night calls of late
that I am tired out, and was hoping to have a good rest, especially on
Christmas Day."

In less than half an hour Pedro was again bounding nimbly over the
road, this time headed straight for Mrs. Bean's ten miles off.  Jasper
believed that the doctor slept most of the way for he never uttered a
word from the time they started until they drew up before Mrs. Bean's
house.

The sound of the bells brought Jimmy to the door, and asking him to
stable Pedro and give him something to eat, Jasper accompanied the
doctor.  He was anxious to find out as soon as possible whether his
surmise was correct about the sick man.  If so, he had his mind all
made up what he would do, and there was no time to be lost.

Mrs. Bean was waiting at the door to receive them, and led the way at
once into the little sitting room which was warm and cosy.

"Where's that man?" the doctor asked as he threw off his coat.  "You
might have waited until morning before sending for me.  It's no joke to
come so far on a cold night like this."

"But I was afraid he would die, sir," Mrs. Bean replied.  "He is a very
sick man.  He's in there," and she pointed to a door which led from the
sitting room.

After warming himself for a few minutes before the stove, the doctor
entered the small bedroom closely followed by Jasper.  A shaded lamp
with the wick turned down stood on a little table by the side of the
bed.  Though the light was dim, it was enough for Jasper to recognise
the man lying upon the bed.

"You know who it is," he remarked in a low voice as he turned to the
doctor.

"Good heavens! it's Peter Sinclair!" was the astonished exclamation.
"What in thunder is he doing here?"




CHAPTER XVIII

THE WILD NOR'EASTER

Jasper did not remain long in the bedroom.  There was nothing there
that he could do and he would be only in the way.  He found Mrs. Bean
in the kitchen putting some wood in the stove.

"Do you know who that sick man is?" he asked.

"No, I have not the least idea," was the reply.  "He is a stranger to
me, but that makes no difference.  The Bible bids us to entertain
strangers for they may be angels unawares.  Isn't that so?"

"But the Bible doesn't say that they will all be good angels, does it?
Suppose the stranger you entertain should turn out to be your enemy,
for instance?"

"Why, what do you mean?" and the widow looked her surprise.  "How could
an angel be one's enemy?"

"Doesn't the Bible speak about evil angels?  If people were troubled
with them in olden days I guess affairs haven't changed much since.
Now, suppose the stranger you have entertained should be your enemy
unawares instead of your friend, what would you do?"

"It wouldn't make any difference in my care of him," Mrs. Bean
emphatically replied.  "I should do just as the Scripture tells me, 'If
thine enemy hunger, feed him; if he thirst, give him drink: for in so
doing thou shalt heap coals of fire on his head.'  That is what I
should do."

"Well, I guess you'll feel like heaping on the coals, all right, when
you learn the name of your stranger.  You had better get a shovelful
ready, for I am going to tell you."

Mrs. Bean was busy setting the table for she knew how the men would
appreciate a cup of hot tea and some of her fresh homemade bread after
their long cold drive.  She paused with a plate in her hand and looked
keenly at Jasper as he stood with his back to the stove.  When he had
mentioned evil angels she thought that he was joking.  But now
something told her that he was in earnest.  Suddenly there flashed into
her mind an idea which made her heart thump.

"There is only one person in the world who is my enemy, as far as I
know," she remarked.

"The man who is stealing your logs, eh?" Jasper queried.

"Yes.  But surely he's not in there!"

"Get your coals ready, Mrs. Bean," Jasper bantered.  "You can use them
right away if you want to."

Mrs. Bean paid no attention to these words.  Her worn face grew a shade
paler and her hand shook as she laid the plate upon the table.  Just
then the doctor entered the kitchen.

"We must have a trained nurse at once," he began.  "That's a very sick
man in there, Mrs. Bean, and he must have the greatest of care."

"I shall do the best I can, sir," was the quiet reply.  "No one shall
ever say of me that I didn't do my duty.  I have tried to do it in the
past and shall try to do it still."

"I know you will do what you can, Mrs. Bean," and the doctor's voice
was more gentle than usual, "but you must have assistance.  No one
could expect you to look after the house and take care of such a sick
man as that.  We must send to the city for a nurse at once."

"What about Miss Sinclair?" Jasper asked.  "She should be told of her
father's illness.  I was planning to phone to her when we get hack to
Creekdale.  She could arrange for a nurse to come by train, and I could
meet her at the station.  This is Christmas Day and I'm afraid it will
be difficult to get a nurse to come on go short a notice.  She would
have to come on the suburban this evening, though, as that will be the
only train she would be able to get."

"Do the best you can," the doctor replied.  "I shall stay here to-day.
It would not do for me to leave now until some one comes to help Mrs.
Bean."

The sun was just rising above the far-off horizon as Jasper rode into
Creekdale.  Not a breath of wind was astir, and the only signs of life
were the long wreathes of smoke circling up from numerous chimneys.
The village nestled on the side of a hill and thus met the sun's early
smile while the surrounding valleys were still draped in shadows.  To
Jasper it seemed as if fairyland had burst suddenly upon his view after
his drive through the sombre forest.  The snow sparkled like countless
diamonds and the white-robed trees stood bathed in glistening glory.
It was Nature's silent symphony in honour of the birthday of the great
Prince of Peace.

The telephone was at the store and it did not take Jasper long to
arouse Andy Forbes and acquaint him with the object of his early visit.
The storekeeper was greatly interested in the news of Peter Sinclair's
illness.  He knew that in a short time various rumours would be
circulating throughout the parish.  But he would have exact information
and would be able to impress all by his hints of superior and
first-hand knowledge.

It took Andy some time to get "Central" in the city, and longer still
to make connection with the Sinclair home, the number of which he had
found in the Telephone Directory.  But at length his efforts were
rewarded and he handed the receiver to Jasper.

"Guess it's her, all right," was his comment.  "Her voice seems mighty
shaky as if she's scared most out of her wits."

How far away seemed Lois' voice and how anxious the tone as before
Jasper had even time to explain she asked about her father.  Then, as
briefly as possible, Jasper told what had happened to him, his illness,
and where he was.

"We need a nurse at once," he said, "and if you can get one, send her
out on the suburban.  I will meet her at the station."

"She will be there," was the emphatic reply.  "I know of one who will
go without fail.  I thank you very much, Mr. Randall, for all your
kindness to my father."

Leaving the store Jasper made straight for the Haven where he received
a royal welcome.  Early though it was they were all astir for a
wonderful Christmas tree had been prepared the day before, and there it
stood loaded with presents.

"We had it for Betty," Mrs. Peterson explained, though it was quite
evident that she and the captain as well as David were as much pleased
as the girl.

Besides the presents from one another there was something for each one
from Lois.  As Jasper watched them unwrap their gifts and listened to
Betty's exclamations of delight, a slight feeling of jealousy stole
into his heart.  He was the only one there beyond the orbit of Lois'
circle of remembrance.  He was well aware that he had no reason to
expect anything, and yet how much any little token would have meant to
him, for it would have told him that she had not forgotten him.

"Wasn't it kind of Miss Lois to send these lovely presents," Betty
exclaimed, after she had examined everything most carefully.  "And
there's something for you, too, Mr. Jasper," she added.  "I kept it
till the last," and a merry twinkle shone in her eyes as she handed him
a neatly-tied package.

"Why, who sent me this?" Jasper asked in surprise.

"Miss Lois, of course.  She knew that you would be here to-day, and she
asked me to give it to you when you came.  This tree is her idea, you
see.  We would never have thought about it but for her.  Isn't she
great!"

Jasper took the package in his hands and held it there like a big
awkward school boy.  He could not trust himself to speak lest he should
betray his feelings.  He longed to be away in the quietness of his own
cabin that he might open his treasure and that no eyes but his might
look upon the gift.  But Betty knew nothing of such thoughts.

"Open it, Mr. Jasper," she ordered, "I know you'll be surprised."

Slowly and carefully Jasper untied the red ribbon and opened out the
paper wrapping.  As he did so there came forth a grey woollen
well-knitted muffler.

"Isn't it lovely!" Betty exclaimed as Jasper stood holding it in his
hands staring hard upon it.  "And I saw Miss Lois begin it herself just
before she left for the city.  She asked me what I thought you would
like for a Christmas present, and I told her that you should have a
muffler to keep your throat warm on cold days.  She thought maybe you
would rather have a book, but when I told her that you could buy books,
but not a muffler like she could make, she said that perhaps I was
right.  Let me see what it looks like on you, for I must write and tell
her all about it."

Before this torrent of words Jasper was as helpless as a child.  He
allowed Betty to unfold the muffler and wrap it carefully about his
neck.

"There, isn't that fine, Mrs. Peterson?" she asked.  "Mr. Jasper won't
get cold now in his throat, will he?"

"I have never worn such a thing in my life," Jasper managed to explain.
"What shall I do with it?  I couldn't wear that in the woods."

"Oh, but you might need it, Mr. Jasper," Betty insisted.  "Anyway, if
you don't wear it Miss Lois will be so disappointed.  She knit every
bit of it with her own fingers, for she told me so.  You should wear it
because of that if for no other reason."

Jasper made no reply, but taking off the muffler folded it up and laid
it upon the table.  In fact, he hardly knew what he was doing so full
of happiness was his heart.  It was fortunate that just then Mrs.
Peterson announced that breakfast was ready, for it changed the topic
of conversation and gave him time to think it all over.

What a day that was at the Haven!  There were so many things to talk
about and such a number of questions to be asked and answered that the
time sped by all too quickly.  David was in excellent spirits, for he
learned of the progress the men were making in the woods.  Jasper
heard, as well, about Lois, and Betty showed him several letters she
had received from her.  In every one she told of her longing for the
spring that she might return to Creekdale.

When Jasper left the Haven he noticed how the weather had changed.  The
brightness of the day had passed and the sky was a mackerel grey.  The
wind, drifting in from the northeast, hummed a weird prelude to the
coming storm upon the telephone wires stretched along the road.

The journey to the station was a pleasant one, for Pedro, after his
rest, swung along at a swift clip.  The wind was in their backs and the
snow had not begun to fall.  Jasper realised that the storm would not
hold off much longer, and he wondered how the nurse would mind facing
it for fifteen miles to Mrs. Bean's.  The muffler that Lois had given
him he was wearing.  Betty had put it there before he left the Haven
with the strict instruction to wear it, because if he didn't Miss Lois
would feel badly.  Never had he received any present which he valued
more highly than this.  And to think that Lois made it herself,
especially for him, and that it had been so often in her hands.  He was
almost like a man beside himself as he thought of this, and several
times his lips pressed the muffler in the fervency of his emotion.

Reaching the station he had half an hour to spare before the train
would arrive.  This gave him an opportunity to give Pedro a feed of
oats in a nearby stable, for he well knew that a severe battle was
ahead of him.  Already the storm had set in, gentle at first but
increasing in intensity as the afternoon waned.  It was snowing hard by
the time the train surged up to the station, and as Jasper waited for
the passengers to alight he wondered whether it would be advisable to
face the tempest on such a night and in the teeth of so furious a storm.

As the passengers came forth what was his surprise to see not a
stranger as he had expected but Lois Sinclair.  Scarcely had she
stepped upon the platform ere Jasper hurried forward.  Her face
brightened when she saw him and she reached out her gloved hand.

"How is my father?" was her first question.  "I have been so uneasy
about him."

As they walked along the platform Jasper told her all he could about
the sick man, and how the doctor was staying with him, to assist Mrs.
Bean until the nurse arrived.

"I little expected to see you," he added, "I am afraid it will be a
terrible drive in the face of this storm.  But if we wait until morning
the roads will be so blocked that we may not be able to get there for
several days."

"Let us go to-night," Lois replied.  "I can stand the storm, but it is
a great pity to give you so much trouble.  How far is it?"

"About fifteen miles.  You get good and warm in the waiting-room while
I go for Pedro.  Wrap yourself up well before we start."

In about a quarter of an hour they had left the station and Pedro was
speeding up the road with long swinging strides.  So far but little
snow had fallen to interfere with the travelling, and they made
excellent progress.  But after they had been on the way for about an
hour Pedro was forced to slow down and walk most of the time.  Drifts
were forming across the road and the snow was blinding.  At times they
obtained considerable shelter from stretches of woods they passed
through.  But out in the open the tempest struck them with full force,
blotting out everything from view.

But notwithstanding the discomforts of the journey, Jasper was
supremely happy.  For a few brief hours this beautiful woman by his
side was his, and he was her guide and protector.  The unexpected had
happened and come what might he would always look back upon this drive
as one of the happiest times in his life.

Lois, too, enjoyed the drive.  She was content to sit there and to feel
Jasper's strength by her side, as he guided Pedro through the night.
Owing to the storm there was very little conversation.  But it was not
necessary.  They were happy in each other's presence and words were not
needed.

The farther they went the heavier became the roads and the more violent
the storm.  It was cold as well, and once a shiver shook Lois' body,
which Jasper was quick to notice.

"Are you cold?" he asked.  "I have an extra rug.  Let me wrap it around
you."

Carefully as if she had been a child, Jasper placed the rug about Lois'
shoulders and over her head.  Then, taking off the precious muffler he
folded it about her body in such a way as to hold the rug in place and
thus form a complete shelter from the driving storm.  This
accomplished, he reached over and drew the sleigh-robe around her body.
It was but natural that his arm should remain around her for a while
that the robe might be kept in place.  Their heads, too, drew closer
together.  Perhaps it was the storm which caused this movement, for it
was difficult to face the tempest.  It was merely an incident in their
young lives, and yet it caused their hearts to beat faster and their
faces to flush, the memory of which they would ever cherish.  How easy
then it would have been for Jasper to give voice to the promptings of
his heart.  He felt that Lois cared for him and would respond to his
love.  But just when he might have spoken Pedro plunged into the ditch,
and it took all of his master's attention to get him back on the road
without upsetting the sleigh.

"We nearly went over that time," Jasper remarked.  Then they both
laughed.  Why they did so they alone knew.  But from that moment they
understood each other better than ever before.

It was a hard struggle Pedro put up that night as mile after mile he
crept onward.  The froth flew from his champing mouth and the vapour
rose from his steaming body.  The footing was uncertain, the snow deep,
and the driving storm almost blinded him.  But never for an instant did
he hesitate or show the least sign of discouragement.  He seemed to
realise how much depended upon his exertions this night, and he felt
bound to do his utmost.  His master held the reins and in his judgment
he had perfect confidence, and for him he would have expended the last
ounce of his marvellous strength.  Nevertheless, his eyes brightened
and his weary steps quickened when at length he saw the lights from
Mrs. Bean's house struggling faintly through the night.  With a sudden
spurt he dashed through the gateway and surged proudly up to the door
like a hero who had fought a hard battle and had won.




CHAPTER XIX

DEVELOPMENTS

Lois was destined to remain at Mrs. Bean's during January and February.
She camped, as she called it, in the room next to the small one
occupied by her father, and thus she was always near to wait upon him
day or night.  Mr. Sinclair's recovery was slow, and at first the
doctor almost despaired of his life.  It was a bad case of pneumonia
brought on by his becoming over-heated while walking along the cut-out,
and then getting chilled to the bone lying on the snow.  To Lois it was
a most anxious time, and during the first two weeks she seldom went out
of the house.  When at last her father was able to be left alone for a
while she spent an hour or so out of doors with Dora and Stephen.

It was a wonderful winter to the Bean family.  Never before had Mrs.
Bean known what it was to be free from the oppressing spectre of want.
No longer was she forced to worry about household supplies; neither was
it necessary for Steve to go to the store each week with his basket of
eggs and a few rolls of butter.  He carried, instead, an order from
Lois, and Andy Forbes was only too willing to deliver the goods in
person instead of letting Steve carry them as hitherto.  Jimmy was
working in the woods with Jasper, and every Saturday night he brought
his wages home to his mother.  Thus the Bean household was well
supplied with sufficient food and the widow's heart was made glad.

To some city people the life in a country house, especially in the
winter time, would have been very lonely and trying.  But with Lois it
was different.  She thoroughly enjoyed the change, and as soon as she
was able to leave her father alone for a few hours she would spend the
time out of doors with Dora and Stephen.  To them she was a marvellous
woman, and they fairly worshipped her.  What fun they had coasting down
the big hill over the firm crust, and what snow-houses they made when
the snow could be packed and moulded into any shape.  But to Lois the
best enjoyment of all was to accompany Steve on his rounds to his
rabbit snares.  The forest was a revelation to her.  She knew it well
in summer, but nothing about its winter moods, such as the weird
silence of a frosty morning, broken only at times by the pistol-like
report from a distant tree.  It startled her at first, and she stood
spell-bound listening to its reverberation up and down the long woody
reaches.

"The frost does that," Steve explained.  "I've heard our house do the
same thing on a cold night.  Ma says it's drawin' the nails."

Lois liked the woods best when a stiff wind was abroad.  She enjoyed
hearing it roaring overhead, bending and twisting the tops of the
pointed trees.  The forest then seemed to be alive, and not so
inanimate as on a cold frosty morning.  It was more companionable in
such a mood, and it seemed to her like a wonderful organ with all the
stops out under the control of some mighty unseen master.  It was a
pleasure to her to stand and listen to the varying sounds.  But Steve
and Dora knew nothing of such feelings and kept her constantly on the
move.  The tracks of the rabbits or those of a fox thrilled them far
more than Nature's mysterious melodies.

It was a Saturday afternoon such as this that Lois was with Steve and
Dora on their regular rounds.  They led her this day farther than usual
to some new snares that Steve had set.  At length they came out upon
the trail leading from Mrs. Bean's to the falls, travelled chiefly by
Jimmy.  Lois was standing on the path with Dora by her side waiting
until Steve had set one more snare in a good place he had spied.  She
presented a picture of perfect health and beauty as she stood there,
with the rich blood mantling her face.  Jasper was sure that he had
never seen any one so lovely as he appeared suddenly in sight around a
bend in the trail.  He was walking fast with an axe over his shoulder,
but he stopped in his tracks when he saw Lois before him.  At first he
was half tempted to turn back, lest his presence might not be desired.
He did not wish to have the appearance of spying upon those before him.
But before he had time to decide, Dora saw him.

"Oh, look," she cried, "there is Mr. Jasper."

Startled more than was her wont, Lois quickly turned and her eyes
rested upon the young man who was now hastening forward.

"Pardon me," Jasper began, "I am so sorry that I have frightened you."

"Oh, it is not as bad as that," Lois replied with a smile.  "I was not
frightened, only startled.  Anyway, we are glad to see you, for you
have deserted us of late."

"It was not my fault, I assure you," Jasper explained.  "We have been
so busy that I have had no time to come, though I sent Jimmy often, to
enquire about your father.  I have had to go to the city every Saturday
since I saw you last and never got back until late Sunday night.  The
company is pushing us hard, and now that the portable saw-mill has
arrived there is no let-up.  To-day I was cruising the woods for some
special trees the company wants, and as I came so near I made up my
mind to drop in and see for myself how you are all making out."

"And you will come and have tea with us?" Lois asked.

"Yes, if I shall not be in the way.  It will be a great change for me."

"We shall be delighted to have you, and I know my father will be
pleased to see you, for he gets so lonely at times.  He is sitting up
now, and likes to have some one to talk to.  He has changed a great
deal since his illness."

By this time Steve had finished setting his snare, and then they all
started homeward.  It was quite an event to have a visitor, so Dora and
Steve rushed on ahead to tell their mother to set an extra place "fer
company."  Lois and Jasper had no inclination to hurry.  Their hearts
were happy in each other's company, and they walked slowly along the
trail not talking about anything in particular, and laughing when there
was really nothing to laugh about.

Mr. Sinclair was sitting in a big, cosy chair before the fire as Lois
and Jasper entered the room.  Notwithstanding the change that had come
over him and his desire for conversation, he looked upon his visitor
with a reserved suspicion.

"You belong to that new company, eh?" he questioned.

"Only as an employee," Jasper replied.  "I am merely working for wages."

"H'm, is that so?  I thought you had an interest in the concern."

"In a way I have.  I am interested in getting out as many logs and
poles as I can this winter.  But apart from that I am nothing as far as
the company goes."

"But you know all about their plans, I suppose, and what they intend to
do?"

"Oh, yes, I naturally understand that they intend to supply light and
power to the city and the surrounding country, but further than that I
know nothing."

"Don't you know who compose the company?"

"No, I have not the least idea."

"Well, that's queer," and Sinclair shifted uneasily in his chair.
"Perhaps you can tell me, though, where Crazy David comes in?  He seems
to be somewhat connected with the whole affair."

"He supplied the plans, so I believe.  They paid him, and made him
Honorary President of the company."

"And so that's all you know about it?"

"Certainly.  The whole affair is as much of a mystery to me as it is to
you."

"Confound it all!" and Sinclair stamped his right foot upon the floor.
"I'd like to know what's coming over people, anyway.  Things are
getting so mysterious these days that I'm about crazy trying to puzzle
matters out."

"Don't try, father, dear," Lois soothed, placing her arms about his
neck.  "You must not make yourself worse by worrying over such things
now.  Supper is all ready, and Mrs. Bean is waiting for us, so let us
forget all about such matters for the present."

Jasper stayed for a while that evening, and before leaving he made
arrangements with Lois to take her to church in the morning, and then
they would stop at the Haven for dinner.  That was the beginning of a
most delightful time for Lois and Jasper.  Every fine Sunday he called
for her, and pleasant were the drives they had together.

When Mr. Sinclair was well enough he moved with his daughter into his
own house.  Lois and Betty had spent several days getting it in order
and thoroughly warmed.  It was really a comfort to be here, and for the
first time he expressed his pleasure to Lois.

"This is a comfort," and he gave a sigh of relief as he sat in a big
chair before a bright open fire.  "How large and roomy this house seems
after living for so long at Mrs. Bean's.  But she was good to us and I
hope you sent her that money."

"For the logs on her place?" Lois asked.

"Yes.  I made out a cheque the night I took ill, but she never got it.
This new one is larger and will somewhat pay her for the trouble we
have been to her as well as for the logs."

"I mailed it to-day, father, and Mrs. Bean should get it to-morrow."

"That is good.  I feel more contented now.  But, see here, Lois, you
will be very lonely now with only me to talk to.  Isn't there any one
who could come and visit us for a while?  It might brighten us both up."

"I expect Margaret," Lois replied.  "She said she would be delighted to
come as soon as we moved into our own house.  Dick, you know, will
bring her in the car just as soon as the roads are settled.  It will be
so nice to have her."

"Do you think Mr. Randall will forsake us now?" Mr. Sinclair asked.

"Why, what makes you think that he will?" Lois replied.

"I was afraid he might, that's all.  I like that young man.  But he has
peculiar ideas, and will not go where he thinks he is not wanted."

Lois did not reply to these words.  She was sitting by her father's
side sewing, and she went on calmly with her work.  But she was
thinking of the great change that had come over her father since his
illness.  He was so gentle and considerate, and was more companionable
than she had ever known him to be.  It caused her great joy of heart,
and she was so thankful now that she had not left him when he had made
life so miserable for her.  She was thankful as well that he liked
Jasper and welcomed his visits to the house.  She, too, had wondered if
he would come as often as he did to Mrs. Bean's.  When Margaret arrived
he might think that he was not needed and would stay away.

Jasper, however, did not stay away.  He came as often as before, even
after Margaret arrived.  He now believed that Lois cared for him and
looked forward with pleasure to his visits.  Never before had the
Sundays seemed so far apart.  She was his inspiration in all that he
did and she was ever in his mind throughout the week.  How delightful
it was to listen to her playing upon the piano, and then when she and
Margaret sang, as they did so well together, it seemed to him as if
heaven had opened and poured upon him its greatest joys.  His past
trials were all forgotten, and he did not worry about the future.

One balmy spring Sunday evening they were all gathered around the piano
as usual singing several of their favourite hymns.  Lois was playing,
and the soft light from the shaded lamp fell upon her face.  Jasper
standing near thought he had never seen her look so beautiful.  It
seemed to him that her face was almost radiant and her eyes glowed with
an intense light of holy fervour.  Everything in that room spoke of
peace and harmony.  The singers were happy in one another's company,
and no worry troubled them.

As they sang, the shades of night deepened over the land and brighter
the light seemed to shine through the large window facing westward.  A
man standing just outside watched all that was going on within the
room.  He had approached cautiously and now stood back far enough from
the window that he might not be observed should any one happen to look
in his direction.  To all outward appearance he might have been drawn
there out of mere curiosity or by the sound of the music.  His lean,
smooth-shaven face betrayed nothing, and his steel-grey eyes which
rested alternately upon Jasper and the fair young player were
expressionless.  Well it was for Lois' peace of mind that she did not
see that face out there in the night, for it was the same face which
had been haunting her for months.




CHAPTER XX

BUSINESS DETAILS

As spring drew near David became anxious for more definite news about
the work at the falls.  He knew what Jasper and his men were doing and
how the portable mill was busy sawing the logs which had been hauled
out.  But he was impatient to see what he called "the real beginning."
It was, therefore, with considerable satisfaction when at last the
great start was made.  As the weeks passed word reached him of what was
going on.  He had not yet visited the falls as he did not feel equal to
the walk.  But he listened eagerly to all that was told him.  The
reports were truly marvellous of the large number of men engaged upon
the "Plant," of the activity at Creekdale and all up the brook.  In a
few weeks the whole place had been converted into a hive of bustling
industry.  It seemed as if a magic wand had been suddenly waved over
the place to produce such an astonishing change.

In addition to this there were men working between the city and
Creekdale as well as along the road leading up-river, putting large
poles in place for the electric wires.  These poles had been run down
the brook and then floated to various places along the river.  In this
way the work was facilitated.  Everything had been well planned, and it
seemed as if nothing had been overlooked.  Though David could not visit
the falls, yet he and Betty often sat by the road and watched the
workmen as they dug the deep holes, erected the poles and strung the
wires.

One beautiful morning as they came to the road, they saw a man not far
off busily sketching a clump of white birch trees a short distance
away.  So intent was he upon his work that he did not appear to notice
the two who were watching him with undisguised curiosity.

"Who is he?" David whispered, fearful lest he should disturb the man.

"He must be that artist who came yesterday," Betty replied.  "He has a
little tent over there," and she pointed to the right.  "I saw him
fixing it up yesterday and it looks so cosy.  He spoke to me as I came
by and seemed to be very friendly."

"And you say that he is an artist?" David enquired.

"Yes.  Don't you see him painting now?  He told me that he wants to get
some pictures of this beautiful place."

"He must see the falls, girl," and David rose from his sitting
position.  "There is nothing here to equal it, and how nice it would be
to have a picture before too great a change takes place up there."

"Suppose we tell him about it," Betty suggested, now much interested in
the idea.  "Come, I will introduce you."

As the two approached, the artist rose to his feet and lifted his hat.

"Why, it's my little visitor of yesterday," he pleasantly remarked.  "I
didn't expect to meet you so soon again.  Is this your grandfather?"

"Oh, no," and Betty laughed heartily.  "This is Mr. David, and I am
looking after him."

"I am glad to meet you, sir," and the stranger held out his hand.  "I
have only arrived lately and of course do not know any of the people
here, so you will pardon my mistake."

"It doesn't matter, I assure you," David replied.  "Betty is really a
daughter to me, so it was no mistake after all.  But I hope we have not
interrupted you."

"Not at all.  I am not doing much this morning, just getting my
bearings, as it were.  But you have a wonderful view from this hill.  I
am hoping to get some excellent pictures.  I wish I had known of this
beautiful spot before."

"Wait until you see the falls," David eagerly replied.  "You will find
something worth while there."

"Is it far from here?" the artist enquired.

"Oh, no.  You can easily find it.  There is a good road there now which
has been made by the new company."

"Is that the place where the light and power are to come from, of which
I have heard so much?"

"So you have heard of it then?  I am very glad."  There was a pleased
expression in David's eyes.  It gave him much satisfaction to know that
the news of what was being done at the falls had extended beyond
Creekdale.

"Oh, yes, every one has heard about the great undertaking which is
going on at Break Neck Falls," the artist replied.  "I have read much
about it in the city papers, and only recently there was a long article
describing certain phases of the work and what would be accomplished.
I have the paper with me.  Here it is, if you care to read it," and the
artist drew from his pocket a carefully-folded newspaper, and handed it
to the old man.

With much eagerness David took it in his hands, unfolded it and ran his
eyes quickly over the article with the big headlines, "A Gigantic
Undertaking."  Betty stepped close to his side and began to read as
well.  Her animated face and sparkling eyes showed plainly the keen
interest she took in the whole affair, and several times she gave
expression to exclamations of delight.

"Isn't it great!" she cried, when she had finished.  "And what a lot
they tell about you, Mr. David, and how you had that thing in your head
for so long when you were very poor."

"Yes, girl," David replied, "and did you notice what is said about the
benefit it will be to the city and the whole country?"

In their intense excitement they had forgotten all about the artist.
But as they talked like two happy children he was watching them very
closely, especially the old man.  In his eyes there was a peculiar
half-gloating expression, while a partly-suppressed sinister smile
lurked about the corners of his mouth.

"May we show this paper to Miss Lois?" Betty asked, turning suddenly
toward the artist.  As she did so, she started, for intuitively she saw
something in the man's face which frightened her.  Whatever it was, it
instantly dispelled the happiness which possessed her.  The artist
noticed this, and it annoyed him.  He shrugged his shoulder and gave a
short laugh.

"Yes, you may keep the paper," he said.  "I am through with it.  But I
must get on with my work now."

They stood and watched him as he walked away carrying with him his
easel and camp-stool.

"I am afraid of him," Betty whispered to her companion.  Then she
shivered as if cold.

"Why, what's the matter?" David asked in surprise.  "What makes you
afraid of that man?  He is only a harmless artist, and he was very kind
to us this morning.  I feel most grateful for the paper he has given
us."

"I know that, but I don't want to see him again," the girl replied.  "I
saw something in his eyes which I don't like.  I can't explain it, but
it makes me afraid of him.  I hope he will go away soon."

"Tut, girl, that is all nonsense," David chided.  "It is just a notion
on your part.  I like him well enough for a stranger.  What harm can he
do us?"

During the rest of the morning Betty could not get clear of the feeling
of fear which possessed her, and David worried much over her unusual
silence.  She longed to see Lois that she might talk it all over with
her.  In fact she had her mind made up to visit her that afternoon when
an unlooked-for excitement changed the entire current of her thoughts,
and put the artist out of her mind for the rest of the day.

It was just after dinner when the captain and David were out upon the
verandah enjoying their pipes, when a big car lurched up and stopped in
front of the house.  To David's surprise he saw Mr. Westcote alight and
come up the verandah steps.  He at once rose to meet him.

"I have come to give you a ride in my car," Mr. Westcote informed
David, after he had been introduced to the captain, and had handed him
a cigar.  "It is a pity to take you from such a beautiful place as
this," and he cast his eyes over the sloping fields before him.  "But,
I would like for you to come with me to the city to-day.  It is a
matter of business, that is, some details which should have been
attended to before."

"Has it anything to do with the falls?" David enquired.

"Yes, everything centres there," and Mr. Westcote smiled.  "This affair
is really important or I should not bother you to-day."

"I can be ready in a short time," David replied.  He was eager now to
be away, and the thought that he was needed and was in some way
necessary to the working out of the plans at the falls gave him great
pleasure.

In little less than half an hour the car left the Haven and sped
rapidly down the road.  David enjoyed the ride, and leaned back
comfortably in the soft springy seat.

"You should have a car, sir," Mr. Westcote remarked as he noted how
David liked the drive.  "It would do you so much good to have a spin
every day."

"Why, I never thought of it," was the reply.  "But I would not know how
to handle a car if I did have one.  And besides, it would cost a great
deal."

"Oh, you could easily overcome such difficulties.  You are a rich man,
you know, and could afford to buy a good car and keep a chauffeur to
drive it for you.  You have not spent all of that money you received,
have you?"

"No, no; only a very small portion of it.  You see, Betty and I live
very quietly, and spend but little.  We are planning to build a
comfortable house of our own some day.  We keep putting it off, though,
as we are so happy at the Haven with the captain and Mrs. Peterson."

Nothing more was said about this subject during the rest of the ride,
and in about an hour and a half they reached the city and drew up
before a large building on one of the business streets.  When once
inside David looked around with much interest upon the busy scenes
which met his eyes.

"This is our main office," Mr. Westcote explained, "and we keep quite a
staff.  As the work develops it will be necessary to have a building of
our own, for we have only the ground floor here.  This is my private
office," and he motioned to a door on the right.  "We will be more
quiet there."

David was greatly delighted at all he saw, and he could not restrain
the feeling of pride that he was the cause of all this activity.  Not
the slightest surprise entered his mind at what he observed.  There was
not even the least shadow of mystery about it all.  To him it was but
natural that things should be as they were.  He doubted nothing; he
asked no questions.  His plan was so great and reasonable that he
accepted everything as a matter of course.

"You have perhaps wondered," Mr. Westcote began, after they were
seated, "why I have brought you here to-day.  I told you that it is a
matter of business details, and so it is.  You are Honorary President
of our company and, accordingly, you are a large share-holder.  You
were not aware of that before, and I trust you do not mind our keeping
it a secret?"

"No, no; not at all," David replied.  "Everything is satisfactory to
me."

"That is good," Mr. Westcote continued.  "But as you have such a large
interest in the company, it is necessary that you should have your will
made to save complications in the future.  Life is uncertain, you know,
and if anything should happen to you it would make it very difficult
for us if you did not have your business matters attended to."

"Quite right, quite right," David assented.  "I have thought about it
somewhat of late, and I am very glad that you have mentioned it.  Could
we not have the business attended to at once?  It will not take long,
will it?"

"No, it can soon be done," was the reply.  "But first of all it will be
necessary for you to state in whose favour you wish to make your will.
Then we can have the papers drawn up, and you can sign them before you,
leave the city."

"Yes, that will be necessary," and David placed his right hand to his
forehead in a thoughtful manner.  "I have been thinking that all over,
and know the ones to whom I wish to leave my principal share in the
falls.  You see, I want to have people who will take a keen interest in
the undertaking, such as I have, and who will be able to continue the
work when I am gone."

"You are quite right," Mr. Westcote replied, though it was evident that
he with difficulty repressed a smile of amusement at his companion's
words.

"But I am somewhat worried about the others," David continued.  "I wish
to leave something to my faithful girl, Betty Bean, to her mother, who
is a widow, and to Captain Peterson and his wife, for they have a hard
struggle to make a living.  Now, they are the ones I wish to help as
far as I can, but I have no idea what I ought to leave them."

"How much would you like for them to have?" Mr. Westcote enquired.

"Well, it would be nice if they could have a thousand each.  That would
make them so comfortable.  But I am afraid such an amount is out of the
question."

"Not at all," was the reply.  "You name the amount, and we shall put it
in the will.  You see," he added, as if it were an afterthought, "the
falls will be good for that, and perhaps more, even after you have
arranged for the others."

"I am pleased to hear you express such confidence in the undertaking,"
and David looked into his companion's face.  "I little realised that it
would pay so well in such a short time.  I am very grateful to you for
what you have done."

"It will pay you regularly," Mr. Westcote replied.  "I may as well tell
you that this is one of the most remarkable companies ever formed.
Will you now mention the names of the principal ones to whom you wish
to leave the rest of your interest?"

"There are only two, but I have such unlimited confidence in them that
I feel I am making no mistake.  You know them both for they are Jasper
Randall, the young foreman, and Miss Lois Sinclair."

"Have you no relatives?" Mr. Westcote asked, concealing his surprise as
much as possible.  "If you have, would it not be well to remember them
in your will?"

"I desire that all I possess in this world should go to the ones I have
mentioned," David slowly replied.  "We will not talk about relatives,
please."

"Just as you say," Mr. Westcote assented, as he rose to his feet.  "I
shall have the papers drawn up at once.  In the meantime, you had
better come and stay with me.  You will need a good rest after your
trip."

It was late in the afternoon the next day before the work upon the will
was completed.  It was quite an elaborate affair, so David thought, and
he had to study it carefully before signing it.  When at last all was
finished, the car was waiting before the office to carry them back to
Creekdale.

"I am going with you," Mr. Westcote remarked as he took his seat by
David's side.  "I want to see that you get safely home.  And besides,"
he added, "I wish to learn how the work is getting along up there.  I
have just been telephoning to Mr. Randall, and his report is most
encouraging."




CHAPTER XXI

HARNESSED POWER

It was dark by the time they drew near to Creekdale, and as the car
rounded a bend in the road David was astonished at the sight which met
his eyes.  The entire way was brilliantly illuminated by hundreds of
electric lights strung along both sides of the road.

David started, sat bolt upright, and clutched his companion by the arm.

"What is this?" he demanded in a hoarse whisper.  "Where are we,
anyway?  I thought you were bringing me home."

"So I am," Mr. Westcote laughingly replied.  "We are at Creekdale now.
This is the work of your beloved falls.  Are you satisfied?"

"Oh!"  It was all that the old man could say.  He leaned back in his
seat and a sigh of relief escaped his lips.  It was quite evident that
he was strongly moved by what he saw.

Slowly the car moved up the great white way, and at last turned into
the gate leading to the Haven.  Two large lights had been placed on the
gate post, and these shed forth their bright light upon all sides.  It
was a marvellous transformation which had been made in such a short
time.  David could not utter a word, so overcome was he.  Even when he
saw the house ablaze with many lights and the verandah as bright as
day, and observed the people there waiting to welcome him home, he
seemed like one in a dream.  It was only when Betty danced about him
and caught both of his hands in hers, that he aroused from his
stupefaction.

"What's the matter, Mr. David?" she cried.  "Why don't you speak to me,
and tell me how you like it all?"

"It is wonderful!" and the old man placed his hand to his forehead, as
he always did when greatly affected or puzzled.  "Who did all this?"

"It was done for you, Mr. David," the girl explained.  "My, we have had
a lively time here since you left!"

"And was that the reason why I was taken to the city yesterday?" David
asked, while a new light of comprehension dawned upon his mind.  "You
knew all about this, did you?"

"Oh, no, I didn't know a thing," Betty protested.  "But just as soon as
you got away Mr. Jasper and a whole crowd of men began to work, and
they have been just hustling ever since.  Isn't it lovely!  And to
think that it was in your brain all the time!"

"This is very gratifying, sir," and David turned to Jasper, who was
standing by listening with great interest to the conversation between
the girl and the old man.  "I can hardly believe what I see.  I had no
idea that you had made such progress at the falls.  It will be
necessary for me to go and see the works for myself."

"We have a great deal more to do yet, I assure you," Jasper replied.
"We have merely begun.  We planned this little surprise for your
special benefit.  We wished that you should be the first one to be
honoured.  But we have something more to show you, which, no doubt,
will surprise you.  If you will come with me I will show you what it
is."

Leading the way, he conducted them through the kitchen and into an
adjoining room used partly as a wood-house and also as a wash room.
Each place was brilliantly lighted by means of several electric lamps.
He stopped at last before a cream-separator which was new and recently
installed.  Touching a switch, there was a sudden whirring sound, and
the machine began to revolve, slowly at first, but gaining rapidly in
speed until it was fairly spinning.  After it had been running for a
few minutes Jasper turned off the current, and then stood watching the
separator until its movements ceased.

He next moved across the room to where stood a churn.  Again placing
his finger upon another switch the churn began to revolve.

During all this time David's eyes were ablaze with joy as he watched
all that was taking place.

"It is wonderful!" he remarked.  "How have you managed to arrange
everything in such a short time?  It seems almost magical."

"Oh, we had everything all ready," Jasper laughingly replied.  "And
just as soon as we got you away we merely had to put the machinery into
place.  But here is something else," and he turned to the left.  "This
is a wood-cutting machine, and all you have to do is to turn on the
current, so," and he touched a switch, "and behold, your saw is all
ready for use.  Watch this," he added, picking up a stick, which in an
instant was severed in two.  "That is the way the farmers will cut
their wood.  You have thus seen some of the things your falls will do.
But there are others we cannot show here, which will revolutionise the
entire country."

Scarcely had he ended when Lois entered and stood watching the
revolving saw.  Jasper was the first to see her, and he noticed that
her face was paler than usual and that she seemed to be trembling.

"I am sorry that I am late," she apologised.  "I was planning to be
here to see these wonderful things, but I was delayed."

"But you can see them all now, Miss Sinclair," David eagerly replied.
"Look at the lights along the road and in the house, and the way these
machines run.  Isn't it wonderful?  My visions have come true at last,
and my beautiful falls have done it."

Jasper was anxious to know what was troubling Lois.  Although she
talked and laughed and seemed to be the gayest one there, it was quite
evident to him that she was merely acting the part.  When she had
stayed for about half an hour she spoke to Jasper privately and asked
him to accompany her home.

"I wish to speak to you about something," she told him.

Jasper was delighted, and after they had said good-night to the rest
they walked slowly down the lighted lane toward the main road.

"This is like fairyland," Lois remarked.  "I never expected to see
anything like this."

"It was done for David's sake," Jasper replied.  "And wasn't he
surprised and delighted?  I think I was as much excited as he was."

"Have you any idea why the company should do all this for his sake?"
Lois enquired.  "Who is he, anyway?"

"I have not the slightest idea," was the reply.  "Everything has been a
profound mystery to me from the beginning.  There is something most
interesting back of it all, mark my word.  Mr. Westcote evidently
knows, but he has never enlightened me.  Perhaps his daughter knows
something."

"If she does she has never told me.  Sometimes I think she knows, but
is not at liberty to speak.  Oh, what's that?" and Lois gave a sudden
start.  "I thought I heard something among the trees.  But I guess it
was nothing, only my nerves," and she gave a slight laugh.

"Perhaps it was merely some animal," Jasper suggested.  "It may have
been a dog or a rabbit.  Any slight noise sounds large at night."

"Let us hurry on," Lois urged.  "I am afraid that I am somewhat upset
to-night.  I had such a start on my way to the Haven that I have not
got over it yet."

"I saw that there was something wrong with you when you came into the
house," Jasper replied.

"Did you?  I was hoping that no one noticed it."

"What was the matter?"

"It was a man."

"Oh, was that all?  I thought that perhaps it was a bear."

"But a man can be far worse than a bear, Mr. Randall.  I would not mind
meeting a bear half as much as a brute in the form of a man."

"What, did he frighten you, or try to harm you in any way?"  Jasper
stopped short in his tracks and waited for an answer.  He was beginning
to understand now that Lois' fright was something not to be treated
lightly.

"Oh, no," Lois hastened to explain.  "He didn't even speak to me.  But
I saw him cross the brightly-lighted lane leading to the Haven.  He
plunged among the trees and disappeared."

"Did you know him?" Jasper asked, now much interested.

"Yes.  I met him once in the city at Mrs. Dingle's party.  He is an
English artist, Sydney Bramshaw by name, and he affected me then like a
terrible night-mare.  I could not get him out of my mind for weeks.  I
have never been able to explain it, and never experienced anything like
it before."

"Do you know anything about the man?" Jasper asked.

"No, and that is the strange thing about it.  I had a slight
conversation with him then and his words disgusted me.  Apart from that
I know nothing."

"It is strange," Jasper mused as if to himself.  "We sometimes do get
queer impressions about people, do we not?"

"But I never had anything like this before.  It seemed to me when I
first saw that man that he was Satan in disguise.  A queer idea, was it
not?  I felt that in some unaccountable way he had crossed my path for
evil, and I have that same feeling now."

They had reached the house by this time and were standing near the
verandah steps.  It was a chilly night, and the sky was overcast with
not a star to be seen.  A tremor shook Lois' form as she stood there.

"You are cold," Jasper remarked, "and you should go in the house at
once."

"Will you come in?" Lois asked.  "It is not late and father will be
pleased to see you."

"Not to-night, thank you," Jasper replied.  "I was working nearly all
last night at the Haven, and so must get some rest.  I am living in my
little old cabin now, and it is really good to be there again.  It
seems more like home to me than up the brook.  But, there, I must not
keep you any longer or you will catch cold.  Do not worry too much
about that man.  If he begins to trouble you, he will have to reckon
with me."

Jasper walked slowly away from the house along a path leading to the
main road.  He was thinking seriously of what Lois had told him about
Bramshaw.  He could not understand her strange aversion for the man,
and he wondered if there were really anything in such a presentiment.
He made up his mind that he would be on the lookout and if the fellow
became the least objectionable he would deal with him then in no gentle
manner.

As Jasper drew near to the main road a feeling suddenly possessed him
that he was being followed.  He looked back but could see nothing.
Laughing at himself for what he considered his foolishness, he
continued on his way.  But it was not so easy to banish the impression
he had received, and every once in a while he glanced around as if
expecting to see some one not far off.  Once he thought he heard the
sound of foot-steps in the distance, and he stopped to listen but heard
nothing more.

Reaching at last the path which led to his cabin, he was about to enter
upon this when an idea came into his mind.  It was suggested by a thick
clump of hazel bushes by the side of the road.  As quick as thought he
darted behind these and crouched low upon the ground.  From this
position it was possible for him to watch the road without being
observed.  He wished to find out whether any one was really following
him, or if it was merely imagination on his part.

He had not been there long ere he heard faint footfalls upon the road,
which grew more distinct as he listened.  He was now sure that his
surmises had been true, and it made him angry.  He knew that it was not
an ordinary pedestrian, for why had he come after him along the path
leading from the Sinclair house?  It must be some one stalking him, for
what purpose he could not imagine.

Peering forth from his concealed position Jasper was ere long able to
see the dim form of a man slouching cautiously along, keeping well to
the side of the road where the trees and bushes were the thickest.  He
even brushed the hazel bushes in passing and Jasper held his breath
lest he should be detected by his breathing.  He was sure now that the
man had been following him with no good intentions, and his first
inclination was to rush forward and find out what was his business.  He
resisted, however, thinking it better to remain where he was and see
what the night prowler would do next.

Not long did he have to wait for the man, coming to the path leading
across the fields, stopped and looked carefully around.  The dim form
of the little cabin could be seen in the distance, and for this he at
once started.  There were no trees now to hide him, and he started on a
run across the open space.  Jasper, seeing this, sprang from his hiding
place and hurried forward.  By the time he reached the path the man was
nowhere to be seen.  He had evidently reached the cabin, and was no
doubt at the door or listening at the window.  Jasper knew that it was
now time for him to act and he at once bounded across the field
straight for his cabin.  He had scarcely reached it when the prowler
came suddenly around the corner, and the two met.  In an instant Jasper
reached out his hand and caught the man by the shoulder and demanded
what he was doing around his cabin at that time of the night.  With an
angry oath, the other tried to free himself from the tightening grip,
and when he failed to do so he struck Jasper a blow right in the face
with the clenched fist of his right hand.

"Take that, you damned fool," he growled, "and mind your own business."

Jasper did not wait to argue.  In a twinkling he threw himself full
upon the man.  His blood surged madly through his veins, for the blow
stung him to fury.  His opponent, though he tried to put up a fight,
was as a child in Jasper's hands, and soon he was sprawling upon the
ground with Jasper sitting upon his body.

"Now, then," the victor calmly remarked, "as you would not answer my
question in a civil manner while standing on your feet, perhaps you
will do it here on the ground.  And you will do it before you get up,
remember that, so you might as well speak first as last.  Who are you,
and why were you following me up the road and prowling so suspiciously
around my cabin?"

"I'm a stranger here," was the low reply, "and I was looking for a
place to spend the night.  Will that satisfy you?"

"No, it will not," Jasper emphatically replied.  "I believe that you
are lying.  What is your name?"

"Jim Dobbins," was the somewhat hesitating answer.  "I am seeking for
work with the Light and Power Company and got astray."

"Now, look here," and Jasper rose to his feet, "it's no use for you to
string off such lies to me.  Your name is Sydney Bramshaw, the artist.
I know who you are, but why you are acting this way I do not know.  So
get up now, and clear out of this.  If I catch you at any more such
pranks I'll break every bone in your body.  You had better mind what
you do while in this place, and keep out of my sight after this."

Without a word the prostrate man rose to his feet and stood for an
instant as if he would speak.  He was trembling with rage, though in
the darkness Jasper could not see the ugly expression upon his face.
Presently he turned and glided away swiftly from the cabin, and was
soon lost to sight.

Jasper stood for a while and peered through the night.  He was almost
tempted to follow the man to be sure that he really departed and was
not hiding among the bushes but a short distance away.  He called
himself a fool for letting him off so easily.  He should have kept him
until morning to be sure that he would do no mischief under cover of
darkness.  At length, however, he entered the cabin and threw himself
upon his cot.  He wished to think it all over and keep awake lest the
man should return and wreak vengeance upon him in some under-handed
way.  He felt sure now that Lois' opinion of the man was correct, and
that for some unaccountable reason he had a contemptible enemy to deal
with, who would stoop to almost anything to carry out his evil designs,
whatever they might be.




CHAPTER XXII

IN THE PATH OF DESTRUCTION

It was only natural that the people of Creekdale should have been
greatly excited over the progress made at the falls.  They watched
everything with the keenest interest which reached its highest point on
the night of David's arrival home.  To see the road so brilliantly
illuminated was both wonderful and puzzling.  They all knew that it was
done for "Crazy David's sake," and they could not understand why such a
fuss should be made over his return to the place.

"It beats me," Andy Forbes remarked to a number of men gathered before
the store.  "I'm mighty glad to have the lights there for they make
things around here as bright as day.  But why is it done?  What has
Crazy David got to do with it?  You would think he was a king coming
home instead of a half-cracked old man."

"But he supplied the plans, didn't he?" one of the men asked in reply.

"The plans be jiggered!" and Andy gave a contemptuous toss of his head.
"What value do you suppose were his plans?  I don't believe the company
ever looked at them."

"There must be something, though," Ned Travis replied.  "David's living
in luxury now, and if the plans were not back of it, I'd like to know
what is.  It isn't natural for a big company with unlimited means to
throw away money on an old man like that just for charity."

"How's Jim Goban feeling these days?" Andy asked.  "I haven't seen him
of late."

"He's a very sick man," Billy Goban answered, at which they all
laughed.  "He curses himself every minute day and night for letting
Crazy David out of his clutches.  He believes that if he had kept him
he would have come in for a big share of David's good luck."

"Serves him right," Andy mused as he gazed thoughtfully at the array of
lights before him.  "He should be ashamed of himself, and so should we
for that matter for selling that old man to the lowest bidder.  It'll
be the last time such a thing takes place in this parish if I can help
it, and I guess I can.  It's most degrading, and should be stopped."

While the people of Creekdale were intensely aroused over the
marvellous progress of the Light and Power Company, the world beyond
was becoming much interested in what was taking place.  The day after
David's arrival home the city papers devoted considerable space to the
developments at the falls.  They told about the mysterious company and
the old man who had supplied the plans.  They gave a most vivid account
of the lighted way and the examples of the harnessed power at the
Haven.  They, like the people of Creekdale, could not understand why
such a fuss should be made over David.  They hinted that there was some
mystery back of it all, the solving of which would be watched with
considerable interest.

But the papers had much more to say.  They spoke of the great benefit
the city would receive from cheaper light and power, and how the new
company would lower the rates, and perhaps force the city company out
of business altogether.  They deemed it a day of great things when
people would not be compelled to pay such prices as hitherto, and how
industries of all kinds would increase and flourish.  A table of rates
was appended showing the difference between the rates of the old
company and the new.

It was with much satisfaction that David read these accounts to the
captain as they sat out upon the verandah.  He was a happy man that
day, and when he was through with his reading he leaned back in his
chair and remained silent for a long time.  The captain watched him
somewhat curiously as he puffed away at his pipe.  Presently he took
the pipe from his mouth and allowed it to go out, which was a most
unusual thing for him.  He even stared at David as if he had never seen
him before.  What his thoughts were he kept to himself, but he observed
the old man now more closely than ever and studied his face most
carefully.

They had been sitting on the verandah for about half an hour, when
Sydney Bramshaw strolled up to the house, with his easel under his arm.
He looked none the worse for his experience with Jasper and was most
affable as he accosted David, who at once introduced him to the captain.

"You have a beautiful place here, sir," he remarked to the invalid.  "I
have been fascinated with the scenery and have done considerable work
since my arrival.  May I have the privilege of sketching this
delightful cottage?  It will make a fine picture, I am sure."

"Sketch away all you like," the captain replied.  "It is a beautiful
spot, if I do say it, and it can't be beat anywhere."

From the moment the captain had set eyes upon the artist he was sure
that he had seen him before.  Just where it was he could not at first
recall, but suddenly it flashed into his mind, and with it a train of
thoughts which excited him more than was his wont.  He looked at David
and then at the artist, and for a moment he closed his eyes as memories
drifted upon him.  What was this man doing here? he asked himself.  He
longed to question Bramshaw, but desisted, determined to await future
developments.  Nevertheless, he was very quiet during the rest of the
day, which made his wife and Betty think that he was not well.

"You are not sick, are you?" Mrs. Peterson asked.

"Not at all," was the reply.  "I am only thinking."

"Maybe he's got something in his head just like Mr. David," Betty
suggested.

"Maybe I have, girl," the captain laughed.  "But I'm afraid the thing
that I've got won't make as much money as his.  Where is Mr. David now?"

"He's with that artist over there, watching him sketch this house.  He
likes the man, for he talks to him so much about the falls.  I don't
like him; his face frightens me."

The captain made no reply to these words but gazed meditatively out
over the fields long after Mrs. Peterson and Betty had left him.  He
was trying to piece together a number of fragmentary incidents which
were revolving in his mind, and to ascertain how they were related.

"I'm sure 'twas on that trip," he muttered, "But darn it all, why can't
I remember what he said.  He was always talking and boasting about one
thing and another.  Hello, by jingo, I've got it!" and the captain gave
such a whoop that both Mrs. Peterson and Betty came running from the
kitchen to see what was the matter.

"It's nothing," the captain growled, disgusted with himself for
attracting attention when he wanted to be alone, "I was just thinking,
that's all.  Can't a man whoop when he wants to without everybody
rushing around him like mad?"

"It all depends on what kind of a whoop it is, Robert," his wife
replied.  "We couldn't tell whether you had gone out of your mind or
had fallen off the verandah."

"It's that thing in his brain which did it, Mrs. Peterson," Betty
explained.  "Mr. David acted queer sometimes, though he never hollered
out.  It must be something great, Captain," she added, "which made you
yelp like that."

"It certainly was, girl," and the captain smiled.  "I feel better now,
though, so you women needn't worry about me."

The next morning David told Betty that he had made up his mind to visit
the falls.  He said that he wished to see for himself the wonderful
changes which had been made there.  Betty was delighted and at once set
to work to prepare the luncheon they were to take with them.

"We'll find a nice cosy place along the brook and have a picnic there,"
she told Mrs. Peterson.

"I'm afraid there will not be many cosy places," was the reply.  "You
must be prepared for great changes up the brook."

David and Betty were like two children off for a holiday as they left
the Haven and walked gaily down the lane toward the main highway.  It
was a perfect morning, and the perfume of clover from the expansive
meadows scented the air.  Birds were darting here and there or
twittering from the branches of the trees.  A short distance from the
road, and partly concealed, a white tent nestled among the trees,
though no sign of the artist was to be seen.  Betty breathed a sigh of
relief when they were past.  She did not wish to see Bramshaw, to whom
she had taken such a violent dislike.  She wondered where he was at
that time of the morning.  Perhaps he was still asleep, she thought,
for she knew that he prowled about late at night.

The tent was a small one, such as is generally used by campers.  It was
in a beautiful situation, and it was so placed that it commanded an
excellent view of the Haven and the lane leading to it.  It was a
common occurrence for people from the city to camp along the river
during the summer months, and people did not wonder about this one
among the trees.  They all knew that Bramshaw was an artist of some
note, and they felt rather pleased that he had come to Creekdale to
obtain some pictures.

"I am glad we didn't meet that artist this morning," Petty remarked
after they had left the tent out of sight.

"I cannot understand your dislike to the man," David replied.  "He has
been so civil to us both, and he is very fond of hearing about the work
at the falls, and how the whole community will be benefited."

"I can't help it, Mr. David," and Betty twirled the sunbonnet she was
carrying in her hand, as was often her custom.  "He may be all right,
but I don't like him.  I wish he would go away and never come back.
Isn't it strange how some people spoil everything?  We are so happy
this morning because we are going to the falls together, and yet as
soon as I think of that man I shiver.  I don't understand it at all."

"You'll get over it in time, Betty," David replied.  "But, see, what a
change they have made in our path.  Why, it's a regular road now."

"I don't like it one bit," Betty protested.  "It isn't half as nice as
it was before.  I hope they haven't touched my rock.  If they have,
somebody's going to get a big scolding."

Talking thus and passing remarks upon everything they saw, the two
moved slowly along the newly-made road.  Several freighting teams
passed them and the drivers looked with interest upon the old man and
the bright-faced girl.

"They all know you, Mr. David," Betty remarked.  "Did you notice how
the men lifted their hats!"

"They did it to you, girl," was the reply.  "Why should they do such a
thing to me?"

"Because you are great, that is why.  They all know of the wonderful
thing you had in your head.  Oh!" she suddenly exclaimed, stopping
short in her tracks.

"What is the matter?" David asked.

"They have taken away my rock!  Look, there are only little pieces of
it left."

"They needed it, no doubt, for the works up there, Betty.  You must not
mind when it has been put to such good use."

Betty, nevertheless, felt badly, and for a while she ceased her
chattering and walked along quietly by her companion's side.  At length
they came to a place where the road left the path and swung to the
right.

"Isn't this nice!" Betty exclaimed.  "Some of our dear old path is
left, anyway, and we can follow it and forget that any changes have
been made."

The path ran close to the brook and after they had followed this for
several hundred yards through a growth of young birches and maples,
they came to a clearing which had been made since they were last there.
Above them was the road, and on its lower side was a large pile of big
poles ready to be rolled into the brook.

"I wonder what they left them there for?" David enquired.

"Oh, I know," Betty replied.  "Mr. Jasper told us, don't you remember,
that they left a lot of poles to be used along the brook.  They must be
the ones."

"So he did tell us that," the old man mused.  "Your memory is better
than mine.  Suppose we sit down here and rest a while.  That walk has
tired me."

"There's a nice place right in front of that big stump close to the
brook," and Betty pointed with her finger.  "We can rest there and eat
a part of our lunch."

When they had reached the place Betty began to unpack the basket.
First of all she spread down a white cloth, and then laid out the
sandwiches and cake.  Then she paused, and a look of dismay overspread
her face.

"We forgot to bring anything to drink!" she exclaimed.  "I had the milk
all ready in the bottle and came away without it.  What shall we do?"

"Oh, never mind," David replied.  "We can drink some of this brook
water, can we not?"

"No, it's nasty.  It's too warm.  I know," and she reached for two tin
cups.  "There's a nice cool spring just up the brook.  I have often got
water there.  You keep off the flies from the food.  I won't be a
minute."

Leaving David, Betty hurried up along the edge of the brook until she
reached the spring bubbling out of the bank.  Filling the cups she made
her way back as carefully as possible so as not to spill any of the
water.  She had just reached the edge of the clearing when a strange
sound fell upon her ears.  It startled her, and looking up, her face
blanched with terror, for coming down the steep bank was one of the
large poles which had been separated from its companions.  It was only
a few seconds in making the descent, but in that brief space of time a
world of thought crowded into Betty's excited brain.  She saw David
sitting right in the track of death, unconscious of impending doom.
Betty tried to shout, to rush forward to rescue him, but no words came
from her lips, and her feet seemed glued to the ground.  Rapidly the
pole sped down the bank, and then just when but a score of feet from
the helpless old man it struck the large stump in its onward sweep.
With a wild bound it leaped high and like a mighty catapult hurled
itself through the air over David's head and fell with a terrific crash
into the brook below.

At first a wild scream of terror escaped Betty's lips, followed
instantly by a cry of joy as she rushed forward, seized the hand of the
bewildered old man and led him to a place of safety near the edge of
the forest.  Then her strength deserted her, and she sank down upon the
ground and wept like a child.

"Oh, Mr. David, Mr. David," she sobbed, "you were nearly killed.  Oh,
oh, oh!  Wasn't it awful!"

"There, there, Betty, don't feel so badly," and David stroked her hair
in a gentle manner.  "I'm all right now, so why should you cry?"

"But I can't help it," the girl moaned.  "I was sure you would be
killed, and I could do nothing to save you."

"Strange," her companion mused, "what started that log just as I was
sitting there.  It must have been loose and ready to start at the least
motion."

"Let us go home," and Betty rose suddenly to her feet.  "I don't want
to stay here any longer.  The place is not like it used to be.  I do
not feel safe.  There seems to be danger everywhere."

Hurrying as fast as possible across the open space and casting
apprehensive glances up the bank lest another pole should take a sudden
notion to come down, they soon reached the woods beyond.

"There, I feel safer now," Betty panted.  "Those poles can't touch us,
anyway."

"I did want to see the falls," David replied, "and I am quite
disappointed.  But I do not feel able to try the trip again as it tires
me too much."

"Suppose we ask Mr. Jasper to drive you there," Betty suggested.  "I
know he will be only too pleased to do it.  Isn't it funny we didn't
think of that before?"

"That is a good idea," David assented.  "Maybe he will do it to-morrow.
But what's the matter, girl?" he demanded, looking with surprise upon
Betty, who had suddenly stopped and was staring down upon the brook
through an opening among the trees.

"Look," she whispered, pointing with her finger, "there is that artist
sketching down below.  He doesn't know we are here, so let us be as
quiet as possible."

"Well, why should he startle you?" David enquired.  "He is not
troubling us.  I'm not afraid of him.  In fact, I feel inclined to go
and have a talk with him."

"Don't, please don't," and the girl laid her right hand imploringly on
his arm.  "Let us go home at once, for I feel shaky all over."

"Very well, then," David assented.  "But I wish you would get over your
foolish notion about that man.  He is merely a harmless artist who has
come to this place to get some good pictures.  Why can't you be
sensible?"




CHAPTER XXIII

RESCUED

Jasper had charge of fixing the poles and stretching the wires for
light and power between the city and the falls, as well as throughout
the country wherever it was planned to extend them.  Gangs of men were
at work along the lines, and Jasper was kept busy moving from place to
place giving instructions and supervising everything.  The entire
responsibility rested upon him, and he wished to prove worthy of the
trust.

The afternoon when David and Betty were up the brook, Jasper remained
closer than usual to Creekdale, where a number of men were working.
Opposite them a small island nestled out in the river, called "Emerald"
Island by reason of its rich covering of fir, pine and birch trees.  As
a rule, Jasper paid strict attention to his duties, but to-day his mind
often wandered and he would stand gazing out over the water to the
island beyond.

As the afternoon wore away he became quite restless and watched the
river most anxiously.  A wind had sprung up, which, gentle at first,
increased steadily into a gale.  The water soon became rough and great
white-caps rolled up-stream, especially heavy where the tide was
strongest.

At length, leaving his men he went to the shore and stood close to the
watery edge.  He looked more down the river than formerly, as if
expecting some one from that direction.  But occasionally he cast his
eyes off toward the island and breathed more freely after each look.
He often consulted his watch as he now paced up and down the beach.

"What can be keeping that fellow?" he muttered.  "He should have been
here an hour ago.  Surely he's not tied up on account of the wind.  I
gave him strict instructions to come back as soon as possible.  If he
does not----Hello, there he is now," and his face brightened as he gave
a sigh of relief.

Coming up the river was a big boat used for rafting purposes containing
one man.  Volumes of spray leaped high as she surged through the water
driven by a seven horse-power engine.  This craft was used for towing
logs and poles, and for the carrying of supplies to the various camps.

"You're late, Tom," Jasper remarked as the boat's bow touched the shore
where he was standing.  "I expected you an hour ago."

"It was the wind, sir," was the reply.  "A number of logs broke loose
from the raft and I had a hard time to collect them.  There's a heavy
sea runnin' below the Bar."

"It's bad out there, too," and Jasper pointed off toward the island.

"Sure thing," the man replied, turning partly around.  "There's a boat
leavin' the island now.  Surely it's not goin' to try to run over."

"Where is it?" Jasper demanded.

"Look," and Tom stretched out his long right arm, "ye kin just see it.
There, it's plainer now."

The only answer Jasper made was to give the boat a vigorous push from
the shore, leap aboard, seize the wheel and order Tom to start the
engine.  In a few seconds they were cutting their way rapidly through
the water straight for the big white-caps beyond.  Tom asked no
questions, but attended to the engine.  It was all in the day's work to
him, and this was much easier than towing logs.

From the moment he had seized the wheel Jasper had not taken his eyes
off of the little boat away in the distance.  He could see that it was
in the rough water and was pitching about in an alarming manner.  It
seemed to be beyond control and was drifting rapidly toward the rougher
water of the main channel.

"We are going very slow, Tom," he remarked.  "Can't we do any better?"

"She's runnin' full speed," was the reply.  "I'd like to slow down a
bit, for we're gettin' soaked."

"Never mind the water, Tom.  I wish you could make her go as fast
again.  Oh! did you see that?"

"See what?"

"The way that little boat pitched.  I thought she had swamped."

It did not really take them more than ten minutes to run across that
stretch of water, but to Jasper it seemed much longer.  The boat
pounded and threshed her way forward, shipping water at every plunge,
keeping Tom busy with the small suction pump.  At last, however, it was
easy for Jasper to see two women sitting in the drifting boat.  That
they were helpless and had given up all attempt to reach the shore was
quite evident.  One was seated astern, and the other was holding the
oars in her hands, but making no use of them.  Jasper's heart beat
quicker as he watched her, for he well knew what a struggle she must
have made before giving up in despair.

"They're women!" Tom exclaimed in astonishment.  "What in the devil are
they doin' out here!"

"Shut up, and attend to your engine," Jasper sternly ordered.

They were quite close now, and the women saw them.  As they approached
Jasper could see Lois' face turned toward him and it was very white.

"Sit still," he shouted, and then he motioned to Tom to slow down.
"Stop her," he presently ordered, and soon they were drifting up close
to the little boat.

It took Lois and Margaret but a few seconds to step on board of the
rafting boat, and then their own craft was taken in tow.  There was no
time for words now, as Jasper had all he could do to handle his own
boat, for she was rolling heavily as he swung her around and headed for
the shore.  Running almost broadside to the waves a great deal of water
was shipped, which kept Tom busy at the pump.

Jasper had no time to pay any attention to the women, but he
intuitively knew that Lois was watching him.  He was really happier
than he had been for days, and he was so pleased that he had been of
some service to the woman he loved.  This was the second time he had
rescued her from the water, and his mind went back to the experience up
the brook below the falls.  There was no Sammie Dingle present now to
mar his pleasure, for which he was most thankful.

It did not take the boat long to run to the Sinclair shore, and here in
a snug place, safe from the wind, she was beached.

"We can never thank you for what you have done for us to-day," Lois
remarked as she and Margaret walked with Jasper to the house.  "You
have saved our lives."

"Don't thank me," Jasper replied.  "It was a pleasure for me to do what
I did."

"But how did you know we were out there?" Margaret asked.

"It was Tom who saw you first and pointed your boat out to me.  He is
the one you should thank."

"But why was Tom looking toward the island?" Lois enquired.  "Your
explanation does not satisfy me."

"Do you imagine that I was spying upon your little outing?" Jasper
questioned.

"Not exactly spying.  I don't like that word.  But you must have known
that we were there."

"Yes, I did.  I saw you go over this afternoon, and when the wind
sprang up it was only natural to suppose you would have trouble in
getting home.  That is all there is about it."

"And so you kept watch, and then came to our assistance?"

"Yes."

Lois said no more just then, but walked quietly to the house.  She was
doing considerable thinking, however, and when she and Margaret went
upstairs to change their wet clothes, she again referred to the matter.

"It is just like him," Margaret remarked.  "He knew that we were over
there and that our lives would be in danger on the water.  Not many men
would have thought of such a thing."

Lois made no reply, but there was a deep happiness in her heart.  She
believed that Jasper had been thinking of her throughout the day and
that she was always much in his mind.  Margaret somewhat divined her
thoughts and twined her arms around her neck.

"I believe he thinks a great deal of you, dear," she said, "and I am so
glad.  It is only natural, for who could resist you?  You are as sweet
and loveable as can be.  If I were a man I am sure I would fall in love
with you the first time I met you."

"You did it, anyway, didn't you?" Lois asked, in order to hide her
embarrassment.  "But there is the car," she added.  "I wonder what
brings father home so early?"

Going downstairs, they found Mr. Sinclair and Jasper seated upon the
verandah in a corner protected from the wind by heavy vines.

"You are early to-day, Father," Lois remarked as she gave him the
customary kiss.  "We generally have to wait dinner for you."

"It is quite necessary that I should get back early, from what I have
heard about you young women," was the reply.  "It is hardly safe to
leave you alone."

"So you know all about our narrow escape, then," and Lois looked
enquiringly into his face.  She believed that Jasper must have been
telling him, and it somehow disappointed her.  She did not think that
he would be the first one to talk about the rescue he had made.

"Oh, yes, I learned all about it before I got home," Mr. Sinclair
explained.  "The men down the road saw it all, and then when Tom took
the boat back he gave them the full details.  You must be very careful
after this, Lois, about going over to the island.  You might not always
have a rescuer handy as you had to-day."

Lois did not reply.  She was glad that Jasper had not told, and she was
sorry that she had judged him wrongly.  She might have known better, so
she mused.

Mr. Sinclair was in excellent spirits.  He had changed a great deal
since his illness and had become more like a father to her than he had
ever been before.  He entered more into the life of his family, and his
old sternness passed away.  Lois wondered what brought him back so
early from the city.  She asked no questions, however, feeling sure
that he would explain the reason in due time.

She did not in fact have long to wait, for after they were all seated
at dinner Mr. Sinclair looked quizzically into his daughter's face.

"I know you are puzzling your brain why I came home so early," he
began.  "Now, are you not?"

"I certainly am," Lois laughingly replied.  "Margaret and I have been
having all kinds of surmises."

"I've done a great stroke of business to-day," Mr. Sinclair continued,
"and it has lifted a heavy burden from my mind.  Can any of you guess
what it is?"

"Bought a new tract of timber, Dad," Dick replied.  "I can't think of
anything that would please you better than that."

"No, it's not that."

"Maybe you've found some work for Dick to do," Lois suggested.  "That
would certainly be a great stroke of business."

"Come, come, Lois," her brother remonstrated.  "You seem to think that
I have nothing to do."

"Haven't I good reason to think so?"

"No, it's not that," Mr. Sinclair intervened.  "You're a long way off."

"Have you bought out the new Light and Power Company?" Jasper asked.

"No, no," and Mr. Sinclair chuckled as he went on with his dinner.  He
was enjoying immensely the little game.

"I think I know what it is," and Margaret looked intently into his
face.  "You have sold out to the Break Neck Light and Power Company."

"How in the world did you know that?" Mr. Sinclair asked in surprise.
"Why, I thought it was a dead secret."

"So it was in a way," Margaret smilingly replied.  "But, you see, I am
supposed to know a little of what is going on."

"And your father told you about it, did he?"

"Yes.  I have known for some time that he was hoping you would sell
out, and thus avoid trouble."

"Is it possible, Father," Lois asked, "that you have sold out all your
interest in the City Light and Power Company?"

"We've all sold out, and at such a figure that we are much satisfied."

"Oh, I am so glad," and Margaret clasped her hands before her.  "I was
afraid that there might be trouble between you and father, and I did
not want that."

"There is no danger of that now," Mr. Sinclair replied, "though there
was at one time.  I never believed that the matter could be so
satisfactorily arranged, for I had no idea that the new company would
be willing to come to our terms."

Margaret said nothing more, and while the others talked she took no
part in the conversation.  She very well knew why the matter had been
so amicably settled, and she smiled to herself as she thought of the
several long conversations she and her father had had together.  But
for her interference nothing would have been done, she was well aware
of that.  She remembered how stubborn her father had been when she
first suggested the idea to him.  But after he had considered it most
carefully he realised what a good business proposition it would be.

"I believe Margaret is getting home-sick," Dick remarked.

"Why, what makes you think that?" she asked, somewhat startled by the
question.

"Because you are so quiet.  You haven't said a word for the last five
minutes."

"She hasn't had much chance," Lois laughingly replied.  "You have been
doing most of the talking, Dick."

"Have I?" and the young man opened his eyes wide in apparent amazement.
"But I am going to be silent now and let Margaret tell my fortune.  She
is a dandy at that," and he handed over his cup as he spoke.

"Oh, I have told your fortune so often," was the reply, "that it is
getting to be an old story now."

"Won't you tell me mine?" Jasper asked, passing his cup.  "I should
like to know what's in store for me."

Margaret took the cup in her hand and gazed at it thoughtfully for a
few seconds.

"Do you really wish to know?" she asked.

"Certainly."

"Well, then, I see great trouble ahead of you."

"Whew!" Dick whistled.  "This is getting serious.  You'd better be
careful, Spuds."

"Yes," Margaret continued, "I see a big black cloud, and it entirely
surrounds you."

"Does it pass away?" Lois questioned, now much interested.

"I can not altogether tell."

"He's going to have a nightmare," Dick bantered, at which they all
laughed.

"I hope there's nothing in your prophecy," Jasper remarked.  "If I were
at all superstitious I might worry a great deal over what you say."

"Look here, Lois," and Dick turned to his sister, "is there a hole in
that tea-strainer?  For pity sakes get a new one, and don't let so many
grounds get through in the future.  We don't want any more clouds."

When dinner was over they all went out on the verandah.  It was a
beautiful evening, for the wind had subsided, and the river stretched
out before them like a huge mirror.

"How I should like to be out there now," Lois remarked, as she gazed
pensively upon the water.  "Suppose we go for a row?"

"I should think you'd be sick and tired of the river after your
experience to-day," Dick replied.  "I prefer the car to a boat any
time."

"With all the enjoyment of dust, noise, and smell of gasoline thrown
in," his sister sarcastically retorted.

"I guess you were most thankful to smell gasoline to-day, though, when
Spuds picked you up in that old tub of his.  Now, weren't you?"

Before Lois could reply Betty suddenly appeared before them.  Her face
was flushed, and she was panting as if she had been running fast.

"I have only a minute to spare," she explained, "for Mr. David doesn't
know I have left him.  He wants to see you, Mr. Jasper, and so I have
come before it gets too late.  I am afraid to come out after dark now."




CHAPTER XXIV

GATHERING CLOUDS

Jasper did not like the idea of leaving such agreeable company and
going with Betty.  It was so pleasant to be near Lois, and he was
hoping that they might have a quiet little conversation together.  Why
could not David wait?  There was surely nothing of great importance
that he wished to see him about.  No doubt he wanted to ask him some
questions concerning the progress of the work at the falls.  He could
call in on his way home and have a chat with him.

These thoughts ran quickly through his mind as he sat there watching
Betty.  But something in the girl's face told him that he had better go
at once, and so he rose from his chair.

"Won't you come back again?" Lois asked.  "It is go early that surely
Mr. David will not keep you all the evening."

"I'm afraid not," was the reluctant reply.  "I shall go over to my
cabin and get a good sleep.  I was up late last night looking after
that raft of poles which we took down river to-day."

Lois had the feeling that something was wrong, and she longed to go to
the Haven and find out what it was.  She was almost tempted to leave
the rest and accompany Jasper and Betty.  She banished this idea,
however, thinking that after all there was nothing over which she
should worry.  But in a twinkling there flashed into her mind the words
Margaret had so lightly spoken over the tea-cup.  "I see a big black
cloud, and it entirely surrounds you."  Why did those words come to her
now? she asked herself, and why should she have that strange foreboding
of impending trouble?  So strong was this impression that she was
inclined to hurry after Jasper and give him warning.  She did nothing
of the kind, however, but during the remainder of the evening she was
quieter than usual and took little part in any conversation.

Jasper walked by Betty's side along the road leading to the main
highway.

"How did you know where I was?" he presently asked her.

"We saw you this afternoon out on the river saving Miss Lois and Miss
Margaret."

"Why, where were you?"

"Mr. David and I were up on the hill.  We had just come back from a
walk up the brook.  Mr. David was tired after his excitement, and so we
sat down to rest.  It was then that we saw you."

"What made Mr. David excited?" Jasper enquired.  "I suppose it was the
great change he saw at the falls, was it?"

"Oh, no, not that.  It was the rolling log which did it.  You see, Mr.
David was nearly killed this afternoon."

At these words Jasper stopped short and looked keenly into Betty's face.

"Nearly killed!  What do you mean?" he demanded.

"Yes, that was it."  Then in a few words the girl told him what had
happened up the brook that afternoon, and of old David's narrow escape.

For a while Jasper walked slowly along the road after Betty had
finished.  He was greatly puzzled, for he could not believe that any
log would become loosened at the exact moment when David was directly
in front of it unless there was something to start it on its downward
course.

"Did you see any men working near the logs when you were there?" he at
length asked.

"I didn't see any," was the reply.  "But we met several teams on our
way up."

"And you saw no one near the place at all?"

"We didn't see any one near where we were going to have our lunch, but
as we were coming home we saw the artist down by our brook."

"You did?  And where was he?"

"Not far from Pyramid Rock.  I don't think he saw us, for we hurried by
as fast as we could."

"Why did you do that?"

"Because I'm afraid of him."

"What, did he ever do anything to frighten you?"

"No.  But he makes me shiver all over.  I can't understand why it is."

Jasper found David crouched in his big easy chair near the open window
facing the falls.  His eyes brightened as the young man entered and sat
down by his side.

"It is good of you to come," David began, "for I have been anxious to
speak to you ever since we came back from up the brook.  You may go,"
and he motioned Betty to the door.  "I wish to be alone for a while
with Mr. Randall."

He waited until the door had closed behind the girl, and then turned
his eyes upon his visitor's face.  Jasper noted the worry there, and at
once connected it with his experience up the brook that afternoon.

"Has Betty told you?" and David laid his right hand gently upon
Jasper's arm.

"About the rolling log, and your narrow escape this afternoon?"

David nodded.

"Yes, she told me about it on our way here.  I am so thankful that you
were not hurt."

"I might have been killed!  It was nothing less than a miracle that I
escaped."

"It has shaken you up a great deal, so I see.  But you will be all
right after a good night's sleep.  Your nerves are somewhat unstrung
now."

"Perhaps so," the old man mused.  "But I feel uneasy.  It may be the
shock, as you suggest.  But there is something in my heart that I
cannot explain.  I never had such a feeling before, and I thought that
perhaps you could help me."

"In what way?" Jasper asked, as David paused as if groping for the
right words.

"It appears as if everything is about to slip away from me.  I seem
to-night as if about to start on a long mysterious journey, and that I
shall never return.  People call me crazy, and perhaps they have good
reason for doing so.  You may think the same, and especially so now as
you listen to my words.  But I cannot help this peculiar notion that
possesses me and almost overwhelms me with strange forebodings.  It may
be the outcome of a mind diseased, who knows?  My great concern,
though, is in connection with the work at the falls.  I have the
feeling that in some way I am necessary to its welfare.  I do not wish
it to stop, and I want you to promise me to-night that if anything
should happen to me that you will take my place, and be keenly
interested in it."

"I do not see how I can take your place, for that is not in my power.
But take a deep interest in all that goes on up there I certainly
shall, and be as deeply interested in its progress as you have been."

"Ah, you can never be interested in it as I am," and David's eyes
glowed with the intensity of his old-time devotion.  "Can any one be as
much interested in the growth and progress of a child as its parents?
My child is up there," and he stretched out his arm toward the falls.
"For it I have longed and suffered.  It is bone of my bone and flesh of
my flesh.  My heart's blood is there."

Jasper now felt certain that the old man's mind was really unbalanced.
He attributed it to the excitement of his narrow escape that afternoon.
A good sleep would refresh him, and he would be all right in the
morning.  He rose to his feet and took David's hand in his.

"I must go now," he said.  "We both need sleep.  I was up late last
night, and so must go home early to get a good rest.  You had better do
the same."

 "I don't want to sleep," David emphatically replied.
"My mind is too much upset to rest.  But if you must go let me walk a
short way with you.  Perhaps the cool night air will refresh me.  Wait
a moment until I put on my coat and hat.  Betty will be angry if I go
without them."

Then he suddenly paused and caught Jasper fiercely by the arm.

"Do you hear them?" he asked.  "Listen," and he held up his right hand.

In the old man's eyes had come a peculiar light, and his manner
reminded Jasper of the first night he had met him on the road when he
had rescued him from the speeding auto.

"Do you hear them?" David repeated.  "My beautiful falls, my beautiful
falls.  What sweeter music than the sound of your rushing water.
People have been deaf to your luring voice.  I alone have listened and
understood.  They called me a fool and said I was crazy, ha, ha!  But
they know better now.  They have seen what my beautiful falls can do.
Light and power!  Light and power!  The world transformed.  Burdens
lifted from weary shoulders; homes transformed, and the hearts of all
made glad."

He was standing in the middle of the room as he uttered these words,
and Jasper noted how the fire of excitement was increasing in intensity.

"Come," and he laid his hand upon his companion's arm as he spoke, "let
us go for a walk."

"Hush!  Listen!" he cried, unheeding Jasper's words.  "There it is
again!  Do you hear it?  It's coming from the valley; it has winged its
way across the sea.  Ha, ha, he will hear it and tremble.  But, wait,
he is not there; he is in hell.  Yes, that's where he is--in hell!
Where else could he be?"

David's voice had risen to a shriek as he uttered the last words.
Jasper stared at him in amazement.  What did he mean by such strange
utterances?  Surely the man was out of his mind.

"Come," he again ordered, "let us leave the house and go for a walk.
You will feel better out in the cool air."

Taking him by the arm Jasper led him out upon the verandah and down the
steps.  The twilight was deepening fast, and a quiet peace had settled
over the land.  Away to the right the trees on the high hills were
clearly silhouetted against the evening sky.  At any other time Jasper
would have stood and revelled in the beauty of his surroundings.  But
now he was too much concerned about the man at his side to think about
such things.  From the time they left the house until they reached the
main highway David talked incessantly.  He was greatly excited, and
gesticulated at almost every word.

At length he stopped, placed his right hand to his forehead, and looked
around.

"What have I been saying?" he asked in a calmer voice.  "It seems to me
that I have been in a strange country seeing all kinds of things."

"You are all right now," Jasper replied.  "You certainly have been
raving at a great rate."

"Have I?" the old man queried, and he lapsed into a momentary silence.
"Peculiar feelings come over me at times.  The fresh air of night has
done me much good.  I shall walk a short way with you along the road."

David was now a pleasant companion, and Jasper enjoyed talking to him.
He enquired about the progress of the work at the falls and asked
numerous questions.  Not once did he refer to the dark forebodings
which had possessed him at the Haven, and Jasper believed that he had
forgotten about them.

"I think I shall return now," he said after they had walked some
distance.

"Shall I go back with you?" Jasper asked.

"Not at all.  I shall enjoy the walk alone.  You are tired and should
get home at once.  So, good night.  I hope to see you again soon."

Jasper stood and watched him until the darkness swallowed him up.  Then
he made his way along the road to his own lonely house.  He was very
tired, but he found it difficult to get to sleep.  The strange words
which David had uttered kept running constantly through his mind.  When
he did at last fall into a fitful slumber, he was beset by a dreadful
monster, which was slowly crushing him to pieces while he was unable to
do anything to save himself.

He was aroused from this nightmare by a loud pounding upon the door.
At first he imagined it was some one coming to his relief.  Half dazed
he groped his way across the room, threw open the door and peered out
into the night.

"Who's there?" he demanded.

"It's only me," came a voice which he recognised at once as Betty's.
"Oh, Mr. Jasper, have you seen Mr. David?" she asked.

"Seen Mr. David!" Jasper exclaimed in surprise.  "I haven't seen him
since I left him last night on the road near the Haven.  Didn't he go
home?"

"No, he didn't, and that's the reason I'm here.  I waited up for him
and when he didn't come back, I started out to find him."

"You stay there a minute," Jasper ordered, as he closed the door and
turned back into the room.  Lighting a lamp, he was astonished to find
that it was near midnight.  It took him but a few moments to dress, and
then he again threw open the door and stepped out into the night.




CHAPTER XXV

MYSTERY

By the light streaming through the doorway Jasper could see that
Betty's face was very pale.  She was greatly agitated as well, and her
teeth chattered as she spoke.

"You have been running hard," Jasper remarked.  "You had better come in
and rest awhile."

"No, no," the girl protested.  "Don't let us wait a minute.  We must
find Mr. David!"

"Are you sure he isn't home?" Jasper asked.

"Yes, I am sure he isn't there."

"But he may have slipped in and you didn't hear him."

"No, no, he couldn't have done it.  I was listening and watching every
minute for him to come back.  I am certain I would have seen him."

"Does Mrs. Peterson know where you are?"

"No.  She was asleep when I left.  I only intended, to come a short
distance for I was sure that I would meet Mr. David coming back.  But
when I didn't, I came all the way here.  Oh, let us go at once."

Jasper stepped back into the room, and put out the light.  He was about
to close the door when he paused.

"Wait a minute," he said, "until I get my lantern.  We can't do
anything without a light.  Mr. David may have fainted by the side of
the road.  He is an old man, you know."

It did not take Jasper long to get the lantern, and soon they were
speeding across the field toward the main highway.  He noticed that
Betty kept very close to him, and as they drew near the Haven she
seemed to be trembling violently.  She started often, and Jasper
wondered what was the matter with her.

"Were you not frightened to come all the way alone?" he asked.

"Not at first," was the reply.  "But I was frightened after a while and
I ran hard."

"What frightened you?  Were you afraid of the dark?"

"No--yes," Betty faltered.  Jasper wondered at her answer, but made no
comment.

All along the road they watched most carefully, thinking they might
find David.  Especially careful was this search as they neared the
Haven but not a trace of him could they find.

The Petersons were greatly concerned over the missing man.  The captain
suggested that the neighbours should be notified and a search-party
should start out at once.  As this seemed the only thing to do, Jasper
hurried to the village and aroused Andy Forbes from his slumbers.  It
took the storekeeper several minutes to grasp the significance of the
affair, and Jasper had to do considerable explaining.

"So you tell me that Crazy David is lost?" he at length queried.

"Certainly.  Isn't that what I have been trying to tell you?  We must
get a search-party out after him at once.  I fear that evil has
befallen the old man.  He may be wandering off in the woods somewhere,
as his mind seems to be uncertain at times."

"I'm afraid we can't do much to-night," and Andy scratched his head in
perplexity.  "However, I'll see what I can do.  Maybe I can get a bunch
of men together before morning."

"That's good," Jasper encouraged.  "You round up the men here, and I'll
go to the camp down the road.  There are several men there and I'll get
one of them to hurry to the falls and bring in all the men.  I feel
responsible for the welfare of David as I had strict instructions to
look after him.  If anything has befallen him I shall never forgive
myself."

It took Jasper over an hour to go to the camp and bring back a half
dozen men.  In the meantime a dozen or more had left the village with
lanterns to begin the search.  These he met up the road.  They had
searched every nook and corner, but had found no trace of the missing
one.

"It's no use hunting when it is so dark," Andy informed him.  "We might
as well look for a needle in a hay-stack.  I move that we wait until
morning."

This suggestion was carried out, and while most of the men went back to
their homes in order to get something to eat, Jasper made his way to
the Haven.  Mrs. Peterson met him at the door and her face bore a
worried expression.

"Have you found him?" she enquired.  "We have been so uneasy."

"No," was the reply.  "We must wait until morning.  It is no use
groping about in the dark.  Where is Betty?"

"She's in Mr. David's room.  I am so anxious about her.  She has been
crying and wringing her hands ever since you left.  I cannot tell what
has come over the girl."

"She is fretting about David, no doubt."

"Yes, that may account for some of her grief," and Mrs. Peterson's eyes
rested thoughtfully upon the floor.  "But there's something else
troubling her, mark my word.  She's been nearly frightened to death
over something, and the way she sits and shivers at times is hard for
me to stand."

"But won't she tell you what's the matter?" Jasper asked.

"I have asked her over and over again, but she always shakes her head,
and falls to sobbing and moaning worse than ever.  Poor child, I feel
so sorry for her."

"It is strange," Jasper mused.  "May I see her?  Perhaps it is only the
excitement that is troubling her."

Betty's face brightened somewhat as Jasper entered the room.  This was
for only an instant, however, and then she buried her face in her hands
and sobbed as if her heart would break.

"Betty, Betty, what is the matter?" Jasper asked.  "Tell me what is
worrying you?"

"It's about Mr. David!" she moaned.  "He's lost and I'm sure he's dead!"

"But we hope to find him," Jasper soothed.  "Just as soon as it is
light enough we are going to continue our search for him.  He must have
wandered away into the woods, and no doubt we shall soon find him.
There is something else troubling you, is there not?  Won't you tell me
what it is?"

But the girl shook her head, and try as he might Jasper could not
induce her to talk.  She was determined to remain obstinately silent.

There was but one person to whom Jasper felt he could turn for
assistance, and that was Lois.  He had thought of her before, and
wondered if she had heard the news of David's disappearance.  He felt
that it was unlikely as no one would think of carrying the news there.
As he stood for a few minutes looking upon Betty who was sitting before
him the very embodiment of abject misery, he believed that Lois was the
only one who could comfort her, and perhaps induce her to reveal the
cause of her unusual state of agitation.  Telling the girl to be brave,
and to keep up hope for David's safe return, he left the Haven and
hastened down the road toward the main highway, and then took a short
cut across the field toward the Sinclair house.  Far off in the east
light was breaking above the horizon, and he knew that in a short time
the search would again begin for the missing man, and he must be there.

Not a sign of life could he observe around the place, and he wondered
how he could awaken Lois and not disturb the whole household.  As he
drew near the verandah he noticed that a light shone from one of the
upstairs windows.  Whether it was Lois' room or not he could not tell,
but scarcely had he stepped upon the verandah and tapped gently upon
the door, ere it was opened and Lois stood before him, dressed in her
out-of-door clothes.

"What's the matter?" she asked before Jasper had time to say a word.

"Have you heard anything?" Jasper enquired,

"No, nothing," was the reply.  "But I saw the lights near the Haven and
along the road and felt sure that something was wrong."

Jasper noted that Lois' face was very pale, and that she was trembling
as if cold.  He did not know that she had been unable to sleep owing to
the strange presentiment which had come to her the previous evening.
So strong had this at last become that she had risen and looked out of
the window facing the Haven.  It was then that she saw the moving
lights, and her worst tears were confirmed.

"David is missing," Jasper told her, "and we are waiting for daylight
to have another search for him."

"David is missing!" Lois slowly repeated, as if she had not heard
aright.  "Have you any idea where he is?"

"No.  I left him last night on the road near the Haven.  He may have
wandered off somewhere into the woods.  But Betty is feeling very
badly, and I have come thinking that perhaps you might be able to
comfort her."

"I shall go at once," Lois replied.  "I am so glad you have come for
me, as I was almost frantic wondering what was going on."

As they made their way toward the Haven Jasper told Lois more about
Betty and her state of agitation.

"What is the cause of it, do you suppose?" Lois asked.  "Do you think
it is in connection with Mr. David?"

"Not altogether, I am quite certain.  There is something else on her
mind.  She might explain to you what it is when she would tell no one
else."

They had just reached the gate leading to the Haven when Andy Forbes,
accompanied by several men, swung up the road.

"I must leave you now," Jasper told Lois, "and assist in the search."

"Please let us know as soon as you find any trace of Mr. David," Lois
replied.  "I shall stay with Betty for a while."

It was quite light now, and as the men walked along the road they
searched most carefully every nook and corner, but all in vain.

"He is not anywhere here," Andy remarked.  "But he may have wandered
into the woods along that old winter road.  I suggest that we follow it
for a while.  He may be wandering about in there.  We can comb the
woods if he's not on the road."

The men moved very quietly, keenly alert, each hoping to make the
discovery first.  To Jasper there seemed something uncanny about the
way they moved so silently onward at that weird morning hour.  A spirit
of depression came upon him, and his companions appeared like enemies.
He felt that in some unaccountable way they believed that he was to
blame for all the trouble, and that he should have taken more care of
the old man.

After they had gone some distance along the old road and had found
nothing, they stopped and held a consultation as to what they should do.

"Suppose we divide up and search through the woods," Jasper suggested.
"Andy, you and Dave come with me, and we'll work back on this side of
the road, while the rest of the men do the same on the other."

Acting upon this suggestion, they at once plunged into the woods and
took up their positions several rods from one another.  Jasper was
nearest the road.  Next to him was Dave, while Andy was farthest off.
Walking abreast among the trees, they were thus enabled to examine
every portion of the ground.  In a way it seemed almost a hopeless
task, but there was nothing else for them to do.  They knew that other
men would be scouring up and down the main road, as well as through the
fields, and in fact every place where David might have strayed.

They had been thus searching for some time and were not far from the
main highway, when they heard loud shouting from the men on the other
side of the old wood-road.  Feeling sure that they were needed, the
three men hurried forward in the direction from whence the sounds came.
Jasper led, and his heart beat fast as he bounded through the woods,
unheeding scratches upon his face and hands from the rough branches
which brushed his body.

It took him only a few minutes to accomplish this, and he suddenly came
upon the men grouped around something which was lying upon the ground.
When his eyes rested upon the form of David huddled there, he gave a
half-suppressed cry, and brushing the men aside, dropped upon his knees
by the old man's side.

"Is he dead?" he asked in a hoarse whisper.

"Dead as a door nail," Jim Goban replied.  "Guess he's been dead fer
some time by the look of things.  Mighty bad piece of business this, I
call it."

"Do you suppose he was killed?" Jasper enquired.

"Sure.  There's no doubt about that from the mark on his head.  He's
been knocked down like an ox."

A shiver shook Jasper's body at these words, and he straightened
himself up.  He did not notice that several of the men were watching
him closely and observing his every word and action.

"Who could have done such a diabolical thing?" Jasper mused, as if to
himself.  "Let us examine the ground very carefully to see if the man
who did this deed left any trace.  He might have dropped something."

"We have looked," Jim replied, "and we found this."

Jasper's eyes had been searching the ground, but something in Jim's
voice caused him to turn suddenly, and as he did so his heart almost
stopped beating and his face turned ghastly pale, for there in the
man's out-stretched hand was an envelope with his own name upon it.

"Where did you find that?" he gasped, as he reached out to take it.

But Jim drew back, while an expression of exultation gleamed in his
eyes.

"No, I guess I better keep it," he replied.  "It might come in handy
later on.  We found it right there," and he pointed to a spot near
where the dead man was lying.  "Guess we all saw it at once."

A sickening feeling suddenly overwhelmed Jasper, and he felt faint.  He
looked keenly into the faces of the men standing near, but their eyes
were averted.  Did they believe him to be guilty of such a foul deed?
he asked himself.  Something told him that they did, and the less he
now said the better it would be.  He wanted to get away from their
presence to think it all over.

"You better carry the body to the Haven," he at length suggested in a
voice as calm as possible.  "I'm afraid I can't be of any more service."

With that, he turned and walked rapidly away, leaving the men staring
after him with suspicious, wondering eyes.




CHAPTER XXVI

UNDER SUSPICION

Never in the entire history of Creekdale had there been such intense
excitement as when word was received of the murder of old David.  At
first people could not believe it was true, and thought there had been
some mistake.  But when the men who had found David related the story
then all doubt was set aside.  The store was crowded that afternoon
with excited men who had gathered to hear the smallest detail, and to
discuss with one another the whole affair.  It was Sandy Miller who
described how he had made the discovery, and then shouted for his
companions.

"Was the letter lying near?" Andy Forbes asked.

"I didn't notice it at first," was the reply, "as I was so overcome by
the sight before me.  It must have been lying there all the time, for
Jim Goban saw it at once."

"Where is that letter now?"

"Jim has it, I guess.  It wasn't a letter, but merely an envelope with
'Jasper Randall' written plain on the outside.  You should have seen
that fellow's face when Jim showed it to him."

"But do you think that proves anything?" Andy enquired.

"Wouldn't like to say.  But you know as well as I do how suspicious the
thing looks, and how much the lawyers will make out of it."

"Is the body at the Haven now?" one of the men asked.

"We took it there," Andy replied.  Then he paused and looked around
upon his audience.  "I hope I shall never have to take part in such a
business again," he continued.  "I can't get the face of that girl
Betty out of my mind, and her wild cry is still ringing in my ears.  I
thought she would go crazy for sure when she heard what had happened."

"She was very fond of the old man, so I understand," Ned Purvis
remarked.

"She certainly was.  They were just like father and daughter.  But I
must say that Miss Sinclair was a regular brick.  She took charge of
everything at once and seemed to know the right thing to do.  But, my,
her face was pale, and you should have seen her eyes--when she turned
them upon Jim Goban."

"What did she do that for?" Ned questioned.

"Because Jim showed her the envelope and hinted that Randall was the
guilty one."

"Did she say anything?"

"Never a word.  But her eyes said enough, and I saw Jim flinch as if he
had been struck in the face."

"The women folks say that her and him are pretty thick," Steve Clemwell
drawled.  "Maybe that's the reason why she's goin' to stick up fer him.
They've been seen drivin' together, and he's been often at her house."

"But what reason would Randall have for murdering Crazy David?" Andy
asked.  "They've always been the best of friends, and they've never had
a quarrel as far as I know."

"But the old man had money, so it was reported," Ned replied.  "Andy
here knows something about that."

The storekeeper, however, shook his head.  He was not anxious now to
appear to know more than he really did.  He alone of all the men was
feeling keenly for Jasper.

"Mark my word, men," and he looked around solemnly upon those before
him, "there's a deep mystery connected with this affair.  You have
taken for granted that Randall is guilty because that envelope was
found near the body.  But I think we had better keep our mouths shut,
for if we don't some of us may get into trouble.  There's going to be a
big time over this, and it's best for us to wait and see what will be
the outcome.  When the detectives get to work they won't leave a stone
unturned, and the smallest detail which bears upon the matter will be
put into evidence.

"When will the detectives begin work?" Ned asked.

"I don't know, and I don't suppose any of us will, for that matter.
They're not going to inform the public of their movements, and maybe
we'll never know they've been here.  But they'll find out all there is
to know, or I'm much mistaken."

"D'ye s'pose they'll arrest that chap on suspicion?" Steve enquired, as
he cut a slice from a plug of tobacco he was holding in his hand.
"I've heered they ginerally do that furst of all so as to make no
mistake."

"Most likely they will," Andy replied.  "I wonder where he is, anyway.
I haven't seen him since he left us in the woods."

"Maybe he's cleared out," Ned suggested.

Scarcely had he finished speaking ere Jasper entered the store.  His
face was very pale, and he walked at once toward Andy.

"I want to use the phone," he told him.

"All right, go ahead," and the storekeeper motioned to a small
closet-like compartment in one corner of the room.  Andy prided himself
upon this place which he had built with his own hands.  As there were
generally people in the store he found it important that the ones using
the telephone should be as private as possible.  It was for his own
protection as well as for others that he had built it.

Jasper at once crossed the room, entered the place and closed the door
tightly after him.  He well knew that the ears of all would be strained
to the utmost to hear what he was saying.  It took him only a short
time to call up Central in the city and to get into communication with
Mr. Westcote.  His message was very brief.

"There is great trouble here, and you must come as soon and fast as you
possibly can.  Come at once to my cabin, and bring the best lawyer in
the city.  I will explain everything then."

That was the message, and in reply Mr. Westcote told him that he would
leave immediately in his car, travel as fast as possible, and bring his
own lawyer with him.

Jasper then crossed the room and paid the storekeeper the price of the
message.  There was a dead silence while he did this, which Jasper was
not slow to notice.  He spoke to none of the men gathered there, in
fact did not even look at them, but left the store as soon as possible.

From the time the blow had fallen and he realised that he was a man
suspected of murder, he seemed to be dazed.

He had gone to his own cabin and had tried to reason the whole thing
out.  But the more he thought the more puzzled he became.  There was no
doubt that David had been murdered, but who had done the deed, and for
what purpose?  Only one person came to his mind, and he recalled what
Betty had told him about the old man's narrow escape from the rolling
log.  Though he felt that Sydney Bramshaw had something to do with the
affair, he had no definite proof.  He naturally connected him with the
murder.  But what object would the man have for doing such a dastardly
deed?  He wondered much about the envelope, and how it got there.  He
had never been to that spot before, and he was quite certain that David
did not have it with him.  Somebody, then, must have obtained
possession of the envelope and dropped it near the body in order to
cast suspicion upon him.  But why should any one wish to involve him in
such a serious crime?

Long and carefully Jasper considered the matter in an effort to solve
the problem.  But the more he thought the greater was he puzzled.  He
realised that he must have assistance as that envelope and the fact
that he was on the road with David the night of the murder would tell
strongly against him.  He naturally turned to Robert Westcote as the
one man who could help him and would stand by him in his time of need.

He felt very lonely and wretched as he left the store and walked slowly
up the road.  He did not wish to go back to the silence of his own
cabin.  If he could only speak to some one and feel that all were not
against him it would be some comfort.  He thought of Lois, and wondered
if she were at the Haven.  He was certain that she would not believe
him guilty of such a cowardly deed, but would stand by him to the last.
Yes, she was the very one, and he would go to her at once.  His step
quickened as this impulse possessed him and he hurried rapidly along
the road, with swinging strides.

"Hello, you seem to be in a great hurry."

Jasper started at these words, stopped short and looked in the
direction from whence the voice came.  As he did so his face darkened,
for there, sitting before his easel not far from the road, was Sydney
Bramshaw.

His brush was poised in hand as if he had merely paused in his work of
sketching a bunch of birch trees a short distance away.

"You seem to be in a great hurry," the artist repeated, evidently
enjoying the forbidding expression upon Jasper's face.

"Well, what of it?" was the curt reply.  "It's a free country, isn't
it?"

"That all depends," and Bramshaw laid down his brush in a thoughtful
manner.  "It might be free to one and not to another.  You and I can do
about as we please to-day, and no one will try to interfere with us.
But it isn't the same with the one who put that poor old man out of
business last night.  He isn't free in the sense we are."

"So you've heard about it, have you?" Jasper questioned.

"Oh, yes.  The whole country is wild with the news.  I have been
talking to a number of people and they are greatly worked up over the
cowardly deed.  Poor old David!  He certainly was an innocent cuss."

"When did you first hear about it?" Jasper enquired.

"Not until late this morning.  I am a sound sleeper."

"You surely must be.  I don't see how any man could sleep with all the
noise the men made passing along the road last night.  Were you up
late, eh?"

"What do you mean?" and an angry light leaped into Bramshaw's eyes.  "I
wish you to know that I went to sleep with the birds last night."

"I am glad to hear of it.  You didn't always keep such good hours,
especially one night when I caught you prowling about my place.
Perhaps a hint to the wise was sufficient, and you have changed your
manner of living."

"D---- you!" Bramshaw cried, rising to his feet.  "I was willing to be
friendly with you, but you insult me to my face."

"That's much better than insulting you behind your back, isn't it?  You
are sure who does it and you can act accordingly."

"Is that a challenge to fight?"

"Take it any way you like.  I am anxious to get my hands on somebody
to-day, for I want a little exercise.  I'm getting tired of doing
nothing."

"But there's nothing to be gained by fighting," Bramshaw protested.
"What reason have we for fighting?"

Jasper gave a sarcastic laugh, and looked the artist up and down.

"You certainly wouldn't gain much by fighting, but I would.  Sydney
Bramshaw, I believe you are a miserable sneak, ay, and worse, and it
would be a great satisfaction for me to get my hands on your measly
carcass just for two minutes."

Under the impulse of the moment Jasper had left the road and approached
close to the artist.  The latter shrank back and his face paled at the
action of his formidable opponent.

"Bah!  I wouldn't touch you," Jasper sneered.  "I wouldn't spoil your
nice clothes and your soft delicate hands.  Oh, no.  Go on with your
work of painting the beautiful things in nature."

For a few seconds Jasper stood and looked upon the man cowering before
him.  He longed to pierce his very soul that he might learn whether his
suspicious were really true.  He was tempted to startle him with a
question about that envelope.  But, no, he felt that it would be better
to consult the lawyer before saying anything.

Leaving the artist, Jasper regained the highway with a bound, and
hurried onward.  It did not take him long now to reach the road leading
to the Haven, and his angry mood passed like a cloud from the face of
the sun when he saw Lois standing there beneath the shade of a large
tree.  Her eyes brightened when she saw him, and without a word she
held out her hand.  For a few heartbeats neither spoke, but their eyes
met, and Jasper knew by the look that Lois gave him that she at least
was true and believed in him.

"You know all?" he stammered.

"No, not all," was the quiet reply.  "But I know enough to make me
certain that the people in this place are wrong in their suspicions."

"Whom do they suspect?" Jasper eagerly asked, thinking that perhaps he
might learn something new.

"Don't you know?"

"Yes, I'm afraid I do," Jasper bitterly replied.  "But I can endure it
if I know that you believe me to be innocent."

"I certainly do, no matter what others think."

"What proof have you?"

"Your life; isn't that proof enough?"

"It may be to you, but I'm afraid it will count but little at the
trial."

"At the trial!" Lois repeated in amazement.  "Surely you'll not be-----"

"Arrested?" Jasper assisted, as Lois' voice faltered.

"Yes, that's what I mean."

"I'd like to know what's to prevent it.  Wasn't I with David the night
he was murdered, and wasn't that envelope with my name on it found by
his body?  Do you for one moment imagine that I can hope to escape a
severe grilling and perhaps conviction with such evidence against me?"

"But it isn't right," and Lois stamped her foot impatiently.  "It's
only circumstantial evidence, and that shouldn't count."

"But it does.  It has convicted many men before this.  But tell me, did
you learn what is troubling Betty?"

"It's about Mr. David, you know.  She grieves very much over his death.
She loved the old man dearly, almost as if he were her own father."

"I know she feels badly.  But isn't there something else troubling her
as well?  Didn't you notice it?"

"I did, but Betty would tell me nothing.  I believe she has been
frightened in some way, for at times she started up in terror, and her
whole body trembled.  I wonder what it can be!"

Before Jasper could reply, an auto swung up the road and stopped near
them.  There were two men in the car and almost intuitively Jasper knew
that they were detectives.  They looked keenly at the two standing
beneath the tree, and then asked the way to Captain Peterson's.  Jasper
told them, and without another word they turned to the left and sped up
to the house.

"Who are they, do you suppose?" Lois asked.

"They must be detectives," Jasper slowly replied.

"Oh!"  It was all that Lois could say as she stood watching the car
until it drew up before the Haven.

"I shall go back to my cabin now," Jasper remarked.  "I expect Mr.
Westcote shortly, and so I must be there when he arrives."

Slowly they walked along the road to the gate leading to the Sinclair
house.  For a while neither spoke.  Jasper realised that it would be a
long time ere he would again be with her who was so dear to him.
Perhaps never, for who could tell what the lap of the future might
contain?  Lois was thinking of the same thing, and her heart was very
heavy.  There came to her mind the words Margaret had so lightly spoken
over the tea-cup.  Why had she not warned Jasper? she asked herself
over and over again.  Never before had she fully comprehended what this
man really meant to her.  He was the first one who had ever inspired
her with the spirit of courage and endurance.  Not once had she heard
him whine or complain but, in her presence at least, he had always
appeared as master of his fate.  Now he was going from her, and she
might never see him again.  But no matter what happened she was sure
that he would bear himself manfully, and fight to the very last.

Having reached the gate, they paused.  Both knew that the moment for
parting had come and strange feelings stirred their hearts.  Jasper
thought that Lois never looked so beautiful.  Oh, if he were only
certain that she loved him.  If he could only take her in his arms and
tell her of his love, and feel that his great love was returned; then
he could go down into the dark valley of trouble, and perhaps death,
with a braver heart.  But, no, it would not do for him to tell of his
love now with such a shadow hanging over his head.  There were many
things he longed to do, but all he did was to step forward, seize Lois'
right hand in his, and press it fervently to his lips.  Instantly he
realised his boldness.

"Forgive me," he cried, "but I could not help it."

"There is nothing to forgive," Lois quietly replied, though her heart
was beating fast and her face was more flushed than usual.  "You had
better go now, for Mr. Westcote may come at any moment.  Good-bye, and
may God bless and keep you."

That was the hardest parting Jasper had ever known.  But as he walked
up the road a new spirit possessed his soul.  He knew what it was to
fight, for he had fought all his life long.  But now he had the vision
of a fair woman to sustain him, and for her sake, and to show her that
he was worthy of her trust he would still fight the fiercest battle of
all.  What the outcome would be he could not tell, but he was
determined to bear himself in such a manner that Lois would never be
ashamed of him.  He well knew that even a defeated man might be more of
a conquerer than those who triumphed over him.  And even as he walked
there flashed suddenly into his mind a vision of the Man of Sorrows
bearing his cross.  Why had he not thought of Him before? he asked
himself.  There was his example to follow; there was the One who was
the victor even on the cross, and there was the One to whom he could
now turn for comfort in the hour of his great need.




CHAPTER XXVII

IN THE TOILS

It was with a heavy heart that Lois made her way slowly toward the
house.  She felt that many changes would take place before she would
again see Jasper.  Not for an instant did she consider him guilty of
murdering old David.  But she was well aware that others would think
differently, and would be only too ready to condemn Jasper upon the
slightest evidence.  An idea suddenly flashed into her mind, which
caused her heart to beat quicker.  Some one was guilty of the murder,
and that person must be found, whoever and wherever he was.  Was there
not something that she could do? she asked herself.  Jasper must be
saved, and who else would take such a real heart interest in the matter
as herself?  She knew that a woman was not expected to undertake work
of such a nature.  But Lois Sinclair had very little respect for social
customs if they stood in the way of duty.

During the day she had thought much about the murder and had tried to
unravel the mystery connected with it.  Who was there in the place
likely to commit such a cowardly deed, and what would be his motive?
Old David had not an enemy, as far as she knew, and he had injured no
one.  It was necessary for her to probe deeper still, and as she neared
the house her mind brooded over this question.  She chided herself that
she had not asked Jasper's opinion.  Perhaps he had some suspicion, for
even upon the slightest clue important results might depend.

Lois had reached the steps leading to the verandah when she happened to
stop and look down toward the river.  As she did so, she started, for
there near the shore, with his easel before him, was Sydney Bramshaw.
Had she known of the stormy scene which had taken place between him and
Jasper about an hour before she would have been more surprised to see
him where he was.  He was seated facing the house, and thus could
observe all that took place about the building.  If he saw Lois he gave
no sign of recognition, but seemed to be entirely occupied with his
work.

The sight of this man had a remarkable effect upon Lois.  She had seen
him but little of late, and to behold him now when she was thinking so
much about the murder was most startling.  She entered the house as if
nothing unusual were agitating her mind.  But with the door closed
behind her, she hurried upstairs, where she found Margaret sitting in
her room engaged upon some fancy-work.  It was a bright sunny room, and
the girl sitting there by the open window presented a beautiful picture
of peace and youthful charm.

"What is the matter, dear?" she asked, pausing in her work, as she
noted the troubled expression upon Lois' face.

"Look," and Lois pointed toward the river, "there he is near the shore."

"Well, what of it?" Margaret enquired with a smile.  "One would think
that you had never seen a man before."

"But not such a man as that, Margaret," and Lois sat down by the girl's
side.  "Something tells me that he had much to do with the murder of
poor old David."

"Whatever put such a foolish notion as that into your head?" and
Margaret looked keenly into Lois' face.

"Sydney Bramshaw is merely a harmless artist, and wouldn't hurt a fly."

"So you have always said.  You may be right, but my heart tells a
different story, and it is hard for me not to believe it.  I am going
to find out, anyway, if there is any justification for my suspicion of
that man."

"You!" and Margaret looked her astonishment.  "Why, what can you do?"

"Perhaps nothing.  Anyway, I am going to try.  Something must be done
at once if Mr. Randall is to be saved."  Lois then told Margaret all
about the finding of David, of the envelope lying near the body, and
how the people were accusing Jasper of the murder.

When Mr. Sinclair and Dick came home they brought with them a copy of
_The Evening News_, which contained a long account of the murder.
Lois' hand trembled as she took the paper and saw the big startling
headlines.  She feared lest Jasper's name should be mentioned in
connection with the affair, and she breathed a sigh of relief when she
saw that it did not appear.  The article merely said that a certain
person was suspected and that the detectives were working on the case.

"I'm afraid Spuds is in hot water," Dick remarked, as they all sat down
to dinner.

"What makes you think that?" Lois asked in a voice as calm as possible.

"Oh, from what people are saying.  It's known all over the country that
he was with Crazy David that night, and that they left the Haven and
walked along the road together.  That in itself looks suspicious, for
Spuds was the last person seen with old David."

"Who saw them together?" Lois enquired, "and how did that information
get abroad?"

"The Petersons, I suppose, or that girl Betty told it."

"But do you suppose some one else saw them together?  Have you thought
of that?"

"I don't catch the drift of your meaning," and Dick looked enquiringly
at his sister.

"Suppose there was some one else near the road that night watching Mr.
Randall and David as they walked along?  And suppose, further, that
when the old man was going back alone to the Haven some one had killed
him?"

"Good heavens, Lois! you make my blood run cold.  Why should you
suggest such a thing?"

"But you don't believe that Mr. Randall killed David, do you?"

"No, no!  I couldn't for a moment think that Spuds would do such a
thing."

"Well, then, some one must have done it in a way similar to what I have
said."

"Sure, I never thought of that.  But who do you suppose did it?"

"That's for us to find out."

"Us?"

"Yes, why not?  Isn't it right to stick by our friends in their time of
need?"

"But what can we do?"

"That remains to be seen."

"But what about that envelope, Lois?  How do you I suppose it got
there?  That looks queer, doesn't it?"

"That's another part of the mystery to be solved, that's all."

The next day was an exciting one, for all kinds of rumours were afloat,
and at times Lois hardly knew what to believe.  But there were several
things about which there was no doubt.  She learned that an inquest had
been held over David's body, and that it had been decided that David
Findlay had met his death at the hands of some unknown person or
persons.  There was nothing more left to be done but to give the body a
decent burial.

The funeral was held that afternoon, and it seemed that the entire
parish turned out.  It was a fine mild summer day, but notwithstanding
that the farmers left their fields and attended the funeral.  Lois and
Betty walked together to the church, and as they passed Jasper's cabin
they looked across the field, thinking they might see some one there.
But not a sign of life could they behold.

The service in the church was brief and solemn, and Betty found it very
difficult to control her feelings.  At the grave side she broke down
completely, and Lois had to lead her away to a quiet spot.

"Poor Mr. David!" the girl moaned.  "I shall never see him again.  He
was so good to me."

"There, there, dear," Lois soothed.  "If he were alive he would not
wish you to feel so badly.  He is at rest, anyway."

"I know that, but I miss him so much.  Oh, why was he taken?"

For some time they sat there, Betty sobbing out her grief, and Lois
trying to sooth her, at the same time wondering what had become of
Jasper.  If he had not gone away it was strange that he was not at the
funeral.  The people leaving the grave passed close to the spot where
they were sitting, and many were the curious glances cast in their
direction.  Several women stopped to speak to them, among whom was Mrs.
Wadell, noted all over the parish for her fondness for gossip, as well
as for meddling in the affairs of others.

"So ye feel bad, do ye?" and she fixed her piercing eyes upon Betty's
tear-stained face.  "I wouldn't feel bad fer such as him," and she
jerked her thumb toward the grave.

"But I do," Betty protested.  "He was good to me, and now he is gone."

"I guess ye'll like him better now that he's gone," Mrs. Wadell
remarked.  "I know I should, anyway, if he'd done as handsome by me as
he's done by you."

"Why, what do you mean?" Betty asked in surprise.

"Why, about the money he's left ye.  It's a snug sum, so I understand,
and I suppose it'll make ye put on mighty fine airs, so's ye won't
speak to common folks any more."

Lois now became much interested in the words of this garrulous old
woman, and she was anxious to know more, and where she had obtained her
information.

"How did you hear that?" she asked.

"Land sakes, don't ask me sich a question as that, Miss," was the
evasive reply.  "How could I begin to tell ye where I hear things, fer
the air is full of all kinds of stories to-day.  But I guess it's true
all right."

"I didn't know that Mr. David had made a will.  That is a surprise to
me."

"And indeed it is to everybody else, Miss.  We didn't think that Crazy
David had anything to leave.  Why he was sold as a pauper to Jim Goban
in this very parish about a year ago.  But that isn't the only thing
that surprises me."

"What, is there something more?"

"There surely is, Miss.  It's reported that he's left a hull lot to
that Randall feller.  I guess he knew how to work his cards all right
with the old man.  He didn't take an interest in him fer nuthin', oh,
no.  People don't generally do sich things these days fer love."

"Mr. Jasper hadn't anything to do with that will," Betty angrily
protested.  "He didn't know anything about it, neither did I."

"Oh, you wouldn't know," and the old woman gave a sarcastic chuckle.
"He wouldn't want people to know what he was doin'.  He was cute enough
fer that.  And then to think that he should kill Crazy David to git his
money.  Why the poor old man couldn't have lived much longer, anyway."

"You lie!" and Betty, trembling in every limb, sprang to her feet.
"Mr. Jasper didn't do it.  I tell you he didn't, and you have no right
to say such things."

"Come, Betty," Lois remarked, rising to her feet and taking the girl by
the arm, "let us go home."

"Ye may not believe me," the old woman called after them as they walked
away, "but ye'll soon find out fer yerselves, and then maybe ye won't
talk so big and mighty."

Betty was going to reply, but Lois checked her.

"I wouldn't say anything more, dear," she advised.  "We must expect
people to talk and imagine all sorts of things.  Let us be brave and
hope for the best."

"But I can't bear to hear them say such awful things about Mr. Jasper,"
the girl sobbed.  "I'm sure he didn't get Mr. David to make his will,
and then kill him to get the money."

"So am I, Betty.  But I'm afraid we'll be the only ones who think so.
We'll stand by him, anyway, and do all we can for him, won't we?"

Lois suddenly stopped and her face went pale.  They had now come in
sight of Jasper's cabin, and near it were several men.  On the road
were most of the people who had been at the funeral.  That they were
greatly excited was quite evident.  In an instant Lois realised the
meaning of it all, and she clutched Betty by the arm in the intensity
of her emotion.

"They are going to arrest him!"  Her voice was hoarse, and she spoke
scarcely above a whisper.

"Who?" Betty asked in surprise, not fully comprehending the meaning of
her words.

"The constables are after Mr. Randall," Lois explained.  "There they
are now!" she cried.  "They are coming from the house, and he is
walking between them."

"Are they going to put him in prison?" the girl asked.

"Yes, I'm afraid so."

With a wild cry, Betty sprang forward and rushed up the road.  Lois
followed, wondering what the girl was going to do.  She reached the
crowd just as Jasper and the constables approached, and stood there a
silent watcher.  What could she do? she asked herself.  Would he see
her, and know of her sympathy?

Jasper was walking with a free easy motion, closely guarded by the two
constables, one of whom was Jim Goban.  His face was pale and he looked
very careworn, but he held his head erect and kept his eyes straight
before him.  Betty standing near, rushed suddenly forward and caught
him by the hand.

"Oh, Mr. Jasper," she cried, "we know you didn't do at, and I want to
tell you so."

Taken by surprise, Jasper paused and looked at the girl.

"Thank you," he replied.  "I am glad you believe in me."

"And so does Miss Lois," Betty explained.  "She's standing right
there," and she motioned to the right.

Jasper turned, saw Lois, and their eyes met.  Not a word did they say,
but in that fleeting glance the expression that he saw in the eyes of
the woman he loved gave him great comfort and courage.

"Git out of the way, girl," Jim Goban brutally ordered.  "What d'ye
mean by stoppin' us in our duty?  We'll miss the boat if we don't
hurry."




CHAPTER XXVIII

LIGHT BREAKS

Lois stood and watched Jasper and the constables until a bend in the
road hid them from view.  Then taking Betty by the hand, she moved away
from the crowd.  She could not bear to listen to their animated
discussions as to what would happen to the prisoner, for she was well
aware that most of them believed him to be guilty.  She walked quite
fast until the path across the field was reached.  This led along the
edge of a grove of young maples and birches, and here was a restful
seclusion from all prying eyes.

"You must come and have dinner with me, Betty," she said, speaking for
the first time since leaving the crowd.  "You will be lonely at the
Haven now, and I would like to have you for company, as Miss Westcote
has gone to the city."

"Oh, may I?" and the girl lifted her tear-dimmed eyes to her
companion's face.  "How nice that will be, and we can talk together
about him, can't we?  I must go home soon, for mother will be anxious
to see me.  She hasn't been well lately and wasn't able to get to the
funeral.  I must do what I can to help her."

"You will not have to work out any more, I suppose," Lois remarked.

"Why?" the girl asked.

"Because of the money Mr. David has left you.  You remember what Mrs.
Wadell said, don't you?"

"Oh, yes," and Betty fixed her eyes thoughtfully upon the ground.  "I
have been thinking about that.  But do you think I should use that
money on myself?"

"Why, certainly; what else should you do with it?"

"But Mr. Jasper will need it, will he not?"

"In what way?"

"Won't he need a lawyer to help him?  I know it costs so much to get a
lawyer for mother has told me so.  We must do all we can to save him."

A mistiness came into Lois' eyes as Betty uttered these words.  She
suddenly stopped, put her arms lovingly around the girl, and tenderly
kissed her.

"You precious dear," she cried.  "How sweet it is of you to think of
him, and I am most grateful to you.  But I do not think you need worry
about paying the lawyer.  I am sure Mr. Westcote will look after that."

"Oh, do you think he will?" and the girl breathed a sigh of relief.
Then her face clouded, and that worried expression again came into her
eyes.

"What will they do with Mr. Jasper?" she enquired.

"I can't say," was the low reply.

"Will they keep him in prison a long time, or will they----?"

"Don't say that word!" Lois cried, clutching Betty firmly by the arm.
"I know what you were going to say, and I can't bear to hear it."

They were walking slowly now along the narrow path, bordered by waving
grass.  Birds sang in the trees to their left and butterflies flitted
here and there over the broad fields.  It was a scene of peace and
contentment.  Nature was in her most attractive mood and seemed to care
nothing for the cares of struggling humanity.  At any other time Lois
would have rejoiced in the beauty around her and would have revelled in
the glory of earth and sky.  But now it was otherwise.  How could she
be happy when her heart was so heavy?  She knew the cause, and she was
not ashamed to confess it to herself.  In fact, it brought a slight ray
of comfort to feel that she was suffering with him.

They had almost reached the house when a boy was seen approaching.  He
carried a note in his hand, which he gave at once to Lois.

"It's from Mr. Forbes," he explained, "and he told me to hustle, and
take an answer back as quick as I can."

Lois read the note, which simply stated that she was wanted at the
telephone.

"Tell Mr. Forbes that I shall be there shortly," she told the boy, at
the same time handing him a coin for his trouble in carrying the
message.

Hurrying into the house in order to leave word with the maid where she
was going in case any one should call, Lois started with Betty for the
store.  There was no more loitering now as she was anxious to learn who
wanted her on the phone.  It was rarely that any one called her up, and
she was hoping that it might be Margaret to tell her that she was
coming back that evening.

On their way they came to the grove at the top of the hill not far from
the Haven.  Here Betty stopped, and stood as if hesitating what to do.

"I think I shall leave you, Miss Lois," she said.

"What, are you not going with me to the store?"

"No, I guess not.  I will see you later.  I want to go to my room now
to think something over."

She was trembling as she said this, and Lois wondered what was the
matter with her.  Then an idea flashed into her mind.  Was she afraid
to go past the artist's tent? she asked herself.  There could surely be
nothing else which would cause her to leave her and go to the
loneliness of her own room.  She said nothing to Betty, however, of her
thoughts, but bade her good-bye and hurried on her way.

Coming at length to the spot where Bramshaw had been living, she
glanced to the left as if expecting to see him.  But no sign of him did
she see, and great was her surprise to find that his tent was gone.
She rubbed her eyes, thinking that she had not seen aright.  But, no,
there was no mistake.  Bramshaw had gone, and had taken all his
belongings with him.  This was strange, and as she walked along she
began to muse as to where he had gone and the purpose of his hasty
departure.  Had it anything to do with the murder of old David? she
wondered.

Lois was thinking of these things as she reached the store, where she
met Andy Forbes.

"Do you know what has become of the artist?" she enquired.

"Isn't he up the road?" Andy asked in reply.

"His tent has been removed, and so I suppose he has gone with it."

"Gone!" he exclaimed in surprise.  "Why, when did he go?"

"I haven't the least idea."

"Well, I guess there must be something in it after all," Andy mused as
if to himself.

"In what?" Lois questioned, wondering what the man meant.

"I'll tell you in a minute, Miss Sinclair, but you'd better read this
first," and the storekeeper handed her a piece of paper.  "It's the
telephone message," he explained.

Lois took the paper in her hand, and read.  It was from Mr. Westcote,
containing a request that she should go to the city the next day if she
possibly could, as he wished to see her on important business.

"Why didn't you send this with the boy?" Lois enquired, somewhat
annoyed.  "It would have saved my coming here."

But Andy did not notice her annoyance, for something seemed to be
troubling him.

"Would you mind coming into the house?" he asked.  "My wife will look
after the store for a few minutes.  There is an important matter I wish
to speak to you about."

Opening the door to the right, he ushered her at once into a small
sitting-room.  It was a cosy place, and here she found Mrs. Forbes, a
bright-eyed little woman, seated at the window facing the road, doing
some sewing.  Lois knew her very well as one of the quiet thoughtful
women, of Creekdale, and who was of such great assistance to her
husband.

"It is too bad to disturb you," Lois apologised, when Andy had asked
her to look after the store for a short time.

"Oh, I do not mind," she pleasantly replied.  "I am so glad you have
come, for I have been most anxious for Andy to have a talk with you.
Sit down, please," and she motioned to a chair.

Andy did not sit down but walked up and down the room, as was his
custom when greatly excited.  Presently he paused and looked keenly
into Lois' expectant face.

"It's something very serious I've got to tell you, Miss Sinclair," he
began.  "In fact, it's so serious that I have been doubting for some
time whether I should tell anybody about it.  But when I told my wife
this afternoon she advised me to tell you, and so that's the reason why
I asked you to come here."

"Has it anything to do with the murder case?" Lois asked, now much
interested.

"Yes, I believe it will have, and that is what makes me so worried,
because I don't want to get tangled up in that nasty affair."

"Tell me what it is," Lois suggested, impatient to learn what it really
was.

"Well, it has to do with that envelope."

"Oh!"  Lois was more interested than ever now.

"Yes, that's what it is about.  You see, Randall came to the office one
day last week, and there was a letter for him from his company.  I know
that much about it for their name was on the top left hand corner.
Randall opened the letter right in the store and dropped the envelope
on the floor, and didn't pay any more heed to it.  I've seen him do the
same thing several times and so I didn't pay any special attention to
it.  Now, Randall hadn't been gone very long before that artist came
for his mail.  There was nothing for him and he seemed very surly and
said a few cuss words about people not writing.  As he was standing
there talking I saw him stoop and pick up the envelope Randall had
dropped.  He didn't know that I saw him doing it, for I was busy with
the mail though I was watching him all the time out of the corner of my
eye, for I never liked the fellow.  I saw him glance at me, and when he
felt sure that I didn't notice what he was doing he slipped that
envelope into an inside pocket of his coat."

When Andy began his story Lois was sitting with her hands clasped
before her and her eyes fixed full upon his face.  But before he had
finished she had risen to her feet greatly agitated.

"Are you sure that is the same letter that was found by David's side?"
she asked in a hoarse whisper.

"I couldn't swear that it was," Andy slowly replied.  "Anyway, it looks
very much like it, and the name of the company is on the left-hand
corner, just as it was on the one which Randall dropped on the floor
and Bramshaw picked up."

"It must have been the same one," Lois emphatically declared.  "Oh, I
am so thankful that you have told me this.  I am sure it will go a long
way toward saving Mr. Randall."

"I can't swear though that it's the same envelope," Andy repeated.

"But you will be willing to swear to what you have just told me, will
you not?" Lois asked.

"Sure.  I'd swear to that any time and anywhere."

"Thank you," and Lois breathed a sigh of relief.  "I feel quite certain
that it will be valuable evidence."

"Now, I wonder what that chap wanted that envelope for?" Andy mused.

"To leave it by old David's body, of course, and to throw the blame on
Mr. Randall."

"Yes, that no doubt was his idea.  But why did he want to do that?  And
if he committed that deed, why did he do it?  What object did he have
in murdering an innocent old man who never injured anybody, as far as I
know?"

"That is the puzzling thing which must be solved," Lois replied.  "But
I must go home now, Mr. Forbes, and I thank you very much for what you
have told me this afternoon."

She left the store with a lighter heart than she had entered it, and
walked briskly up the road.  She somehow felt that what Andy had told
her would be of great value in freeing Jasper and bringing home the
crime to the right person.  But something more must be done, and she
knew that it would be quite necessary to find the motive which prompted
Bramshaw to pick up that letter and to commit the deed.

As Lois came to the road leading to the Haven, she found Betty waiting
there for her.  The girl seemed brighter than she had been since the
night of the murder, and Lois wondered what was the cause of it.  Had
she heard some good news? she asked herself.

"Oh, Miss Lois," Betty cried, "I have been waiting a long time for you
and I thought you would never come.  May I go home with you?"

"Certainly, I shall be delighted to have you.  But you look brighter,
Betty, than you did when I left you.  Have you heard anything new?"

"Oh, yes, Miss Lois, I have," the girl replied.  "The captain told me
that he has gone away."

"Who?" Lois enquired.

"The artist!  Just think of that!  He has cleared out, and taken
everything with him."

"Why should that make you so happy, Betty?"

"Because he can't hurt me now."

"Why, did he ever try to hurt you?"

"Oh, yes, he said he would kill me if I told on him."

"Kill you!" Lois exclaimed, stopping short.  "If you told on him!  I do
not understand you."

"Hush," and the girl raised a warning finger and looked apprehensively
around.  "Don't speak too loud.  I am really afraid yet.  But I know he
can't hurt me because he has gone."

"No, he won't hurt you, Betty.  I will see that he doesn't.  Tell me
when he said he would kill you."

"The night I went to meet Mr. David."

"Oh!"

"Yes, I was hurrying along the road just up there when I heard some one
coming toward me.  I was sure it was Mr. David, and so I rushed up to
him and called out his name.  Instead of Mr. David it was the artist,
just think of that!  My, he was surprised when he found who I was.  He
was so excited that he caught me by the arm so hard that I cried out
with pain and fear."

"He did?"

"Yes; and he said he would kill me if I ever told that I had met him
there on the road that night.  He said that nothing could save me from
him, and oh, how he did curse and swear what he would do.  He made my
blood run cold."

"And did you promise that you wouldn't tell?" Lois asked.

"No, indeed I didn't!  I jerked myself suddenly away from him and ran
home as hard as I could.  He ran after me, but he didn't catch me.  I
was so afraid to look for Mr. David after that.  I stayed in the house
till near midnight before I went out again."

"So that was what was troubling you so much, was it?" Lois asked.

"Yes.  I was afraid that he would kill me.  I guess I'm a coward
anyway.  But when I saw the constables take Mr. Jasper away this
afternoon I made up my mind to tell you all about it.  I don't mind now
if the artist does kill me if I can save Mr. Jasper.  Anyway, I am glad
that he has cleared out."

"Don't be afraid, Betty, he will not hurt you at all," and Lois put her
arms lovingly around the girl.  "I am so thankful that you have told me
this.  Come, now, and let us go home."




CHAPTER XXIX

LOIS GOES TO THE CITY

Betty's story filled Lois with still greater hope, and she was anxious
to see Jasper's lawyer that she might tell him what she had learned.
For most of the night she thought about the matter, and she tried to
find some reason why Bramshaw should commit the murder.  She thought,
too, of Jasper, and wondered how he was bearing himself in his lonely
cell.  She longed to speak to him and tell him of the discovery she had
made.  She knew that his mental suffering must be great, and she did
want to help him to bear his trouble.

Lois learned from her father and Dick upon their arrival from the city
what a strong feeling was abroad against Jasper.  People condemned him
in no measured language, and denounced him as a dastardly villain who
deserved the severest punishment.  Mr. Sinclair told of the
conversation he had with several people along the road, and how all
were loud in their severe denunciations.  Even the city papers,
following the popular cry, had editorials about the murder.  Though
they did not mention Jasper by name, yet their allusions were so
pointed that no one could mistake their meaning.  All united in
condemning the criminal and declaring that the deed was all the more
abhorrent owing to the age of the murdered man and the friendly
relations which had existed between him and his suspected assailant.

All this was very hard for Lois to endure.  It annoyed her to think how
willing people were to condemn a man and judge him worthy of death
before he had received a fair trial.  She had a secret satisfaction,
however, in the information Andy and Betty had imparted to her.  It
buoyed her up with the hope that it would greatly assist in freeing
Jasper and clearing him entirely from all blame.  It was only natural
that she should desire to see the ones who condemned him so severely
put to an ignominious silence.  She smiled almost bitterly as she
thought how they would come about Jasper with their smooth, oily words
of congratulation when he again came into their midst.

In the morning Lois went to the city with her father and Dick.  She
enjoyed the ride in the fresh air and she was somewhat sorry when she
alighted from the car in front of her father's office.  Dick wanted to
drive her around to Mr. Westcote's house as he was most anxious to see
Margaret.  He had not met her for two days, and to him it seemed a very
long time.  But as Lois had some shopping to do, she preferred to walk.

"I'll be around this afternoon, though," Dick told her.

"Oh, I know you will," was the laughing reply.  "Shall I tell her?"

"Yes, do, Lois.  She's great, isn't she?"

"She certainly is, Dick.  But I must hurry away now," she added as she
saw that her brother was anxious to talk more about Margaret.

It did not take Lois long to do her shopping, and she was just leaving
the store when she met Mrs. Dingle face to face.  Had she seen her
sooner she would have made a desperate effort to escape her.  But there
was nothing for her to do now but to submit with the best grace
possible.

"Oh, isn't it lovely to see you, dear," Mrs. Dingle effusively cried,
as she gave her a peck-like kiss upon the right cheek.  "We have been
talking so much about you lately.  Sammie is fairly crazy to see you,
and you must be prepared for a visit from him as soon as he learns you
are in town.  I am so thankful that I have such a dutiful son.  He is
quite a comfort to me, and I am sure any woman would be proud to have
him for a husband.  There are so many bad men these days that we
appreciate a good one when we find him.  We knew that you would come
back to the city."

"What made you think that?" Lois enquired as Mrs. Dingle paused an
instant for breath.

"To get away from that horrid country place, of course, where that
terrible murder was committed.  I hope they have that villain securely
locked up."

"What villain?" Lois asked.

"Why the one who killed that poor old man for his money."

"No, he is not locked up yet."

"But I heard that he is.  Surely he hasn't escaped!" and Mrs. Dingle
held up her well-gloved hands.

"No, he isn't in prison yet," Lois calmly replied.  "But there is an
innocent man there, though, I am sorry to say."

"Do you mean that uncouth fellow Sammie was telling me about?"

"I am not referring to any uncouth fellow, Mrs. Dingle, but merely to
Mr. Jasper Randall, a gentleman and a friend of mine."

"Oh, I didn't know that," and Mrs. Dingle looked her surprise as well
as her embarrassment.  "All I know is what Sammie told me."

"What did Sammie tell you?"  Lois voice was sharp as she asked the
question.

"I can't remember all.  But he said that he was brought up on a farm,
had to work his way through college, and that sort of thing, you know.
As he is not of our set, of course I did not pay much attention to what
Sammie told me."

Lois was both angry and disgusted at this woman.  Oh, how she longed to
tell her something that she would not soon forget.  How she was tempted
to place Jasper and Sammie side by side and compare them; the one an
insignificant, brainless, useless, overdressed nincompoop; the other a
strong, self-reliant, masterful man, fighting against fate with face to
the front and head erect.

"Excuse me, Mrs. Dingle," she said, "I am in a great hurry this
morning.  And I am afraid if I stay I may say something to hurt your
feelings.  Mr. Randall is a friend of mine, and I have great respect
for him.  I have always made it a point of being loyal to my friends,
and adversity is the test of friendship."

Mrs. Dingle stared in amazement after Lois.  She could not understand
what had come over the girl, and at luncheon she discussed the matter
with Sammie.

"You must see her at once, dear," she told him.  "It would not do to
lose her, for her father is very rich and she is his only daughter.  I
am afraid she thinks a great deal of that uncouth fellow who has been
arrested."

"Hm," her son grunted.  "Don't you worry one bit.  Spuds'll be fixed
all right.  The noose is hanging over his head and just ready to drop,
I was talking to some of the fellows to-day and they say that he's a
goner, and that nothing can save him.  Oh, by the way, Ma, I saw
Bramshaw to-day."

"You did!" his mother replied in surprise.  "Why I thought he had left
the city."

"So he did; but he's back now all right."

"Where did you meet him?"

"Just as he was coming out of the C. P. R. ticket office.  He was in a
great hurry and had no time to stop and talk."

"You must find out where he is staying, Sammie, and invite him to come
and see us.  He is a very distinguished young man, you know; an artist
of wide reputation, and it makes a favourable impression to have such a
man visit us.  He is a gentleman, and not like that uncouth man who
committed that terrible crime at Creekdale."

"But I don't believe he'll be here long, Ma," Sammie replied.

"Why, what makes you think that?"

"I guess he's leaving the city.  He must have been at the office
getting his ticket when I met him.  No doubt he is going on this
evening's train."

"He is visiting some of the big cities, no doubt, Sammie.  A man like
that could not be expected to remain in a small place like this.
People must be anxious to see the man who has painted such famous
pictures."

"Have you seen any of them, Ma?" her son asked.

"Oh, no.  But he has told me about them, and they must be great from
what he said.  He has sold a great many at large prices, but the most
valuable he keeps in his mansion in England, so he informed me.  He
said that he regretted that he had not brought several with him, but
the risk was too great, and the pictures were so big that it was
difficult to transport them so far."

"H'm," Sammie grunted, as he went on with his luncheon, and nothing
more was said then about the artist.

Lois found Margaret at home and they had luncheon together.  There was
only one topic of conversation, and Lois told of the information she
had received from Andy and Betty Bean.

"Have you any idea what your father wishes to see me about?" she asked.
"I am quite curious to know."

"I really don't know," and Margaret shook her head.  "He generally
tells me his secret plans because he knows that I will not divulge
them."

"You will go with me to his office this afternoon, will you not?"

"Certainly, if you care to have me.  Father generally gets his luncheon
out and is somewhat late getting back to his office.  Wait a minute,
dear, while I phone and tell him you are here."

Margaret was gone only a few minutes, and when she returned she resumed
her seat at the table.

"Father will be back in his office at one-thirty," she began, "and he
says that I may go with you.  Lois, I have something important to tell
you."  Here she dropped her voice and looked apprehensively around the
room.  "Since you told me about that letter and Betty's fright I have
been doing some serious thinking.  You say that Sydney Bramshaw has
left Creekdale?"

"Yes.  He cleared out, tent and baggage."

"Have you any idea where he is?"

"No.  But I am afraid he is far away by this time."

"Well, he isn't.  He's in the city now."

"In the city!" Lois repeated in surprise.

"Yes.  I met Sammie Dingle on the street this morning, and he told me
that he met Bramshaw coming out of the C. P. R. ticket office."

"Oh!"

"Yes, that's what he told me.  I did not think anything about it at the
time, but I see things in a different light now.  He must be planning
to leave the city on the evening train, and if he once gets across the
Border it will be difficult to find him.  You should tell father all
you know, and I am sure he will take action at once."

"And will he have Bramshaw arrested?" Lois asked.

"What else will there be to do?  It would not do to let him escape with
such evidence against him.  It will be necessary for him to explain
about that letter and his suspicious actions and threat to Betty.  We
have really no time to lose.  My, I am getting interested and excited."

"For my part," Lois replied, "I believe he is the guilty man.  But I
cannot understand the motive of his crime.  If we knew that it might
lead to greater discoveries.  You see, in reference to that envelope it
will be merely one man's word against another.  Andy will swear that he
saw him pick up an envelope which Mr. Randall dropped on the floor, but
he cannot swear that it is the same one that was found by the side of
the murdered man.  Bramshaw will also swear that he never met Betty
that night on the road.  His lawyer will not overlook anything, mark my
word.  It will be only circumstantial evidence after all, and it may
not have much effect."

"Keep up courage, Lois," Margaret encouraged.  "You have accomplished a
great deal in a short time, and I know that father's lawyer has not
been idle."

"Has he found out anything yet?" Lois eagerly asked.

"I am afraid not.  There has not been much time, you see.  But he is a
very able man and will leave no stone unturned.  But, come, dear, it is
time for us to get ready.  We must not keep father waiting as he is
very busy these days."




CHAPTER XXX

A STRANGE COMMISSION

Robert Westcote did not go to his luncheon the day of Lois' visit to
the city.  He intended to go but was unexpectedly detained.  He had
been very busy all the morning in his office.  His lawyer had been with
him for some time, and when he was at last alone he turned his
attention to a type-written manuscript lying on the desk before him.
This consisted of several sheets of legal paper, attached to which was
an official seal which had been recently broken.  This was the third
time that Mr. Westcote had read it and when he was through he sat for a
while in deep thought.  He paid no attention to the click of the
typewriters in the adjoining room, and so engrossed was he that he did
not at first hear a tap upon the office door.  When it was repeated, he
started from his reverie and called to the visitor to enter, thinking
that perhaps it was one of the clerks.  It was not his habit to be
caught off guard, for he prided himself upon his alertness and strict
attention to every business detail.

The office door slowly opened, and instead of a clerk, there stood
before him a man dressed in rough working clothes.  He recognised him
at once as one of the men employed at the falls, and whom he had met on
several occasions.  It was Mr. Westcote's kindness and courtesy which
always won for him the hearty support of his employees.  They knew that
they would receive justice and consideration at his hands and that he
did not look upon them with contempt and as inferior beings.  Mr.
Westcote at once arose from his chair and held out his hand.

"Why, Dobbins," he exclaimed, "this is a surprise.  I did not know you
were in the city.  How are things going on at the falls?  Nothing
wrong, I hope?  Sit down, please," and he motioned him to a chair.

"The work is going on all right, sir," Dobbins replied, as he took the
offered seat.  "But I have come to see you, sir, on very important
business.  It has troubled me so much that I have not been able to
sleep ever since Randall was arrested."

"Oh, I see, it has to do with that murder case, has it?" Mr. Westcote
asked, now greatly interested.

"I wouldn't like to say that, sir," and Dobbins twirled his hat in his
hands.  "But it might throw some light upon the matter.  You see,
somebody killed old David.  That's certain, isn't it?"

Mr. Westcote nodded his assent.

"Well, if you knew for sure that somebody had tried to but a short time
before, it would make you rather suspicious of that somebody, wouldn't
it?"

"I should say so!" Mr. Westcote exclaimed.  "But do you know of any one
who made the attempt, Dobbins?"

"You can judge of that, sir, when you hear what I have to say.  It was
this way.  The day of the big wind I was sent to the shore to get a
piece of mill belting, which was to come from the city on the afternoon
boat.  I had almost reached the brow of logs on the edge of the
clearing when I stopped to get a drink from that little spring by the
side of the road.  I sat down for a minute or two under the shade of a
small thick fir tree to fill my pipe, when happening to glance to my
left I saw a man running up the road.  I at once saw it was that artist
fellow, and curious to know what he was running for I moved back a
little behind the fir so's he couldn't see me.  He stopped right by the
logs and peered down the bank.  Then he looked cautiously around and,
picking up a stick, he pried loose one of the logs lying on top, and
which was almost ready to go anyway.  As soon as he had done this, he
dropped the stick and ran like a streak of lightning down the road, and
that was the last I saw of him."

"Well?" Mr. Westcote questioned as Dobbins paused and wiped the
perspiration from his forehead with a big red handkerchief.

"This is the part, sir, which I am ashamed to tell," the man continued.
"I heard the crash of that log down the bank and the splash in the
water.  Then there fell upon my ears a shriek of terror.  I knew it was
a woman's voice and I leaped from my hiding place and peeked down the
bank.  And there I saw old David and that girl Betty Bean standing
there frightened almost out of their senses.  Say, I wasn't long
getting back under cover again, for I knew that if they saw me they
would say for sure that I had rolled that log down the bank on purpose.
I didn't dare to go to the shore on the road so I cut up through the
woods and came out another way.  I didn't dare to say a word about it
for fear I might get into trouble.  But when young Randall, who is a
chap we all think a lot of, was arrested for the murder of that old man
I couldn't sleep a wink.  If that artist fellow tried to kill old David
once he would try again, and put the blame off on some one else.  At
last I could stand it no longer and so made up my mind to tell you all
I know.  You can judge now, sir, for yourself."

Mr. Westcote was greatly excited at this story, though outwardly he
remained very calm.  Twice during the narration he had glanced at the
manuscript lying upon the desk, and once he had reached out his hand as
if to pick it up.  For a few seconds he remained silent when the story
was ended.  Then he rose to his feet and reached out his hand.

"Dobbins," he began, "I wish to thank you for what you have told me
to-day.  You have done a good deed by thus unburdening your mind.  Will
you be willing to swear to what you have just told me?"

"Swear!  Indeed I will.  I'll swear on a dozen Bibles any time and
anywhere."

"That's good," Mr. Westcote replied, as he bade him good-day.  "We
shall need you before long, if I'm not much mistaken, so be ready."

Dobbins had scarcely left the office when Lois and Margaret arrived.

"My, how the morning has gone!" Mr. Westcote remarked as he greeted
Lois with a hearty shake of the hand.  "I suppose we had better get
down to business at once, as no doubt you wish to go home this
afternoon.  I hope you will pardon my sending for you and giving you
all this trouble."

"I do not mind in the least," Lois replied, "for I am sure it has
something to do with the murder, and I am so anxious to learn whether
you have found out anything new."

"Only something this morning, Miss Sinclair, which may be of
considerable value.  I trust that we may unearth more in a few days."

"Oh, don't wait for a few days, Mr. Westcote," Lois pleaded.  "You must
act at once, this very afternoon, if the criminal is to be caught."

"How can we, Miss Sinclair," was the reply, "when we are not sure who
the real criminal is?"

"But I know, and I think you will agree with me when I tell you my
story.  Listen."

Lois then related what she had heard from Andy Forbes and Betty Bean.
She told her story well and Mr. Westcote was keenly interested not only
in what she told him, but in the animated look in her eyes and the
varying shades of expression which passed over her fair face.  He
considered Jasper a lucky fellow in having such a beautiful woman
striving so hard for his release.

When Lois had finished, Mr. Westcote turned to his desk and drew the
telephone toward him.

"What you tell me, Miss Sinclair," he said, "is very valuable, and I
must see my lawyer at once.  Excuse me a moment."

After he had called up the lawyer and asked him to come at once to his
office, he hung up the receiver and sat for a few seconds lost in deep
thought.

"Yes, we had better do it at once," he remarked as if to himself.  "It
will not do to run any risk."

"Do what, Father?" Margaret enquired.

"Have that Bramshaw detained.  I have received some additional
information to-day, and with what Miss Sinclair has just told me it
should be enough to arrest any man.  Now, I must come to the question I
wish to speak to you about," and he turned to Lois.  "You have told me
your story and in return I shall relate one perhaps of a more startling
nature."

"In connection with this same affair?" Lois eagerly asked.

"It has a direct bearing upon it.  It has to do with the mystery which
has been surrounding the life of old David."

"And does it clear it up?"

"Wait, please, until I am through, and you can judge for yourself," Mr.
Westcote smilingly told her.

"I shall be as patient as Job," Lois replied, as she settled herself in
her chair as comfortably as possible.

"My story might seem strange to you," Mr. Westcote began.  "In fact, it
has always seemed strange to me, and sometimes I think that I shall
wake up and find it nothing more than a dream.  Well, without going
into details, which would not interest you, it is sufficient to say
that I came to this country over two years ago on one of the strangest
commissions ever given to man.  I was handed two sealed papers numbered
1 and 2, with strict orders to break the seal of paper Number 1 only
upon my arrival in Canada, and then I should find my instructions in
reference to Number 2."

"What were the instructions?" Lois eagerly asked, as Mr. Westcote
paused for a few seconds as if considering how to proceed.

"That will come later," he replied.  "I must tell you about Number 1
first.  You promised to be patient, you know."

"Excuse me, I know I did," Lois smilingly confessed, as she glanced at
Margaret, whose eyes were twinkling with amusement.

"I was naturally anxious to know what my orders were," Mr. Westcote
continued, "and shortly after my arrival here, I broke the seal of
Number 1.  Then I learned that I was to search for an old man who was
living in this country under the name of David Findley.  No effort or
expense was to be spared.  Money would be provided without stint
through one of the city banks.  When the old man was found he was to be
kept in complete ignorance of the fact that I had been searching for
him.  The hard part was that I should undertake to assist him in such a
way that he should not have the slightest idea that anything was being
done on his behalf.  There was not to be the least semblance of
charity, and whatever was done for him had to appear to be the natural
payment for value received.  If the old man had any special hobby or
scheme, no matter how wild, so long as it was legitimate, I was to
undertake to see that it should be carried out, no matter what the
expense.  If the scheme proved feasible, so much the better, and strict
business methods were to be used to make it pay.  But if not, the old
man's every lawful wish was to be gratified.  One of the strict
instructions was that he should be induced as soon as possible to make
his will.  This was to be done in such a way as to arouse no suspicion,
but that he should consider it as a matter of business detail, so that
his fond scheme, or whatever it might be, would not suffer in case of
his death.

"You can readily understand, Miss Sinclair, the magnitude of the
undertaking.  At first I thought that I had been made the victim of a
madman, and was tempted to return to England at once, and have nothing
to do with the affair.  But the amount of money placed at my disposal
in the bank settled all scruples and started me forth upon my strange
quest.  I even began to enjoy the adventure of the whole thing, and the
mystery attached to it lured me on.  I searched far and wide for David
Findley and at last, owing to an accident to my auto, located him at
Creekdale, living as a pauper.  By the description given in paper
Number 1 I knew that he was the man for whom I had been searching.
After that, matters moved along very smoothly.  He had a fond scheme,
too, which served my purpose splendidly.  He was wrapped up in the idea
of converting the water of Break Neck Falls into light and power for
the benefit of the entire community.  I consulted with the best
engineers, and they said the scheme was most feasible, and so we began
work.  David was paid a sum of money for his plans, which satisfied
him, and he was made Honorary President of a company which has never
really existed.  The money at my disposal made everything easy.  You
know the rest, and why should I go further into details?  It would be
unnecessary for me to tell you of the faithful and excellent work of
Mr. Randall.  He has been of great assistance to me, and without his
aid my task would have been much harder than it has been."

When Mr. Westcote paused Lois looked enquiringly into his face.

"May I speak now?" she asked.  "I have been very patient, have I not?"

"Indeed you have, Miss Sinclair," and Mr. Westcote smiled.  "You may
ask anything you like."

"Surely you have not told me all.  I thought you had merely begun when
you stopped.  Who was David Findley, anyway, and what does paper Number
2 contain?  I am most curious to know the end of this strange story."

"Oh, I forgot to tell you a very important thing," and Mr. Westcote
laughed.  "My instructions in paper Number 1 told me not to open Number
2 until after the old man's death.  Then I should learn all about him
and the mystery of my strange commission would be solved."

"Do you know yet?" Lois eagerly asked.  "Have you broken the seal?"

"Yes, I broke it this morning, and have read the contents of the paper
three times.  I am going to read it to you now, for that will be better
than if I tell it to you in my own words."




CHAPTER XXXI

PAPER NUMBER TWO

Mr. Westcote was about to begin the reading of the manuscript lying
before him, when his lawyer was announced.

"Excuse me for a moment," he said, "I must speak to Dr. Turnsell at
once."

"Suppose we go out for a while, Father," Margaret suggested.  "You will
wish to see him privately, I suppose."

"Remain just where you are," was the reply.  "It is not necessary for
you to leave."

When they were alone Lois and Margaret discussed what Mr. Westcote had
just told them.

"Isn't it strange?" Margaret began.  "Did you ever hear anything like
it before?"

"No, I never did,"  was the reply.  "But did you know about it?"

"Oh, yes.  Father told me, of course, but I had to promise that I
wouldn't say a word about it.  And I didn't, did I, not even to you?  I
longed to tell you all I knew, but that would not have been right."

"I wonder what that paper contains," and Lois motioned to the desk.
"It, no doubt, will explain everything.  I wish your father would hurry
back."

"Here he is now," Margaret replied.  "He wasn't long with Dr. Turnsell."

"I am afraid that I shall have to leave you young ladies for a while,"
Mr. Westcote informed them as soon as he had closed the door behind
him.  "My lawyer wants me to go with him.  It is too bad as I wished to
read that paper to you."

"Why cannot we read it ourselves?" Margaret asked.  "You surely will
not keep us in suspense any longer."

"Why, certainly," was the reply.  "That will do just as well.  Strange
that I never thought of that.  Suppose you read it, Miss Sinclair," and
he handed the manuscript to her.  "I shall come back as soon as I can,
so you had better wait here until I return unless I am too late."

"Hurry up, Lois," Margaret urged, when they were once more alone.  "I
can't wait another minute."

Lois was nothing loath, and in a clear, well-modulated voice she began:


"I, Simon Dockett, feeling keenly the weight of years, and knowing that
my days on earth are but few, desire to unburden my soul and make
amends as far as possible for a grievous wrong I have committed.  That
wrong can never be fully rectified in this world.  If money could do
it, then it would flow like water; if a troubled conscience and a
wearied and a burdened soul could atone for what I have done, then
surely I have made atonement enough.  They greatly err who say that a
man can sin and yet have peace of mind.  I tell you it is hell; yes,
hell here, and hell in the world to come.

"I have heaped up riches in my life, enough to satisfy the most
avaricious.  But at what cost have I acquired them, and of what comfort
are they to me now?  I am old, lonely, and menials serve me because of
my money.  How much better are my so-called friends?  They fawn upon me
with their lips, but deceit is in their hearts.  They laugh at me
behind my back, and joke about 'Old Dockett' and his money.  In all the
world there is none who loves me, but many who hate me.  One especially
there is who desires my death, thinking that he will get my money.
That is part of what my riches have cost me, though not all.

"I have a brother, and when we were young our hearts were as one.  He
was gentle and thoughtful, while I was rough and impetuous.  My one
object was to make money for self, his, to assist others.  Once I loved
him as my own soul.  But gold got into my heart and changed everything.
I became a machine, nay, more, a brutal thinking machine, with gold as
the one object in life.

"All natural affections died in me, and I think I would have betrayed
my parents for gold, but thank God they were beyond my power.  My only
brother, Henry, however, was not, and him I betrayed, deceived and
ruined.  All that he had became mine, and I considered it shrewd
business.  He left England and I was glad that he was out of my sight.
I have never seen him since, but I have kept track of him.

"Had my brother cursed me when I robbed him, it would have been easier
for me in after years.  But he reproached me not, except with his eyes,
and the look that he gave me as we parted has haunted me ever since.  I
tried to forget what I had done to him, and plunged deeply into
business.  But all in vain.  I could not banish the wrong I had
committed, and my brother's face with the reproachful eyes was ever
before me day and night.

"At last I could endure it no longer, and so resolved to make what
amends I could.  I found out where my brother was living, wrote to him,
and sent him a considerable sum of money.  He returned it, and that
made me angry.  But I knew that my brother was right, and I also
learned that he would starve rather than accept a penny from me or help
in any form.

"For several years I made no further attempt to assist him.  But the
remorse gnawing at my soul could not be silenced.  I reasoned that I
had done what I could to rectify my wrong, but that gave me no peace.
Finally I resolved that I would help him in such a manner that he
should never know that I had anything to do with it.  I knew that he
was living in Eastern Canada, but just where I was uncertain.

"After weeks of careful consideration I made arrangements that all that
I possess should go to my brother Henry after my death.  In the
meantime I planned with my solicitors that a man of exceptional ability
and unimpeachable character and integrity should be sent to Canada,
backed with sufficient money, to find my brother and to devise some
means of assisting him, and carrying out his every legitimate wish
without his ever knowing that I was behind the scheme.

"I have also provided that he should be given two sealed papers, the
first setting forth his instructions, which he is not to open until his
arrival in Canada.  He will then learn that this second which I am now
writing must not be opened until after my brother's death, should he
outlive me.  If he should die first then this paper is to be returned
to me with the seal unbroken.  The man chosen for this special
undertaking must not know anything about me, and he is not to have the
least idea who my brother really is.  When I am dead, my solicitors
will notify the man so that he may break the seal of this paper
immediately after my brother's death.

"My solicitors have full knowledge of my business affairs, and they
will continue to manage them after my death.  In case of my brother
Henry dying without having made a will, they have full instructions as
to the disposal of my property.  Only one other living relative I have,
and he is my sister's son, Melburne Telford.  He cherishes the hope
that my money will go to him after my death.  In this, however, he is
mistaken, for I have taken a great dislike to the young man.  He is
absolutely worthless, and travels over the country as an artist.  I
have given him considerable money at various times, for my dead
sister's sake.  But he has been very ungrateful, and lives a most evil
life.  He believes that my brother Henry is the only one who stands
between him and my money.  But I have so arranged that he shall not
receive one penny of it, though he is not aware of the fact.

"I have now done all in my power to make amends for past wrongs to my
only brother.  I should like to see him again, and to hear from his own
lips words of forgiveness.  But that can never be.  People have called
me hard, and good reason have they had for such an opinion.  But they
have not known all.  When I am gone and this story is told, perhaps
they may think somewhat differently of me.  But whether they do or not
will not affect me then.  I have made my bed, and so I must lie in it.

  (Signed) "SIMON DOCKETT,
       Liverpool, England."


When Lois had finished, she laid the paper upon the desk and remained
silent for a few seconds.  The last part of the confession was what
interested her most of all.  She felt sure that Melburne Telford was
none other than Sydney Bramshaw.  But how was she to prove it?  Where
could the person be found who could identify him? she asked herself.

"What do you think of the story?" Margaret asked, as she studied Lois'
face in an effort to divine her thoughts.

"It is most interesting," was the reply, "and it explains things I
could not understand before.  But how are we to prove that Sydney
Bramshaw is really Simon Dockett's nephew?"

"Perhaps father may know more about it than we do," Margaret suggested.
"He must have received notice of Simon Dockett's death."

Lois was about to reply when a sudden thought flashed into her mind,
which caused her face to flush with excitement.

"What is it, dear?" Margaret questioned, noticing her agitation.

"Don't press me for an answer, please," and Lois rose to her feet.  "I
shall explain everything to you later.  I must get home at once.  A new
idea has come into my mind, which makes me very restless."

As she was standing there, Mr. Westcote entered.  His face bore a
worried expression which Lois and Margaret were not slow to notice.

"Have they caught him?" Lois eagerly asked.

"No, not yet, but he will be taken no doubt at the station.  You have
finished reading the paper, I see," and he glanced toward the desk.
"What do you think of it?"

"We have found it most interesting, but some of it quite puzzling."

"What part?"

"Where it speaks about Simon Dockett's nephew.  Who is Melburne
Telford, do you think?"

"Ah, that is where the present trouble lies, Miss Sinclair.  I firmly
believe that this Sydney Bramshaw is the man, but how are we to prove
it without bringing people all the way from England?  I thought there
was a man in the city who could identify him, as he had done business
with the Dockett Concern, as it is commonly called in England.  My
lawyer and I hunted him up this afternoon, but he told us that he never
knew before that Simon Dockett had a nephew.  Now if we could only
unearth some one who knows that Sydney Bramshaw is in reality Melburne
Telford then our case is complete."

"I believe I know the right man," Lois remarked in a low voice.  "He is
living at Creekdale, and if you will take me there at once we can have
a talk with him.  I know he will assist us all he can, and we can
depend upon what he says."

"We shall go at once," Mr. Westcote replied.  "I shall order the car
immediately.  You had better come too, Margaret."

Lois was now in a great whirl of excitement, and she could hardly wait
for the arrival of the car.  Mr. Westcote told the chauffeur to make
good time, and though they travelled fast it seemed to Lois a long time
before the Haven appeared in sight.

The captain and Mrs. Peterson were greatly surprised when the car swung
up to the Haven and the young women and Mr. Westcote alighted.  The
captain was lying in his big chair upon the verandah with his wife
knitting by his side.

"Well, this is a surprise," he exclaimed as he shook hands with his
visitors.  "I thought you were all in the city, and had forgotten your
country friends."

"Oh, we can never forget you, Captain," Lois smilingly replied.  "We
have come on purpose to see you, and so you should feel very much
elated and be on your best behaviour."

"Sure, sure, indeed I shall.  But what do you want to see me about?" he
enquired.  "Has it anything to do with that murder case?  I am most
anxious to hear the latest news."

"I have come to ask you to get your thinking-cap on," Lois replied.

"My thinking-cap!  Why, bless your heart, it's always on, day and
night."

"That's good, Captain.  But first I wish to ask you a few questions."

"Drive ahead, then, I'm ready."

"You have often sailed to Liverpool, have you not?"

"Sure.  Know the place well."

"You knew also of the Dockett Concern there, didn't you?  I have heard
you mention that name."

"Yes, indeed I did.  Knew old Simon Dockett himself, and saw him often.
My, he was a cranky cuss, if ever there was one.  He had a whale of a
tongue, and knew how to use it."

"Did you know anything about his family?"

"Not much.  He never married, as I guess no woman would have him.  But
I know for sure that he has a nephew.  He sailed once on my ship, and
that was the first time I met him.  He was a gay one."

"Do you remember his name?"  Lois was much excited now.

"Sure; it was Melburne Telford.  I couldn't forget that for if he told
it to us once on that trip he told it a hundred times.  He was always
boasting that he was the nephew of old Simon Dockett, and that he was
to fall heir to his wealth."

"Have you ever seen him since, Captain?"

"Not until he struck this place, travelling under the name of Sydney
Bramshaw.  I knew him, though he didn't know me," and the captain
smiled as he ran his hand over his bearded face.  "I didn't have this
then.  At first I couldn't exactly make out where I had seen the fellow
before, but when I remembered I gave such a whoop that the women folk
thought I had gone out of my mind, and came running in to see what was
wrong."

"So that was the matter with you that day, was it?" Mrs. Peterson asked
as she paused in her knitting.

"Yes, that was it, and poor little Betty thought I had something in my
head like 'Mr. David,' ho, ho!"

"But why didn't you tell us who Sydney Bramshaw really was?" Lois asked.

"At first I thought I would.  But then I decided to await developments,
and see what the fellow was doing around here, and why he was sailing
under another name.  If I told what I knew it would have been gabbled
all over the place in no time, and the chap would have been looked upon
with suspicion.  He seemed to be harmless enough, and so I thought I
might as well hold my tongue for a while anyway.  But since he's gone
and you've asked me point blank about him, I can't see any harm in
telling what I know."

"Would it surprise you, Captain, to learn that Melburne Telford, alias
Sydney Bramshaw, is David Findley's nephew?" Mr. Westcote asked.

"His nephew!" the captain exclaimed.  "Old David's nephew!"

"Yes, that's who he is, and David and Simon Dockett were brothers."

"Good heavens!" the captain ejaculated.  "What's the meaning of it all,
I'd like to know?"

"Let me tell you," Mr. Westcote replied.  "It is only right that you
should know."

As briefly as possible he related the story of the two sealed papers,
the captain and his wife listening with the keenest interest.  He told
also of Bramshaw's suspicious actions.

"And do you mean to tell me that old David was murdered by his nephew?"
the captain asked in amazement when the story was finished.

"It looks very much like it, doesn't it?"

"It certainly does.  My, my, who'd have thought such a thing!" and the
captain leaned back overcome by what he had just heard.

Before the visitors left, Mrs. Peterson spread a little table with a
spotless cloth, and brought forth some of her fresh bread, cake and
preserves.

"It is no trouble, I assure you," she replied in answer to Lois'
remonstrance.  "You must have a cup of tea before you leave, and I
thought it would be nice out here on the verandah."

"That looks good to me," Mr. Westcote remarked as he drew his chair up
to the table.  "I haven't eaten a bite since morning.  I was all ready
to go to the restaurant when Dobbins came to see me, and then you girls
arrived.  If this keeps up much longer I shall be a skeleton.  But I
must not remain too long," he added, as he consulted his watch.  "I
must be back in the city before the C. P. R. leaves."

"May I stay with Lois?" Margaret asked.

"Why yes, if you will not be in the way."

"She must stay," Lois replied.  "I could not get along without her now.
You will keep us informed, I hope, of how you make out."

"Yes, I shall write to-night, and if anything of great importance turns
up I shall let you know at once."




CHAPTER XXXII

THE TABLES TURNED

The agony of mind that Jasper suffered in leaving his cabin and meeting
the people of Creekdale on their return from old David's funeral was
only a part of the trial he endured on his journey to the county jail.
On the wharf, while waiting for the arrival of the steamer, he was
subjected to the pitiless stares and gibes of men, women and children.
News of the arrest had spread from house to house, and people had
flocked to the wharf to have a last look upon the suspected man.
Jasper stood with his face to the river watching the steamer off in the
distance, which was rapidly approaching.  The actions of the crowd
disgusted him.  There was not one friendly voice lifted up on his
behalf.  Jim Goban strutted up and down keeping close watch upon his
prisoner, and gloating over his task.  He was having his revenge now
for the blows he had received on the day of David's release.

When once on the steamer Jasper believed that he would be free from all
curious eyes.  In this, however, he was mistaken.  There were many on
board and all soon learned that the "terrible murderer" was in their
midst.  Jasper was kept down below near the engine room and it was
remarkable how most of the people on that boat found it necessary to
pass him quite often.  He could hear some of their comments as they
moved away.

"What a bad face he has," a woman remarked.

"Yes," her companion replied, "he surely does look like a desperate
character.  Wasn't it awful for him to kill that poor old man?"

Jasper's face was really hard and stern; how could it have been
otherwise?  Where was all their Christian charity? he asked himself.
Where was the spirit of justice?  Those people knew that he had not yet
received a fair trial, and why were they so willing and eager to
believe him guilty?

Old Simon Squabbles was on board, and though he said nothing to Jasper,
he expressed his views to several men a short distance away.

"It's nothin' more than I expected," he boasted.  "I knew he would soon
reach the end of his tether after the experience I had with him.  I had
him workin' fer me, an' when I wouldn't pay him fer loafin' in the
potato patch, he got as mad as blazes an' said things I wouldn't like
to repeat."

Jasper endured such remarks without a word.  He did not feel like
making any reply.  In fact, he realised how useless it would be, and
the less said the better.

The limit of his bitterness was reached when a woman approached and
began to speak to him about his soul, and the danger of hell fire.  She
dilated glibly upon the awfulness of sin, and even offered to pray for
him.

"Keep your prayers for yourself," Jasper retorted, stung almost to fury
by her impudence.  "You'll do more good if you pray for these
snivelling hypocrites," and he motioned to those standing around him.

"Isn't it awful!" and the woman held up her hands in horror.  "You
should be afraid to speak that way, and you in such danger.  Read this,
poor man," and she held forth a tract she had been holding in her hand.

Jasper glanced at it and read the heading, "Flee from Hell Fire."  He
took it, and then crushing it in his hand, threw it from him.

"I've had enough of this," he cried, "and I'll stand no more.  Leave me
alone, is all I ask.  Hell can be no worse than what you people are
dealing out to me now."

Jasper's look and attitude caused those near him to shrink back, and
during the rest of the voyage he had peace from the clatter of tongues,
at least.

It was a great relief to him when at last he was lodged in the cell of
the county jail.  Here he was alone and free from all curious eyes, and
he had time and quietness for thought.  His heart was nevertheless
heavy as he sat there in his solitude.  He brooded over all that had
taken place, and the one and only ray of brightness which came to him
in his misery was the thought of Lois and the vision of her standing
where he last saw her with such deep sympathy expressed in her eyes.

The following day Mr. Westcote's lawyer came to see him, and they had a
long talk together.  Dr. Turnsell was greatly impressed by Jasper and
the straightforward manner in which he told about his visit to David
the night of the murder.

"We shall do the best we can for you," the lawyer informed him as he
bade him good-bye.  "We have tried to get you out on bail, but so far
have been unsuccessful."

This visit somewhat encouraged Jasper.  He knew that able men were
working for him and that Mr. Westcote would spare no money on his
behalf.  As he sat there in his cell he thought over his past life and
of the many struggles he had made to succeed.  He brooded over the
injustice he had received from so many simply because he was poor and
forced to fight his own battles against almost overwhelming odds.  "And
is this the end?" he asked himself.  "Will all my efforts amount to
nothing?"  He thought of several of his college companions, sons of
rich men, who knew not what it was to fight in order to win their way,
and who were now occupying important positions in life.  He knew what
they would say about him now.  "Poor Spuds," would be their laconic
comment.  "He was always an odd one, anyway."  Yes, that was the way
they would talk, and then dismiss him from their minds.

The afternoon slowly passed, and after a while he rose and paced up and
down his small room.  He looked through the barred window and saw the
clouds sweeping across the "long savannahs of the blue."  How precious
freedom seemed to him, and he longed to be once more in the open.  He
thought of Lois, and wondered if she were thinking of him.  Perhaps she
was out on the river in her little boat watching those same clouds.
There would be no one near now to rescue her should the water get rough.

Jasper was interrupted in his reverie by the entrance of the jailor.
He carried a letter in his hand, which he gave to the prisoner, and
then retired and bolted the door.

Jasper glanced at the writing and his heart gave a great bound as he at
once recognised Lois' handwriting.  Quickly he tore open the envelope
and drew forth the letter.


"Dear Mr. Randall," it began, "I am sending you this little note to
remind you that all your friends have not forgotten you, and that we
are doing what we can on your behalf.  Keep up courage.  I am very
hopeful now and feel sure that everything will turn out right.  I know
you are innocent, and am confident that you will soon be free.
Good-bye.

"Yours in haste,

"Lois Sinclair."


Next to Lois herself nothing could have been more welcome to Jasper
than that letter.  He pressed it fervently to his lips, and read it
over and over again.  It brought a great comfort to his burdened heart.
He was sure now that Lois was thinking of him and doing what she could
for his release.  He wondered what she had discovered, and mused much
upon the words "I am very hopeful now."

Jasper slept well that night and awoke in the morning greatly
refreshed.  He wondered what the day would bring forth, and as he paced
up and down his room in order to get a little exercise, he squared back
his shoulders and held his head high.  He felt fit and ready for battle
and longed for activity of some kind.  As the morning hours wore slowly
away he became restless and impatient.  The silence of his room was
affecting his nerves, and he thought with a shudder of men who were
condemned for life to solitary confinement.  What more horrible
punishment could be meted out to any man?  He was sure that he would go
mad in a few days.

Jasper could eat but little of the meagre dinner the jailor brought
him.  He was hoping that there would be a letter or some message for
him, and when there was none he felt sadly disappointed.  How long
would it be before he had any word from the lawyer? he wondered.

He was brooding at the table when the door again opened and to his
great joy and surprise Mr. Westcote entered.  Jasper sprang to his feet
and seized the hand held out to him.

"Are you quite repentant now?" Mr. Westcote smilingly asked.

"Quite," was the reply.  "I think this dose will do me all my life.  I
am willing to do anything you ask me, even to blacking your boots."

"That's good, so obey me at once and leave this confounded hole."

"What, go with you?"

"Certainly.  What else would have brought me here but to take you away?"

"To the court-room, I suppose," was the bitter rejoinder.

"Not at all.  But come now, and I will explain everything on our way to
the city.  My car is just outside."

How good Jasper felt to be once again out of doors, and he expanded his
chest and inhaled great draughts of the fresh air.

"My, that's great!" he exclaimed.  "It will take me a long time to get
the poison of that cell out of my lungs, and----"

"The bitterness out of your soul, eh?" Mr. Westcote quietly asked, as
Jasper paused.

"Yes, that's what I was going to say.  But I'm afraid it will be a much
harder thing to do.  I've been the sport of fools so long that the
bitterness of my soul has become a chronic disease."

"Tut, tut, don't talk that way any more," Mr. Westcote chided.  "Jump
on board now, and let us be off.  I'll tell you something that will
sweeten your soul and make life worth living."

To Jasper it seemed almost like a dream as he leaned back and listened
to what his companion told him about the net of evidence which had been
woven about Sydney Bramshaw.  He did not mention Lois in connection
with the affair, but related the incidents of the letter, the threat to
Betty Bean, and old David's narrow escape from the falling log.  He
told him also about the two sealed papers, and who David Findley and
Sydney Bramshaw really were.

"This is certainly remarkable!" Jasper exclaimed, when Mr. Westcote
ceased speaking and took a cigar from his pocket.  "But where is
Bramshaw now?" he asked.  "Surely he has not been allowed to escape."

"Indeed he hasn't.  He's in the city jail, that's where he is."

"Oh, I see."  It was all Jasper could say.

"Yes, he was arrested last night as he was about to board the C. P. R.
for New York.  His grip was searched and letters of a most
incriminating nature were found.  Why, the fellow must be a fool to
have kept them with him.  Almost any man in his right mind would have
destroyed them at once."

"How did he take his arrest?" Jasper enquired.

"At first he put up a big bluff and threatened all sorts of things.
But after a night in the lock-up and a thorough grilling this morning,
he broke down and begged for mercy.  He was confounded by the net which
had been woven about him, and the look of terror in his eyes was really
pathetic."

"And has he confessed to murdering old David?" Jasper eagerly asked.

"Not exactly.  But he has come so near to it that not the shadow of a
doubt is left about his guilt.  I believe that he will confess all
shortly in the hope that he may escape the death penalty by doing so."

Jasper remained silent for a while apparently studying the scenery as
they sped on their way.  But he saw nothing of tree, flower or rich
rolling meadows.  His thoughts were elsewhere, and his next question
revealed the working of his mind.

"To whom am I indebted for the collecting of all that valuable
evidence?" he questioned.  "Some one must have been very busy."

"You are indebted to several," was the reply.  "But Miss Sinclair has
been the most active."

"So I imagined," was all Jasper said and he once more lapsed into a
silence which he did not break until the car drew up before Mr.
Westcote's office.  He knew now that Lois cared for him, and his heart
thrilled with joy as he thought of the efforts she had made on his
behalf.  How he longed to see her and thank her for what she had done.

The surprise which came to Jasper upon his speedy release and
vindication was nothing compared to the shock he received when Mr.
Westcote told him about old David's will.

"Surely he has not left everything to me!" Jasper exclaimed.

"No, not all; merely half after a few bequests have been disposed of.
Then you and Miss Sinclair are to share alike."

"I don't seem to comprehend it all yet," and Jasper placed his hand to
his forehead in a bewildered manner.

"It's only natural that you shouldn't.  It will take you some time to
grasp the significance of the bequest which has been made to you.  Your
responsibility will be very heavy, but from what I know of you I
believe that you will be equal to the undertaking."

"I shall do the best I can," Jasper replied.  "I am too much dazed at
present to think it carefully over.  For a man to be freed from all
suspicion of a terrible crime, and then to find himself heir to a vast
fortune all in one day is enough to turn any one's brain."

A knock sounded upon the office door, and Dr. Turnsell at once entered.
He shook hands with Jasper and heartily congratulated him.

"I have come to tell you," he added, "that Bramshaw has made a full
confession of his crime.  He is a nervous wreck, and this morning he
broke down completely."

"I am very thankful that he has confessed," and Jasper gave a sigh of
relief.  "Wasn't it lucky that he was caught before he got over the
Border?"

"You have to thank Miss Sinclair for that," Mr. Westcote replied.  "But
for her prompt action I am afraid we would be frantically searching for
Bramshaw now."

"And I would be still in jail," Jasper mused.

"Undoubtedly.  Now, it seems to me that Miss Sinclair should be
informed of what has happened as soon as possible.  Suppose we slip up
and tell her?"

"That will be great," and Jasper sprang to his feet.  "When can we
start?"

"At once.  The car is waiting outside.  I knew that you would be
anxious to go, and so ordered the chauffeur to be ready."




CHAPTER XXXIII

THE REAL HAVEN

Lois rose early that morning and attended to numerous household
affairs.  It was necessary for her to keep busy, as her mind was always
calmer when her hands were employed.  She had the feeling that the day
would be an unusual one, and that much would happen before its close.
She could not rid her mind of this idea, and she mentioned it to
Margaret over the breakfast table.

"Do you believe in premonitions?" she asked.

"In a way I do," was the reply.  "Strange things happen sometimes, you
know.  I, too, have a peculiar feeling this morning that we are to hear
great news today.  Everything is so still just now, with not a leaf nor
a blade of grass aquiver.  See how the fog rests upon the river through
which the sun is trying to break.  There will be a heavy wind this
afternoon, mark my word.  I have often noticed it to be so.  It is the
rule rather than the exception.  And it may be the case with us.  The
quietness of the morning may give place to excitement before night."

"You are quite a philosopher," Lois laughingly remarked.

"Not at all, dear.  I am merely an observer, and I notice that what
happens in nature around us is often true in our own lives.  The law
which governs the waves of the ocean affects in a similar manner the
ripples of a tiny pool.  I am going to make a prophecy now."

"Let it be a good one."

"Certainly.  I am going to predict that this afternoon will bring us
the excitement of joy, and that there will be a happy company seated at
this table for dinner.  How is that for a prophecy?"

"I hope it will come true," Lois replied with a smile.

"Do you care for a walk this morning?" she asked.

"No, I think not.  I have some needle-work to finish, and I do so like
that shady corner of the verandah.  But don't you stay in on my
account."

"I'm afraid I couldn't content myself in any one place this morning,"
and Lois gazed thoughtfully out of the window.  "I am so restless that
I must be on the move.  I shall visit the Haven first and then go for
the mail.  We should hear something from your father."

Lois enjoyed the walk up along the shaded lane, and when she was almost
to the main highway she sat down under a large tree and looked out upon
the river.  The last trace of fog was slowly lifting and not a ripple
disturbed the surface of the water.  She longed to be out there in her
boat and made up her mind to go for a row during the afternoon.  She
thought of the day Jasper had rescued her and Margaret.  What was he
doing now? she wondered.  Perhaps he was sitting in his lonely cell
thinking of her.  The thought brought a flush to her cheeks and a sweet
peace to her heart.  No doubt he had received her letter, and that
would tell him that she had not forgotten him.

She found the captain in his accustomed place upon the verandah.

"You are early this morning," was his salutation as he took the pipe
from his mouth.

"Why shouldn't I be?" she asked, as she sat down by his side.
"Wouldn't it be a pity to stay indoors a morning like this?"

"Sure it would.  But you are lucky to be able to walk about.  Look at
me; nothing but a cripple who must stick to this one place with never a
chance of moving around."

"But you don't need to, Captain.  People come to see you, and you know
all that is going on.  You held quite a reception yesterday afternoon."

"Indeed I did.  And I have been thinking very much about what I heard.
It is wonderful.  I do hope they have caught that rascal."

"Have you seen Betty lately?" Lois enquired.

"We expect her to-night.  She is coming to stay a few days with us.  It
will be good to have her here again, for we miss her very much."

"Have you any idea what she is going to do?"

"Her mind is set upon being a nurse, so I understand.  She'll make a
good one, mark my word.  The way she took to old David and looked after
him was a marvel."

Mrs. Peterson now came from the house and joined in the conversation.

"You must excuse me, dear," she apologised, "but I haven't had time to
dress up this morning.  Betty is coming to-night, and I want to get
some cakes and pies made."

"You won't have to work so hard when you get your money," Lois replied.
"I suppose you have heard nothing more about it?"

"Only that we're to get a thousand a year.  Isn't it wonderful!  It
seems that it must be all a dream.  At first we couldn't understand
where so much money was to come from.  But after what Mr. Westcote told
us it is all clear.  Betty and her mother are to get the same amount
each, so I believe.  Poor old David!  We little realised what he would
do for us when we took him to board.  I did hear that Mr. Jasper is to
come in for a large share.  I hope he does, anyway, for he deserves it."

"Have you heard who will get the balance of the money, property, or
whatever it is?" Lois asked.

"Why, certainly.  Don't you know?" Mrs. Peterson asked in astonishment.

"No, I have not the least idea."

"Well, isn't that strange!  Why, the bulk of the property is to go to
you and Mr. Jasper."

At these words Lois' eyes opened wide with amazement, and she felt that
she had not heard aright.

"To me?" she gasped.

"So I understand.  We didn't mention it to you, thinking that you knew
all about it.  But isn't it wonderful what strange things have happened
in such a short time?"

Lois made no reply, for her mind was too much agitated.  She wished to
be by herself that she might think over this remarkable piece of news.
Bidding the captain and his wife good-bye, she walked slowly down the
road toward the store.  Surely there had been some mistake, she
reasoned.  Why should anything have been left to her?  What had she
done to merit it?  She wished that David had not done such a thing.  It
would mean a great responsibility, and she did not feel equal to the
task.

Reaching the store, her attention was diverted for a time by the brief
note she received from Mr. Westcote telling of the arrest of Sydney
Bramshaw.  This was very gratifying news, but she longed to hear some
word about Jasper, and whether he would be released.  This and what
Mrs. Peterson had told her about the will occupied her mind all that
afternoon.  She was unusually silent, and Margaret was afraid that she
was not well.  She spent a couple of hours upon the river, but the
water becoming rough she was unable to remain out any longer.

"Your prediction has come true, Margaret," she said when she had
reached the house.  "It is very rough out there now.  You were quite
right as regards the water, but I guess that is about as far as it
goes.  It is almost dinner time and here we are just as quiet as we
were this morning."

"There is plenty of time yet," and Margaret looked up from her work
with a smile.  "I have had such a delightful day," she added.  "See, I
have done all this," and she held up a piece of needle-work for
inspection.

"I wish that I could settle down to something definite," Lois sighed.
"I have never been so restless in all my life as I have to-day.  I have
the feeling that something wonderful is about to happen, and that a
great change is to take place in my life.  If I were superstitious I
should be quite uneasy."

"Is it a feeling of dread?" Margaret asked.

"No, not at all.  I cannot explain it, for I never experienced anything
like it before."

This conversation was suddenly interrupted by a long succession of
raucous honks up the road, and in a few seconds a car swung around the
corner of the house and stopped before the verandah.

Lois had risen and stepped forward.  But she stopped short in amazement
when she saw Jasper in the car, seated by Mr. Westcote's side.  Her
father and Dick were in the front seat, but she hardly noticed them.
Jasper was free!  That was the one idea which filled her mind.  It
seemed almost too good to be true.  Just what happened next she was not
altogether certain.  She welcomed them all and listened to their
voices, but she seemed to be living in a dream from which she would
suddenly awaken.  She took her place as usual at the head of the table,
but made so many mistakes that Dick laughed at her.

"What's the matter, Lois?" he enquired.  "You're surely strong on hot
water.  You've given me a cup of it instead of tea, and the rest you
poured into the milk pitcher."

"Did I do that?" Lois asked in surprise.  "Well, I guess I'm rattled,
anyway.  You have told me so many things during the last half hour that
my brain is all in a whirl."

Jasper was as much excited as Lois, though outwardly he remained calm.
He said very little, and let Mr. Westcote tell how their car had broken
down and but for the timely arrival of Mr. Sinclair and Dick they would
not have been able to reach their destination.  He recalled his feeling
of dismay when they were stalled, and he feared that he would not be
able to see Lois that night.  He did want to tell her how grateful he
was for what she had done for him.  But now he was near her and yet he
had not told her.  He had thought over the proper words he would say,
but when he had taken her hand as she met him at the verandah steps, he
did not utter them.

After dinner they all went out upon the verandah, and what a delightful
time that was.  It was a happy company, and for a while all cares were
banished.  It was a balmy evening, the wind of the afternoon having
subsided, and all nature was hushed in repose as the shades of night
began to steal over the land.  It was the hour of enchantment, and
while Mr. Sinclair and Mr. Westcote discussed matters relating to the
work at the falls, Dick and Margaret strolled slowly down to the river.

Jasper and Lois thus found themselves sitting alone on the verandah
steps.

"Suppose we pay a visit to the Haven," Jasper suggested.  "It is a
perfect night for a walk, and I know the captain and his wife will be
glad to hear the news.  Your father won't mind our leaving him, will
he?"

"He won't realise that we have gone," Lois laughingly replied.  "He is
very happy just now."

Jasper and Lois were in no great hurry to reach the Haven.  Their
hearts were happy, and as they walked slowly along Jasper told Lois all
that had happened to him since the day of his arrest.

"I can never thank you enough for sending me that letter of
encouragement, and what you have done for me," he told her.

"Don't try to do so," Lois replied.  "It was a joy to me to be able to
do something."

They were standing beneath a big maple tree, and Lois was plucking at a
wild flower she had just picked.  Jasper suddenly reached out, caught
both her hands in his and held them tight.

"Lois, Lois," he breathed, and his voice was intense with emotion, "I
want you for my very own.  I cannot live without you."

"Oh, look, you have crushed my flower," Lois remonstrated, while a
nervous little laugh escaped her lips.

"That is too bad," and at once Jasper released her hands and placed his
arms around her.

"Lois, I love you," he murmured.  "I have loved you for years.  Can you
love me in return?"

In reply Lois lifted her flushed face to his and their lips met.  The
seal of their betrothal was set, and their young hearts were as one.
Time to them was nothing now in the rapturous joy of their sweet pure
love.  Their past doubts, cares and trials were all ended.  They had
started forth to reach the Haven nestling on the hill and they found on
the way the real Haven which they had long been seeking--the enchanted
Haven of Love.



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK UNDER SEALED ORDERS***


******* This file should be named 16714.txt or 16714.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/1/6/7/1/16714



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.net/fundraising/pglaf.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://www.gutenberg.net/about/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.net/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit:
http://www.gutenberg.net/fundraising/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

