The Project Gutenberg EBook of Jacqueline of Golden River, by H. M. Egbert

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Jacqueline of Golden River

Author: H. M. Egbert

Illustrator: Ralph Pallen Coleman

Release Date: September 28, 2005 [EBook #16771]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK JACQUELINE OF GOLDEN RIVER ***




Produced by Al Haines










[Frontispiece: He went without a backward glance . . . and I knew what
the parting meant to him.]






JACQUELINE OF GOLDEN RIVER

BY

H. M. EGBERT






FRONTISPIECE

BY

RALPH PALLEN COLEMAN





DOUBLEDAY, PAGE & COMPANY

GARDEN CITY ---------- NEW YORK

1920




COPYRIGHT, 1920, BY

DOUBLEDAY, PAGE & COMPANY


ALL RIGHTS RESERVED, INCLUDING THAT OF

TRANSLATION INTO FOREIGN LANGUAGES

INCLUDING THE SCANDINAVIAN





COPYRIGHT, 1915, BY THE FRANK A. MUNSEY COMPANY




CONTENTS

     I.  A DOG AND A DAMSEL
    II.  BACK IN THE ROOM
   III.  COVERING THE TRACKS
    IV.  SIMON LEROUX
     V.  M. LE CURE
    VI.  AT THE FOOT OF THE CLIFF
   VII.  CAPTAIN DUBOIS
  VIII.  DREAMS OF THE NIGHT
    IX.  THE FUNGUS
     X.  SNOW BLINDNESS
    XI.  THE CHATEAU
   XII.  UNDER THE MOUNTAINS
  XIII.  THE ROULETTE-WHEEL
   XIV.  SOME PLAIN SPEAKING
    XV.  WON--AND LOST
   XVI.  THE OLD ANGEL
  XVII.  LOUIS D'EPERNAY
 XVIII.  THE LITTLE DAGGER
   XIX.  THE HIDDEN CHAMBER
    XX.  AT SWORDS' POINTS
   XXI.  THE BAIT THAT LURED
  XXII.  SURRENDER
 XXIII.  LEROUX'S DIABLE
  XXIV.  FULL CONFESSION
   XXV.  THE END OF THE CHATEAU




JACQUELINE OF GOLDEN RIVER


CHAPTER I

A DOG AND A DAMSEL

As I sat on a bench in Madison Square after half past eleven in the
evening, at the end of one of those mild days that sometimes occur in
New York even at the beginning of December, a dog came trotting up to
me, stopped at my feet, and whined.

There is nothing remarkable in having a strange dog run to one nor in
seeing the creature rise on its hind legs and paw at you for notice and
a caress.  Only, this happened to be an Eskimo dog.

It might have been mistaken for a collie or a sheepdog by nearly
everybody who saw it, though most men would have turned to admire the
softness of its fur and to glance at the heavy collar with the silver
studs.  But I knew the Eskimo breed, having spent a summer in Labrador.

I stroked the beast, which lay down at my feet, raising its head
sometimes to whine, and sometimes darting off a little way and coming
back to tug at the lower edge of my overcoat.  But my mind was too much
occupied for me to take any but a perfunctory interest in its
manoeuvres.  My eight years of thankless drudgery as a clerk, following
on a brief adventurous period after I ran away to sea from my English
home, had terminated three days before, upon receipt of a legacy, and I
had at once left Tom Carson's employment.

Six thousand guineas--thirty thousand dollars--the will said.  I had
not seen my uncle since I was a boy.  But he had been a bachelor, we
were both Hewletts, and I had been named Paul after him.

I had seen for some time that Carson meant to get rid of me.  It had
been a satisfaction to me to get rid of him instead.

He had been alternately a prospector and a company promoter all the
working years of his rather shabby life.  He had organized some dubious
concerns; but his new offices on Broadway were fitted so
unostentatiously that anyone could see the Northern Exploitation
Company was not trying to glitter for the benefit of the small investor.

Coal fields and timber-land somewhere in Canada, the concession was
supposed to be.  But Tom was as secretive as a clam, except with Simon
Leroux.

Leroux was a parish politician from some place near Quebec, and his
clean-shaven, wrinkled face was as hard and mean as that of any city
boss in the United States.  His vile Anglo-French expletives were as
nauseous as his cigars.  He and old Tom used to be closeted together
for hours at a time.

I never liked the man, and I never cared for Carson's business ways.  I
was glad to leave him the day after my legacy arrived.

He only snorted when I gave him notice, and told the cashier to pay me
my salary to date.  He had long before summed me up as a spiritless
drudge.  I don't believe he gave another thought to me after I left his
office.

My plans were vague.  I had been occupying, at a low rental, a tiny
apartment consisting of two rooms, a bath, and what is called a
"kitchenette" at the top of an old building in Tenth Street which was
about to be pulled down.  Part of the roof was gone already, and there
was a six-foot hole under the eaves.

I had arranged to leave the next day, and a storage company was to call
in the morning for my few sticks of furniture.  I had half planned to
take boat for Jamaica.  I wanted to think and plan.

I had nobody dependent on me, and was resolved to invest my little
fortune in such a way that I might have a modest competence, so that
the dreadful spectre of poverty might never leer at me again.

The Eskimo dog was growing uneasy.  It would run from me, looking round
and uttering a succession of short barks, then run back and tug at my
overcoat again.  I began to become interested in its manoeuvres.

Evidently it wished me to accompany it, and I wondered who its master
was and how it came to be there.

I stooped and looked at the collar.  There was no name on it, except
the maker's, scratched and illegible.  I rose and followed the beast,
which showed its eager delight by running ahead of me, turning round at
times to bark, and then continuing on its way with a precision which
showed me that it was certain of its destination.

As I crossed Madison Square the light on the Metropolitan Tower flashed
the first quarter.  Broadway was in full glare.  The lure of electric
signs winked at me from every corner.  The restaurants were disgorging
their patrons, and beautifully dressed women in fine furs, accompanied
by escorts in evening dress, stood on the pavements.  Taxicabs whirled
through the slush.

I began to feel a renewal in me of the old, old thrill the city had
inspired when I entered it a younger and a more hopeful man.

The dog turned down a street in the Twenties, ran on a few yards,
bounded up a flight of stone steps, and began scratching at the door of
a house that was apparently empty.

I say apparently, because the shades were down at every window and the
interior was unlit, so far as could be seen from the street; but I knew
that at that hour it must contain from fifty to a hundred people.

This place I knew by reputation.  It was Jim Daly's notorious but
decently conducted gambling establishment, which was running full blast
at a time when every other institution of this character had found it
convenient to shut down.

So the creature's master was inside Daly's, and it wished me to get him
out.  This was evidence of unusual discernment in his best friend, but
it was hardly my prerogative to exercise moral supervision over this
adventurous explorer of a chillier country even than his northern
wastes.  I looked in some disappointment at the closed doors and turned
away.

I meant to go home, and I had proceeded about three paces when the lock
clicked.  I stopped.  The front door opened cautiously, and the gray
head of Jim's negro butler appeared.  Behind it was the famous grille
of cast-steel, capable, according to rumour, of defying the axes of any
number of raiding reformers.

Then emerged one of the most beautiful women that I had ever seen.

I should have called her a girl, for she could not have been more than
twenty years of age.  Her hair was of a fair brown, the features
modelled splendidly, the head poised upon a flawless throat that
gleamed white beneath a neckpiece of magnificent sable.

She carried a sable muff, too, and under these furs was a dress of
unstylish fashion and cut that contrasted curiously with them.  I
thought that those loose sleeves had passed away before the nineteenth
century died.  In one hand she carried a bag, into which she was
stuffing a large roll of bills.

As she stepped down to the street the dog leaped up at her.  A hand
fell caressingly upon the creature's head, and I knew that she had one
servant who would be faithful unto death.

She passed so close to me that her dress brushed my overcoat, and for
an instant her eyes met mine.  There was a look in them that startled
me--terror and helplessness, as though she had suffered some benumbing
shock which made her actions more automatic than conscious.

This was no woman of the class that one might expect to find in Daly's.
There was innocence in the face and in the throat, uplifted, as one
sees it in young girls.

I was bewildered.  What was a girl like that doing in Daly's at half
past twelve in the morning?

She began walking slowly and rather aimlessly, it seemed to me, along
the street in the direction of Sixth Avenue.  My curiosity was
unbounded.  I followed her at a decent interval to see what she was
going to do.  But she did not seem to know.

The girl looked as if she had stepped out of a cloister into an unknown
world, and the dog added to the strangeness of the picture.

The street loafers stared after her, and two men began walking abreast
of her on the other side of the road.  I followed more closely.

As she stood upon the curb on the east side of Sixth Avenue I saw her
glance timidly up and down before venturing to cross.  There was little
traffic, and the cars were running at wide intervals, but it was quite
half a minute before she summoned resolution to plunge beneath the
structure of the elevated railroad.  When she had reached the other
side she stood still again before continuing westward.

The two men crossed the street and planted themselves behind her.  They
were speaking in a tongue that sounded like French, and one had a patch
over his eye.  A taxicab was crawling up behind them.  I was sure that
they were in pursuit of her.

The four of us were almost abreast in the middle of the long block
between Sixth and Seventh Avenues.  We were passing a dead wall, and
the street was almost empty.

Suddenly the man with the patch turned on me, lowered his head, and
butted me off my feet.  I fell into the roadway, and at that instant
the second fellow grasped the girl by the arm and the taxicab whirled
up and stopped.

The girl's assailants seemed to be trying to force her into the cab.
One caught at her arm, the other seized her waist.  The bag flew open,
scattering a shower of gold pieces upon the pavement.

And then, before I could get upon my feet again, the dog had leaped at
the throat of the man with the patch and sent him stumbling backward.
Before he recovered his balance I was at the other man, striking out
right and left.

It was all the act of an instant, and in an instant the two men had
jumped into the taxicab and were being driven swiftly away.  I was
standing beside the terrified girl, while an ill-looking crowd,
gathering from God knows where, surrounded us and fought like harpies
for the coins which lay scattered about.

I laid my hands on one who had grabbed a gold piece from between my
feet, but the girl pulled at my arm distractedly.  She was white and
trembling, and her big grey eyes were full of fear.

"Help me!" she pleaded, clinging to my sleeve with her little gloved
hands.  "The money is nothing.  I have eight thousand dollars more in
my bag.  Help me away!"

She spoke in a foreign, bookish accent, as though she had learned
English at school.  Fortunately for us the mob was too busily engrossed
in its search to hear her words.

So I drew her arm through mine and we hurried toward Sixth Avenue,
where we took an up-town car.

We had reached Herald Square when it occurred to me that my companion
did not seem to know her destination.  So we descended there.  I
intended to order a taxicab for her, had forgotten the dog, but now the
beautiful creature came bounding up to us.

"Where are you going?" I asked the girl.  "I will take you to your
home--or hotel," I added with a slight upward intonation on the last
word.

"I do not know where I am going," she answered slowly.  "I have never
been in New York until to-day."

"But you have friends here?" I asked.

She shook her head.

"But are you really carrying eight thousand dollars about with you in
New York at night?" I asked in amazement.  "Don't you know this city is
full of thieves, and that you are in the worst district?"

For a moment it occurred to me that she might have been decoyed into
Daly's.  And yet I knew it was not that sort of place; indeed, Daly's
chief desire was to remain as inconspicuous as possible.  It was very
difficult to get into Daly's.

"Do you know the character of the place you came out of?" I asked,
trying to find some clue to her actions.

"The character?" she repeated, apparently puzzled at first.  "Oh, yes.
That is Mr. Daly's gaming-house.  I came to New York to play at
roulette there."

She was looking at me so frankly that I was sure she was wholly
ignorant of evil.

"My father is too ill to play himself," she explained, "so I must find
a hotel near Mr. Daly's house, and then I shall play every night until
our fortune is made.  Tonight I lost nearly two thousand dollars.  But
I was nervous in that strange place.  And the system expressly says
that one may lose at first.  To-morrow I raise the stakes and we shall
begin to win.  See?"

She pulled a little pad from her bag covered with a maze of figuring.

"But where do you come from?" I asked.  "Where is your father?"

Again I saw that look of terror come into her eyes.  She glanced
quickly about her, and I was sure she was thinking of escaping from me.

I hastened to reassure her.

"Forgive me," I said.  "It is no business of mine.  And now, if you
will trust me a little further I will try to find a hotel for you."

It would have disarmed the worst man to feel her little hand slipped
into his arm in that docile manner of hers.  I took her to the Seward,
the Grand, the Cornhil, and the Merrimac--each in turn.

Vain hope!  You know what the New York hotels are.  When I asked for a
room for her the clerk would eye her furs dubiously, look over his book
in pretense, and then inform me that the hotel was full.

At the Merrimac I sat down in the lobby and sent her to the clerk's
desk alone, but that was equally useless.  I realized pretty soon that
no reputable hotel in New York City would accommodate her at that hour.

We were standing presently in front of the _Herald_ office.  Her hand
still touched my arm, and I was conscious of an absurd desire to keep
it there as long as possible.

My curiosity had given place to deep anxiety on her account.  What was
this child doing in New York alone, what sort of father had let her
come, if her story were true?  What was she?  A European?  Too
unconventional for that.  An Argentine?  A runaway from some South
American convent?

Her skin was too fair for Spanish blood to flow beneath it.  She looked
French and had something of the French frankness.

Canadian?  I dared not ask her any more questions.  There was only one
thing to do, and, though I shrank from the suggestion, it had to be
made.

"It is evident that you must go somewhere to-night," I said.  "I have
two rooms on Tenth Street which I am vacating to-morrow.  They are
poorly furnished, but there is clean linen; and if you will occupy them
for the night I can go elsewhere, and I will call for you at nine in
the morning."

She smiled at me gratefully--she did not seem surprised at all.

"You have some baggage?" I asked.

"No, _monsieur_," she answered.

She _was_ French, then--Canadian-French, I had no doubt.  I was hardly
surprised at her answer.  I had ceased to be surprised at anything she
told me.

"To-morrow I shall show you where to make some purchases, then," I
said.  "And now, _mademoiselle_, suppose we take a taxicab."

As her hand tightened upon my arm I saw a man standing on the west side
of Broadway and staring intently at us.

He was of a singular appearance.  He wore a fur coat with a collar of
Persian lamb, and on his head was a black lambskin cap such as is worn
in colder climates, but it seldom seen in New York.  He looked about
thirty years of age, he had an aspect decidedly foreign, and I imagined
that he was scowling at us malignantly.

I was not sure that this surmise was not due to an over-active
imagination, but I was determined to get away from the man's scrutiny,
so I called a taxicab and gave the driver my address.

"Go through some side streets and go fast," I said.

The fellow nodded.  He understood my motive, though I fear he may have
misinterpreted the circumstances.  We entered, and the girl nestled
back against the comfortable cushions, and we drove at a furious speed,
dodging down side streets at a rate that should have defied pursuit.

During the drive I instructed my companion emphatically.

"Since you have no friends here, you must have confidence in me,
_mademoiselle_," I said.

"And you are my friend?  Well, _monsieur_, be sure I trust you," she
answered.

"You must listen to me attentively, then," I continued.  "You must not
admit anybody to the apartment until I ring to-morrow.  I have the key,
and I shall arrive at nine and ring, and then unlock the door.  But
take no notice of the bell.  You understand?"

"Yes, _monsieur_," she answered wearily.  Her eyelids drooped; I saw
that she was very sleepy.

When the taxicab deposited us in front of the house, I glanced hastily
up and down the road.  There was another cab at the east end of the
street, but I could not discern if it were approaching me or
stationary.  I opened the front door quickly and admitted my companion,
then preceded her up the uncarpeted stairs to my little apartment on
the top floor.  I was the only tenant in the house, and therefore there
would be no cause for embarrassment.

As I opened the door of my apartment the dog pushed past me.  Again I
had forgotten it; but it had not forgotten its mistress.

I looked inside my bare little rooms.  It was hard to say good-by.

"Till to-morrow, _mademoiselle_," I said.  "And won't you tell me your
name?"

She drew off her glove and put one hand in mine.

"Jacqueline," she answered.  "And yours?"

"Paul," I said.

"_Au revoir_, Monsieur Paul, then, and take my gratitude with you for
your goodness."

I let her hand fall and hurried down the stairs, confused and choking,
for there was a wedding-ring upon her finger.




CHAPTER II

BACK IN THE ROOM

The situation had become more preposterous than ever.  Two hours before
it would have been unimaginable; one hour ago I had merely been
offering aid to a young woman in distress; now she was occupying my
rooms and I was hurrying along Tenth Street, careless as to my
destination, and feeling as though the whole world was crumbling about
my head because she wore a wedding-ring.

Certainly I was not in love with her, so far as I could analyze my
emotions.  I had been conscious only of a desire to help her, merging
by degrees into pity for her friendlessness.

But the wedding-ring--what hopes, then, had begun to spring up in my
heart?  I could not fathom them; I only knew that my exaltation had
given place to profound dejection.

As I passed up the street the taxicab which I had seen at the east end
came rapidly toward me.  It passed, and I stopped and looked after it.
I was certain that it slackened speed outside the door of the old
building, but again it went on quickly, until it was lost to view in
the distance.

Had I given the pursuers a clue by my reappearance?

I watched for a few moments longer, but the vehicle did not return, and
I dismissed the idea as folly.  In truth, there was no reason to
suppose that the man I had seen in Herald Square was connected with the
two others, or that any of the three had followed us.  No doubt the
third man was but a street-loafer of the familiar type, attracted by
Jacqueline's unusual appearance.

And, after all, New York was a civilized city, and I could be sure of
the girl's safety behind the street door-lock and that of my apartment
door.  So I refused to yield to the impulse to go back and assure
myself that she was all right.  I must find a hotel and get a good
night's sleep.  In the morning, undoubtedly, I would see the episode in
a less romantic fashion.

As I went on, new thoughts began to press on my imagination.  Such an
event as this, told in any gathering of men, why, they would smile at
me and call me the victim of an adventuress.  The tale about the
father, the assumed ignorance of the conventions--how much could be
believed?

Had she not probably left her husband in some Canadian city and come to
New York to enjoy her holiday in her own fashion?  Could she innocently
have adventured to Daly's door and actually have succeeded in gaining
admission?  Why, many a would-be gambler had had the wicket of the
grille slammed in his face by the old colored butler.

Perhaps she was worse than I was even now imagining!

I had turned up Fifth Avenue, and had reached Twelfth or Thirteenth
Street when I thought I heard the patter of the Eskimo dog's feet
behind me.  I spun, around, startled, but there was only the long
stretch of pavement, wet from a slight recent shower, and the
reflection of the white arc-lights in it.

I had resumed my course when I was sure I heard the pattering again.
And again I saw nothing.

A moment later I was hurrying back toward the apartment-house.  My
nerves had suddenly become unstrung.  I felt sure now that some
imminent danger was threatening Jacqueline.  I could not bear the
suspense of waiting till morning.  I wanted to save her from something
that I felt intimately, but did not understand, and at which my reason
mocked in vain.

And as I ran I thought I heard the patter of the dog's feet, pacing
mine.

I was rounding the corner of Tenth Street now, and again the folly of
my behaviour struck home to me.  I stopped and tried to think.  Was it
some instinct that was taking me back, or was it the remembrance of
Jacqueline's beauty?  Was it not the desire to see her, to ask her
about the ring?

Surely my fears were but an overwrought imagination and the strangeness
of the situation, acting upon a mind eagerly grasping out after
adventure, being set free from the oppression of those dreadful years
of bondage!

I had actually swung around when I heard the ghostly patter of the feet
again close at my side.  I made my decision in that instant, and
hurried swiftly on my course back toward the apartment house.

I was in Tenth Street now.  It was half-past two in the morning, and
beginning to grow cold.  The thoroughfare was empty.  I fled, a tiny
thing, between two rows of high, dark houses.

When at last I found my door my hands were trembling so that I could
hardly fit the key into the lock.

I wondered now whether it had not been the pattering of my heart that I
had heard.

I bounded up the stairs.  But on the top story I had to pause to get my
breath, and then I dared not enter.  I listened outside.  There was no
sound from within.

The two rooms that I occupied were separated only by a curtain, which
fell short a foot from the floor and was slung on a wooden pole,
disclosing two feet between the top of it and the ceiling.  The rooms
were thus actually one, and even that might have been called small, for
the bed in the rear room was not a dozen paces from the door.

I listened for the breathing of the sleeping girl.  My intelligence
cried out upon my folly, telling me that my appearance there would
terrify her; and yet that clamorous fear that beat at my heart would
not be silenced.

If I could hear her breathe, I thought, I would go quietly away, and
find a hotel in which to sleep.  I listened minute after minute, but I
could not hear a sound.

At last I put my mouth to the keyhole and spoke to her.  "Jacqueline,"
I called.  The name sounded as strange and sweet on my own lips as it
had sounded on hers when she told it to me.  I waited.

There was no answer.

Then a little louder: "Jacqueline!"

And then quite loudly: "Jacqueline!"

I listened, dreading that she would cry out in alarm, but the same dead
silence followed.

Then, out of the silence, hammering on my eardrums, burst the loud
ticking of the little alarm-clock that I had left on the mantel of the
bedroom.  I heard that, and it must have been ticking minutes before
the sound reached me; perhaps if I waited a little longer I should hear
her breathing.

The alarm-clock was one of that kind which, when set to "repeat,"
utters a peculiar little click every two hundred and eighth stroke
owing to a catch in the mechanism.  Formerly it had annoyed me
inexpressibly, and I would lie awake for hours waiting for that tiny
sound.  Now I could hear even that, and heard it repeat and repeat
itself; but I could not hear Jacqueline breathe.

I took the key of the apartment door from my pocket at last and fitted
it noiselessly into the lock.  I stood there, trembling and irresolute.
I dared not turn the key.  The hall door gave immediately upon the
rooms without a private passage, and at the moment when I opened the
door I should be practically inside my bedroom save for the intervening
curtain.

Once more I ventured:

"Jacqueline!  Jacqueline!"

There was not the smallest answering stir within.  And so, with shaking
fingers, I turned the key.

The door creaked open with a noise that must have sounded throughout
the empty house.  I recollected then that it was impossible to keep it
shut without locking it.  The landlord had long ago ceased to concern
himself with his tumble-down property.

I caught at the door-edge, missed it and, tripping over a rent in the
cheap mat that lay against the door inside, stumbled against the
table-edge and clung there.

And even after I had caught at it, and stayed my fall, that infernal
door went creaking, creaking backward till it brought up against the
wall.

The room was completely dark, except for a little patch of light high
up on the bedroom wall, which came through the hole the workmen had
made when they began demolishing the building.  I hesitated a moment;
then I drew a match from my pocket and rubbed it softly into a flame
against my trouser leg.

I reached up to the gas above the table, turned it on, and lit the
incandescent mantle, lowering the light immediately.  But even then
there was no sound from behind the curtains.

They hung down close together, so that I was able to see only the
gas-blackened ceiling above them and, underneath, the lower edge of the
bed linen, and the bed-frame at the base, with its enamelled iron feet,
The sheets hung straight, as though the bed had not been occupied; but,
though there was no sound, I knew Jacqueline was at the back of the
curtains.

The oppressive stillness was not that of solitude.  She must be awake;
she must be listening in terror.

I went toward the curtains, and when I spoke I heard the words come
through my lips in a voice that I could not recognize as mine.

"Jacqueline!" I whispered, "it is Paul.  Paul, your friend.  Are you
safe, Jacqueline?"

Now I saw, under the curtains, what looked like the body of a very
small animal.  It might have been a woolly dog, or a black lambkin, and
it was lying perfectly still.

I pulled aside the curtains and stood between them, and the scene
stamped itself upon my brain, as clear as a photographic print, for
ever.

The woolly beast was the fur cap of a dead man who lay across the floor
of the little room.  One foot was extended underneath the bed, and the
head reached to the bottom of the wall on the other side of the room.
He lay upon his back, his eyes open and staring, his hands clenched,
and his features twisted into a sneering smile.

His fur overcoat, unbuttoned, disclosed a warm knit waistcoat of a
gaudy pattern, across which ran the heavy links of a gold chain.  There
was a tiny hole in his breast, over the heart, from which a little
blood had flowed.  The wound had pierced the heart, and death had
evidently been instantaneous.

It was the man whom I had seen staring at us across Herald Square.

Beside the window Jacqueline crouched, and at her feet lay the Eskimo
dog, watching me silently.  In her hand she held a tiny, dagger-like
knife, with a thin, red-stained blade.  Her grey eyes, black in the
gas-light, stared into mine, and there was neither fear nor recognition
in them.  She was fully dressed, and the bed had not been occupied.

I flung myself at her feet.  I took the weapon from her hand.
"Jacqueline!" I cried in terror.  I raised her hands to my lips and
caressed them.

She seemed quite unresponsive.

I laid them against my cheek.  I called her by her name imploringly; I
spoke to her, but she only looked at me and made no answer.  Still it
was evident to me that she heard and understood, for she looked at me
in a puzzled way, as if I were a complete stranger.  She did not seem
to resent my presence there, and she did not seem afraid of the dead
man.  She seemed, in a kindly, patient manner, to be trying to
understand the meaning of the situation.

"Jacqueline," I cried, "you are not hurt?  Thank God you are not hurt.
What has happened?"

"I don't know," she answered.  "I don't know where I am."

I kneeled down at her side and put my arms about her.

"Jacqueline, dear;" I said, "will you not try to think?  I am
Paul--your friend Paul.  Do you not remember me?"

"No, monsieur," she sighed.

"But, then, how did you come here, Jacqueline?" I asked.

"I do not know," she answered.  And, a moment later, "I do not know,
Paul."

That encouraged me a little.  Evidently she remembered what I had just
said to her.

"Where is your home, Jacqueline?"

"I do not know," she answered in an apathetic voice, devoid of interest.

There was something more to be said, though it was hard.

"Jacqueline, who--was--that?"

"Who?" she inquired, looking at me with the same patient, wistful gaze.

"That man, Jacqueline.  That dead man."

"What dead man, Paul?"

She was staring straight at the body, and at that moment I realized
that she not only did not remember, but did not even see it.

The shock which she had received, supervening upon the nervous state in
which she had been when I encountered her, had produced one of those
mental inhibitions in which the mind, to save the reason, obliterates
temporarily not only all memory of the past, but also all present
sights and sounds which may serve to recall it.  She looked idly at the
body of the dead man, and I was sure that she saw nothing but the worn
woodwork of the floor.

I saw that it was useless to say anything more upon this subject.

"You are very tired, Jacqueline?" I asked.

"Yes, _monsieur_," she answered, leaning back against my arm.

"And you would like to sleep?"

"Yes, _monsieur_."

I raised her in my arms and laid her on the bed, telling her to close
her eyes and sleep.  She was asleep almost immediately after her head
rested Upon the pillow.  She breathed as softly as an infant.

I watched her for a while until I heard a distant clock strike three.
This recalled me to the dangers of our situation.  I struck a match and
lit the gas in the bedroom.  But the yellow glare was so ghastly and
intolerable that I turned it down.

And then I set about the task before me.




CHAPTER III

COVERING THE TRACKS

I thought quickly, and my consciousness seemed to embrace all the
details of the situation with a keenness foreign to my nature.

Once, I believe, I had been able to play an active part among the men
who were my associates in that adventurous life that lay so far behind
me.  But eight years of clerkship had reduced me to the condition of
one who waits on the command of others.  Now my irresolution vanished
for the time, and I was my old self once more.

The first task was the disposal of the body in such a way that
suspicion would not attach itself to me after I had vacated the rooms
next morning.

There was a fire-escape running up to the floor of that room on the
outside of the house, though there was no egress to it.  It had been
put up by the landlord to satisfy the requirements of some new law; but
had never been meant for use, and it was constructed of the flimsiest
and cheapest ironwork.  I saw that it would be possible by standing on
a chair to swing myself up to the hole in the wall and reach down to
the iron stairs up which, I assumed, the dead man had crept after I had
given him the hint of Jacqueline's abode by emerging from the front
door.

I raised the dead man in my arms, looking apprehensively toward the
bed.  I was afraid Jacqueline would awaken, but she slept in heavy
peace, undisturbed by the harsh creaking of the sagging floor beneath
its double burden.  I put the fur cap on the grotesque, nodding dead
head, and, pushing a chair toward the wall with my foot, mounted it and
managed with a great effort to squeeze through the hole, pulling up the
body with me as I did so.

Then I felt with my foot for the little platform at the top of the iron
stairs outside, found it, and dropped.  Afterward I dragged the
dreadful burden down from the hole.

I had not known that I was strong before, and I do not understand now
how I managed to accomplish my wretched task.

I carried the dead man all the way down the fire-escape, clinging and
straining against the rotting, rusting bars, which bent and cracked
beneath my weight and seemed about to break and drag down the entire
structure from the wall.

I hardly paused at the platforms outside the successive stories.  The
weather was growing very cold, a storm was coming up, and the wind
soughed and whined dismally around the eaves.

I reached the bottom at last and rested for a moment.

At the back of the house was a little vacant space, filled with heaps
of debris from the demolished portions of the building and with refuse
which had been dumped there by tenants who had left and had never been
removed.  This yard was separated only by a rotting fence with a single
wooden rail from a small blind alley.

The alley had run between rows of stables in former days when this was
a fashionable quarter, but now these were mostly unoccupied, save for a
few more pretentious ones at the lower end, which were being converted
into garages.

Everywhere were heaps of brick, piles of rain-rotted wood, and
rubbish-heaps.

I took up my burden and placed it at the end of the alley, covering it
roughly with some old burlap bags which lay there.  I thought it safe
to assume that the police would look upon the dead man as the victim of
some footpad.  It was only remotely possible that suspicion would be
directed against any occupant of any of the houses bordering on the
_cul-de-sac_.

I did not search the dead man's pockets.  I cared nothing who he was,
and did not want to know.  My sole desire was to acquit Jacqueline of
his death in the world's eyes.

That he had come deservedly by it I was positive.  I was her sole
protector now, and I felt a furious resolve that no one should rob me
of her.

The ground was as hard as iron, and I was satisfied that my footsteps
had left no track; there would be snow before morning, and if my feet
had left any traces these would be covered effectively.

Four o'clock was striking while I was climbing back into the room
again.  Jacqueline lay on the bed in the same position; she had not
stirred during that hour.  While she slept I set about the completion
of my task.

I took the knife from the floor where I had flung it, scrubbed it, and
placed it in my suit-case.  Then I scrubbed the floor clean, afterward
rubbing it with a soiled rag to make its appearance uniform.

I washed my hands, and thought I had finally removed all traces of the
affair; but, coming back, I perceived something upon the floor which
had escaped my notice.  It was the leather collar of the Eskimo dog,
with its big silver studs and the maker's silver name-plate.

All this while the animal had remained perfectly quiet in the room
crouching at Jacqueline's feet and beside the bed.  It had not
attempted to molest me, as I had feared might be the case during the
course of my gruesome work.

I came to the conclusion that there might have been a struggle; that it
had run to its mistress's assistance, and that the collar had been torn
from it by the dead man.

My first thought was to put the collar back upon the creature's neck;
but then I came to the conclusion that this might possibly serve as a
means of identification.  And it was essential that no one should be
able to identify the dog.

So I picked the collar up and carried it into the next room and held it
under the light of the incandescent gas-mantle.  The letters of the
maker's name were almost obliterated, but after a careful study I was
able to make them out.  The name was Maclay & Robitaille, and the place
of manufacture Quebec.  This confirmed my belief concerning
Jacqueline's nativity.

I pried the plate from the leather and slipped it into my pocket.  I
put the broken collar into my suitcase, together with the dagger, and
then I set about packing my things for the journey which we were to
undertake.

I had always accustomed myself to travel with a minimum of baggage, and
the suit-case, which was a roomy one, held all that I should need at
any time.  When I had finished packing I went back to Jacqueline and
sat beside her while she slept.  As I sat dawn I heard a city clock
strike five.

In a little while it would begin to lighten, and the advent of the day
filled me with a sort of terror.

I watched the sleeping girl.  Who was she?  How could she sleep calmly
after that night's deed?  The mystery seemed unfathomable; the girl
alone in the city, the robbers, the dog, the dead man, and the one who
had escaped me.

Jacqueline's bag lay on the bureau and disgorging bills.  There were
rolls and rolls of them--eight thousand dollars did not seem too much.

Besides these, the bag contained the usual feminine properties: a
handkerchief, sachet-bag, a pocket mirror, and some thin papers, coated
with rice-powder.

The thought crossed my mind that the bills might be counterfeit, and I
picked one up and looked carefully at it, comparing it with one from my
own pocketbook.  But I was soon satisfied that they were real.  Well--I
turned back to Jacqueline, ashamed of the suspicion that had crossed my
mind.

Her soft brown hair streamed over the pillow and hung down toward the
floor, a heavy mass, uncoiled from the wound braids upon her neck.  Her
breast rose and fell evenly with her breathing.  She looked even
younger than on the preceding evening.  I was sure now that she was
innocent of evil, and my unworthy thoughts made me ashamed.  Her
outstretched arm was extended beyond the edge of the bed.

I raised her hand and held in it my own, and I sat thus until the room
began to lighten, watching her all the while.

It was strange that as I sat there I began to grow comforted.  I looked
on her as mine.  When I had kissed her hands I had forgotten the ring
upon her finger; and now, holding that hand in mine and running my
fingers round and round the circlet of gold, I was not troubled at all.
I could not think of her as any other man's.  She was mine--Jacqueline.

Presently she stirred, her eyes opened, and she sat up.  I placed a
pillow at her back.  She gazed at me with apathy, but there was also
recognition in her look.

"Do you know me, Jacqueline?" I asked.

"Yes, Paul," she answered.

"Your friend?"

"My friend, Paul."

"Jacqueline, I am going to take you home," I said, hoping that she
would tell me something, but I dared ask her no more.  I meant to take
her to Quebec and make inquiries there.  Thus I hoped to learn
something of her, even if the sight of the town did not awaken her
memories.

"I am going to take you home, Jacqueline," I repeated.

"Yes, Paul," she answered in that docile manner of hers.

"It is lucky you have your furs, because the winter is cold where your
home is."

"Yes, Paul," she repeated as before, and a few more probings on my part
convinced me that she remembered nothing at all.  Her mind was like a
person's newly awakened in a strange land.  But this state brought with
it no fear, only a peaceful quietude and faith which was very touching.

"We have forgotten a lot of things that troubled us, haven't we, Paul?"
she asked me presently.  "But we shall not care, since we have each
other for friends.  And afterwards perhaps we shall pick them up again.
Do you not think so, Paul?"

"Yes, Jacqueline," I answered.

"If we remembered now the memory of them might make us unhappy," she
continued wistfully.  "Do you not think so, Paul?"

"Yes, Jacqueline."

There was a faint and vague alarm in her eyes which made me glad for
her sake that she did not know.

"Now, Jacqueline," I said, "we shall have to begin to make ready for
our journey."

I had just remembered that the storage company which was to warehouse
my few belongings was to call that day.  The van would probably be at
the house early in the morning, and it was essential that we should be
gone before it arrived.

Fortunately I had arranged to leave the door unlocked in case my
arrangements necessitated my early departure, and this was understood,
so that my absence would cause no surprise.

I showed Jacqueline the bathroom and drew the curtains.  Then I went
into the kitchenette and made coffee on the gas range, and, since it
was too early for the arrival of my morning loaf, which was placed just
within the street door by the baker's boy every day, I made some toast
and buttered it.

I remember reflecting, with a relic of my old forced economy, how
fortunate it was that my pound of butter had just lasted until the
morning when I was to break up housekeeping.

When I took in the breakfast Jacqueline was waiting for me, looking
very dainty and charming.  She was hungry, too, also a good sign.

She did not seem to understand that there was anything strange in the
situation in which we found ourselves.  I did not know whether this was
due to her mental state or to that strange unsophistication which I had
already observed in her.  At any rate, we ate our breakfast together as
naturally as though we were a married couple of long standing.

After the meal was ended, and we had fed the dog, Jacqueline insisted
on washing the dishes, and I showed her the kitchenette and let her do
so, though I should never have need for the cheap plates and cups again.

"Now, Jacqueline, we must go," I said.

I placed her neckpiece about her.  I closed her bag, stuffing the bills
inside, and hung it on her arm.  I could not resist a smile to see the
little pad covered with its maze of figures among the rolls of money.
I was afraid that the sight of it would awaken her memories, but she
only looked quietly at it and put it away.

I wanted her to let me bank her money for her, but did not like to ask
her.  However, of her own account she took out the bills and handed
them to me.

"What a lot of money I have," she said.  "I hardly thought there was so
much money in the world, Paul."

It was past eight when we left the house.  I carried my suit-case and,
stopping at a neighbouring express office, had it sent to the Grand
Central station.  And then I decided to take the dog to the animal's
home.

I did not like to do so, but was afraid, in the necessity of protecting
Jacqueline, that its presence might possibly prove embarrassing, so I
took it there and left it, with instructions that it was to be kept
until I sent for it.  I paid a small sum of money and we departed,
Jacqueline apparently indifferent to what I had done, though the
animal's distress at being parted from her disturbed my conscience a
good deal.

Still it seemed the only thing to do under our circumstances.

Quebec, then, was my objective, and with no further clue than the
dog-collar.  There were two trains, I found, at three and at nine.  The
first, which I proposed to take, would bring us to our destination soon
after nine the next day, but our morning was to be a busy one, and it
would be necessary to make our preparations quickly.

A little snow was on the ground, but the sun shone brightly, and I felt
that the shadows of the night lay behind us.




CHAPTER IV

SIMON LEROUX

With Jacqueline's arm drawn through mine I paid a visit to the bank in
which I had deposited my legacy, and drew out fifteen hundred dollars,
next depositing Jacqueline's money to my own account.  It amounted to
almost exactly eight thousand dollars.

The receiving teller must have thought me an eccentric to carry so
large a sum, and I know he thought that Jacqueline and I had just been
married, for I saw him smile over the entry that he made in my bank
book.

I wanted to deposit her money in her own name, but this would have
involved inquiries and explanations which I was not in a position to
satisfy.  So there was nothing to do but deposit it in my own, and
afterward I could refund it to her.

I said that the receiving teller smiled--he wore that indescribable
congratulatory look with which it is the custom to favor the newly
married.

In fact, we were exactly like a honeymoon couple.  Although I
endeavored to maintain an air of practical self-assurance there was now
a new shyness in her manner, an atmosphere of undefinable but very real
sweetness in the relationship between us which set my heart hammering
at times when I looked at her flushed cheeks and the fair hair, blown
about her face, and hiding the glances which she stole timidly at me.

It was like a honeymoon departure, only with another man's wife; and
that made the sentiment more elevated and more chivalrous, for it set a
seal of honour on me which must remain unbroken till the time arrived.

I wondered, as we strolled up Fifth Avenue together, how much she knew,
what she remembered, and what thoughts went coursing through her head.
That child-like faith of hers was marvellously sweet.  It was an
innocent confidence, but it was devoid of weakness.  I believed that
she was dimly aware that terrible things lay in the past and that she
trusted to her forgetfulness as a shield to shelter not only herself
but me, and would not voluntarily recall what she had forgotten.

It was necessary to buy her an outfit of clothes, and this problem
worried me a good deal.  I hardly knew the names of the things she
required.

I believe now that I had absurd ideas as to the quantity and
consistency of women's garments.  I was afraid that she would not know
what to buy; but, as the morning wore away, I realized that her mental
faculties were not dimmed in the least.

She observed everything, clapped her hands joyously as a child at the
street sights and sounds, turned to wonder at the elevated and at the
high buildings.  I ventured, therefore, upon the subject that was
perplexing me.

"Jacqueline," I said, "you know that you will require an outfit of
clothes before we start for your home.  Not too many things, you know,"
I continued cautiously, "but just enough for a journey."

"Yes, Paul," she answered.

"How much money shall I give you, Jacqueline?"

"Fifty dollars?" she inquired.

I gave her a hundred, and took ridiculous delight in it.

We entered a large department store, and I mustered up enough courage
to address the young woman who stood behind the counter that displayed
the largest assortment of women's garments.

"I want a complete outfit for--for this lady," I stammered.  "Enough
for,"--I hesitated again--"a two weeks' journey."

The young woman smiled in a very pleasant way, and two others, who were
near enough to have overheard, turned and smiled also.

"Bermuda or Niagara Falls?" asked the young woman.

"I beg your pardon?" I inquired, conscious that my face was
insufferably hot.

"If you are taking _madame_ to Bermuda she will naturally require
cooler clothing than if you are taking her to Niagara Falls," the young
woman explained, looking at me with benevolent patience.  And seeing
that I was wholly disconcerted she added:

"Perhaps _madame_ might prefer to make her own selection."

As I stood in the centre of the store, apparently a stumbling block to
every shopper, Jacqueline flitted here and there, until a comfortable
assortment of parcels was accumulated upon the counter.

"Where shall I send them, _madame_?" inquired the saleswoman.

There was a suit-case to be bought, so I had them transferred to the
trunk and leather-goods department, where I bought a neat sole-leather
suit-case which, at Jacqueline's practical suggestion, was changed for
a lighter one of plaited straw.

After that I abstained from misdirecting my companion's activities.

And everybody addressed her as _madame_, and everybody smiled on us,
and sometimes I reflected miserably upon the wedding ring, and then
again smiled too and forgot, watching Jacqueline's eager face flushed
with delight as she looked at the pretty things in the store.

I had meditated taking her into Tiffany's to buy her a trinket of some
kind.  A ring seemed forbidden, and I was weighing the choice between a
bracelet and a watch, my desire to acquire a whole counter of trinkets
rapidly getting the better of my judgment, when something happened
which put the idea completely out of my head.

It was while Jacqueline was examining the suitcases that my attention
was drawn to a tall, elderly man with a hard, drawn, and deeply lined
weather-beaten face, and wearing a massive fur overcoat, open in front,
who was standing in the division between the trunk department and that
adjoining it, immediately behind Jacqueline.  He was looking at me with
an unmistakable glance of recognition.

I knew that I had seen him several times before, but, though his
features were familiar, I had forgotten his name.

In fact, I had seen him only a week before, but the events of the past
night had made a week seem like a week of years.  I stared at him and
he stared back at me, and made an urgent sign to me.

Keeping an eye on Jacqueline, and not losing sight of her at any time,
I followed the tall man.  As I neared him my remembrance of him grew
stronger.  I knew that powerful, slouching gait, that heavy tread.
When he turned round I had his name on my lips.

It was Simon Leroux.

"So you've got her!" he began in a hoarse, forcible whisper.  "Where
did you pick her up?  I was hurrying away from Tom's office when I
happened to see you two entering Mischenbusch's."

I remembered then that the office in which I had drudged was only a
couple of blocks away.  I made no answer, but waited for him to lead
again--and I was thinking hard.

"There's the devil to pay!" he went on in his execrable accent.  "Louis
came on posthaste, as you know, and he hasn't turned up this morning
yet.  Ah, I always knew Tom was close, but I never dreamed _you_ knew
anything.  When I used to see sitting near the door in his office
writing in those _sacre_ books I thought you were just a clerk.  And
you were in the know all the time, you were!  You know what happened
last night?" he continued, looking furtively around.

"It was an unfortunate affair," I said guardedly.

"Unfortunate!" he repeated, staring at me out of his bloodshot eyes.
"It was the devil, by gosh!  Who was he?"

His face was fiery red, and he cast so keen a look at me that I almost
thought he had discovered he was betraying himself.

"It was lucky I was in New York when Louis wired us she had flown," he
continued--I omit the oaths which punctuated his phrases.  "Lucky I had
my men with me, too.  I didn't think I'd need them here, but I'd
promised them a trip to New York--and then comes Louis's wire.  I put
them on the track.  I guessed she's go to Daly's--old Duchaine was mad
about that crazy system of his, and had been writing to him.

"He used to know Daly when they were young men together at Saratoga and
Montreal, and in Quebec, in the times when they had good horses and
high-play there.  I tell you it was ticklish.  There was millions of
dollars worth of property walking up Broadway, and they'd got her, with
a taxi waiting near by, when that devil's fool strolls up and draws a
crowd.  If I'd been there I'd have----"

A string of vile expletives followed his last remark.

"They got on his track and followed them to the Merrimac," he
continued.  "And they never came out.  They waited all night till nine
this morning, and they never came out.  My God, I thought her a good
girl--it's awful!  Who was he?  Say, how much do you know?"

His face was dripping with sweat, and he shot an awful look at
Jacqueline as she bent over the suit-case.  I could hardly keep my
hands off him, but Jacqueline's need was too great for me to give vent
to my passion.

I remembered now that, after sending Jacqueline to the clerk's desk
alone, she had gone to a side entrance and I had joined her there and
left the hotel with her in that fashion.  At any rate, Simon's words
showed me that his hired men were not acquainted with the rest of the
night's work.

I gathered from what he had said that the possession of Jacqueline was
vitally important both to Leroux and to Tom Carson, for some reason
connected with the Northern Exploitation Company, and that they had
endeavoured to kidnap her and hold her till the man Louis arrived to
advise them.

"How much do you know?" hissed Simon at me.

"Leroux," I said, "I'm not going to tell you anything.  You will
remember that I was employed by Mr. Carson."

"Ain't I as good as Carson?  What are you going to do with her?"

"You'd better go back to the office and wait, unless you want to spoil
the game by letting her see you," I said.

I was sure he was hiding from her intentionally, and I could see that
he believed I was working for Carson, for though he scowled fearfully
at me he seemed impressed by my words.

"I don't know whether Tom's running straight or not," he said huskily;
"but let me tell you, young man, it'll pay you to keep in with me, and
if you've got any price, name it!"

He shook his heavy fist over me--I believe the clerks thought he was
going to strike me, for they came hurrying toward us.  But I saw
Jacqueline approaching, and, without another word, Leroux turned away.

Jacqueline caught sight of his retreating figure and her eyes widened.
I thought I saw a shadow of fear in them.  Then the memory was effaced
and she was smiling again.

I instructed the store to call a messenger and have the suit-case taken
at once to the baggage-room in the Grand Central station.

"Now, Jacqueline, I'm going to take you to lunch," I said.  "And
afterward we will start for home."

Outside the store I looked carefully around and espied Leroux almost
immediately lighting a cigar in the doorway of a shop.  I hit upon a
rather daring plan to escape him.

Carson's offices were in a large modern building, with many elevators
and entrances.  I walked toward it with Jacqueline, being satisfied
that Leroux was following us; entered about twenty-five yards before
him, and ascended in the elevator, getting off, however, on the floor
above that on which the offices were.

I was satisfied that Leroux would follow me a minute later, under the
impression that we had gone to the Northern Exploitation Company, and
so, after waiting a minute or two, I took Jacqueline down in another
elevator, and we escaped through the front entrance and jumped into a
taxicab.

I was satisfied that I had thrown Leroux off the scent, but I took the
precaution to stop at a gunsmith's shop and purchase a pair of
automatic pistols and a hundred cartridges.  The man would not sell
them to me there on account of the law, but he promised to put them in
a box and have them delivered at the station, and there, in due course,
I found them.

But I was very uneasy until we found ourselves in the train.  And then
at last everything was accomplished--our baggage upon the seats beside
us and our berths secured.  At three precisely the train pulled out,
and Jacqueline nestled down beside me, and we looked at each other and
were happy.

And then, at the very moment when the wheels began to revolve, Leroux
stepped down from a neighbouring train.  As he passed our window he
espied us.

He started and glared, and then he came racing back toward us, shaking
his fists and yelling vile expletives.  He tried to swing himself
aboard in his fury despite the fact that the doors were all shut.  A
porter pushed him back and the last I saw of him he was still pursuing
us, screaming with rage.

I knew that he would follow on the nine o'clock train, reaching Quebec
about five the following afternoon.  That gave us five hours' grace.
It was not much, but it was something to have Jacqueline safe with me
even until the morrow.

I turned toward her, fearful that she had recognized the man and
realized the situation.  But she was smiling happily at my side, and I
was confident then that, by virtue of that same mental inhibition, she
had neither seen nor heard the fellow.

"Paul, it is _bon voyage_ for both of us," she said.

"Yes, my dear."

She looked at me thoughtfully a minute.

"Paul, when we get home----"

"Jacqueline?"

"I do not know," she said, putting her palms to her head.  "Perhaps I
shall remember then.  But you--you must stay with me, Paul."

Her lips quivered slightly.  She turned her head away and looked out of
the window at the horrible maze of houses in the Bronx and the
disfiguring sign-boards.

New York was slipping away.  All my old life was slipping away like
this--and evil following us.  I slipped one of the automatics out of my
suit-case into my pocket and swore that I would guard Jacqueline from
any shadow of harm.

Each minute that I spent with her increased my passion for her.  I had
ceased to have illusions on that score.  One question recurred to my
mind incessantly.  Could she be ignorant that she had a husband
somewhere?  Would she tell me--or was this the chief of the memories
that she had laid aside?

I opened one of the newspapers that I had bought at the station
bookstand, dreading to find in flaring letters the headlines announcing
the discovery of the body.

I found the announcement--but in small type.  The murder was ascribed
to a gang battle--the man could not be identified, and apparently both
police and public considered the affair merely one of those daily
slayings that occur in that city.

Another newspaper devoted about the same amount of space to the
account, but it published a photograph of the dead man, taken in the
alley, where, it appeared, the reporter had viewed the body before it
had been removed.  The photograph looked horribly lifelike.  I cut it
out and placed it in my pocketbook.

For the present I felt safe.  I believed the affair would be forgotten
soon.  And meanwhile here was Jacqueline.

I turned toward her.  She was asleep at my side, and her head drooped
on my shoulder.  We sat thus all the afternoon, while the city
disappeared behind us, and we passed through Connecticut and approached
the Vermont hills.

Then we had a gay little supper in the dining car.  Afterward I walked
to the car entrance and flung the broken dog collar away--across the
fields.  That was the last link that bound us to the past.

Then the berths were lowered and made up; and fastening from my upper
place the curtain which fell before Jacqueline's, I knew that, for one
night more, at least, I held her in safe ward.




CHAPTER V

M. LE CURE

The very obvious decision at which I arrived after a night of
cogitation in my berth was that Jacqueline was to pass as my sister.  I
explained my plan to her at breakfast.

There had been the examination of baggage at the frontier and the
tiresome change to a rear car in the early morning, and most of us were
heavy-eyed, but she looked as fresh and charming as ever in her new
waist of black lace and the serge skirt which she had bought the day
before.  It seemed impossible to realize that I was really seated
opposite her in the dining car, talking amid the punctuating chatter of
a party of red-cheeked French-Canadian school children who had come on
the train at Sherbrooke, bound for their home on the occasion of the
approaching Christmas holidays.

"You see, Jacqueline," I explained, "it will look strange our
travelling together, unless some close relationship is supposed to
exist between us.  I might subject you to embarrassment--so I shall
call you my sister, Miss Hewlett, and you will call me your brother
Paul."  And I handed her my visiting card, because she had never heard
my surname before.

"I shall be glad to think of you as my brother Paul," she answered,
looking at the card.  She held it in her right hand, and it was not
until the middle of the meal that the left hand came into view.

Then I discovered that she had taken off her wedding ring.

I wondered what thought impelled her to do this, whether it was
coquetry or the same instinct which seemed to interpret the situation
at all times perfectly, though it never welled up into her
consciousness.

We sped northward all that morning, stopping at many little wayside
stations, and as we rushed along beside the ice-bound St. Francis the
air ever grew colder, and the land, deep in snow, and the tall pines,
white with frost, looked like a picture on a Christmas card.

At last the St. Lawrence appeared, covered with drifting floes; the
Isle of Orleans, with the Falls of Montmorency behind it; the ascending
heights which slope up to the Chateau Frontenac, the fort-crowned
citadel, the long parapet, bristling with guns.

Then, after the ferry had transferred us from Levis we stood in Lower
Quebec.

We had hardly gone on board the ferryboat when an incident occurred
that greatly disturbed me.  A slightly built, well-dressed man, with a
small, upturned mustache and a face of notable pallor, passed and
repassed us several times, staring and smiling with cool effrontery at
both of us.

He wore a lambskin cap and a fur overcoat, and I could not help
associating him with the dead man, or avoiding the belief that he had
travelled north with us, and that Leroux had been to see him off at the
station.

I was a good deal troubled by this, but before I had decided to address
the fellow we landed, and a sleigh swept us up the hill toward the
chateau to the tune of jingling bells.  It was a strange wintry
scene--the low sleighs, their drivers wrapped in furs and capped in
bearskin, the hooded nuns in the streets, the priests, soldiers, and
ancient houses.  The air was keen and dry.

"This is Quebec, Jacqueline," I said.

I thought that she remembered unwillingly, but she said nothing.

I dared ask her no questions.  I fancied that each scene brought back
its own memories, but not the ideas associated with the chain of scenes.

We secured adjacent rooms at the chateau, and leaving Jacqueline to
unpack her things, and under instructions not to leave her room and
promising to return as soon as possible, I started out at once to find
Maclay & Robitaille's.

This proved a task of no great difficulty.  It was a little shop where
leather goods were sold, situated on St. Joseph Street.  A young man
with a dark, clean-shaven face, was behind the counter.  He came
forward courteously as I approached.

"I have come on an unusual mission," I began foolishly and stopped,
conscious of the inanity of this address.  What a stupid thing to have
said!  I must have aroused his suspicions immediately.

He begged my pardon and called a man from another part of the shop.
And that gave me my chance over again, for I realized that he had not
understood my English.

"Do you remember," I asked the newcomer, "selling a collar to a young
lady recently--no, some long time ago--a dog-collar, I mean?"

The proprietor shrugged his shoulders.  "I sell a good many dog-collars
during the year," he answered.

I took the plate from my pocket and set it down on the counter.  "The
collar was set with silver studs," I said.  "This was the plate."  Then
I remembered the name Leroux had used and flung it out at random.  "I
think it was for a Mlle. Duchaine," I added.

The shot went home.

"Ah, _monsieur_, now I remember perfectly," answered the proprietor,
"both from the unusual nature of the collar and from the fact that
there was some difficulty in delivering it.  There was no post-office
nearer the _seigniory_ than St. Boniface, where it lay unclaimed for a
long time.  I think _madamoiselle_ had forgotten all about the order.
Or perhaps the dog had died!"

"Where is this _seigniory_?"

"The _seigniory_ of M. Charles Duchaine?" he answered, looking
curiously at me.  "You are evidently a stranger, _monsieur_, or you
would have heard of it, especially now when people are saying that----"
He checked himself at this point.  "It is the oldest of the
_seigniories_," he continued.  "In fact, it has never passed out of the
hands of the original owners, because it is almost uninhabitable in
winter, except by Indians.  I understand that M. Duchaine has built
himself a fine chateau there; but then he is a recluse _monsieur_, and
probably not ten men have ever visited it.  But _mademoiselle_ is too
fine a woman to be imprisoned there long----"

"How could one reach the chateau?" I interpolated.

He looked at me inquiringly as though he wondered what my business
there could be.

"In summer," he replied, "one might ascend the Riviere d'Or in a canoe
for half the distance, until one reached the mountains, and then----"
He shrugged his shoulders.  "I do not know.  Possibly one would inquire
of the first trapper who passed in autumn.  In winter one would fly.
It is strange that so little is known of the _seigniory_, for they say
the Riviere d'Or----"

"The Golden River?"

"Has vast wealth in it, and formerly the Indians would bring gold-dust
in quills to the traders.  But many have sought the source of this
supply in past times and failed or died, and so----"  He shrugged his
shoulders again.

"You see, M. Duchaine is a hermit," he continued.  "Once, so my father
used to say, he was one of the gayest young men in Quebec.  But he
became involved in the troubles of 1867--and then his wife died, and so
lie withdrew there with the little _mademoiselle_--what was her name?"

He called his clerk.

"Alphonse, what is the name of that pretty daughter of M. Charles
Duchaine, of Riviere d'Or?" he asked.

"Annette," answered the man.  "No, Nanette.  No Janette.  I am sure it
ends with 'ette' or 'ine,' anyway."

"_Eh bien_, it makes no difference," said the proprietor, "because,
since she left the Convent of the Ursulines here in Quebec, where she
was educated, her father keeps her at the chateau, and you are not
likely to set eyes on M. Charles Duchaine's daughter."

A sudden stoppage in his flow of words, an almost guilty look upon his
face, as a new figure entered the little shop, directed my attention
toward the stranger.

He was an old man of medium size, very muscularly built, stout, and
with enormous shoulders.  He wore a priest's _soutane_, but he did not
look like a priest--he looked like a man's head on a bull body.  His
smooth face was tanned to the colour of an Indian's--his bright blue
eyes, almost concealed by their drooping, wrinkled lids, were piercing
in their scrutiny.

He wore a bearskin hat and furs of surprising quality.  It was not so
much his strange appearance that attracted my interest as the singular
look of authority upon the face, which was yet deeply lined about the
mouth, as though he could relax upon occasion and become the jolliest
of companions.

And he spoke a pure French, interspersed with words of an uncouth
patois, which I ascribed to long residence in some remote parish.

"_Bo'jour_, Pere Antoine," said the shopkeeper deferentially, fixing
his eyes rather timidly upon the old priest's face.

"_Eh bien_, who is this with whom thou gossipest concerning the
daughter of M. Duchaine?" inquired Father Antoine, looking at me keenly.

"Only a customer--a stranger, _monsieur_," answered the proprietor,
rubbing his hands together.  "He wishes to see--a dog collar, was it
not?" he continued, turning nervously toward me.

"You talk too much," said Pere Antoine roughly.  "Now, _monsieur_," he
said, addressing me in fair English, "what is the nature of your
business that it can possibly concern either M. Duchaine or his
daughter?  Perhaps I can inform you, since he is one of my
parishioners."

"My conversation was not with you, _monsieur le cure_," I answered
shortly, and left the shop.  I had ascertained what I needed to know,
and had no desire to enter into a discussion of my business with the
old man.

I had not gone three paces from the door, however, when the priest,
coming up behind me, placed a huge hand upon my shoulder and swung me
around without the least apparent effort.

"I do not know what your business is, _monsieur_," he said, "but if it
were an honest one you would state it to me.  If you wish to see M.
Duchaine I am best qualified to assist you to do so, since I visit his
chateau twice each year to carry the consolations of religion to him
and his people.  But if your business is not honest it will fail.  End
it then and return to your own country."

"I do not intend to discuss my business with you, _monsieur_," I
answered angrily.  It is humiliating to be in the physical grip of
another man, even though he be a priest.

He let me go and stood eyeing me with his keen gaze.  I jumped on a
passing car, but looking back, I saw him striding along behind it.  He
seemed to walk as quickly as the car went through the crowded street,
and with no effort.

When I got off in the neighbourhood of the Place d'Armes it was nearly
dark; but though I could not see the old man, I was convinced that he
was still following me.

I found Jacqueline in her room looking over her purchases, and took her
down to dinner.

And here I had another disconcerting experience, for hardly were we
seated when the inquisitive stranger whom I had seen at the ferry came
into the dining-room, and after a careful survey which ended as his
eyes fell on us, he took his seat at an adjacent table.

I could not but connect him with our presence there.

Leroux was due to arrive at any moment.  I realized that great issues
were at stake, that the man would never cease in his attempts to get
hold of Jacqueline.  Only when I had returned her to her father's house
would I feel safe from him.

The chateau was the worst place to have made my headquarters.  If I had
realized the man's persistence, perhaps I would have sought less
conspicuous lodgings.  Leroux's behaviour at the railroad station had
betrayed both an ungovernable temper when he was crossed, and to a
certain extent, fearlessness.

Nevertheless I believed him to have also an elemental cunning which
would dissuade him from violent measures so long as we were in Quebec.
I resolved, therefore, not to avoid him, but to await his lead.

After dinner I had some conversation with one of the hotel clerks.  I
discovered that the Riviere d'Or flowed into the Gulf of St. Lawrence
from the north, in the neighbourhood of Anticosti.

It was a small stream, and except for a postal station at its mouth
named St. Boniface, was little known, the only occupants of those parts
being trappers and Indians.

When I told the clerk that I had business at St. Boniface I think he
concluded that I represented an amalgamation of fishing interests, for
he became exceedingly communicative.

"You could hire dogs and a sleigh at St. Boniface for wherever your
final destination is," he said, "because the dog mail has been
suspended owing to the new government mail-boats, and the sleighs are
idle.  I think Captain Dubois would take you on his boat as far as that
point, and I believe he makes his next trip in a couple of days."

He gave me the captain's address, and I resolved to call on him early
the following day and make arrangements.

I was just turning away when I saw the inquisitive stranger leave the
smoking-room.  He crossed the hall and went out, not without bestowing
a long look on me.

"Who is that man?" I asked.

"Why, isn't he a friend of yours?" inquired the clerk.

"Only by the way he stares at me," I said.

"Well, he said he thought he knew you and asked me your name," the
clerk answered.  "He didn't give me his, and I don't think he has been
in here before."

I took Jacqueline for a stroll on the Terrace, and while we walked I
pondered over the problem.

The night was too beautiful for my depression of mind to last.  The
stars blazed brilliantly overhead; upon our left the faint outlines of
the Laurentians rose, in front of us the lights of Levis twinkled above
the frozen gulf.  There was a flicker of Northern Lights in the sky.

We paced the Terrace, arm in arm, from the statue of Champlain that
overlooks the Place d'Armes to the base of the mighty citadel, and
back, till the cold drove us in.

Jacqueline was very quiet, and I wondered what she remembered.  I
dreaded always awakening her memory lest, with that of her home, came
that other of the dead man.

Our rooms were on the side of the Chateau facing the town, and as we
passed beneath the arch I saw two men standing no great distance away,
and watching us, it seemed to me.

One wore the cassock of a priest, and I could have sworn that he was
Pere Antoine; the other resembled the inquisitive stranger.  As we drew
near they moved behind a pillar.  Thus, inexorably, the chase drew near.

My suspicions received confirmation a few minutes later, for we had
hardly reached our rooms, and I was, in fact, standing at the door of
Jacqueline's, bidding her good night, when a bellboy came along the
passage and announced that the gentleman whom I was expecting was
coming up the stairs.

I said good-night to Jacqueline and went into my room and waited.  I
had thought it would be the stranger, but it was the priest.

I invited him to enter, and he came in and stood with his fur cap on
his head, looking direfully at me.

"Well, _monsieur_, what is the purpose of this visit?" I asked.

"To tell you," he thundered, "that you must give up the unhappy woman
who has accompanied you here."

"That is precisely what I intend to do," I answered.

"To me," he said.  "Her husband----"

I felt my brain whirling.  I knew now that I had always cherished a
hope, despite the ring--what a fool I had been!

"I married them," continued Pere Antoine.

"Where is he?" I demanded desperately.

He appeared disconcerted.  I gathered from his stare that he had
supposed I knew.

"This is a Catholic country," he went on, more quietly.  "There is no
divorce; there can be none.  Marriage is a sacrament.  Sinning as she
is----"

I placed my hand on his shoulder.  "I will not hear any more," I said.
"Go!"  I pointed toward the door.

"I am going to take her away with me," he said, and crossing the
threshold into the corridor, placed one hand on the door of
Jacqueline's room.

I got there first.  I thrust him violently aside--it was like pushing a
monument; turned the key, which happily was still outside, and put it
in my pocket.

"I am ready to deal with her husband," I said.  "I am not ready to deal
with you.  Leave at once, or I will have you arrested, priest or no
priest."

He raised his arm threateningly.  "In God's name--" he began.

"In God's name you shall not interfere with me," I cried.  "Tell that
to your confederate, Simon Leroux.  A pretty priest you are!" I raged.
"How do I know she has a husband?  How do I know you are not in league
with her persecutors?  How do I know you are a priest at all?"

He seemed amazed at the violence of my manner.

"This is the first time my priesthood has been denied," he said
quietly.  "Well, I have offered you your chance.  I cannot use
violence.  If you refuse, you will bring your own punishment upon your
head, and hers on that of the unhappy woman whom you have led into sin."

"Go!" I shouted, pointing down the passage.

He turned and went, his _soutane_ sweeping against the door of
Jacqueline's room as he went by.  At the entrance to the elevator he
turned again and looked back steadily at me.  Then the door clanged and
the elevator went down.

I unlocked the door of Jacqueline's room.  I saw her standing at the
foot of the bed.  She was supporting herself by her hands on the brass
framework.  Her face was white.  As I entered she looked up piteously
at me.

"Who--was--that?" she asked in a frightened whisper.

"An impudent fellow--that is all, Jacqueline."

"I thought I knew his voice," she answered slowly.  "It made
me--almost--remember.  And I do not want to remember, Paul."

She put her arms about my neck and cried.  I tried to comfort her, but
it was a long time before I succeeded.

I locked her door on the outside, and that night I slept with the key
beneath my pillow.




CHAPTER VI

AT THE FOOT OF THE CLIFF

The next morning, after again cautioning Jacqueline not to leave her
room until I returned, I went to the house of Captain Dubois on Paul
Street, in the Lower Town.

I was admitted by a pleasant-looking woman who told me that the captain
would not be home until three in the afternoon, so I returned to the
chateau, took Jacqueline for a sleigh ride round the fortifications,
and delighted her, and myself also, by the purchase of two fur coats,
heavy enough to exclude the biting cold which I anticipated we should
experience during our journey.

In the afternoon I went back to Paul Street and found M. Dubois at
home.  He was a man of agreeable appearance, a typical Frenchman of
about forty-five, with a full face sparsely covered with a black beard
that was beginning to turn grey at the sides, and with an air of
sagacious understanding, in which I detected both sympathy and a
lurking humour.

When I explained that I wanted to secure two passages to St. Boniface,
his brows contracted.

"So you, too, are going to the Chateau Duchaine!" he exclaimed.  "Is
there not room for two more on the boat of Captain Duhamel?"

I disclaimed all knowledge of Duhamel, but he looked entirely
unconvinced.

"It is a pity, _monsieur_, that you are not acquainted with Captain
Duhamel," he said dryly, "because I cannot take you to St. Boniface.
But undoubtedly Captain Duhamel will assist you and your friend on your
way to the Chateau Duchaine."

"Why do you suppose that I am going to the Chateau Duchaine?" I
inquired angrily.

He flared up, too.  "_Diable_!" he burst out, "do you suppose all
Quebec does not know what is in the wind?  But since you are so
ignorant, _monsieur_, I will enlighten you.  We will assume, to begin
then, that you are not going to the chateau, but only to St. Boniface,
perhaps to engage in fishing for your support.  Eh, _monsieur_?"

Here he looked mockingly at my fur coat, which hardly bore out this
presumption of my indigence.

"_Eh bien_, to continue.  Let us suppose that the affairs of M. Charles
Duchaine have interested a gentleman of business and politics whom we
will call M. Leroux--just for the sake of giving him a name, you
understand," he resumed, looking at me maliciously.  "And that this M.
Leroux imagines that there is more than spruce timber to be found on
the seigniory.  _Bien_, but consider further that this M. Leroux is a
mole, as we call our politicians here.  It would not suit him to appear
openly in such an enterprise?  He would always work through his agents
in everything would he not being a mole?

"Let us say then that he arranges with a Captain Duhamel to convey his
party to St. Boniface to which point he will go secretly by another
route and that he will join them there and--in short, _monsieur_, take
yourself and your friend to the devil, for I won't give you passage."

His face was purple, and I assumed that he bore no love for Simon,
whose name seemed to be of considerable importance in Quebec.  I was
delighted at the turn affairs were taking.

"You have not a very kindly feeling for this mythical person whom we
have agreed to call Leroux," I said.

Captain Dubois jumped out of his chair and raised his arms passionately
above him.

"No, nor for any of his friends," he answered.  "Go back to him--for I
know he sent you to me--and tell him he cannot hire Alfred Dubois for
all the money in Canada."

"I am glad to hear you say that," I answered, "because Leroux is no
friend of mine.  Now listen to me, Captain Dubois.  It is true that I
am going to the chateau, if I can get there, but I did not know that
Leroux had made his arrangements already.  In brief, he is in pursuit
of me and I have urgent reasons for avoiding him.  My companion is a
lady----"

"Eh?" he exclaimed, looking stupidly at me.

"And I am anxious to take her to the chateau, where we shall be safe
from the man----"

"A lady!" exclaimed the captain.  "A young one?  Why didn't you tell me
so at first, _monsieur_?  I'll take you.  I will do anything for an
enemy of Leroux.  He put my brother in jail on a false charge because
he wouldn't bow to him--my brother died there, _monsieur_--that was his
wife who opened the door to you.  And the children, who might have
starved, if I had not been able to take care of them!  And he has tried
to rob me of my position, only it is a Dominion one--the rascal!"

The captain was becoming incoherent.  He drew his sleeve across his
eyes.

"But a lady!" he continued, with forced gaiety a moment later, "I do
not know your business, _monsieur_, but I can guess, perhaps----"

"But you must not misunderstand me," I interposed.  "She is not----"

"It's all right!" said the captain, slapping me upon the back.  "No
explanations!  Not a word, I assure you.  I am the most discreet of
men.  Madeleine!"

This last word was a deep-chested bellow, and in response a little girl
came running in, staggering under the weight of the captain's overcoat
of raccoon fur.

"That is my overcoat voice," he explained, stroking the child's head.
"My niece, _monsieur_.  The others are boys.  I wish they were all
girls, but God knows best.  And, you see, a man can save much trouble,
for by the tone in which I call Madeleine knows whether it is my
overcoat or my pipe or slippers that I want, or whether I am growing
hungry."

I thought that the captain's hunger voice must shake the rafters of the
old building.

"And now, _monsieur_," he continued seriously, when we had left the
house, "I am going to take you down to the pier and show you my boat.
And I will tell you as much as I know concerning the plans of that
scoundrel.  In brief, it is known that a party of his friends has been
quartered for some time at the chateau; they come and go, in fact, and
now he is either taking more, or the same ones back again, and God
knows why he takes them to so desolate a region, unless, as the rumour
is, he has discovered coal-fields upon the seigniory and holds M.
Duchaine in his power.  Well, _monsieur_, a party sails with Captain
Duhamel on tonight's tide, which will carry me down the gulf also.

"You see, _monsieur_," he continued, "it is impossible to clear the ice
unless the tide bears us down; but once the Isle of Orleans is past we
shall be in more open water and independent of the current.  Captain
Duhamel's boat is berthed at the same pier as mine upon the opposite
side, for they both belong to the Saint-Laurent Company, which leases
them in winter.

"We start together, then, but I shall expect to gain several hours
during the four days' journey, for I know the _Claire_ well, and she
cannot keep pace with my _Sainte-Vierge_.  In fact it was only
yesterday that the government arranged for me to take over the
_Sainte-Vierge_ in place of the _Claire_, which I have commanded all
the winter, for it is essential that the mails reach St. Boniface and
the maritime villages as quickly as possible.  So you must bring your
lady aboard the _Sainte-Vierge_ by nine to-night.

"I shall telegraph to my friend Danton at St. Boniface to have a sleigh
and dogs at your disposal when you arrive, and a tent, food, and
sleeping bags," continued Captain Dubois, "for it must be a hundred and
fifty miles from St. Boniface to the Chateau Duchaine.  It is not a
journey that a woman should take in winter," he added with a
sympathetic glance at me, "but doubtless your lady knows the way and
the journey well."

The question seemed extraordinarily sagacious; it threw me into
confusion.

"You see, M. Danton carried the mails by dog-sleigh before the
steamship winter mail service was inaugurated," he went on, "and now he
will be glad of an opportunity to rent his animals.  So I shall wire
him tonight to hold them for you alone, and shall describe you to him.
And thus we will check M. Leroux's designs, which have doubtless
included this point.  And so, with half a day's start, you will have
nothing to fear from him--only remember that he has no scruples.
Still, I do not think he will catch you and Mlle. Jacqueline before you
reach Chateau Duchaine," he ended, chuckling at his sagacity.

"Ah, well, _monsieur_, who else could your lady be?" he asked, smiling
at my surprise.  "I knew well that some day she must leave those wilds.
Besides, did I not convey her here from St. Boniface on my return, less
than a week ago, when she pleaded for secrecy?  I suspected something
agitated her then.  So it was to find a husband that she departed thus?
When she is home again, kneeling at her old father's feet, pleading for
forgiveness, he will forgive--have no fear, _mon ami_."

So Jacqueline had left her home not more than a week before!  And the
captain had no suspicion that she was married then!  Yet Pere Antoine
claimed to have performed the ceremony.

To whom?  And where was the man who should have stood in my place and
shielded her against Leroux?

I made Dubois understand, not without difficulty, that we were still
unmarried.  His face fell when he realized that I was in earnest, but
after a little he made the best of the situation, though it was evident
that some of the glamour was scratched from the romance in his opinion.

By now we had arrived at the wharf.  It was a short pier at the foot of
one of the numerous narrow streets that run down from the base of the
mighty cliff which ascends to the ramparts and Park Frontenac.  On
either side, wedged in among the floes, lay a small ship of not many
tons' burden--the _Claire_ and the _Sainte-Vierge_ respectively.  The
latter vessel lay upon our right as we approached the end of the wharf.

"Hallo!  Hallo, Pierre!" shouted Dubois in what must have resembled his
dinner voice, and a seaman with a short black beard came running up the
deck and stopped at the gangway.

"It is all right," said Dubois, after a few moments' conversation.
"Pierre understands all that is necessary, and he will tell the men.
And now I will show you the ship."

There was a small cabin for Jacqueline and another for myself
adjoining.  This accommodation had been built for the convenience of
the passengers whom the Saint-Laurent Company, though its boats were
built for freight, occasionally accepted during its summer runs.  I was
very well satisfied and inquired the terms.

"If it were not for the children there should be no terms!" exclaimed
the captain.  "But it is hard, _monsieur_, with prices rising and the
hungry mouths always open, like little birds."

He was overjoyed at the sight of the fifty dollars which I tendered
him.  However, my generosity was not wholly disingenuous.  I felt that
it would be wise to make one stanch friend in that unfriendly city; and
money does bind, though friendship exist already.

"By the way," I said, "do you know a priest named Pere Antoine?"

"An old man?  A strong old man?  Why, assuredly, _monsieur_," answered
the captain.  "Everybody knows him.  He has the parish of the Riviere
d'Or district, and the largest in Quebec.  As far as Labrador it is
said to extend, and he covers it all twice each year, in his canoe or
upon snowshoes.  A saint, _monsieur_, as not all of our priests are,
alas!  You will do well to make his acquaintance."

He placed one brawny hand upon my shoulder and swung me around.

"Now at last I understand!" he bellowed.  "So it is Pere Antoine who is
to make you and mademoiselle husband and wife!  And you thought to
conceal it from me, _monsieur_!" he continued reproachfully.

His good-humour being completely restored by this prospective
consummation of the romance, the captain parted from me on the wharf on
his way to the telegraph-office, repeating his instructions to the
effect that we were to be aboard the boat by nine, as he would not be
able to remain later than that hour on account of the tide.

It had grown dark long before and, looking at my watch, I was surprised
to see that it was already past six o'clock.  I had no time to lose in
returning to the chateau.

But though I could see it outlined upon the cliff, I soon found myself
lost among the maze of narrow streets in which I was wandering.  I
asked the direction of one or two wayfarers, but these were all men of
the labouring class, and their instructions, given in the provincial
patois, were quite unintelligible to me.

A man was coming up the street behind me, and I turned to question him,
but as I decreased my pace, he diminished his also, and when I
quickened mine, he went faster as well.  I began to have an uneasy
sense that he might be following me, and accordingly hastened onward
until I came to a road which seemed to lead up the hill toward the
ramparts.

The chateau now stood some distance upon my left, but once I had
reached the summit of the cliff it would only be a short walk away.

The road, however, led me into a blind alley, the farther extremity
being the base of the cliff; but another street emerged from it at a
right angle, and I plunged into this, believing that any of the byways
would eventually take me to the top of the acclivity.

As I entered this street I heard the footsteps behind me quicken and,
looking around, perceived that the man was close upon me.  He stopped
at the moment I did and disappeared in a small court.

There was nothing remarkable in this, only to my straining eyes he
seemed to bear a resemblance to the man with the patch whom I had
encountered at the corner of Sixth Avenue on that night when I met
Jacqueline.

I knew from Leroux's statement to me that the man had been a member of
his gang.  I was quite able to take care of myself under normal
circumstances.

But now--I was afraid.  The mighty cliff before me, the silence of the
deserted alleys in which I wandered helplessly, the thought of
Jacqueline alone, waiting anxiously for my return, almost unmanned me.
I felt like a hunted man, and my safety, upon which her own depended,
attained an exaggerated importance in my mind.

So I almost ran forward into the byway which seemed to lead toward the
summit, and as I did so I heard the footsteps close behind me again.

I had entered one of the narrowest streets I had ever seen, and the
most curious.  It was just wide enough to admit the passage of a sleigh
perhaps; the crumbling and dilapidated old houses, which seemed
deserted, were connected overhead by a succession of wooden bridges,
and those on my left were built into the solid rock, which rose sheer
overhead.

In front of me the alley seemed to widen.  I almost ran; but when I
reached it I found that it was merely a bend in the passage, and the
alley ran on straight as before.

On my left hand was a tiny unfenced courtyard, not more than six yards
in area, and I turned into this quickly and waited.  I was confident
that the bend in the street had hidden me from my pursuer and, as I
anticipated, he came on at a swifter rate.

He was abreast of me when I put out my hand and grasped him by the
coat, while with the other I felt in my pocket for my automatic pistol.

It was not there.  I had left it in the pocket of the overcoat which I
had changed at the furrier's shop and had sent to the chateau.  And I
was looking into the villainous face of the ruffian who had knocked me
down on Sixth Avenue.

"What are you following me for?" I cried furiously.

He wrenched himself out of my grasp and pulled a long knife from his
pocket.  I caught him by the wrist, and we wrestled to and fro upon the
snow.  He pummelled me about the face with his free hand, but though I
was no match for him in strength, he could not get the knife from me.
The keen steel slashed my fingers, but the thought of Jacqueline helped
me.

I got his hand open, snatched the knife, and flung it far away among
the stunted shrubs that clung to the cliffside.  And we stood watching
each other, panting.

He did not try to attack me again, but stood just out of my reach,
grinning diabolically at me.  His gaze shifted over my shoulder.
Instinctively I swung around as the dry snow crackled behind me.

I was a second too late, for I saw nothing but the looming figure of a
second ruffian and his upraised arm; then painless darkness seemed to
enfold me, and I was conscious of plunging down into a fathomless abyss.




CHAPTER VII

CAPTAIN DUBOIS

Clang!  Clang!

It sounded as though some titanic blacksmith were pounding on a mighty
anvil to a devil's chorus of laughter.  And I was bound to the steel,
and each blow awakened hideous echoes which went resounding through my
brain forever.

Clang!  Clang!

The blows were rhythmical, and there was a perceptible interval between
each one and the next; they were drawn out and intolerably slow, and
seemed to have lasted through uncountable eons.

I strove to free myself.  I knew that it was a dream from which I must
awaken, for the fate of the whole world depended on my awakening from
the bonds of sleep.

It would be so easy to sink down into a deeper slumber, where even the
clanging of the anvil beneath those hammer strokes would not longer be
heard; but against this was the imperative need to save--not the world
now, but----

The name was as sweet as honey upon my lips.  It was something worth
living for.  It was--Jacqueline!

The remembrance freed me.  Dimly consciousness began to return.  I knew
the hammering was my own heart, forcing the blood heavily through the
arteries of the brain.

That name--Annette--Jeannette--Jacqueline!

I had gone back to my rooms and saw a body upon the floor.  Jacqueline
had killed somebody, and I must save her!

All through the mist-wrapped borderland of life I heard her voice
crying to me, her need of me dragging me back to consciousness.  I
struggled up out of the pit, and I saw light.

Suddenly I realized that my eyes were wide open and that I was staring
at the moon over the housetops.  With consciousness came pain.  My head
throbbed almost unbearably, and I was stiff with cold.  I raised myself
weakly, and then I became aware that somebody was bending over me.

It was a roughly dressed, rough-looking denizen of the low quarter into
which I had strayed.  His arms were beneath my neck, raising my head,
and he was looking into my face with an expression of great concern
upon his own good-natured one.

"I thought you were dead!" I could make out amid the stream of his
dialect, but the remainder of his speech was beyond my understanding.

"Help me!" I muttered, reaching for his hand.

He understood the gesture, for he assisted me to my feet, and, after I
had leaned weakly against the wall of a house for a minute or two, I
found that I could stand unassisted.

I looked round in bewilderment.

"Where am I?" I asked, still bound by that first memory of New York.

"In Sous-le-Cap, _m'sieur_," answered the man.

I felt in my pocket for my watch and drew it out.  It was strange that
the men had not robbed me, but I suppose they had become terrified at
their work and had run off.  However, I did not think of that at the
time.

I think my action was an automatic one, the natural refuge for a
perplexed man.  But the sight of the time brought back my memory, and
the events of the day rushed back into my mind with a force that seemed
to send an accession of new strength through my limbs.

It was a few minutes past eight.  And the boat sailed at nine.  I must
have lain stunned in Sous-le-Cap Street for an hour and a half, at
least, and only the supreme necessity of awakening, realized through
unconsciousness, had saved me from dying under the snows.

I found that I could walk, and having explained to the man that I
wished to go to the chateau, was taken by him to the top of a winding
road near at hand, from which I could see my destination at no great
distance from me.

Dismissing my friendly guide, and sending him back rejoicing with
liberal largesse, I hurried as quickly as I could make my way along the
ramparts, past the frowning, ancient cannon skirting the park, until I
burst into the chateau at half past the hour.

I must have presented a dreadful spectacle, for my hair and collar were
matted with blood, and I saw the guests stare and shrink from me.  The
clerk came toward me and stopped me at the entrance to the elevator.

"Where as Miss Hewlett?" I gasped.

"Didn't you meet her?  She left here nearly an hour ago."

I caught him by the arm, and I think he imagined that I was going to
seize him by the throat also, for he backed away from me, and I saw a
look of fear come into his eyes.  The elevator attendant came running
between us.

"Your friend----" he began.

"My _friend_?" I cried.

"He came for her and said that you had met with an accident," the clerk
continued.  "She went with him at once.  He took her away in a sleigh.
I was sure that you had missed her when you came in."

But already I was half-way across the hall and running for the door.  I
raced wildly across the court and toward the terrace.

The meaning of the scheme was clear.  Jacqueline was on Captain
Duhamel's boat, which sailed at nine.  And only twenty minutes remained
to me.  If I had not had the good luck to meet Dubois!

I must have noticed a clock somewhere during the minute that I was in
the chateau, and though I had not been conscious of it, the after-image
loomed before my eyes.  As I ran now I could see a huge phantom clock,
the dial marked with enormous Roman letters, and the hands moving with
dreadful swiftness toward the hour of nine.

I had underestimated Leroux's shrewdness.  He must have telegraphed
instructions from New York before my train was out of the county,
secured the boat, laid his plans during his journey northward, and had
me struck down while Jacqueline was stolen from my care.  And he had
spared no details, even to enlisting the aid of Pere Antoine.

If he had known that my destination was the same as his, he might have
waited.  But it was not the character of the man to wait, any more than
it was to participate personally in his schemes.  He worked through
others, sitting back and pulling the strings, and he struck, each blow
on time.

I ought to have known that.  I should have read him better.  I had
always dawdled.  I trusted to the future, instead of acting.  What
chance had I against a mind like his?

I was a novice at chess, pitting myself against a master at the game.

I must have been running aimlessly up and down the terrace, blindly
searching for a road down to the lower town, for a man seized me by the
sleeve, and I looked into the face of the hotel clerk again.  He seemed
to realize that more was the matter even than my appearance indicated,
for he asked no questions, but apparently divined my movements.

"This way!" he said, and hurried me to a sort of subway entrance, and
down a flight of steps.  Before me I saw the turnstile which led to a
cable railway.  He paid my fare and thrust me into a car.  A boy came
to close the latticed door.

"Wait!" I gasped.  "Who was it that called?"

"The man with the mustache who asked for you--about whom you inquired."

I turned away.  I had thought it was Leroux.  Of course it had not been
he.

The car glided down the cliff, and stopped a few seconds later, I
emerged through another turnstile and found myself in the lower town
again at the foot of the precipice, above which rose the chateau with
its imposing facade, the ramparts, and the towering citadel.

The hands of the phantom clock pointed to ten minutes of nine.  But I
knew the gulf lay before me at the end of the short, narrow street that
led down to it, up which I had passed two hours before upon that
journey which so nearly ended in the snow-drifts of Souse-le-Cap.

I reached the wharf and raced along the planks.  I was in time,
although the engines were throbbing in the _Sainte-Vierge_.  But it was
not she, but the dark _Claire_ I sought at that moment, and I dashed
toward her.

A man barred my approach.  He caught me in his strong arms and held me
fast.  I dash my fists against his face, but he would not let me go.

"Are you mad, _monsieur_?" he burst out as I continued to struggle.
And then I recognized my captor as Captain Dubois.

"Jacqueline is on the _Claire_!" I cried, trying to make him
understand.  "They took her there.  They----"

"It is all right," answered Dubois, holding me with one hand, while
with the other he wiped a blood drop from his lip where I had struck
him.  "It is all right.  I have her."

I stared wildly at him.  "She is on the _Claire_!" I cried again.

"No, _mon ami_.  She is aboard the _Sainte-Vierge_," replied Dubois,
chuckling, "and if you wish to accompany _mademoiselle_ you must come
with me at once, for we are getting up steam."

I could not believe him.  I thought that Leroux had tampered with the
honest man.  It was not until he had taken me, half forcibly, aboard,
and opened the cabin door, that I saw her.  She was seated upon her
berth, and she rose and came toward me with a glad little cry.

"Jacqueline!" I cried, and clasped her in my arms for joy, and quite
forgot.

A dancing shadow fell upon the wall behind the oil-lamp.  The honest
captain was rubbing his hands in the doorway and chuckling with delight.

"It is all right, it is all right; excuse me, _monsieur_," he said, and
closed the door on us.  But I called him, and he returned, not very
reluctantly.

"What has happened, captain?" I asked.  "You are not going to leave me
in suspense?"

"But what has happened to you, _monsieur_?" he asked, with great
concern, as he saw the blood on my coat-collar, "You have met with an
accident?"

Jacqueline cried out and ran for water, and made me sit down, and began
bathing my head.  I contrived to whisper something of what had occurred
during the moments when Jacqueline flitted to and fro.  Dubois swore
roundly.

"It is my fault, _monsieur_," he said.  "I should have known.  I should
have accompanied you home.  It would be a tough customer who would
venture to meddle with Alfred Dubois!  But I was anxious to get to the
telegraph office to inform M. Danton of your coming.  And I suspected
something, too, for I knew that Leroux had something more in his mind
than simply to convey some of his men to St. Boniface at such expense.

"So as soon as I had finished telegraphing I hurried home and bade
adieu to Marie and the little Madeline and the two nephews, and then I
came back to the boat--and that part I shall tell you later, for
_mademoiselle_ knows nothing of the plot against her, and has been
greatly distressed for you.  So it shall be understood that you fell
down and hurt your head on the ice--eh?"

I agreed to this.  "But what did she think?" I asked, as Jacqueline
went back for some more water.

"That you had sent her to the _Sainte-Vierge_," he answered, "and that
you were to follow her here--as you did.  Even now the nephews are
searching the lower town for you."

"But if I had not come before nine?"

"I should have waited all night, _monsieur_, even though I had lost my
post for it," he said explosively, and I reached out and gripped his
hand.

"You may not have seen the baggage here," continued the captain slyly.

I glanced round me.  Upon the floor stood the two suit-cases, which
should have been in our rooms in the chateau, and Jacqueline was busily
tearing up some filmy material in hers for bandages.

I looked at Dubois in astonishment.

"Ah, _monsieur_, I sent for those," he said, "and paid your bill also.
When I fight Simon Leroux I do not do things by halves.  You see,
_monsieur_, wise though he is, there are other minds equal to his own,
and since he killed my brother, I----"

Here he nearly broke down, and I looked discreetly away.

"One question of curiosity, _monsieur_, if it is permissible," he said
a little later.  "Why does Leroux wish so much to stop your marriage
with _mademoiselle_ that he is ready to stoop to assassination and
kidnapping?"

My heart felt very warm toward the good man.  I knew how that loose end
in the romance that he had built up troubled him.  And, though I hardly
knew myself, I must give him some satisfactory solution of his problem.

"Because he is himself in love with her," I said.

The captain clenched his fists.  "God forbid!" he muttered.  "They say
his wife died of a broken heart.  Ah, _monsieur_, swear to me that this
shall never come about, that mademoiselle become his wife.  Swear it to
me, _mon ami_!"

I swore it, and we shook hands again.  I was sorry for my deception
then, and afterward I had occasion to remember it.

Five minutes later we had cast off, and the _Sainte-Vierge_ steamed
slowly through the drift ice that packed the gulf.  There were no
lights upon the _Claire_, and I surmised that the conspirators were
keeping quietly hidden in expectation of Jacqueline's arrival, though
how Dubois had outwitted them I could not at the time surmise.

However, there was little doubt that once the trick was discovered the
_Claire_ would follow on our heels.

Standing on deck, I watched the lights of Levis and Quebec draw
together as we steamed eastward.  I cast a last look at the chateau and
the ramparts.  I felt it would be many days before I set eyes on them
again.

Then I sought my cabin and fell asleep, dreaming of Jacqueline.




CHAPTER VIII

DREAMS OF THE NIGHT

Jacqueline and I were together, the only human beings within a score of
miles.  We were seated side by side in the sleigh at which the dogs
pulled steadily.

We glided with slow, easy monotony along the snow-covered trail,
through the sparse forest that fringed the ice-bound waters of the
Riviere d'Or.  Seen through our tinted snow-glasses, the landscape was
a vast field of palest blue, dotted with scattered clusters of spruce
and pine trees.

The mystery of Jacqueline's rescue by Captain Dubois had been a simple
one.  The young man with the mustache was a certain Philippe Lacroix,
well known to Dubois, a member of a good family, but of dissolute
habits--just such a one as Leroux found it convenient to attach to his
political fortunes by timely financial aid.

Having acquired power over him, Leroux was in this way enabled to
obtain political influence through his family connections.

There was no doubt that he had been in New York with Leroux, and that
they had hatched the plot to kidnap Jacqueline after I had been struck
down.

Fortunately for us, Lacroix, ignorant, as was Leroux himself, that the
two ships had exchanged roles and duties, took Jacqueline aboard the
_Sainte-Vierge_, where Captain Dubois, who was waiting in anticipation
of just such a scheme, seized him and marched him at pistol point to
the house on Paul Street, in which Lacroix was kept a prisoner by
friends of Dubois until the _Sainte-Vierge_ had sailed.

The gulf was fairly free from ice, and our journey to St. Boniface,
where we arrived on the fifth morning after our departure from Quebec,
had been an uneventful one.  We had not seen the smoke of the _Claire_
behind us at any period during the voyage, and Dubois had not spared
his coal to show the other vessel his heels.

He left us at St. Boniface with a final caution against Leroux, and
proceeded along the shore with his bags of mail; but first he had a
satisfactory conversation with M. Danton concerning us.

I had given Dubois to understand that Jacqueline had been ill.  I was
apprehensive that he might question her and so discover her mental
state; but the good man readily understood that an elopement causes
much mental anguish in the case of the feminine party--at least this
supposition was in line with the romantic requirements of the case,
according to all the books that the captain had ever read; and he
leaped at the hypothesis.

He not only forbore to question Jacqueline, but he explained the
situation to Danton, a friendly but taciturn old man who kept the store
and post-office at St. Boniface.

Danton, who of course knew Jacqueline, took the opportunity of assuring
me that her father, though a recluse and a misanthrope who had not left
his seigniory for forty years, was said to be a man of heart, and would
undoubtedly forgive us.  He was clearly under the impression that we
were married, and, since Dubois had not enlightened him on this point,
I did not do so.

In fact, his ignorance again aroused in me elusive hopes--for if a
marriage _had_ occurred would he not have known, of it?  At any rate, I
should know soon; and with this reflection I had to console myself.

Since Jacqueline was supposed to know the route, I could ask no direct
questions; but I gathered that the _chateau_ lay about a hundred and
twenty miles north-westward.  For the first part of the journey we were
to travel along the right bank of the Riviere d'Or; at the point where
the mountains began there were some trappers' huts, and there doubtless
I could gain further information.

M. Danton had his sleigh and eight fine-looking dogs ready for us.  I
purchased these outright in order to carry no hostages.  We took with
us several days' supply of food, a little tent, sleeping-bags, and
frozen fish for the animals.

I must record that a small wharf was in course of construction, and
that the contractor's sign read: "Northern Exploitation Company."  M.
Danton informed me that this was a lumber company which had already
begun operations, and that the establishment of its camps accounted for
the absence of inhabitants.

In fact, our arrival was almost unobserved, and two hours afterward we
had set forth upon our journey.

I wondered what Jacqueline remembered.  Vague and unquiet thoughts
seemed to float up into her mind, and she sat by my side silent and
rather sad.  I think she was afraid of the knowledge that was to come
to her.

God knows I was, and for this reason was resolved to ask no questions
unless they should become necessary.  Whether or not she even knew the
route I had no means of discovering.

The sun shone brightly; the air, intensely cold, chilled our faces, but
could not penetrate our furs.  Sometimes we rubbed each other's cheeks
with snow when they grew threateningly white, laughing to see the blood
rush to the under surface of the skin, and jested about our journey to
drive away our fears.

And it was wonderful.  It was as though we were the first man and woman
in the world, wandering in our snow-garden, and still lost in amazement
at each other.  The prospect of meeting others of our kind began to be
a fantastic horror to me.

We were happy with each other.  If we could travel forever thus!  I
watched her beautiful, serene face; the brown hair, brought low over
the ears to guard them against the cold; the big grey eyes that were
turned upon mine sometimes in puzzled wonder, but very real content.

I held her small gloved hand inside the big sable muff, and we would
sit thus for hours in silence while the dogs picked their way along the
trail.  When I looked back I could see the tiny pad-prints stretching
away toward the far horizon, an undeviating black blur upon the
whiteness of the snow.

It was a strange situation.  It might easily have become an impossible
one.  But it was a sacred comradeship, refined above the love of friend
for friend, or lover for lover, by her faith, her helplessness, and
need.

We tried so hard to be merry.  When we had fed the dogs at noon and
eaten our meal we would strap on the _raquettes_, the snow-shoes with
which Danton had furnished us, and travel over the crusted drifts
beside the stream.  We ran out on the surface of the river and made
snowballs, and pelted each other, laughing like school children.

But after the journey had begun once more we would sit quietly beside
each other, and for long we would hardly utter a word.

I think that she liked best to sit beside me in the narrow sleigh and
lean against my shoulder, her physical weariness the reflection of her
spiritual unrest.  She did not want to think, and she wanted me to
shield her.

But even in this solitude fear drove me on, for I knew that a
relentless enemy followed hard after us, camping where we had camped
and reading the miles between us by the smouldering ashes of our old
fires.

At nightfall I would pitch the tent for Jacqueline and place her
sleeping-bag within, and while she slept I would lie by the huge fire
near the dogs, and we kept watch over her together.

So passed three days and nights.

The fourth short day drew toward its end a little after four o'clock.
I remember that we camped late, for the sun had already dipped to the
level horizon and was casting black, mile-long shadows across the snow.

A whistling wind came up.  The dogs had been showing signs of distress
that afternoon, pulling us more and more reluctantly, and walking with
drooping ears and muzzles depressed.

I hammered in the pegs and built a fire with dry boughs, collecting a
quantity of wood sufficient to last until morning.  Then Jacqueline
made tea, and we ate our supper and crept into our sleeping-bags and
lay down.

"Three more days, dear, at most, and our journey and our troubles will
all be at an end," I had said.  "Let us be happy together while we have
each other, and when our mutual need is past I shall stay with you
until you send me away."

"That will never be, Paul," she answered simply.  "But I shall be happy
with you while our day lasts."

And I thought of the text: "For soon the long night cometh."

I lay outside the tent, trying to sleep; but could not still my mind.
The uncertainty ahead of us, the knowledge of Leroux behind, tried me
sorely, and only Jacqueline's need sustained my courage.

As I was on the point of dropping asleep I heard a lone wolf howl from
afar, and instantly the pack took up the cry.  One of the dogs, a
great, tawny beast who led them, crept toward me and put his head down
by mine, whimpering.  The rest roamed ceaselessly about the fire,
answering the wolf's challenge with deep, wolf-like baying.

I drew my pistols from the pockets of my fur coat.  It was pleasant to
handle them.  They gave me assurance.  We were two fugitives in a land
where every man's hand might be against us, but at least I had the
means to guard my own.

And looking at them, I began to yield to that temptation which had
assailed me ceaselessly, both at Quebec and since we left St. Boniface,
not to yield up Jacqueline, never to let her go.

Why should I bear the yoke of moral laws here in this wilderness, with
our pursuing enemy behind--a day's journey perhaps--but leaving me only
a breathing spell, a resting space, before I must fight for Jacqueline?
Or when her own had abandoned her?

Jacqueline glided out of the tent and knelt beside me, putting her arms
about the dog's neck and her head upon its furry coat.  The dogs loved
her, and she seemed always to understand their needs.

"Paul, there is something wrong with them," she said, her hand still
caressing the mane of the great beast, who looked at her with pathetic
eyes.

I had noticed that they did not eat that night, but had imagined that
they would do so later when they had recovered from their fatigue.

"What is wrong with them, Jacqueline?" I asked.

She raised her head and looked sadly at me.  "It is I, Paul," she
answered.

"You, Jacqueline?"

"Yes, it is I!" she cried with sudden, passionate vehemence.  "It is
_I_ who am wrong and have brought trouble on you.  Paul, I do not even
know how you came into my life, nor who I am, nor anything that
happened to me at any time before you brought me to Quebec, except that
my home is there."  She pointed northward.  "Who am I?  Jacqueline, you
say.  The name means nothing to me.  I am a woman without a past or
future, a shadow that falls across your life, Paul.  And I could
perhaps remember, but I know--I _know_--that I must never remember."

She began weeping wildly.  I surmised that she must have been under an
intense strain for days.  I had not dreamed that this girl who walked
by my side and paid me the tribute of her docile faith suffered and
knew.

I took her hand in mine.  "Dear Jacqueline," I answered, "it is best to
forget these things until the time comes to remember them.  It will
come, Jacqueline.  Let us be happy till then.  You have been ill, and
you have had great trouble.  That is all.  I am taking you home.  Do
you not remember anything about your home, Jacqueline?"

She clapped her hands to her head and gave a little terrified cry.

"I--think--so," she murmured.  "But I dare not remember, Paul.

"I have dreamed of things," she went on in agitated, rapid tones, "and
then I have seemed to remember everything.  But when I wake I have
forgotten, and it is because I know that I must forget.  Paul, I dream
of a dead man, and men who hate and are following us.  Was
there--ever--a dead man, Paul?" she asked, shuddering.

"No, dear Jacqueline," I answered stoutly.  "Those dreams are lies."

She still looked hopelessly at me, and I knew she was not quite
convinced.

"Oh, it was not true, Paul?" she asked pleadingly, gathering each word
upon each indrawn breath.

I placed one arm around her.

"Jacqueline, there never was any dead man," I said.  "It is not true.
Some day I will tell you everything--some day----"

I broke off helplessly, for my voice failed me, I was so shaken.  I
knew that at last I was conquered by the passion that possessed me,
long repressed, but not less strong for its repression.  I caught her
in my arms.

"I love you, Jacqueline!" I cried.  "And you--you?"

She thrust her hands out and turned her face away.  There was an awful
fear upon it.  "Paul," she cried, "there is--somebody--who----

"I have known that," she went on in a torrent of wild words.  "I have
known that always, and it is the most terrible part of all!"

I laid a finger on her lips.

"There is nobody, Jacqueline," I said again, trying to control my
trembling voice.  "He was another delirium of the night, a fantom of
your illness, dear.  There was never anybody but me, and there shall
never be.  For to-morrow we shall turn back toward St. Boniface again,
and we shall take the boat for Quebec--and from there I shall take you
to a land where there shall be no more grief, neither----"

I broke off suddenly.  What had I said?  My words--why, the devil had
been quoting Scripture again!  The bathos of it!  My sacred task
forgotten and honour thrown to the winds, and Jacqueline helpless
there!  I hung my head in misery and shame.

But very sweetly she raised hers and spoke to me.

"Paul, dear, if there never was anyone--if it is nothing but a
dream----"  Here she looked at me with doubtful scrutiny in her eyes,
and then hastened to make amends for doubting me.  "Of course, Paul, if
there had been you could not have known.  But though I know my heart is
free--if there was nobody--why, let us go forward to my father's home,
because there will be no cause there to separate us, my dear.  So let
us go on."

"Yes, let us go on," I muttered dully.

But when the issue came I knew that I would let no man stand between us.

"And some day I am going to tell you everything I know, and you shall
tell me," she said.  "But to-night we have each other, and will not
think of unhappy things--nor ever till the time comes."

She leaned back against my shoulder and held out her hands to the
fire-light.  She had taken off her left glove, and now again I saw the
wedding-ring upon her finger.

She was asleep.  I drew her head down on my knees and spread my coat
around her, and let her rest there.  She was happy again in sleep, as
her nature was to be always.  But, though I held her as she held my
heart, my soul seemed dead, and I waited sleepless and heard only the
whining of the heavy wind and scurry of the blown snow.

The wolf still howled from afar, but the dogs only whimpered in answer
among the trees, where they had withdrawn.

At last I raised her in my arms and carried her inside the tent.  She
did not waken, but only stirred and murmured my name drowsily.  I stood
outside the tent and listened to her soft breathing.

How helpless she was!  How trusting!

That turned the battle.  I loved her madly, but never again dare I
breathe a word of love to her so long as that shadow obscured her mind.
But if sunlight succeeded shadow----

The fire had sunk to a heap of red-grey ashes.   I piled on fresh
boughs till the embers caught flame again and the bright spears danced
under the pines.  The reek of smoking pine logs is in my nostrils yet.




CHAPTER IX

THE FUNGUS

My rest was miserable.  In a succession of brief dreams I fled with
Jacqueline over a wilderness of ice, while in the distance, ever
drawing nearer, followed Leroux, Lacroix, and Pere Antoine.  I heard
Jacqueline's despairing cries as she was torn from me, while my
weighted arms, heavier than lead, drooped helplessly at my sides, and
from afar Simon mocked me.

Then ensued a world without Jacqueline, a dead eternity of ice and snow.

I must have fallen sound asleep at last, for when I opened my eyes the
sun was shining brightly low down over the Riviere d'Or.  The door of
the tent stood open and Jacqueline was not inside.

With the remembrance of my dream still confusing reality, I ran toward
the trees, shouting for her in fear.

"Jacqueline!  Jacqueline!" I called.

She was coming toward me.  She took me by the arm.  "Paul!" she began
with quivering lips.  "Paul!"

She led me into the recesses of the pines.  There, in a little open
place, clustered together upon the ground, were the bodies of our dogs.
All were dead, and the soft forms were frozen into the snow, which the
poor creatures had licked in their agony, so that their open jaws were
stuffed with icicles.

Jacqueline sank down upon the ground and sobbed as though her heart
would break.  I stood there watching, my brain paralyzed by the shock
of the discovery.

Then I went back to the sleigh, on the rear of which the frozen fish
was piled.  I noticed that it had a faint, slightly aromatic odor.  I
flung the hard masses aside and scooped up a powdery substance with my
hands.

Mycology had been a hobby of mine, and it was easy to recognize what
that substance was.

It was the _amanita_, the deadliest and the most widely distributed of
the fungi, and the direst of all vegetable poisons to man and beast
alike.  The alkaloid which it contains takes effect only some hours
after its ingestion, when it has entered the blood-streams and begun
its disintegrating action upon the red corpuscles.  The dogs must have
partaken of it on the preceding afternoon.

Jacqueline joined me.  The tears were streaming down her cheeks; she
slipped her arm through mine and looked mutely at me.

I knew this was Leroux's work.  He had tricked me again.  I had seen
clusters of the frozen fungus outside St. Boniface.  I suppose that,
when winter comes suddenly, such growths remain standing till spring
thaws and rots them, retaining in the meanwhile all their noxious
qualities.

It would have been an easy matter for one of Leroux's agents to have
cast a few handfuls of the deadly powder over the fish while the sleigh
stood waiting outside Danton's door, and the jolting of the vehicle
would have shaken the substance down into the middle of the heap, so
that it would be three or four days before the dogs got to the poisoned
fish.

I was mad with anger.  The white landscape seemed to swim before my
eyes.  I meant to kill the man now, and without mercy.  I would be as
unscrupulous as he.  He would be in this place by the afternoon; I
would wait for him outside the trail.  My pistols----

Jacqueline was looking up into my face in terror.  The sight of her
recalled me to my senses.  Leroux afterward--first my duty to her!

"Paul!  What is the matter, Paul?" she cried.  "I never saw you look
like that before."

I calmed myself and led her away, and presently we were standing before
the fire again.

"Jacqueline," I said, "it is easier to go on than to turn back now."

She watched me like a lip-reader.  "Yes, Paul; let us go on," she
answered.

So we went on.  But our journey was to be very different now.  There
was no possibility of taking much baggage with us.  We took a few
things out of our suit-cases and disposed them about us as best they
could.

The heavy sleeping-bags would have made our progress, encumbered as we
were with our fur coats, too slow; but I had hopes that we would reach
the trappers' huts that afternoon, and so decided to discard them in
favour of the fur-lined sleigh-rug, which would, at least, keep
Jacqueline warm.

So we strapped on our snow-shoes, and I made a pack and put three days'
supplies of food in it and fastened it on my shoulders, securing it
with two straps from the harness.  I rolled the rug into a bundle and
tied it below the pack; and thus equipped, we left the dead beasts and
the useless sleigh behind us for Leroux's satisfaction, and set out
briskly upon our march.

It is a strange thing, but no sooner had I passed out of sight of the
sleigh than, weighted though I was, I felt my spirits rising rapidly.
The freedom of movement and the exhilarating air gave my mind a new
sense of liberty, and Jacqueline, who had been watching me anxiously,
seeing the gloom disappear from my face, tried, first to tempt me to
mirth, and then to match me in it.  Sometimes we would run a little
way, and then we would fall back into our steady, ambling plod once
more.

The cold was less intense, but, looking at the sky, which was heavily
overcast, I knew that the rise in temperature betokened the advent of a
heavy fall of snow, probably before night.

We were merrier than at any previous time, having by tacit agreement
resolved to put our troubles behind us.  Jacqueline laughed gaily at my
clumsy attempts to avoid tripping myself upon my snow-shoes.

We stopped to look at the trees and the traces of deer-croppings upon
the bark.  Sometimes we took to the river-bed, and then again we paced
among the trees, which were now becoming so sparsely scattered that the
trail was hardly discernible.  This caused me no concern, however, for
I believed that when we reached the huts, we should be able to obtain
certain information as to the remainder of our course.

And though I knew that Leroux was behind, and that he would press
forward the more impetuously when he discovered the success of his
deadly ruse, I did not seem to care.  Above me was the pale sun, the
glow of health was in my limbs--and beside me walked Jacqueline.

We must have covered at least a dozen miles or more at the time, when
we stopped for a brief midday meal.  I was a little fatigued from
carrying the pack, and my ankles ached from the snow-shoes; but
Jacqueline, who had evidently been accustomed to their use, was as
fresh as when she started.

I was glad of the respite; but we needed to press on.  It was probable
that Simon would camp by our dismantled sleigh that night.

When we resumed our march the character of the country began to change.
Hitherto we had been traversing an almost interminable plain, but now a
ridge of jagged mountains, bare at their peaks and fringed around the
base with evergreens, appeared in the distance.  The sky became more
leaden.

Suddenly we emerged from among the trees upon an almost barren plateau,
and there again we halted for a breathing spell.

All that morning I had been looking for the trappers' huts.  I had
already come to the conclusion that M. Danton's instructions were to be
taken by and large, for we could not now be more than twenty-five miles
from the chateau, and it was only here that the Riviere d'Or left us,
whirling in quick cascades, ice-free, among the rocks of its narrow
bed, some distance east of us.

There was, of course, the possibility that the distance had been
understated, and that we were only now half way.  But I could not let
my mind dwell upon that possibility.

I scanned the horizon on every side.  It had seemed to me all that day
that our road was running up-hill, but now, looking back, I was
astonished to see how high we had ascended, for the whole of the vast
plain across which we had been travelling lay spread out like a
wrinkled table-cloth before my eyes.

In that grey light, which shortened every distance, it almost seemed
that I could discern the slope of the St. Lawrence far away, and the
hills, foot-spurs of the mighty Laurentian range, that bordered it.
The mountains which we were approaching seemed quite near, and I knew
that beyond them lay the seigniory.

I resolved to take my bearings still more accurately, and telling
Jacqueline to wait for me a few minutes at the base of a hill and
setting down my pack, I began the ascent alone.  The climb was longer
than I had anticipated.  My eyes were aching from the glare of the
snow.  I had left my coloured glasses behind me in the tent and gone
on, saying nothing, though I had realized my loss when I was only a
mile or so away.

However, I hoped that the night would restore my sight, and so,
dismissing the matter from my mind, I struggled up until at last I
stood upon the summit of the hill.

The view from this point was a stupendous one.  New peaks sprang into
vision, shimmering in the sunlight.  Patches of dark forest stained the
whiteness of the land, and far away, like a thin, winding ribbon among
the hills, I saw the valley of the Riviere d'Or.

I cried out in delight and lingered to enjoy the grandeur of the
spectacle.

Beneath me I saw Jacqueline waiting, a tiny figure upon the snow.  My
heart smote me with a deep sense of reproach that I had put her to so
much sacrifice.  But I had seen the valley between those mountains, the
only possible entrance to that mysterious land.  Nothing could fail us
now.

I cast my eyes beyond her toward the mist-wrapped tops of the far
Laurentians and the plains.

And a sense of an inevitable fate came over me as I perceived far away
a tiny, crawling ant upon the snows--Simon Leroux's dog sleigh.


I went back to the little, patient figure that was waiting for me, and
I took up my pack again and told her nothing.  She stepped bravely out
beside me, frozen, fatigued, but willing because I bade her.  She did
not ask anything of me.

The sun dipped lower, and far away I heard the howl of the solitary
wolf again.

My mind had been working very fast during that journey down the hill,
and long before I reached Jacqueline I had resolved that she should
know nothing of the pursuit until the moment came when she must be told.

That the pursuer was Leroux there could be no possible doubt.  He had
evidently passed the sleigh, and was undoubtedly pressing forward,
elated and confident of our capture.  But he must still be at least a
dozen miles away.

He could not reach us that night and he could hardly travel by night.
We should have a half day's start of him in the morning.

I gripped my pistols as we strode along.

We went on and on.  The afternoon was wearing away; the sun was very
low now and all its strength had gone.  The wolf followed us, howling
from afar.  Once I saw it across the treeless wastes--a gaunt, white,
dog-like figure, trotting against the steely grey of the sky.

We ascended the last of the foot-hills before the trail dipped toward
the valley, which was guarded by two sentinel mountains of that jagged
ridge before us.  From the top I looked back.  Simon was nowhere to be
seen.

"Courage, Jacqueline," I said, patting her arm, "The huts ought to be
here."

Her courage was greater than my own.  She looked up and smiled at me.
And so we descended and went on and on, and the sun dipped below the
edge of the world.

The wolf crept nearer, and its howls rang out with piercing strokes
across the silence.  My eyes ached so that I could hardly discern the
darkening land, and the snow came down, not steadily, but in swirling
eddies blown on fierce gusts of wind.

And suddenly raising my eyes despairingly, I saw the huts.  They stood
about four hundred yards away from where the trail ran through the
mountains.

There were five of them, and they had not been occupied for at least
two seasons, for the blackened timbers were falling apart, and the
roofs had been torn off all but one of them, no doubt for fuel.  The
wind was whirling the snow wildly around them, and it whistled through
the broken, rotting walls.

I flung my pack inside the roofed one, and began tearing apart the
timbers of another to make a fire.

Jacqueline stood looking at me in docile faith.

"I can go on," she said quietly.  "I can go on, Paul."

I caught her hands in mine.  "We shall stay here, Jacqueline," I said.

She did not answer me, but, opening the pack, began the preparation of
our meal, which consisted of some biscuits left from the night before,
when we had made a quantity on the wood ashes.  We made tea over the
roaring flames, and sat listening to the wolf's call and the wind that
drove our fire in gusts of smoke and flame.

The wind grew fiercer.  It was a hurricane.  It drowned the wolf's
call; it almost silenced the sound of our own voices.  Thank God that
we had at least our shelter in that storm.

I scooped out a bed for Jacqueline inside the snow-filled hut and
spread it with the big sleigh robe.  She lay down in her fur coat, and
I wrapped the ends around her.  I looked into her sweet face and
marvelled at its serenity.  Her eyes closed wearily.

But, though I was as tired as she, I could not sleep.  I crouched over
the fire, pondering over the morrow's acts.

Should I wait for Leroux and shoot him down like a dog if he molested
us?  Or should we hide among the hills and watch him pass by?  But that
would avail us nothing.  If we went on we must encounter him, and the
sooner the better.

This problem and a fiercer one filled my mind, for my soul was as
storm-beset as the hut, whose planking shook under the gale's force.  I
realized how incongruous my position was.

I had no status at all.  I was accompanying a run-away wife back to her
father's home, perhaps to meet her husband there.  And whether Leroux
held me in his present power or not, inexorably I was heading for his
own objective.




CHAPTER X

SNOW BLINDNESS

More madly now than ever I felt that fierce temptation.  There she lay,
the one woman who had ever seriously come into my life, sleeping so
near to me that I could bend down and rest my hand on the inert form
over which the snow drifted so steadily.

I brushed it away.  I brooded over her.  Why had I ever brought her on
that journey?  Would that I had kept her, with all her love and
gentleness, for my delight.

If I had taken her to Jamaica, where I had planned to go, instead of
engaging that mock-heroic odyssey--there, among palm trees, in an
eternal spring, there would have been no need that she should remember.

I looked down on her.  Again the snow covered her.

It fell so inexorably.  It was like Leroux.  It was as tireless as he,
and as implacable as he.  I brushed it away with frantic haste, and
still it drifted into the doorless hut.

A dreadful fear held me in its grip: what if she never awoke?  Some
people died thus in the snow.  I raised the sleigh robe, and saw that
the fur coat stirred softly as she breathed.

How gently she slept--as gently as she lived.  How could her own have
abandoned her in her need?

At last, out of the wild passions that fought within me, decision was
born.  I would go on, because she had bidden me.  And I would be ready
for Leroux, and let him act as he saw fit.  I loaded my pistols.  I
could do no more than fight for Jacqueline, and with God be the issue.

And with that determination I grew calm.  And I sat over the fire and
let my imagination stray toward some future when our troubles would be
in the past and we should be together.

"Paul!"

I must have been half asleep, for I came back to myself with a start
and sprang to my feet.  Jacqueline had risen upon her knees; she flung
her arms out wildly, and suddenly she caught her breath and screamed,
and stood up, and ran uncertainly toward me, with hands that groped for
me.

She found me; I caught her, and she pushed me from her and shuddered
and stared at me in that uncertain doubt that follows dreams.

"I am here, Jacqueline," I said.  "With you--always, till you send me
away.  Remember that even in dreams, Jacqueline."

She knew me now, and she was recoiling from me, out through the hut
door, into the blinding snow.  I sprang after her.

"Jacqueline!  It is I--Paul!  It is Paul!  Jacqueline!"

She was running from me and screaming in the snow.  I heard her
moccasins breaking through the thin ice crust.  And, mad with terror, I
rushed after her.

"Jacqueline!  It is Paul!" I cried.

And as I emerged from the hut's shelter a red-hot glare from the east
seemed to sear and kill my vision.  It was the rising sun.  I had
thought it night, and it was already day.  And I could see nothing
through my swollen eyelids except the white light of the shining snow.
The wind howled round me, and though the sun shone, the snowflakes
stung my face like hail.

I did not know under the influence of what dread dream she was.  But I
ran wildly to and fro, calling her, and now and again I heard the sound
of her little moccasins as she plunged through the knee-high snow.

Sometimes I seemed to be so near that I could almost touch her hand,
and once I heard her panting breath behind me; but I never caught her.
And never once did she answer me.

"What is it?  What is it?" I pleaded madly.  "Jacqueline, don't you
know me?  Don't you remember me?"

The sound of the moccasins far away, and then the whine of the wind
again.  I did not know where the huts were now.  I could see nothing
but a yellow glare.  And fear of Leroux came on me and turned my heart
to water.  I stood still, listening, like a hunted stag.  There came no
sound.

It was horrible, in that wild waste, alone.  I tried to gather my
scattered senses together.

Eastward, I know, the river lay, and that blinding brightness came from
the east.  Southward a little distance, was the hill that we had last
ascended on the evening before.  I could discern the merest outlines of
the land, but I fancied that I could see that it sloped upward toward
the south.

I set off in the direction of the hill, and soon I found myself
climbing.  The elevation hid the sun, and this enabled me to glimpse my
surroundings dimly, as through a heavy veil.

I called once more, and then I was scrambling up the hill, stumbling
and falling on the ice-coated boulders.  My coat was open, and the wind
cut like a knife-edge, but I did not notice it.  Perhaps from the
hill-top I should see her.

"Jacqueline!  Jacqueline!" I screamed frantically.

No answer came.  I had gained the summit now, and round me I saw the
shadowy outlines of the snow-covered rocks, but five or six feet from
me a deep, impenetrable grey wall obscured everything.  I tried to peer
down into the valley, and saw nothing but the same fog there.  Once
more I called.

A dog barked suddenly, not far away, and through the mist I heard the
slide of sleigh-runners on snow; and then I knew.

I scrambled down, slipping, and gashing my hands upon the rocks and
ice.  At the foot of the hill I saw two straight and narrow lines on
the soft snow.  They were the tracks of sleigh-runners.

I followed them, sobbing, and catching my breath, and screaming:

"Jacqueline!  Jacqueline!"

Then I heard Simon's voice, and with the sound of it my dream came back
with prophetic clearness.

"_Bonjour,_ M. Hewlett!" he called mockingly.  "This way!  This way!"

I turned and rushed blindly in the direction of the cry.  I had left my
snow-shoes behind me in the hut, and at each step my feet broke through
the crusted snow, so that I floundered and fell like a drunken man to
choruses of taunts and laughter.

It was a horrible blindman's bluff, for they had surrounded me, yelling
from every quarter.

"This way, _monsieur_!  This way!" piped a thin, voice which I knew to
be Philippe Lacroix.

A snowball struck me on the chin, and they began pelting me and
laughing.  I was like a baited bear.  I was beside myself with rage and
helpless fury.  The icy balls hit my face a dozen times; one struck me
behind the ear and hurled me down half stunned.

I was up again and rushing at my unseen tormentors.  I heard the
barking of the dogs far away, and I ran in the direction of the sound,
sobbing with rage.  I pulled my pistols from my pockets and spun round,
firing in every direction through that wall of grey, yielding mist that
gave me place but never gave me vision.

The clouds had obscured the sky and the snow was falling again.  My
hands were bare and numb, except where the cold steel of the pistol
triggers seared my fingers like molten metal.

They had formed a wider circle round me, and pistol range is longer
than snowball range, so that they struck me no more.  I heard the
shouts and mockery still, but never Jacqueline's voice.

"Here, M. Hewlett, here!" piped Philippe Lacroix once more.

Again I turned and rushed at him, firing shot after shot.  I heard his
snow-shoes plodding across the crust, and yells from the others
indicated that Philippe's adventure had been a risky one.

Then Simon called again and I turned, like a foolish, baited beast, and
fired at him.

A dog barked once more, very far away, and at last I understood their
scheme.

Doubtless Simon had reached the huts at dawn and had discovered us
there.  He must have been in waiting, but when he saw Jacqueline run
from me he changed his plans and sent the sleigh after her.  Then,
realizing from my actions that I was snow-blind, he had remained behind
with some of his followers to enjoy the sport of baiting me, and
incidentally to drive me out of the way while the sleigh went on.

And now there was complete silence.  He had accomplished his purpose.
He had gained all that he had to gain.  Fortune had fought upon his
side, as always.

But Jacqueline----

She had tried to escape me.  She could not have been playing a
part--she was too transcendentally sincere.  Something must have
occurred--some dream which had momentarily crazed her; and she had
confounded me with her persecutors.

I could not think evil of her.  I flung myself down in the snow and
gave way to abject misery.

But hope is not readily overthrown.  For her sake I resolved to pull
myself together.  I did not now know whether Leroux was in front or
behind me, or upon either hand.

I stood deep in the snow, a pistol in each hand, waiting.  When he
called again I should make my last effort.

But he called me no more.  Once I heard the dog yelp, far up the
valley, and then there was only the soughing of the wind and the sting
of the driving sleet flakes.  And the grey mist had closed in all about
me.  I was alone in that storm-swept wilderness and there was no sun to
guide me.

I saw a shadow at my feet, and stooping down, perceived that accident
had brought me back to the sleigh tracks.  From the direction in which
the dog had howled, I judged that my course lay straight ahead as I was
standing.  I started off wearily.  At least it was better to walk than
to perish in the snow.

But before many minutes had passed the realization of my loss stung me
into madness again, and I began to run.  And, as I ran, I shouted, and,
shouting, I fired.

I plunged along--half delirious, I believe, for I began to hear voices
on every side of me and to imagine I saw Simon standing, just out of
reach, a shadow upon the mist, taunting me.  I followed him at an
undeviating distance, firing, reloading, and firing again.  I was no
longer conscious of my progress.  The fingers that pressed the triggers
of my pistols had no sensation in them, and in my imagination were
parts of a monstrous mechanism which I directed.  My legs, too, felt
like stilts that somebody had strapped to my body, and, instead of
cold, a warm glow seemed to suffuse me.

And while my helpless body stumbled along its route my mind was back in
New York.  This was my apartment on Tenth Street, and Jacqueline sat
behind the curtains.  I had dreamed of a long journey through a
snow-bound wilderness, but I had awakened and we were to start for
Jamaica by that day's boat.  How dear she was!  She raised her eyes,
full of trusting love, to mine, and I knew that there would never be
any parting until death.

We sat beneath the palms, beside a sea that plunged against our little
island, and the air was fragrant with the scent of orange-blossoms,
carried upon the wind from the distant mainland.  We were so happy
there--there was no need to think or to remember.  I slept against her
shoulder.


Somebody was shaking me.

"Get up!" he bellowed in my ear.  "Get up!  Do you want to die in the
snow?"

I closed my eyes and sank back into a lethargy of sleep.




CHAPTER XI

THE CHATEAU

I had an indistinct impression of being carried for what seemed an
eternity upon the shoulders of my rescuer, and of clinging there
through the delirium that supervened.

Sometimes I thought I was on a camel's back, pursuing Jacqueline's
abductors through the hot sands of an Egyptian desert; sometimes I was
on shipboard, sinking in a tropical sea, beneath which amid the marl
and ooze of delta depositions, hideous, antediluvian creatures, with
faces like that of Leroux, writhed and stretched up their tentacles to
drag me down.

Then I would be conscious of the cold and bitter wind again.  But at
last there came a grateful sense of warmth and ease, followed by a
period of blank unconsciousness.

When at last I opened my eyes it was late afternoon.  Though they
pained me, I could now see with tolerable distinctness.

I was lying upon a bed of dried balsam-leaves inside a little hut, and
through the half-open door I could see the sun just dipping behind the
mountains.  Besides the bed the hut contained a roughly hewn table and
chair and a bookcase with a few books in it.  Upon a wall hung a big
crucifix of wood, and under it an old man was standing.

He heard me stir and came toward me.  I recognized the massive
shoulders and commanding countenance of Pere Antoine, and remembrance
came back to me.

"Where am I?" I asked.

"In my cabin, _monsieur_," answered the priest, standing at my side, an
inscrutable calm upon his face.

"You saved me?"

"Three days ago.  You were dying in the snow.  You had fired off your
pistols and had thrown your coat away.  I had to carry you back and
find it.  It is lucky that I found you, _monsieur_, or assuredly you
would soon have been dead.  But for your dog----"

"_My_ dog!" I exclaimed.

"Certainly, a dog came to me and brought me a mile out of my route to
where you were lying.  But, now, come to think of it, it disappeared
and has not returned.  Perhaps it was sent to me by _le bon Dieu_."

"Where is Mlle. Duchaine?" I burst out.

"Ah, M. Hewlett," said the priest, looking at me severely, "that was a
wild undertaking of yours, and God does not prosper such schemes,
though I confess I do not understand why you were taking her to her
home.  Rest assured she is in good hands.  I met the sleigh containing
her, and M. Leroux informed me that all would be well.  It is strange
that he did not speak of you, though, and I do not understand how----"

"He stole her from me when I was snow-blind, and left me to die!" I
exclaimed.  "I must rescue her----"

Father Antoine laid a heavy hand upon my shoulder.

"Be assured, _monsieur_, that _madame_ is perfectly happy and contented
with her friends," he said.  "And no doubt she has already regretted
her escapade.  Did I not warn you in Quebec, _monsieur_, that your
enterprise would be brought to naught?  And now you will doubtless be
glad of your lesson, and will abandon it willingly and return homeward.
I have to depart at daybreak upon an urgent mission a hundred miles
away, which was interrupted by your rescue; but I shall be back within
a week, by which time you will doubtless be able to accompany me to the
coast.  Meanwhile, you will rest here, and my provisions and a few
books are at your disposal."

"I shall not!" I cried weakly.  "I am going on to the _chateau_!"

He looked at me steadily.

"You cannot," he said.  "If you attempt it you will perish by the way."

"You cannot stop me!" I cried desperately.

"Perhaps not, _monsieur_; nevertheless, you will not be able to reach
the _chateau_."

"Who are you that you should stop me?" I exclaimed angrily.  "You are a
priest, and your duty is with souls."

"That is why," answered Pere Antoine.  "You are in pursuit of a married
woman."

"I do not know anything about that, but I am the protector of a
defenceless one," I answered, "and I shall seek her until she sends me
away.  Do you know where her husband is?"

"No, _monsieur_," answered the old man.  "And you?"

I burst into an impassioned appeal to him.  I told him of Leroux and
his conspiracy to obtain possession of the property, of my encounter
with Jacqueline, and how I had rescued her, omitting mention of course
of the murder.

As I went on I could see the look of surprise upon his face gradually
change into belief.

I told him of our journey across the snow and begged him to help me to
rescue Jacqueline, or at least to find her.  I added that the trouble
had partially destroyed her memory, so that she was not competent to
decide who her protectors were.

When I had ended he was looking at me with a benignancy that I had
never seen before upon his face.

"M. Hewlett," he answered, "I have long suspected a part of what you
have told me, and therefore I readily accept your statements.  I
believe now that _madame_ has suffered no wrong from you.  But I am a
priest, and, as you say, my care is only that of souls.  _Madame_ is
married.  I married her----"

"To whom?" I cried.

"To M. Louis d'Epernay, nephew of M. Charles Duchaine by marriage, less
than two weeks ago in the _chateau_ here."

The addition of the last word singularly revived my hopes.  It had
slipped from his lips unconsciously, but it gave me reason to believe
that the chateau was near by.

Father Antoine sat down upon the chair beside me.

"M. Duchaine has been a recluse for many years," he said, "and of late
his mind has become affected.  It is said that he was implicated in the
troubles of 1867, and that, fearing arrest, he fled here and built this
chateau, in this desolate region, where he would be safe from pursuit.
If anyone ever contemplated denouncing him, at any rate those events
have long ago been forgotten.  But solitude has made a hermit of him
and taken him out of touch with the world of to-day.

"I believe that Leroux has discovered coal on his property, and by
threatening him with arrest has gained a complete ascendency over the
weak-minded old man.  However, the fact remains that his daughter was
married by me to M. d'Epernay some ten or twelve days ago at the
_chateau_.

"I was uneasy, for it did not look to be like a love-match, and I knew
that M. d'Epernay had the reputation of a profligate in Quebec, where
he was hand in glove with Philippe Lacroix, one of M. Leroux's aids.
But a priest has no option when an expression of matrimonial consent is
made to him in the presence of two witnesses.  So I married them.

"My duties took me to Quebec.  There I learned that Mme. d'Epernay had
fled on the night of her marriage, and that her husband was in pursuit
of her.  Again it was told me that she was living at the Chateau
Frontenac with another man.  It was not for me to question whether she
loved her husband, but to do my duty.

"I appealed to you.  You refused to listen to my appeal.  You
threatened me, _monsieur_.  And you denied my priesthood.  However, I
do not speak of that, for she is undoubtedly safe with her father now,
awaiting her husband's return.  And I shall not help you in your
pursuit of her, M. Hewlett, for you are actuated solely by love for the
wife of another man.  Is that not so?" he ended, bending over me with a
penetrating look in his blue eyes.

"Yes, it is so.  But I shall go to the chateau," I answered.

Pere Antoine rose up.

"You will find food here," he said, "and if you wish to take exercise
there are snow-shoes.  Try to find the _chateau_--do what you please;
but remember that if you lose your way I shall not be here to save you.
I shall return from my mission in a week and be ready to conduct you to
St. Boniface.  And now, _monsieur_, since we understand each other, I
shall prepare the supper."

I swallowed a few mouthfuls of food and fell asleep soon afterward.  In
the morning when I awoke the cabin was empty.

My eyes were almost well, but my hands had been badly frozen and were
extremely painful, while I was so weak that I could hardly walk.  I
spent the next two days recovering my strength, and on the third I
found myself able to leave the hut for a short tramp.

I found snow-shoes and coloured glasses in the cabin; my overcoat was
there, and I did not feel troubled in conscience when I appropriated a
pair of warm fur mittens which the good priest had made from mink
skins.  They had no fingers, and were admirably adapted to the weather.

I found one of the pistols in the hut, and in the pocket of my fur coat
were a couple of cartridges which I had overlooked.  The rest I had
fired away in my delirium.

The cabin, was situated in a valley, around which high hills clustered.
Strapping on the snow-shoes, I set to work to climb a lofty peak which
stood at no great distance.

It took me a couple of hours to make the ascent, and when at last I
sank down exhausted on the summit there was nothing in sight but a
succession of new hills in every direction.  I seemed to be on the
summit of the ridge which sloped away to east and west of me.  Hidden
among the hills were little lakes.

There was no sign of life in all that desolate country.

My disappointment was overwhelming.  Surely the _chateau_ was near.  I
strode up and down upon the mountain-top, clenching my hands with rage.
It was four days since I had lost Jacqueline, and Leroux had
contemptously left me to die in the snow.  He was so sure I could not
follow and find him.

I began the descent again.  But it is easy to lose one's way upon a
mountain-peak, and the hills presented no clear definition to me.  Once
in the valley I could locate the cabin again, but the sun had travelled
far toward the west and no longer guided me accurately.

I must have turned off at a slight angle which took me some distance
out of my course, for my progress was suddenly arrested by a mighty
wall of rock, a sheer precipice that seemed to descend perpendicularly
into the valley underneath.  Somewhere a torrent was roaring like a
miniature Niagara.

I discovered my error and bent my footsteps along the summit of the
precipice, and as I proceeded the noise of the torrent grew louder
until the din was deafening.  I was treading now upon a smooth slope,
like the glacis of a fortress.  I continued the descent, and all at
once, at no great distance from me, I saw a tremendous waterfall,
ice-sheeted, that tumbled down the face of the declivity and sent up a
cloud of misty spray.

I stopped to stare in admiration.  Far below me the narrow valley had
widened into the smooth, snow-coated surface of a lake.

And on a point of land projecting from the bottom of that mighty wall I
saw the _chateau_!

It could have been nothing else.  It was a splendid building--not
larger than the house of a country gentleman, perhaps, and made of hewn
logs; but the rude splendour of it against that icy, rocky background
transfixed me with wonder.

It was a rambling, straggling building, apparently constructed at
different times; having two wings and a wide central hall, with odd
projecting chambers, and it was hidden so cunningly away that it was
visible from this side of the lake only from the point of the rocky
precipice above on which I stood.

The _chateau_ stood under the overhanging precipice in such a way that
half the building was invisible even from here.  It seemed to be set
back into a hollow of the mountainside, which appeared every moment
about to overwhelm it.

And now I perceived that the smooth slope on which I stood was a
snow-covered glacier, a million tons of ice, pressing ever by its own
weight toward the precipice, and carrying its debris of rocks and
stones toward the waterfall that issued from it and poured in deafening
clamour into the lake below.

Where the precipice projected the waterfall was split in two, and
rushed down in twin streams, bubbling, tumbling, hissing, plunging into
the lake, which whirled furiously around the spit of land on which the
castle stood, clear of ice for a distance of a hundred feet from the
shore, a foaming maelstrom in which no boat that was ever built could
have endured an instant, but must have been twisted and flung back like
the fantastically shaped ice pinnacles along the marge.

On each side of the _chateau_ a cataract plunged, veiling itself in an
opacity of mist, tinted with all the spectral hues by the rays of the
westering sun.  I could have flung a stone down, not on the _chateau_,
but over it, into the boiling lake.

Why, that position was impregnable!  Behind it the sheer precipice, up
which not even a bird could walk; the impassable lake before it, and
the torrent on either side!

But--how had M. Charles Duchaine gained entrance there?

There seemed to be no entrance.  And yet the _chateau_ stood before my
eyes, no dream, but very real indeed.  There was a small piece of
enclosed land between its front and the lake, and within this I thought
I could see dogs lying.

That might have been my fancy, for the mountain was too high for me to
be able to distinguish anything readily, and the sublime grandeur of
the scene and the roar of the water made me incapable of clear
discernment.

Before I reached the hut again I had formulated my plan.  I would start
at dawn, or earlier, and work around these mountains, a circuit of
perhaps twenty miles, approaching the _chateau_ by the edge of the
lake.  I concluded that there must exist a ridge of narrow beach
between the whirlpool and the castle, though it was invisible from
above, and that the entrance would disclose itself to me in the course
of my journey.

The hope of finding Jacqueline again banished the last vestiges of my
weakness.  I felt like one inspired.  And my spirit was exalted, too.
For she so completely filled my heart that she left no place for doubts
and fears.

That night I paced the little cabin in an ecstasy of joy.  And, as I
paced it, suddenly I perceived a strange flicker of light in the north
sky, and went to the door to see the most beautiful phenomenon that I
had ever witnessed.

There came first a flash, and swiftly long streamers of flame shot up
and spread fanwise over the heavens.  They quivered and sank, and
flared again, and broke into innumerable rippling waves; they hung,
broad banners of light, athwart the skies, then slowly faded, to give
place to a wavering interplay of ghostly beams that sought the darkest
places beyond the moon: celestial fingers whiter than the white glow of
a myriad of arc-lamps.

And somehow the wonder of it filled me with the conviction that all
would be well for those heavenly lights bridged the loneliness of my
soul even as they bridged the sky, from Jupiter, who blazed brilliant
in the east to great Arcturus.

And, so I felt that, though I crossed a void as wide and fathomless in
search of her, some time she should be mine and that our hearts would
beat together so long as our lives should endure.


Although the sun was well above the horizon when I awoke, I started out
on the fourth morning eager to achieve the entrance to the _chateau_.

First I plodded back to the two mountains which guarded the approach to
the valley, then worked round along the flank of the ridge of peaks,
searching for an entrance.  The further I went, however, the higher and
more precipitous became the mountains.

I realized that there was little chance of finding any access along
this side, so after my noon meal I ascended one of the lower elevations
in order to obtain my bearings.  But I could discern neither _chateau_
nor lake nor waterfall, and the sound of the torrent, far away to the
left, came to my ears only as a faint distant murmur.

I was far out of the way.

The snow, which had been falling at intervals during each day since
Jacqueline's abduction, had long ago covered up the tracks of the
sleigh.  I had to trust to my own wit to solve my problem, and there
did not seem to be any solution.

There was no visible entrance to that mountain lake on any side, and to
descend that sheer, ice-coated precipice was an impossibility.

It was long after nightfall when I reached the cabin again, exhausted
and dispirited.

I awoke too late on the fifth morning, and I was too stiff to make much
of a journey.  I climbed to the edge of the glacier once again in the
hope of discovering an approach.  I examined every foot of the ground
with meticulous care.

But whenever I approached the edge the same wall of rock ran down
vertically for some three hundred feet, veneered with ice and wrapped
in a perpetual blinding spray.

And yet sleighs could enter that valley below.  For at the extreme edge
of the lake, outside the enclosed piece of land, I perceived one, a
tiny thing, far under me, and yet unmistakably a sleigh.

I was within three hundred feet of Jacqueline's home and yet as far
away as though leagues divided us.  I looked down at the _chateau_ and
ground my teeth and swore that I would win her.  But all the rest of
that day went in fruitless searching.

I must succeed in finding the entrance on the following day, for now
Pere Antoine might return at any time, and I knew that he would prove
far less tractable here in his own bailiwick than he had been when I
defied him at the Frontenac.  By hook or by crook I must gain entrance
to the valley.

This was to be my last night in the cabin.  I could not return, not
though I were perishing in the snows.

Happily my eyes were now entirely well, and my hands, though chapped
and roughened from the frost-bites, had suffered no permanent injury.
So I started out with grim resolution on the sixth morning, when the
dawn was only a red streak on the horizon and the stars still lit my
way.  Before the sun rose I was standing once more outside those two
sentinel peaks.

To this point I knew the sleigh had come.  But whether it had continued
straight down the valley or turned to the right along that same ridge
which I had fruitlessly explored before, it was impossible to determine.

I tried to put myself in the position of a man travelling toward the
_chateau_.  Which road would I take?  How and where would it occur to
me to seek an entrance into the heart of those formidable hills?

The more I puzzled and pondered over the difficulty the harder it was
to solve.

As I stood, rather weary, balancing myself upon my snow-shoes, I heard
a wolf's howl quite near to me.  Raising my head, I saw no wolf, but an
Eskimo dog--the very dog I had encountered in New York, Jacqueline's
dog!




CHAPTER XII

UNDER THE MOUNTAINS

The dog was standing on a rock at the base of the hill immediately
before me--and calling.

I almost thought that it was calling me.

I took a few steps toward it, and it disappeared immediately, as though
alarmed--apparently into the heart of the mountain.

I thought, of course, that it was crouching in a hollow place, or
behind a boulder, and would reappear on my approach, but when I reached
the spot where it had been it was nowhere to be seen.  And the
pad-prints ran toward a tiny hole no bigger than the entrance to a
fox's lair--and ended there.

At this spot an enormous boulder lay, almost concealing the burrow.  I
put my shoulder against it--in the hope of dislodging it sufficiently
to enable me to see into the cavity.  To my astonishment, at the first
touch it rolled into a new position, disclosing a wide natural tunnel
in the mountainside, through which a sleigh might have passed easily!

I saw at once the explanation.  The boulder was a rocking stone.  It
must have fallen at some time from the top of the arch, and happened to
be so poised that at a touch it could be swung into one of two
positions, alternately disclosing and concealing the tunnel in the
cliff wall.

I stepped within and, striking a match perceived that I was standing
inside a vast cave--a vaulted chamber that ran apparently straight into
the heart of the mountains.

Great stalactites hung from the roof and dripped water upon the floor,
on which numerous small stalagmites were forming, where they had not
been crumbled away by the passage and repassage of sleighs.  These had
left two well-defined tracks in the soft stone under my feet.

The cave was one of those common formations in limestone hills.  How
far it ran I could not know, but I had little doubt that at last I was
well upon my approach to the _chateau_.

The interior was completely dark.  At intervals I struck matches from
the box which I had brought with me, but the road always ran clear and
straight ahead, and I could even guide myself by the ruts in the ground.

And every time I struck a match I could see the vaulted cavern, wide as
a great cathedral, extending right and left and in front of me.

I must have been journeying for half an hour when I perceived a faint
light ahead of me, and at the same time I heard the gurgling of a
torrent somewhere near at hand.

The light grew stronger.  I could see now that the cavern had narrowed
considerably: there were no longer any ruts in the ground, and by
stretching out my arms I could touch the wall on either side of me.  I
advanced cautiously until the light grew quite bright; I saw the tunnel
end in front of me, and emerged into an open space in the heart of the
hills.

I say an open space, for it was as large as two city blocks; but it was
as though it had been dug out of the mountains by an enormous cheese
scoop, for on all sides sheer, vertical walls of rock ascended, so high
that the light of day filtered down only dimly.  A swift river, issuing
from the base of one of these stupendous cliffs, ran across the opening
and disappeared into a cave upon the other side.

I glanced at my watch.  It seemed that I had been travelling for an
interminable time, but it was barely eleven o'clock.  I sat down to
eat, and the thought occurred to me that this would make a good camping
place, if necessary, for it was quite warm at such a depth below the
surface of the hills, and my fur coat had begun to feel oppressive.  I
felt drowsy, too, and somehow, before I was aware of any fatigue, I was
asleep.

That was a lucky thing, for I was not destined to sleep much the
following night.  It was three o'clock when I awoke, and at first, as
always since my journey began, I could not remember where I was.  And,
as always, it was the thought of Jacqueline that recalled to me my
surroundings.

I sprang to my feet and made hasty preparations to resume my journey.

A short investigation showed me that I had come into a _cul-de-sac_,
for there was no path through the opposite hills.  There were, however,
a number of extensive caves in the porous limestone cliffs, any of
which might prove to be the sequence of the road.

The first thing that I perceived on beginning my search was that men
had been here before me.

What was the place?  A robbers' den?  A camp of outlaws?

In the first cave that I explored I found a stock of provisions--flour
and canned meats and matches--snugly stored away safe from the damp and
snow.  Near by were picks and shovels and three very reputable
blankets, with a miscellany of materials suggestive of the camping
party's outfit.

I might have been more surprised than I was, but my thoughts were
centred on Jacqueline, and the waning of the light showed me that the
sun must be well down in the sky.  I must get on at once if I were to
reach the _chateau_ that night.

But how?

I might have wandered for an indefinite time among those caves before
striking the road.  That I was off the track now seemed certain, for it
was obvious that no sleigh could pass through those walls.  The thin
drift of snow that had covered the ground was almost melted, but enough
remained to have showed the pad-prints of the dog, if it had passed
that way.

There was none; nor were there tracks of sleigh runners, which would,
at least, have scored them in the sandy ooze along the bed of the
rivulet.

I had evidently then strayed from the right course while wandering
through the tunnel, and thus come by mischance into this blind alley.

I had noticed, as I have said, that the path narrowed considerably
during the last few hundred feet that I had traversed before I reached
this open place.  In the darkness I might easily have debouched along
one of the numerous paths which, no doubt, existed all through the
interior of this limestone formation.

I started back in haste and reentered the tunnel again, striking a
match every few seconds, lighting each by its predecessor.

I had been travelling back for about ten minutes when I noticed at my
feet the charred stump of a match that I had thrown away some time
before.  I looked around me and saw that I was again in the main road.
There were the faint depressions caused by the sleigh runners in the
soft stone, and the roof and side walls of the tunnel again stretched
away into the obscurity around me.

Satisfied that I had retraced my steps sufficiently far, I turned about
and began to proceed cautiously in the opposite direction, keeping this
time as far as possible to the right of the road instead of to the
left, as before.  The box of matches which I had brought with me was
nearly exhausted, but, by shielding each one carefully, I was able to
examine my ground with fair assurance of my being in the right course.

A draft was now beginning to blow quite strongly inward, and this
convinced me that I was approaching the tunnel's end.

As I proceeded I kept looking to the left to endeavor to locate the
narrow passage into which I had strayed, but it must have been the
merest opening in the wall, so small that only a miracle of chance had
led me into it, for I saw nothing but the straight passage before me.

Presently I began to hear a murmur of water in the distance, and then a
faint flicker of light.  The ground began to grow softer, and now I was
treading upon ooze and mud instead of rock.

The murmur increased in a sonorous crescendo until the full cadence of
the mighty waterfall burst on my ears.

A fiery ball seemed to fill the exit.  The red sun, barred with bands
of coal-black cloud, was dipping into the farther verge of the lake.

The thunder of the cataracts filled my ears.  A fine spray, like a
garment of filmy silk, obscured my clearer vision; but through and
beyond it, between two torrents that sailed above like crystal bows, I
saw the _chateau_ before me.




CHAPTER XIII

THE ROULETTE-WHEEL

I stared at the scene in amazement, for the transition from the dark
tunnel through which I had come was an astounding one, and I could
hardly believe the evidence of my eyes.

I had passed right through the hollow heart of those mighty hills and
now stood underneath the huge glacier, with its million tons of ice
above me, from which the cataracts tumbled, drenching me with spray,
though I was fully a hundred yards away from the log _chateau_.

The building was located, as I had surmised, upon a narrow strip of
land, invisible from above except where its tongue, containing the
enclosed yard, ran out into the lake.  It stood far back beneath the
over-hanging ledge and seemed to be secured against the living rock.
It was evident that there was no other approach except the tunnel
through which I had come, for all around the land that turbulent
whirlpool raved, where the two cataracts contended for the mastery of
the waters.

And for countless ages they must have fought together thus, and neither
gained, not since the day when those mountains rose out of the primeval
ooze.

Within the enclosed space, which was larger than I had thought on
viewing it from above, were two or three small cabins--inhabited,
probably, by habitant or half-breed dependents of the seigneur.

I must have crouched for nearly an hour at the tunnel entrance, staring
in stupefied wonder--for it grew dark, and one by one lights began to
flare at the windows until the whole north wing and central portion of
the building were illuminated.  But the south wing, nearest me, was
dark, and I surmised that this portion was not occupied.

Fortune still seemed to favour me, and with this conclusion and the
thought of Jacqueline, I gained courage to advance again.

It was almost dark now and growing bitterly cold.  I felt in my pocket
for my pistol and loaded it with the two cartridges that alone remained
of the lot I had brought with me.  Then I advanced stealthily until I
stood beneath the cataract; and here I found the spray no longer
drenched me.  The splendid torrent shot out like a crystal-arch above
me--so strong and compact that only those at some distance could feel
the mist that veiled it like a luminous garment.

I came upon a door in the dark wing and, turning the handle
noiselessly, found myself inside the _chateau_.  And at once my ears
were filled with yells and coarse laughter in men's and women's voices.

There was no storm-door, and the interior of the _chateau_--at least,
the wing in which I found myself--was almost as cold as the outside.  I
stood still, hesitating which way to take.  A fiddle was being played
somewhere, and the bursts of noisy laughter sounded at intervals.

As my eyes became accustomed to my surroundings I perceived that I was
standing near the foot of an uncarpeted wooden stairway.  There was a
dark room with an open door immediately in front of me, and another at
the farther end of the passage, from beneath which a glimmer of light
issued, and it was from this room that the sounds of laughter and music
came.

While I was pondering upon my next movement, heavy footsteps fell on
the story above me, and a man began coming down the stairs.  I stole
into the dark room in front of me, and had hardly ensconced myself
there than he brushed past and went into the room at the end of the
hallway.

And I was certain that he was Leroux.

It was evident that he had not closed the door behind him, for the
sounds of the fiddle and of the revellers became much more distinct, I
had left my snowshoes near the entrance to the tunnel, and my moccasins
made no sound upon the floor.

I crept out of my hiding place and went toward the open door.  As I had
surmised, this was the place of the assemblage.  I crouched there, with
my pistol in my hand.  On the opposite side of the room Simon Leroux
was standing, a sneering smile upon his face.

The scene I saw through the crack of the door quite took my breath away.

The room was an enormous one, evidently forming the entire central
portion of the _chateau_.  It was a ballroom, or had been a ballroom,
once, for it had a wide hardwood floor, somewhat worn and uneven.  The
walls were hung with portraits, evidently of the owner's ancestors, for
I caught a glimpse of several faces in wigs and periwigs.

The furniture was of an old type.  Pushed against one wall, near where
Leroux stood, was an ancient piano, and standing upon the other side an
old man played upon a violin.

He must have been nearly eighty years of age.  His face had fallen in
over the toothless gums, leaving the prominent cheek-bones protruding
like those of a skull, and his head was a heavy mat of straight grey
hair.  He looked like a full-blooded Indian.

Two couples were dancing on the floor.  Each man had an Indian woman.
One was middle-aged; the other, a comely young girl with heavy silver
earrings, was laughing noisily as her companion dragged her to a
standstill in front of the fiddler.

"Play faster, Pierre Caribou!" he yelled, pushing the old man backward.

It was the man with the patch!

"Be quiet, Jean Petitjean!" exclaimed the girl, giving him a mock blow.
"Thou shall not hurt my father!"

They laughed drunkenly and resumed the dance.  The man with the older
woman was not--greatly to my surprise--Jean Petitjean's companion of
the night.  The woman was addressing him as Raoul.  She seemed trying
to quiet him, for he was shouting boisterously as he twirled.

From his post across the room Leroux watched the proceedings with his
sneering smile.

Flaring candles were set in sconces of wrought iron around the room,
casting a pallid light upon the scene, and so unreal it would have been
but for my recognition of the men that I might have expected it to
disappear before my eyes.

I crept back from the door and, tracing my journey along the corridor,
began to ascend the stairs.

On the first story I perceived a number of rooms, but those whose doors
were open were dark and apparently empty.  I imagined that all the
magnificence of the _chateau_ was concentrated in that big ballroom.

The corridor on the first story had smaller passages opening out of
it--one at each end.  I turned to the left.  Now the sound of the
cataracts, which had never left my ears, became a din.  The passages
were full of stale tobacco smoke.  And advancing I suddenly found
myself face to face with Philippe Lacroix.

He was seated at a table in a room writing, and I came right upon the
door before I was aware of it.  I saw his thin face with the little
upturned mustache and the cold sneer about the mouth; and I think I
should have shot him if he had looked up.  But he neither heard nor saw
me, but wrote steadily, puffing at a vile cigar, and I crept back from
the door.

Thank God, Jacqueline was not among those brutes below!  But I
shuddered to think of her environment here.

I turned back and followed the corridor to the right, and came to a
little hall toward the rear of the building, as I judged, where the
noise of the torrents was less loud, although I now perceived that the
_chateau_ was in a continual mild tremor from the force of their
discharge.

The windows in this little hall were broken in several places, and had
evidently been in this condition for a long time, for they were covered
with strips of paper, through which the wind entered in chilling gusts.
Beyond me was an open door, and behind it I saw the dull glow of a
stove and felt its heat.

I approached cautiously and looked in.

I never saw a room so littered and uncared for.  There were books
around the walls and books upon the floor, covered with dust; there was
dust and dirt and debris everywhere, and spider-webs along the walls
and ceiling.  The impression of the whole place was that of ruin.

Facing me, above a cracked and ancient mirror, were two rusty
broad-swords, and in the mirror I saw a large, oaken table reflected.
Seated at it, clothed in a threadbare coat of very ancient fashion, was
an old man with long, snow-white hair and a white, forked beard.  He
was busily transferring a stack of gold-pieces from his right to his
left side; and then he began scribbling on a sheet of paper.  He paid
me not the smallest attention as I entered.

Not even when I stood beside him did he look up, but went on sorting
out his coins and jotting down figures upon the paper.  Sheets of it,
covered with penciled figures, stood everywhere stacked upon the table,
and other sheets were strewn among the books upon the floor; and while
I watched, the old man laid aside the sheet he had been writing on and
drew another sheet from the top of a thick pile beside him.

There was a door behind his chair leading, I imagined, into a
lumber-room.  I walked around the room and looked through it, but the
place beyond was dark.

Then I came back to the old man, who still paid me not the least
attention.

Now I perceived that the top of the table was very curiously designed.
It was marked off with squares and columns, and in each square were
figures in black and red.  Upon one end of the table at which the old
man sat was a cup-shaped, circular affair of very dark wood--teak, it
resembled--once delicately inlaid with pearl.  But now most of the
inlay had disappeared, leaving unsightly holes.

At the bottom of the cup were a number of metallic compartments, and
the whole interior portion was revolving slowly at a turn of the old
man's fingers.

He picked a tiny ivory ball from the table and placed it in the cup.
He set the interior spinning and the ball circulating in the reverse
direction.  The sphere clicked and clattered as it forced its way among
the metallic strips.

It may seem strange that I did not at first recognize a roulette-wheel.
But the game is more a diversion of the rich than of those with whom
fortune had thrown me.  Gambling had never appealed to me, and I knew
roulette only by reputation.

The ball stopped and settled in one of the compartments, and the old
man took a gold-piece from one of the squares on the table, transferred
a little pile of gold from his right side to his left, and jotted down
some figures upon his paper.

And suddenly I was aware of an abysmal rage that filled me.  It seemed
like an abominable dream--the futile old man, the ruffians and their
wenches below.  And I had endured so much for Jacqueline, to find
myself immeshed in such things in the end.  I stepped forward and swept
the entire heap of gold into the centre of the table.

"M. Duchaine!" I shouted.  "Why are you playing the fool here when your
daughter is suffering persecution?"

The old man seemed to be aware of my presence for the first time.  He
looked up at me out of his mild old eyes, and shook his head in
apparent perplexity.

"You are welcome, _monsieur_," he said, half rising with a courtly air.
"Do you wish to stake a few pieces in a game with me?"

He gathered up a handful of the coins and pushed them toward me.

"Of course, we shall give back our stakes at the end," he continued,
eyeing me with a cunning expression, in which I seemed to detect
avarice and madness, too.

"This is just to see how well we play.  Afterward, if we are satisfied,
we will play for real money--real gold."

He began to divide the gold-pieces into two heaps.

"You see, _monsieur_, I have a system--at least, I nearly have a
system," he went on eagerly.  "But it may not be so good as yours.
Come.  You shall be the banker, and see if you can win my money from
me.  But we shall return the stakes afterward."

"M. Duchaine!" I shouted in his ear.  "Where is your daughter?"

"My daughter," he repeated in mild surprise.  "Ah, yes; she has gone to
New York to make our fortune with the system.  You see," he continued
with senile cunning, "she has taken away the system, and so I am not
sure whether I can beat you.  But make your play, _monsieur_."  There
was at least no indecision in the manner in which he set the wheel
spinning.

I did not know what to do.  I was fascinated and bewildered by the
situation.

In desperation I thrust a gold-piece upon one of the numbers at the
head of a column.  The wheel stopped, and the ball rolled into one of
its compartments.  The old man thrust several gold-pieces toward me.

I staked again and again, and won every time.  Within five minutes the
whole heap of gold-pieces lay at my side.

The dotard looked at me with an expression of imbecile terror.

"You will give them back to me?" he pleaded.  "Remember, _monsieur_, it
was agreed that we should return the money."

I thrust the heap of coins toward him.  "Now, M. Duchaine," I said; "in
return for these you will conduct me to Mlle. Jacqueline."

He shook his head as though he had not understood.

"It is very strange," he said.  "I do not understand it at all.  The
system cannot be at fault; and yet----"

I snatched the paper from his grasp and threw it on the floor, then
pulled him to his feet.

"Enough of this nonsense, M. Duchaine," I said.  "Will you conduct me
to Mlle. Jacqueline immediately, or shall I go and find her?"

"I am here, _monsieur_," answered a voice at the door; and I whirled,
to see Jacqueline confronting me.




CHAPTER XIV

SOME PLAIN SPEAKING

I took three steps toward her and stood still.  For this was
Jacqueline; but it was not _my_ Jacqueline.  It might have been
Jacqueline's grandmother when she was a girl--this haughty belle with
her high waist and side curls, and her flounced skirt and aspect of
cold recognition.

She did not stir as I approached her, but stood still, framed in the
door-way, looking at me as though I were an unwelcome stranger.  My
outstretched arms fell to my sides.  I halted three paces in front of
her.  There was no answering welcome on her face, only a cold little
smile that showed she knew me.

"Jacqueline!" I cried.  "It is I, Paul!  You know me, Jacqueline?"

Jacqueline inclined her head.  "Oh, yes; I know you, _monsieur_," she
answered.  "Why have you come here?"

"To see you, Jacqueline!  To save you, Jacqueline!"

She made me a mocking courtesy.  "I am infinitely obliged to you,
_monsieur_, for your good will," she said; "but I do not need your aid.
I am with friends now, M.--M. Paul!"

I withdrew a little way and leaned my hand against the table for
support, breathing heavily.  Behind me I heard the click, click of the
roulette-ball as it pursued its course around the wheel.  The old
dotard had already forgotten me, and was playing with his right hand
against his left again.

"Do you not want to see me, Jacqueline?" I asked, watching her through
a whirling fog.

"No, _monsieur_," she answered chillingly.  "No, _monsieur_!"

"Do you wish me to go?"

She said nothing, and I walked unsteadily toward the door.  She
followed me slowly.  I went out of the room and pulled the door to
behind me.  I knew that after it had closed I should never see
Jacqueline again.

She opened it and stood confronting me; and then burst into a flood of
impassioned speech.

"Why have you followed me here to persecute me?" she cried.  "Are you
under the illusion that I am helpless?  Do you think the friends who
rescued me from you have forgotten that you exist?  You took advantage
of my helplessness.  I do not want to see you.  I hate you!"

"You told me that you loved me, and I believed you, Jacqueline," I
answered miserably, watching the colour flame to her lovely face.  And
I could see she remembered that.

"When I was ill you used me for your own base schemes," she went on
with cutting emphasis.  "And you--you followed me here.  Do you think
that I am unprotected, and that you are dealing only with an old man
and a helpless woman?  Why, I have friends who would come in and kill
you if I but raised my voice!"

"Raise your voice, _mademoiselle_.  I am ready for your friends," I
answered.

She looked less steadily at me and seemed to waver.

"What have you come for?" she asked.  "Have you not had money enough?
Do you want more?"

I seized her by the wrists.  Thus I held her at arm's length, and my
fingers tightened until I saw the flesh grow white beneath them.  The
intensity of my rage beat hers down and made it a puny thing.

"Jacqueline!  You take me for an adventurer?" I cried.  "Is _that_ what
they told you?  Why do you think I brought you so near your home when
you were, as you said, helpless?  Only a few nights ago you said you
loved me; that you would never send me away until I wished to go.  What
is it that has happened to change you so, Jacqueline?"

I had her in my arms.  She struggled fiercely, and I let her go.

"How dare you, _monsieur_!" she panted.  "Go at once, or I shall call
for aid!"

So I went into the passage; and as I left the room I could still hear
the hellish click of the ivory ball in the roulette-wheel.  I was
utterly confounded.

But before I reached the end of the little hall Jacqueline came running
back to me.

"Monsieur!" she gasped.  "M. Paul!  For the sake of--of what I once
thought you, I do not want you to be seen.  You are in dreadful danger.
Come back!"

"Never mind the danger, _madame_," I answered, and I saw her flinch at
the word and look at me in dazed bewilderment.  "Never mind my danger."

"It is for your own sake, _monsieur_," she said more gently.

"No, Mme. d'Epernay," I answered; and she winced again, as though I had
struck her across the face.

"For my sake," she pleaded, catching at my arm, and at that moment I
heard a door slam underneath and heavy footsteps begin slowly to ascend
the stairs.

"No, _madame_," I answered, trying to release my arm from her clasp.
Her face was full of fear, and I knew it was fear of the man below, not
me.

"Then for the sake of--our love, Paul!" she gasped.

I suffered her to lead me back into the room.  In truth, I was in no
hurry to go.  As she drew me back and closed the door behind us I heard
the footsteps pause and turn along the corridor.

I knew that heavy gait as well as though I already saw Leroux's hard
face before my eyes.

Jacqueline pushed me inside the room behind her father's chair and
closed, but did not hasp, the door.  The room was completely dark, and
I did not know whether it connected with other rooms or was a mere
closet, but the freshness of the air in it inclined me to the former
view.

Over my head the torrent roared, and I had to stand very close to the
door to hear what passed.

I heard Leroux tramp in and his voice mingling with the _click-click_
of the ball in the roulette-wheel.

"Who is here?" he demanded.

"I am," answered Jacqueline.

"I thought I heard Lacroix," said Leroux thickly.

"I have not seen M. Lacroix to-day," Jacqueline returned.

Leroux stamped heavily about the room and then sat down.  I heard the
legs of his chair scratch the wooden floor as he drew it up to the
table.

"_Maudit_!" he burst out explosively.  "Where is d'Epernay?  I am tired
of waiting for him!"

"I have told you many times that I do not know," answered Jacqueline;
and there followed the _click-click_ of the ball inside the wheel again.

"How long will you keep up this pretense, _madame_?" cried Leroux
angrily.  "What have you to gain by concealing the knowledge of your
husband from me?"

"M. Leroux, why will you not believe that I remember nothing?" answered
Jacqueline.

"How can you have forgotten?  Why did you run away after marrying him?
What were you doing in New York?  Who was the man who accompanied you
to the Merrimac?" he shouted.

Through the chink of the door I saw the old man look up in mild protest
at the disturbing sounds.  I clenched my fists, and the temptation to
make an end of Leroux was almost too strong for my restraint.

But to Jacqueline the insult conveyed no meaning, and Leroux continued
in more moderate tones.

"Come, _madame_, why do you not play fair with me?" he asked.  "Who is
that man Hewlett, and why did he accompany you so far toward your
_chateau_?  Before God, I know your husband and he have been plotting
with Tom Carson against me, but why he should thus place himself in my
power I cannot understand."

"Ah, you have spoken of a Tom Carson many times," said Jacqueline.
"Soon, _monsieur_, I shall begin to believe that such a person really
exists."

"Tell me where you met Hewlett."

"I tell you for the last time, _monsieur_, that I do not remember.  But
what I do remember I shall tell you.  After my father had turned M.
Louis d'Epernay out of his home, whither he had come to beg money to
pay his gambling debts, you brought him back.  You made my father take
him in.  He wanted to marry me.  But I refused, because I had no love
for him.  But you insisted I should marry him, because he had gained
you the entrance to the seigniory and helped you to acquire your power
over my father.  Oh, yes, _monsieur_, let us be frank with each other,
as you have expressed the desire to be."

"Go on," growled Leroux, biting his lips.  "Perhaps I shall learn
something."

"Nothing that you do not already know, _monsieur_," she flashed out
with spirit.  "My father came here, long ago, a political fugitive, in
danger of death.  You knew this, and you played upon his fears.  You
brought your friends and encouraged him to gamble and waste his money
in his old age, when his mind had become enfeebled.

"Yes, you played on the old gambling instinct which had laid dormant in
him for forty years.  You made him think he was acting the _grand
seigneur_, as his father had done in earlier days, in his other home at
St. Boniface.

"You drained him of his last penny, and then you offered him ten
thousand dollars to gamble with in Quebec, telling him of the delights
of the city and promising him immunity," the girl went on
remorselessly.  "And for this he was to assign his property to Louis,
thinking, of course, that he could soon make his fortune at the tables.
And Louis was to marry me, and in turn sell the seigniory to you.  And
so I married Louis under threat of death to my father.

"Oh, yes, _monsieur_, the plan was simple and well devised.  And I knew
nothing of it.  But Louis d'Epernay blurted it all out to me upon our
wedding night.  I think the shame of knowing that I had been sold to
him unhinged my mind, for I ran out into the snows.

"Now you know all, _monsieur_, for I remember nothing more until I
found myself travelling back with M. Hewlett in the sleigh.  You say I
was in New York.  Well, I do not remember it.

"And as for Louis d'Epernay, I know nothing of him--but I will die
before he claims me as his wife!"

She had grown breathless as she proceeded with her scathing
denunciation and now stood facing him with an aspect of fearless
challenge on her face.  And then I had the measure of Leroux.  He
laughed, and he beat down her scorn with scorn.

"You have underestimated your price, _madame_," he sneered.  "Since you
have learned so much, I will tell you more.  You have cost me twenty
thousand dollars, and not ten; for besides the ten thousand paid to
your father, Louis got ten thousand also, upon the signing of the
marriage contract.  So swallow that, and be proud of being priced so
high!  And the seigniory is already his, and I am waiting for him to
return and sell me the ground rights for twenty-five thousand more, and
if I know Louis d'Epernay he will not wait very long to get his fingers
round it."

Jacqueline stood watching him with supreme indifference.

The man's coarse gibes had flown past her without wounding her, as they
would have hurt a lower nature.

"No doubt he will return," she answered quietly.  "If he would take ten
thousand for me, surely he will take twenty-five thousand for the
seigniory.  You have us in your power."

"Then why the devil doesn't he come?" roared Leroux.  "If he is
intriguing with Carson, by God, I know enough to shut him up in jail
the rest of his life.  And so, _madame_," he ended quietly, "it will
perhaps be worth your while to tell me why Tom Carson sent this Hewlett
back to the _chateau_; for no doubt the wolves have picked him pretty
clean by now."

"Listen to me, Simon Leroux," said Jacqueline, standing up before him,
as indomitable in spirit as he.  "All your plots and schemes mean
nothing to me.  My only aim is to take my father away from here, from
you and M. d'Epernay, and let you wrangle over your spoil.  There are
more than four-legged wolves, M. Leroux; there are human ones, and,
like the others, when food is scarce they prey upon each other."

"I like your spirit!" exclaimed Simon, staring at her with frank
admiration.

And Jacqueline's head drooped then.  Unwittingly Simon had pierced her
defences.

But he never knew, for before he had time to know the grey-beard rose
upon his feet and rubbed his thin hands together, chuckling.

"Never mind your money, Simon," he said.  "I'm going to be richer than
any of you.  Do you know what I did with that ten thousand?  I gave it
to my little daughter, and she has gone to New York to make our
fortunes at Mr. Daly's gaming-house.  No, there she is!" he suddenly
exclaimed.  "She has come back!"

Leroux wheeled round and looked from one to the other.

"So that was the purpose of your visit to New York?" he asked the girl.
"So--you have not quite forgotten that, _madame_!  Your price was not
too vile a thing for you to take it to New York with you!  Your shame
was not too great for you to remember that your father had ten thousand
dollars!"

"It was not mine," she flashed back at Leroux.  "My father would have
lost it again to you.  I took it to New York because I thought that I
could make enough to give him a home during the rest of his days.  Do
you think I would have touched a penny of it, _monsieur_?"

"I don't know," answered Leroux.  "But we will soon find out.  Where is
that money, _madame_?"

Jacqueline's lips quivered.  I saw her glance involuntarily toward the
door behind which I was standing.

And suddenly the last phase of the problem became clear to me.
Jacqueline thought I had robbed her.

I stepped from behind the door and faced Leroux.  "I have that money,"
I said curtly.

I saw his face turn white.  He staggered back, and then, with a bull's
bellow, rushed at me, his heavy fists aloft.  I think he could have
beaten out my brains with them.

But he stopped short when he saw my automatic pistol pointing at his
chest.  And he saw in my face that I was ready to shoot to kill.

"You thief--you spy--you treacherous hound, I'll murder you!" he roared.

The dotard, who had been looking at me, came forward.

"No, no, I won't have him murdered, Simon," he protested, laying a
trembling hand on Leroux's shoulder.  "He has almost as good a roulette
system as I have."




CHAPTER XV

WON--AND LOST

We must have stood confronting each other for fully a minute.  Then
Leroux dropped his hands and smiled sourly at me.

"You seem--temporarily--to have the advantage of me, M. Hewlett," he
said.  "I respect your pertinacity, and now at last I am content in
having discovered the motive of your enterprise.  I thought you were
hired by Carson.  If you had been frank with me we might have come to
an understanding long ago.

"So, since you have managed to come thus far, and since I am a man of
business, the best thing we can do is to talk over our difficulties and
try to adjust them.  You will recall that on the occasion of our
meeting in New York I asked you what your price was.  But of course you
were not then prepared to answer me, since you had your price already.
Well, have you come here to get more?"

There was an indescribable insolence in his tone.  In spite of the fact
that I had him at my mercy, the man's force and courage almost made him
my master then.

"You may leave us, Mme. d'Epernay," he said to Jacqueline.  "No doubt
your absence will spare your feelings, for we are going to be frank in
our speech."

"I thank you for your consideration, M. Leroux," replied Jacqueline,
and walked quietly out of the room.  It occurred to me that Leroux
could hardly be more frank than he had been, but I sat down and waited.
The ball was clicking round the wheel again, and very faintly, through
the roar of the cataracts, I heard the sound of the fiddle below.

Leroux sat down heavily.

"I will put down my cards," he said.  "I have you here in my power.  I
have four men with me.  This dotard"--he glanced contemptuously at old
Duchaine--"has no bearing on the situation.  You can, of course, kill
me; but that would not help you.  You are in possession of some money
belonging to Mme. d'Epernay, and also of certain information that I
shall be glad to receive.  There is no law in this valley except my
will.  Give me the information I want, keep your money, and go."

I waited.

"In the first place, are you, or are you not, in Carson's pay?  I shall
believe your answer because, if you are, I shall offer you a better
price to join me, and therefore it will not pay you to lie.  But you
will not be able to deceive me by pretending to be."

"I am not," I answered.

"Then why did he send you here?"

"I left his employ three days before I met Mme. d'Epernay.  If you were
in New York you must have seen that I was not there."

"Good.  Second, where is Louis d'Epernay?"

"I have never seen the man," I replied.

Leroux glanced incredulously at me.

"Then your meeting with _madame_ was purely an accident?" he inquired.
"Your only desire, then, was to get the money you knew she was carrying
with her?  But how did you know that she was carrying that money?"

I shrugged my shoulders.  How was it possible for us to reach an
understanding?

"I don't know why you are lying to me," he said.  "It is not to your
advantage.  You must have known that she was in New York; Louis must
have told Carson, and he must have told you.  And Louis must have told
you the secret of the entrance, unless----"

"Listen to me!" I cried furiously.  "I will not be badgered with any
more questions.  I have told you the truth.  I met Mme. d'Epernay by
accident, and I escorted her toward the _chateau_, and followed her
after you kidnapped her, to protect her from you."

He grunted and glanced at me with an inscrutable expression upon his
hard features.

"You are in love with her?" he asked.

"Put it that way if you choose," I answered.

He scowled at me ferociously, and then he began studying my face.  I
returned stare for stare.  Finally he banged his big fist down upon the
table.

"Well, it doesn't matter," he said, "because, whatever your purpose,
you cannot do any harm.  And you understand that she is a married
woman.  So you will, no doubt, agree to take your money and depart?"

"I shall go if she tells me to go," I answered; but even while I spoke
my heart sank, for I had little hope.

"That is easily settled," answered Leroux.  "I will bring her back and
you shall hear the decision from her own lips."

He left the room, and I sat there alone beside the dotard, listening to
the click of the ball and the chink of the coins, and the roar of the
twin cataracts above.

In truth, I had no further excuse for staying.  I knew what
Jacqueline's reply must be.

But there had been a sinister smoothness in Leroux's latest mood.  I
did not trust the man, for all his bluntness.  I suspected something,
and I did not intend to relax my guard.

A gentle touch upon the elbow made me leap round in my chair.  Old
Charles Duchaine had ceased to play and was watching me out of his mild
eyes.  His fingers stroked my coat-sleeve timidly, as though he were
afraid of me.

"Don't go away!" he said with a shrewd leer.  "Don't go away!"

"Eh?" I exclaimed, startled at this answer to my own self-questioning.

"Simon is a bad man," whispered the greybeard, putting his nodding head
close down to mine.  "He won't let you go away.  He never lets anyone
go when they have come here.  He didn't know my little daughter was
going, but I was too clever for him, because he wasn't here.  They
think I am a silly old man, but I know more than they think.  Simon
thinks he has got me in his power, but he hasn't."

"How is that?" I inquired, startled at the man's sincerity.  I fancied
that he must have been pretending to be half imbecile for reasons of
his own.

"I have a system," leered the dotard.  "I can win thousands and
millions with it.  I have been perfecting it for years.  I have sent my
little daughter to New York to play.  Then I shall put Simon out of the
house and we shall all be happy in Quebec together."

I turned from him in disgust, and, after ineffectually tapping my arm
for a few moments, he went back to his wheel.  But, though I was
disappointed to discover that my surmise as to his playing a part was
incorrect, his words set me thinking.  An imbecile old person is often
a fair reader of character.  Was Simon plotting something?

He came back with Jacqueline before I could decide.

"If you bid him, _madame_, M. Hewlett is willing to take his
departure," said Leroux to her.  "Is it your wish that he remain or go?"

"Oh, I want you to go, _monsieur_," said Jacqueline, clasping her hands
pleadingly.  Her eyes were full of tears, which trickled down her
cheeks, and she turned her head away.  "There is no reason why you
should remain, _monsieur_," she said.

"Are you saying this of your free will, Jacqueline?" I cried.

She nodded, and I saw Simon's evil face crease with suppressed mirth.

I rose up.  "Adieu, then, _madame_," I said.  "But first permit me to
restore the money that I have been keeping for you."  And I took out my
pocketbook.

Simon stared at me incredulously.

"I do not understand you in the least, now, M. Hewlett," he exclaimed.
"You are to keep the money.  I do not go back upon my bargains."

"It is not, however, your money," I retorted, though I knew that it
soon would be.  "I shall return it to Mme. d'Epernay, who entrusted me
with it.  Beyond that I care nothing as to its ultimate destination,
though perhaps I can guess.  Naturally I do not carry eight thousand
dollars about with me----"

"Ten thousand!" shouted Simon.

"Mme. d'Epernay gave me eight thousand," I said.  "I do not know
anything about ten thousand.  Probably Mr. Daly has the rest.  But, as
I was saying, I shall give you a check----"

Leroux burst into loud laughter and slapped me heartily upon the
shoulder.

"Paul Hewlett," he said, with genuine admiration, "you are as good as a
play.  My friend, it would have paid you to have accepted my own offer.
However, you declined it and I shall not renew it.  Well, let us take
your check, and it shall be accepted in full settlement."  He winked at
me and thrust his tongue into his cheek.

I was too sick at heart to pay attention to his buffoonery.  I sat down
at the table and, taking up a pen which lay there, wrote a check for
eight thousand dollars, making it out to Jacqueline d'Epernay.  This I
handed to her.

"_Adieu, madame_," I said.

"_Adieu, monsieur_," she answered almost inaudibly, her head bent low.

I went out of the room, still gripping my pistol, and I took care to
let Simon see it as we descended the stairs side by side.  The noisy
laughter in the ballroom had ceased, but I heard Raoul and Jean
Petitjean quarrelling, and their thick voices told me that they were in
no condition to aid their master.

Then there were only Leroux and Philippe Lacroix to deal with.  I could
have saved the situation.

What a fool I had been!  What an irresolute fool!  I never learned.

As we reached the bottom of the stairs Philippe Lacroix came out of the
ballroom carrying a candle.  I saw his melancholy, pale face twist with
surprise as he perceived me.

"Philippe, this is M. Paul Hewlett," said Leroux.  "To-morrow you will
convey him to the cabin of Pere Antoine, where he will be able to make
his own plans.  You will go by way of _le Vieil Ange_."

Lacroix started violently, muttered something, and passed up the
stairs, often turning to stare, as I surmised from the brief occasions
of his footsteps.

"Now, M. Hewlett, I shall show you your sleeping-quarters for
to-night," Leroux continued to me, and conducted me out into the fenced
yard.  A number of Eskimo-dogs were lying there, and one of them came
bounding up to me and began to sniff at my clothes, betraying every
sign of recognition.

This I knew to be the beast that I had taken to the home.  How it had
managed to make its escape I could not imagine; but it had evidently
come northward with hardly a pause; and not only that, but had
accompanied us on our journey from St. Boniface at a distance, like the
half-wild creature that it was.

Two sleighs were standing before the huts.  Leroux led me past them and
knocked at the door of the largest cabin.

"Pierre Caribou!" he shouted.

He was facing the door and did not see what I saw at the little window
on the other side.  I saw the face of the old Indian, distorted with a
grimace of fury as he eyed Leroux.

Next moment he stood cringing before him, his features a mask.  Looking
in, I saw a huge stove which nearly filled the interior, and seated
beside it the middle-aged squaw.

"This gentleman will sleep here to-night," said Leroux curtly.  "In the
morning at sunrise harness a sleigh for him and M. Lacroix.  Adieu, M.
Hewlett," he continued, turning to me.  "And be sure your check will
never be presented."

There was something so sinister in his manner that again I felt that
thrill of fear which he seemed able to inspire in me.

He was less human than any man I had known.  He impressed me always as
the incarnation of resolute evil.  That was his strength--he was both
bad and resolute.  If bad men were in general brave, evil would rule
the world as he ruled his.  He swung upon his heel and left me.

I went in with Pierre Caribou, and the squaw glided out of the cabin.
There were two couches of the kind they used to call ottomans inside,
which had evidently once formed part of the _chateau_ furnishings for
their faded splendour accorded little with the decrepit interior of the
hut.

I looked at my watch.  I had thought it must be midnight, and it was
only eight.  Within three hours I had won Jacqueline and lost her
forever.  With Leroux in my power, I had yielded and gone away.

And on the morrow I should arrive at Pere Antoine's hut just when he
expected me.

Surely the mockery of fate could go no further!

I sank down on one of the divans and buried my face in my hands, while
Pierre Caribou busied himself preparing food over the stove.




CHAPTER XVI

TEE OLD ANGEL

Presently the Indian touched me on the shoulder and I looked up.  He
had a plateful of steaming stew in his hands, and set it down beside me.

"Eat!" he said in English.

I was too dispirited and dejected to obey him at first.  But soon I
managed to fall to, and I was surprised to discover how ravenous I was.
I had eaten hardly anything for days, and only a few mouthfuls since
morning.

As I was eating there came a scratching at the door, and the Eskimo-dog
pushed its way into the cabin and came bounding to my side.  I stroked
and petted it, and gave it the remnants of my meal, while Pierre
watched us.

"You know him dog?" he asked.

"I saw it in New York," I answered.  "It brought me to Mlle.
Jacqueline."

My mind was very much alert just then.  It was as though some hidden
monitor within me had taken control to guide me through a maze of
unknown dangers.  It was that inner prompting which had forbidden me to
say "Mme. d'Epernay."

I had a consciousness of some impending horror.  And I was shaking and
all a sweat--with fear, too--gripping fear!

Yet the old name sounded as sweet as ever to my lips.

The Indian drew the stool near me and sat down.  "You meet Mlle.
Jacqueline in New York?" he asked.

"I brought her back," I answered.

"I know," the Indian answered.  "I meet Simon; drive him from St.
Boniface to _chateau_.  He want shoot you.  I say no, you blind man,
him leave you die in snow.  I take Ma'm'selle Jacqueline to St.
Boniface when she run 'way.  Simon not here then or I be 'fraid.  Simon
bad man.  He give my gal to Jean Petitjean.  My gal good gal till Simon
give her to Jean Petitjean.  Simon bad man.  Me kill him one day."

I saw a glimmer of hope now, though of what I hardly knew; or perhaps
it was only the desire to talk of Jacqueline and hear her name upon my
lips and Pierre's.

"Pierre Caribou," I said, "wouldn't you like to have the old days back
when M. Duchaine was master and there was no Simon Leroux?"

He did not answer me, but I saw his face-muscles twitch.  Then he
pulled a pipe from his pocket and stuffed it with a handful of coarse
tobacco.  He handed it to me and struck a match and held it to the bowl.

When the tobacco was alight he took another pipe and began smoking also.

I had not smoked for days, and I inhaled the rank tobacco-fumes through
the old pipe gratefully.  I was smoking, with an Indian, and that meant
what it has always meant.  A black cloud seemed to have been lifted
from my mind.  And I was not trembling any more.

But how warily I was reaching out toward my companion.

"Pierre, I came here to save Mlle. Jacqueline," I said.

"No can save him," he answered.  "No can fight against Simon."

"What, in the devil's name, is his power, then?" I cried.

"_Le diable_," he replied.  He may have misunderstood me, but the
answer was apt.  "No use fight him," he said.  "All finish now.  Old
times, him finish, and my gal, too.  Soon Pierre Caribou, him finish.
No can fight Simon.  Perhaps old Pierre kill him, nobody else."  He
looked steadily at me.  "I poison him dogs," he added.

"What?" I exclaimed.

"Simon, him tell me long ago nobody come to _chateau_.  So you finish,
too, maybe.  What he tell you, you go?"

"Lacroix is going to take me to Pere Antoine's cabin to-morrow
morning," I answered.

The Indian grunted.  "Simon no mean to let you go," he said.  "He mean
kill you.  You know too much.  Sometime he kill me, too, or I kill him.
Once I live in old _chateau_ at St. Boniface with old M'sieur Duchaine.
Good days then, not like how.  Hunt plenty game.  Fine people come from
Quebec, not like Simon.  M'sieur Charles small boy then.  All finish
now."

"Pierre," I said, taking him by the arm, "what is the Old Angel--_le
Vieil Ange_?"

He stared stolidly at me.

"Why you ask that?" he said.

"Because Lacroix has been instructed to take me by that route," I
answered.

Pierre said not a word, but smoked in silence.  I sat upon the couch
waiting.  His face was quite impassive, but I knew that my question was
of tremendous import to me.

At last he shook the ashes out of his pipe and rose.  "Come with me,"
he said.  "I show you--because you frien' of Ma'm'selle Jacqueline.
Come."

I followed him out of the hut.  A large moon was just rising out of the
east, but it was not yet high enough to cast much light.

Still Pierre seemed in deadly terror of Simon, for he motioned me to
creep, as he was creeping, out of the enclosure, bending low beside the
fence, so that a watcher from the _chateau_ might not detect our
silhouettes against the snow-covered lake.

When we were clear of the _chateau_, or, rather, the lit portion of it,
Pierre began to run swiftly, still in a crouching position, and in this
way we gained the tunnel entrance.

He took me by the arm, for it was too dark for me to follow him by
sight, and we traversed, perhaps, a mile of outer blackness.  Then I
began to see a gleam of moonlight in front of me, and, though I had not
been conscious of making any turn, I discovered that we must have
retraced our course completely, for I heard the roar of the cataracts
again.

Then we emerged upon a tiny shelf of rock some forty feet up the face
of the wall, and quite invisible from below.  It was a little above the
level of the _chateau_ roof, about a hundred yards away.  Below me I
could see the main entrance to the tunnel.

We had a foothold of about ten feet on the level platform, which was
slippery with smooth, black ice, and thundering over us, so near that I
could almost have touched it had I stretched out my hand, the whirling
torrent plunged into that hell below.

It was a terrific scene.  Above us that stream of white water,
resembling nothing so much as a high-pressure jet from a fireman's hose
magnified a thousand times, curved like a crystal arch, and so compact
by reason of its force that not a drop splashed us.  It was as strong
as a steel girder, and I think it would have cut steel.

Pierre caught my arm as I reeled, sick with the shock of the discovery,
and yelled into my ear above the dim.

"_Le Vieil Ange_!" he cried.  "This way Simon mean you to go to-morrow.
Lacroix him tell you: 'Get down, we find the road.'  He take you up
here and push you--so."

He made a graphic gesture with his arm and pointed.  I looked down,
shuddering, into the black, foam-crested water, bubbling and whirling
among the grotesque ice-pillars that stood like sentries upon the brink.

The horror of the plot quite unmanned me.  I groped for the shelter of
the tunnel, and clung to the rocky wall to save myself from obeying a
wild impulse to cast myself headlong into the flood below.

I perceived now that the whole face of the wall was honeycombed with
tunnels of natural formation running into the recesses of the
limestone.  I wondered that the whole structure, undermined thus and
pressed down by the weight of millions of tons of ice above where the
glacier lay, did not collapse and crumble down in ruin.

Rivulets gushed from the wall everywhere, mingling their contributory
waters with those of the twin torrents.  The plateau seemed to be the
watershed in which the drainage of the entire territory had its origin.
Within those connecting caves, if a man knew their secret, he might
hide from a regiment.

Pierre followed me to the mouth of the tunnel and gripped me by both
arms.

"What you do?" he asked.  "You go to Pere Antoine to-night?  What you
do now?"

I took the pistol from my coat pocket.

"Pierre," I answered, "I have two bullets here, and both of them are
for Simon.  To-night I had him in my power and spared him.  Now I am
going back, and I shall shoot him down like a dog, whether he is armed
or defenceless."

"You no shoot Simon," the Indian grunted.  "_Le diable_ him frien'.
You had him to-night; why you no shoot him then?"

I did not know.  But I was going to find out soon.

"I am going back to kill him now," I repeated.  "Afterward I do not
know what will happen.  But you can go on to the hut of Pere Antoine
and, if luck is with me, I shall meet you, there--perhaps with Mlle.
Jacqueline."

But I had little hope of meeting him with Jacqueline.  Only I could not
forbear to speak her name again.

Pierre's face was twitching.  "You no go back!" he cried.  "Simon he
kill you.  No use to fight Simon.  Him time not come yet.  When him
time come, he die."

"When will it come?" I asked, looking at the man's features, which were
distorted with frenzied hate.

"I not know!" exclaimed Pierre.  "I try find--cards to tell me.  No
Indian man in this part country remember how to tell me.  In old days
many could tell.  Now I wait.  When his time come, old Indian know.  He
kill Simon then himself.  Nobody else kill Simon.  No use you try."

I own that, standing there and thinking upon the man's hellish design,
his unscrupulousness, his singular success, I felt the old fear of
Leroux in my heart, and with it something of the same superstition of
his invulnerability.  But my resolution surpassed my fear, and I knew
it would not fail me.  How often had I resolved--and forgotten.  Not
again would I forget.

I shook the Indian's hands away and plunged forward into the tunnel
again.  I heard him calling after me; but I think he saw that I was not
to be deterred, for he made no attempt to follow me.

And so I went on and on through the darkness, and with each step toward
the _chateau_ my resolution grew.

I seemed to have been travelling for a much longer period than before.
Every moment, straining my eyes, I expected to see the light of the
entrance, but the road went on straight apparently, and there was
nothing but the darkness.

At last I stood still; and then, just as I was thinking of retracing my
steps, I felt a breath of air upon my forehead.

I hurried on again, and in another minute I saw a faint light in front
of me.  Presently it grew more distinct.  I was approaching the
tunnel's mouth.  But I stopped again.  I was waiting for something--to
hear something that I did not hear.  Then I knew that it was the sound
of the waterfalls.  In place of them there was only the gurgling of a
brook.

My elbow grated against the tunnel wall.  I stepped sidewise toward the
centre, and ran against the wall opposite.  Now, by the stronger light,
I could see that I had strayed once again into some byway, for the
passage was hardly three feet wide and the low roof almost touched my
head.

It narrowed and grew lower still; but the light of the stars was clear
in front of me and the cold wind blew upon my face; and I squeezed
through into the same scooped-out hollow which I had entered on the
same afternoon during the course of my journey toward the _chateau_.

I had approached it apparently through a mere fissure in the rocks upon
the opposite side and at a point where I had assured myself that there
could be no passage.  The little river gurgled at my feet, and in front
of me I saw a candle flickering in the recesses of a cave, so elfinlike
that I could distinguish it only by shielding my eyes against the moon
and stars.

I grasped my pistol tightly and crept noiselessly forward.  If this
should be Leroux, as I was convinced it was, I would not parley with
him.  I would shoot him down in his tracks.

My moccasined feet pressed the soft ground without the slightest sound.
I gained the entrance to the cave.  Within it, his back toward me, a
man was stooping down.

As I stepped nearer him my feet dislodged a pebble, which rolled with a
splash into the bed of the stream.

The man started and spun around, and I saw before me the pale,
melancholy features of Philippe Lacroix.




CHAPTER XVII

LOUIS D'EPERNAY

He uttered an oath and took two steps backward, but I saw that he was
unarmed and that he realized his helplessness.  He flung his hands
above his head and stood facing me, surprise and terror twisting his
features into a grimacing grin.

There was no man, next to Leroux, whom I would rather have seen.

"I wanted to see you, M. Hewlett," he babbled.

"I can quite believe that, M. Lacroix," I answered.  "You have looked
for me before.  But this time you have found me."

"I have something of importance to say to you, _monsieur_," he began
again.

"I can believe that, too," I answered.  "It is about _le Vieil Ange_,
is it not?"

"By God, I did not mean--I swear to you, _monsieur_--listen,
_monsieur_, one moment only," he stammered.  "Lower your pistol.  You
see that I am unarmed!"

I lowered it.  "Well, say what you have to say," I said to him.

"Leroux is a devil!" he burst out, with no pretended passion.  "I want
you to help me, M. Hewlett, and I can help you in a way you do not
dream of.  I am not one of his kind, to take his orders.  Why in Quebec
he would be like the dirt beneath my feet.  He has a hold over me; he
tempted me to gamble in one of his houses, and I--well, he has a hold
over me.  But he shall not drive me into murder.  M. Hewlett, how much
do you think this seigniory is worth?"

"I am not a financier," I answered.  "Some half a million dollars,
perhaps."

He came close to me and hissed into my ear: "_Monsieur_, there is more
gold in these rocks than anywhere in the world!  Look here!  Here!"

He stooped down and began tossing pebbles at my feet.  But they were
pebbles of pure gold, and each one of them was as large as the first
joint of my thumb.  And I had misjudged his courage, I think, for it
was avarice and not fear that made him tremble.

So that was Lacroix's master-passion!  I had always associated it with
decrepit old age, as in the case of Charles Duchaine.

I looked into the cave.  Lacroix was bending over a great heap of
sacks, piled almost to the roof.  They were sacks of earth, but the
earth was naked with gold, and I saw nuggets glittering in it.

"It is everywhere, _monsieur_!" cried Lacroix.  "In this stream, in
these hills, too.  You can gather a mortarful of earth anywhere, and it
will show colour when it is washed.  We found this place together----"

"You and Leroux?"

"No!  I and----"

He broke off suddenly and eyed me with furtive cunning.

"Yes, yes, _monsieur_, Leroux and I.  And we two worked here together,
with nothing more than picks and shovels and mortars and pestles,
Leroux and I.  There was nobody else.  We slept here when Duchaine
thought we were in Quebec.  For days and days we washed and dug, and we
have hardly scratched the surface.  Monsieur, it is the Mother Lode, it
is the world's treasure-house!  There are millions upon millions here!"

I understood now why the provisions had been stored there.  And I had
passed by and never known that there was an ounce of gold!  But----

"There are three blankets here," I said.

"Yes, yes, _monsieur_!" cried Lacroix eagerly.  "I suffer much from
cold.  Two of them are mine, and Leroux has only one.  It is the
richest gold deposit in the world, M. Hewlett, and neither Raoul nor
Jean Petitjean knows the secret--only Leroux and I.  One cannot light
upon this place save by a miracle of chance, such as brought you here.
God put this treasure in these hills, and He did not mean it to be
found."

I grasped him by the shoulder.  "Do you see what this means?" I shouted.

"It means a glorious life!" he cried.  "All the wealth in the world----"

"No, it means _death_!" I answered.  "It means that if Leroux succeeds
in killing me, he will kill you, too!  Don't you see that we must stand
together?  Do you suppose that he will share his hoard with you?"

"No, M. Hewlett," answered Lacroix quietly.  "And that is precisely
what I wanted to say to you.  You are not a hog like Leroux; I can
trust you.  And then you are a gentleman, and we gentlemen trust each
other.  I will give you a share in the gold, and you will get
_mademoiselle_.  She has no love for Louis.  She left him half an hour
after the marriage had been performed.  Leroux witnessed the ceremony,
and he hurried away with Pere Antoine, and then she ran away.  She
loves you!  And Louis will not trouble you!"

"Faugh!" I muttered.  "I don't want to hear your views on--on Mlle.
Jacqueline, my friend.  But it seems to me that our interests are
mutual, and, as it happens, I was on my way back to have it out with
Leroux when I stumbled upon this place."

"But I can show you the way," he exclaimed.  "Come with me, _monsieur_.
I don't know how you got into the wrong passage, but it is
simple--straight ahead.  Come with me!  I will precede you."

I followed him into the darkness, and very soon heard the sound of the
cataract again.  And then once more I was standing at the tunnel
entrance, under a brilliant moon, and the _chateau_ was before me.

It was all dark now, except for a glimmer of light that came from two
windows on the far side, visible indirectly as a reflection from the
snowy steeps beyond.  That must be Duchaine's room.

Leroux's I did not know, of course, but I surmised that it was one of
those on the same story, which I had passed while making my previous
tour of discovery.  But this ignorance did not cause me much concern.
I knew that, once we were face to face together, I should gain the
victory over him.

And I would be merciless and not falter.

And Jacqueline!  If I won, should I not keep her?  She was mine, even
against her will, by every rule of war.  And this was a world of war,
where beauty went to the strong, and all rules but that were scratched
from the book of life.

I would not even tread softly now, nor slink within the shadows.  Nor
did I fear Lacroix, although he had fallen out of sight behind me.

I strode steadily across the snow and opened the door in the dark wing,
entered the hall and ascended the stairway, took the turn to the right
and passed through the little hall.  As I had guessed, the light came
from Duchaine's room.

I heard Leroux's harsh voice within; and if I stopped outside it was
not in indecision, but because I meant to make sure of my man this time.

Through the crack of the door I saw old Charles Duchaine nodding over
his wheel.  Leroux was standing near him, and in a corner, beside the
window, was Jacqueline.  She was facing our common enemy as valiantly
as she had done before.  And he was still tormenting her.

"I want you, Jacqueline," I heard him say, in a voice which betrayed no
throb of passion.  "And I am going to have you.  I always have my way,
I am not like that weak fool, Hewlett."

"It was I sent him away, not you," she cried.  "Do you think he was
afraid of you?"

Leroux looked at her in admiration.

"You are a splendid woman, Jacqueline," he said.  "I like the way you
defy me.  But you are quite at my mercy.  And you are going to yield!
You will yield your will to mine----"

"Never!" she cried.  "I will fling myself into the lake before that
shall happen.  Ah, _monsieur_"--her voice took on a pleading tone--"why
will you not take all we have and let us go?  We are two helpless
people; we shall never betray your secrets.  Why must you have me too?"

"Because I love you, Jacqueline," he cried, and now I heard an
undertone of passion which I had not suspected in the man.  "I am not a
scoundrel, Jacqueline.  Life is a hard game, and I have played it hard.
And I have loved you for a long time, but I would not tell you until I
had the right as well as the power--but now my love is my law, and I
will conquer you!"

He caught her in his arms.  She uttered a little, gasping cry, and
struggled wildly and ineffectually in his grasp.

I was quite cold, for I knew that was to be the last of his villainies.
I entered the room and walked up to the table, my pistol raised, aiming
at his heart, and I felt my own heart beat steadily, and the will to
kill rise dominant above every hesitation.

Leroux spun round.  He saw me, and he smiled his sour smile.  He did
not flinch, although he must have seen that my hand was as steady as a
rock.  I could not withhold a certain admiration for the man, but this
did not weaken me.

"What, you again, _monsieur_?" he asked mockingly.  "You have come
back?  You are always coming back, aren't you?"

The truth of the diagnosis struck home to me.  Yes, I was always coming
back.  But this time I had come back to stay.

"Can I do anything further for you, M. Hewlett?" he asked.  "Was not
your bed comfortable?  Do you want something, or is it only habit that
has brought you back here where nobody wants you?"

"I have come back to kill you, Leroux," I answered, and pulled the
trigger six times.

And each time I heard nothing but the click of the hammer.

Then, with his bull's bellow, Simon was upon me, dashing his fists into
my face, and bearing me down.  My puny struggles were as ineffective as
though I had been fighting ten men.  He had me on the floor and was
kneeling on my chest, and in a trice the other ruffians had come
dashing along the hall.

Jacqueline was beating with her little fists upon Leroux's broad back,
but he did not even feel the blows.  I heard old Charles Duchaine's
piping cries of fear, and then somebody held me by the throat, and I
was swimming in black water.

"Bring a rope, Raoul!" I heard Simon call.

Half conscious, I knew that I was being tied.  I felt the rope tighten
upon my wrists and limbs; presently I opened my aching eyes to find
myself trussed like a chicken to two legs of the table.  I think it was
Jean Petitjean who said something about shooting me, and was knocked
down for it.  Leroux was yelling like a demoniac.  I saw Jacqueline's
terrified face and the trembling old man; and presently Leroux was
standing over me again, perfectly calm.

He had taken the pistol from my coat pocket and placed it on the table,
and now he took it in his hand and held it under my eyes.  The magazine
was empty.

"Ah, Paul Hewlett, you are a very poor conspirator, indeed," he said,
"to try to shoot a man without anything in your pistol.  Do you
remember how affectionately I put my arm round you when you were
sitting in that chair writing your ridiculous check?  It was then that
I took the liberty of extracting the two cartridges.  But I did think
you would have had sense to examine your pistol and reload before you
returned."

Jacqueline was clinging to him.  "Monsieur," she panted, "you will
spare his life?  You will unfasten him and let him go?"

"But he keeps coming back," protested Leroux, wringing his hands in
mock dismay.

"Spare him, _monsieur_, and God will bless you!  You cannot kill him in
cold blood," she cried.

"We will talk about that presently, my dear," he answered.  "Go and sit
down like a good child.  I have something more to ask this gentleman
before I make my decision."

He picked up a scrap of newspaper from the table and held it before my
eyes, deliberately turning up the oil-lamp wick that I might read it.
I recognized it at once.  It was the clipping from the newspaper,
descriptive of the murdered man, which I had cut out in the train and
placed in my pocketbook.

"You dropped this, my friend, when you pulled out your check-book,"
said Simon.  "You are a very poor conspirator, Paul Hewlett.  Assuredly
I would not have you on my side at any price.  Well?"

"Well?" I repeated mechanically.

"Who killed him?" he shouted.

He shook the paper before my eyes and then he struck me across the face
with it.

"Who killed Louis d'Epernay?" he yelled, and Jacqueline screamed in
fear.

"I did," I answered after a moment.




CHAPTER XVIII

THE LITTLE DAGGER

Leroux staggered back against the wall and stood there, scowling like a
devil.  It was evident that my answer had been totally unexpected.  I
had never seen him under the influence of any overwhelming emotion, and
I did not at the time understand the cause of his consternation.

Jacqueline was clinging to her father, and the old man looked from one
to the other of us in bewilderment, and shook his white head and
mumbled.

"Did you--know this, _madame_?" cried Leroux fiercely to Jacqueline.

"Yes," she replied.

"So this is why you pretended to have forgotten.  You remembered
everything?"

"Yes."

"You lied to shield yourself?"

"No, to shield him," she cried.  "Because he was my only friend when I
was helpless in a strange city.  You did not steal my money, did you,
Paul?" she added, turning swiftly upon me.  "No, you have paid me.  You
were keeping it for me."

"You lie!" yelled Leroux, and he struck her across the mouth as he had
struck me.

I writhed in my bonds.  I pulled the heavy table after me as I tried
impotently to crawl toward him, sending the wheel flying and all the
papers whirling through the air.  I cursed Leroux as blasphemously as
he was cursing Jacqueline.  I saw a trickle of blood on her cut lip,
and the proud smile upon her face as she defied him.

And at the door was the pale face of Philippe Lacroix.

Leroux turned on me and kicked me savagely, and dragged the table to
the far end of the room, and struck me repeatedly, while I struggled
like a madman.  The oaths and execrations that streamed from my lips
seemed to be uttered by another man, for I heard them indifferently, or
rather something that was I, deep in the maze of my personality, heard
them--not that pitiful, puny, goaded thing that fought in its bonds
until it ceased, panting and exhausted.

There followed a long silence, while Leroux strode furiously about the
room.  At last he stopped; he seemed to have made up his mind.

"I understand now," he said, nodding his head.  "So you are the man who
took this woman to the Merrimac.  And then to your home, and Louis
d'Epernay followed you there, and, naturally, you killed him.  Well, it
is intelligible.  You were not acting for Carson after all, but were
infatuated with this woman.  Well--but----"  He wheeled and turned to
Jacqueline.  "I will marry you still!"

She did not deign to answer him nor to wipe away the blood that
trickled down her chin.

"Do you know why?" he bawled.

She raised her eyes indifferently to his.  I saw that, though her
spirit was unbroken, she was weary to death.

"Because you become part heir of the seigniory by your husband's
death!" he shouted; and then he took Charles Duchaine by the arm and
began shaking him violently.

"Listen, you old fool!" he cried.  "Your son-in-law is dead--Louis
d'Epernay!"

Charles Duchaine looked at Leroux in his mild way.  He had put one arm
round his daughter, and he seemed to understand that Simon was
maltreating her, and to wish to defend her; but his wits were still
wandering, and I saw that he understood only a little of what was
passing.

"Louis d'Epernay is dead!" cried Simon, shaking the old man again.

"Well, well!" answered Duchaine, stroking his long beard with his free
hand.  "So Louis is dead!  Did you kill him, Simon?"

"No, I didn't kill him," Simon sneered.  "Wake up a little more,
Duchaine.  Do you know what happens now he is dead?"

"I expect you to get some more money, Simon," answered the old man with
an ingenuousness that made the reply more stinging than any intended
irony.

Leroux burst into a mirthless laugh.

"You are quite right, Duchaine," he answered.  "And I am not going to
mince matters.  I have a hold over you, and you will do my bidding.
You will assign your share to me as your son-in-law."

I saw Jacqueline looking at me.  I would not meet her gaze, but at last
her persistence compelled me.  Then I saw her glance toward the wall.

The two broadswords hung there, within arm's reach, above the broken
mirror.  My heart leaped up at the thought of her valour.  She had no
mind to yield!

But I shook my head imperceptibly in answer, and looked down at my
bonds.

"I don't want you to marry my daughter, Simon," said old Duchaine
mildly.  "I saw you strike her in the face just now.  No gentleman
would do that.  Come, Simon, you know you are not a gentleman; you
ought not to think of such a thing.  Jacqueline would not be happy with
you.  What does she say?"

"I don't care what she says," snarled Leroux.  "I will take care of
that."

I had been trying hard to devise some method of freeing myself.  My
struggles had relaxed the ropes around my wrists sufficiently to allow
my hands two or three inches of movement, and I hoped, by hard work, to
loosen them sufficiently to enable me to get at least one hand free.

Then I felt that something hard was pressing into my back, just within
reach of my right thumb and forefinger.  My fur coat, which was still
round me, was twisted, so that the inside breast-pocket was behind me,
and I fancied that the hard object was something that I had placed in
this receptacle.

I let my thumb and finger travel up and down it.  It had the form of a
tiny knife, with a heavy, rounded handle.

And suddenly I knew what it was.  It was the knife with which Louis
d'Epernay had been killed!

I must have put it in my breast-pocket at some time, intending to throw
it away, and it had slipped through a hole in the lining and gone down
as far as the next ridge of fur, where it had become wedged.

I could just get my finger and thumb round the point of the blade.  The
ropes scored deeply into my wrists as I worked at it, but I felt the
lining give, and presently I had worked the blade through and had the
knife out by the handle.

But it was made for thrusting more than cutting, and I had to pick the
ropes to pieces, strand by strand.

Jacqueline had been imperceptibly edging away from her father and
Leroux; she was now standing immediately beneath the rusty swords.  And
outside the door I still perceived Lacroix, motionless.

It flashed across my mind that he understood the girl's desperate ruse,
and that he was waiting for the issue.  I picked furiously at the ropes
which bound my hands, and a long strand uncoiled and whipped back on my
wrist.

Suddenly I heard old Charles Duchaine bring down his fist with a
vigorous thud upon the end of the table.

"I'll see you in ---- first, Simon!" was his unexpected remark.

"What?" cried Simon, taken completely aback.

"No, Simon," continued the old man in his mild voice once more.  "You
are not a gentleman you know, and you are not fit to marry Jacqueline."

Leroux thrust his hard face into the old man's.

"Duchaine, your wits are wandering," he answered.  "Listen now!  Have
you forgotten that the government is searching for you night and day?
It was a long time ago that you killed a soldier of the Canadian
forces, but not too long ago for the government to remember.  It has a
long memory and a long arm, too, and at a word from me----"

It was pitiful to see the change that came over Duchaine's face.  He
shook with fear and stretched out his withered hands appealingly.

"Simon, you wouldn't betray me after all these years of friendship?" he
cried.  "_Mon Dieu_, I do not wish to hang!"

"Keep calm, Charles, my friend," responded Simon glibly.  "I am ready
to return friendship for friendship.  Will you acknowledge me as your
son-in-law and heir?"

"Yes," stammered the old man.  "Take everything, Simon; only leave me
free."

"Well, that is more reasonable," said Leroux, evidently mollified.  "I
am not the man to go back on my friends.  I shall give you a cash
return of ten thousand dollars.  You have not forgotten the old times
in Quebec?"

"No, Simon," muttered Duchaine, looking up hopefully at him.

"If you had ten thousand dollars, Charles, you could make your fortune
in a week.  They play high nowadays, and your system would sweep all
before it."

"Yes, yes!" cried the dotard eagerly.  "If only I had ten thousand
dollars I could make my fortune.  But I am old now.  My little daughter
has gone to New York to play for me.  You did not know that, Simon, did
you?" he added, looking at him with a cunning leer.

"She cannot play as well as you, Charles," said Leroux.  "You have
played so long, you know; you have the system at your fingers' ends.
There is nobody who could stand up against you.  Do you remember Louis
Street and the fine people who were your friends?  How they will
welcome you!  You could become a man of fashion again, in spite of your
long exile in these solitudes.  Do you recollect the races, where
thousands can be won in a few minutes, when your horse romps home by a
neck?  And the gaming-tables, where a thousand dollars is but a pinch
of dust, and the bright lights and the chink of money--and you winning
it all away?  You can have horses and carriages again, and all houses
will be open to you, for your little error has long ago been forgotten.
And you are not an old man, Charles."

"Yes, yes, Simon!" cried the old man, fascinated by the picture.  "It
is worth it--by gracious, it is!"

Jacqueline swung round on Leroux.  I saw her fists clench and her
bruised lip quiver.

"Never, Simon Leroux!" she said.  "And, what is more, my father is not
competent to transfer his property, and I will fight you through every
court in the land."

"I was coming to you, _madame_," sneered Simon.  "I don't know much
about the courts in this part of the country, but you will marry me to
save the life of your lover."

"No!" she answered, setting her teeth.

He seized her by the wrists and dragged her across the floor to me.

"Look at him!" he yelled.  "Look into his face.  Will you marry me if I
let him go free?"

"No!" answered Jacqueline.

"I swear to you that he shall be thrown from the top of the cataract
unless you give your consent within five minutes."

"Never!" she answered firmly.

"I will denounce your father!"

"You can't frighten me with such stuff.  I am not a weak old man!"

"You will think differently after Charles Duchaine has been hanged in
Quebec jail," he sneered.

His words received a wholly unexpected answer.  The dotard leaped
forward, stooped down, and picked up the heavy roulette-wheel.

He raised it aloft and staggered wildly toward Leroux.




CHAPTER XIX

THE HIDDEN CHAMBER

Simon turned just in time.  The wheel went crashing to the floor and
bounded and rebounded out of the room and along the little hall.
Philippe jumped in terror from the place where he crouched.

And then the last strand broke, and I was free to slip the cords from
my limbs.

"You old fool!" screamed Leroux, catching Duchaine by the wrists.  But
Charles Duchaine possessed the strength of a madman.  He grasped Leroux
round the waist and clung to him, and would not be shaken off.

"Kill him!" he screamed.  "He is a spy!  He has come to betray me to
the government!"

What followed was the work of a moment.  I saw Jacqueline pull down
both broadswords from the wall.  She flung one down beside me just as I
was staggering to my feet.

Leroux shook off the old man at last.  He turned on me.  I swung the
sword aloft and brought it down upon his skull.

Heaven knows I struck to kill; but my wrist was feeble from the ropes,
and the blade fell flat.  It drew no blood, but Leroux dropped like a
stricken ox upon the floor.

"This way!" gasped the old man.

He pulled at Jacqueline's arm, and half led and half dragged her
through the open door behind his chair, I following.  Lacroix sprang
into the room, called, but whether to us or to the other ruffians I did
not know.  Leroux sat up and looked about him, dazed and bewildered.

Then I was in the little room with Jacqueline and Duchaine, and he
turned and bolted the door behind us.  He seemed possessed of all the
strength and decision of youth again.

When I stood there before the room had been as dark as pitch, but now a
flicker of light was at the far end.  A voice cried:

"_M'sieur_!  _M'sieur_!  I have not forgotten thee!"

It was Pierre Caribou.  I saw his figure silhouetted against the light
of the flaring candle which he held in his hand.

Duchaine had placed one arm about his daughter's waist, and was urging
her along.  But she stopped and looked back to me.  I saw she held one
broadsword in her hand, as I held the other.

"Come, _monsieur_!" she gasped.

But I was too mad with the desire to make an end of Leroux to accompany
her.  I wanted to go back.  I tried to find the bolt of the door in the
gloom, but while my fingers were fumbling for it Jacqueline came
running back to me.

"Quick, or we are lost!" she cried.

"I am going back," I answered, still fumbling for the holt Duchaine had
drawn.

"No!  We are safe inside.  It is a secret room.  My father made it in
the first days of his sojourn here in case he was pursued, and none but
Pierre and he know the secret.  Ah, come, _monsieur_--come!"

She clung to me desperately, and there was an intensity of entreaty in
her voice.

I hesitated.  There was no sound in the room without, and I believed
that the two ruffianly followers were ignorant of what had happened,
and had not dared to return after being driven away.

But I meant to kill Leroux, and still felt for the bolt.

As I fumbled there the door splintered suddenly, and Jacqueline cried
out.  Through the hole I saw the oil-lamp shining in the outer room.

The door splintered again.  All at once I realized that Leroux was
firing his revolver at the panels.  It was fortunate that we both stood
at one side, where the latch was.

Then I yielded reluctantly to Jacqueline's soft violence.  I followed
her through the dark chamber, under an archway of stone, and through a
winding passage in the rock.  Pierre's candle flickered before us, and
in another moment we had squeezed through a narrow opening into a
chamber in the cliff.

On the ground were five or six large stones, and Pierre began to fit
them into the aperture through which we had passed.  In a minute the
place was completely sealed, and we four stood and looked breathlessly
at one another within what might have been a cenotaph.

Not the slightest sound came from without.

We were standing in a stone chamber, apparently of natural formation,
but finished with rough masonry work.  It was about the size of a large
room, and I could see that it was only a widening of the tunnel itself,
which continued through a narrow exit at the farther end, running on
into the unknown depths of the cliff.

From the freshness of the air I inferred that it connected with the
surface at no distant place.

The entrance through which we had come had been made by blasting at
some period, or widened in this way, and then cemented, for the stones
which Pierre had fitted into it exactly filled it, so that it was
barely distinguishable from where I stood, and I am certain that it
would have required a prolonged scrutiny on the part of searchers on
the outside to enable them to detect it.

And even then only dynamite or blasting-powder could have forced a
path, and it would have been exceedingly difficult to handle such
materials within the tunnel without blocking the approach completely,
while leaving open the farther exit.

The chamber seemed at one time to have been prepared for such a
contingency as had occurred, for there were wool rugs on the stone
floor, though they had rotted and partly disintegrated from the
dampness.

There were a table and wooden chairs, also partially decayed.  The
mouldering fringes of some rugs protruded from a bundle wrapped in
oil-paper.

Pierre Caribou opened this and shook them out on the ground.  Except
where their edges had been exposed, they were in good condition, and
were thick enough to lie upon without much discomfort.

The interior of the cave was pleasantly warm, though moist.

"M. Duchaine, he make this place in case gov'ment come take him,"
explained Pierre as he placed the rugs on the floor.  "No can find, no
can break down stone door.  Other way Simon not know--only m'sieur and
me.  Old Caribou he come that way; he see you tied and know it time to
come here.  Soon time to kill Simon come as well."

"When in Heaven's name _will_ it come?" I cried.

"Come soon.  His _diable_ tell me," answered Pierre Caribou.

The chamber was as silent as the grave, except for the gurgling of a
spring of water somewhere and the occasional pattering fall of a drop
of moisture from the roof.  And truly this might prove our grave, I
thought, and none would find our bones in this heart of the cliff
through all the ages that would come.

The flight seemed to have exhausted the last flicker of vitality in the
old man, for he sank down upon the blankets in a somnolent condition.
I could readily understand how his perpetual fear of discovery,
intensified through many years of solitude, had grown to be an
obsession, and how Leroux's idle threats had stimulated his weakened
will to one last effort to escape.

Jacqueline knelt by his side.  She paid no attention to me, except that
once she asked for water.  Pierre brought her some from the spring in a
tin cup, and when she raised her head I could see that her lip was
swollen from the blow of Leroux's fist.

The old man's hands were moving restlessly.  Jacqueline bent over him
and whispered, and he stirred and cried out petulantly.  He missed his
roulette-wheel, his constant companion through those years, his coins,
and paper.  In his way perhaps he was suffering the most of all.

"I go now," Pierre announced.  "To-morrow I come for you, take all
through tunnel.  You stay here till I come; all sleep till morning."

"I will go with you, Pierre," I said, still under my obsession.  But he
laid his heavy hand upon my arm and pushed me away.

"You no kill Simon," he answered.  "Why you no kill him again when you
have sword?  Only _diable_ can kill him.  When time come _diable_ tell
old Caribou.  You sleep now.  I not work for you now.  I go for take my
woman and gal safe through tunnel to place I know.  When my woman and
gal safe I come back to _m'sieur_ and _ma'm'selle_."

It was a brave and simple declaration of first principles, and none the
less affecting, because it came from the lips of a faithful, ignorant
old man.  It was just such simple loyalty that natures like Leroux's
never knew, frustrating the most cunning plans based on self-interest.

I realized the strength of Pierre's argument.  His duty lay first
toward his kin; then he would place his life at his master's service.
But he would have to cover many miles before he returned.

He went without a backward glance; but I saw his throat heave, and I
knew what the parting meant to him.  The feudal loyalty of the past was
all his faith.

I flung myself down on my blanket.  I was utterly exhausted, and with
that dead weariness which precludes sleep.  The candle was burning low
and was guttering down upon one side, and a pool of hardening grease
was spreading over the table-top.

I walked over to the table and blew it out.  We must husband it; the
darkness in the cave would become unbearable without a candle to light.

I lay down again.  The silence was loneliness itself, and not rendered
less lonely by the occasional cries of the old man and the drip, drip
of water.  I could not see anything, and Jacqueline might have been a
woman of stone, for she made not the least movement.

But I felt her presence; I seemed to feel her thoughts, to live in her.

At last I spoke to her.

"Jacqueline!"

I heard her start, and knew that she had raised her head and was
looking after me.  I crawled toward her, dragging my blanket after me.
I felt in the darkness for the place where I knew her hand must be and
took it in mine.

"Jacqueline," I said, "you know I did not steal your money, don't you?"

"Forgive me, _monsieur_," I heard her whisper.

"Forgive _me_, Jacqueline, for I have brought heavy trouble upon you.
But with God's aid I am going to save you both--your father and
you--and take you away somewhere where all the past can be forgotten."

She sighed heavily, and I felt a tear drop on my hand.

"Jacqueline!" I cried.

"Ah, M. Hewlett"--the weariness of her voice went to my heart--"it
might have been different--if----"

"If what, Jacqueline?"

"If there had not been the blood of a dead man between us," she moaned.
"If--you--had not--killed him!"

Her words were a revelation to me, for I learned that she had
mercifully been spared the full remembrance of what had happened in the
Tenth Street apartment.  She thought that it was I who had killed Louis
d'Epernay.

And how could I deny this, when to do so would be to bring to her mind
the knowledge of her own dreadful guilt?

The dotard stirred and muttered, and she whispered to him and soothed
him as though he were a child.  Presently he began to breathe heavily,
as old men breathe in sleep.  But Jacqueline crouched there in the same
motionless silence, and I knew that she was awake and suffering.

And then my watch began hammering again, just as the alarm-clock had
hammered on that awful night in my apartment when I crouched outside
the door, not daring to go in.  My mind was working against my will and
picturing a thousand possibilities.

What was Leroux doing?  He would act with his usual hammer force.  All
depended on Pierre.

The hours wore away, and we three lay there, two waiting and one
dreaming of the old days of youth, no doubt.  I tried to light the
candle to see the time, but my shaking hand sent it flying across the
cave, and when I searched for my matches, I found that the box was
empty.

It seemed an eternity since we had come there.  It is one thing to wait
for dawn and quite another thing to wait where dawn will never come.

It must be day.  And still Pierre did not come.  As I lay there,
listening for his returning footsteps, I heard Jacqueline breathe at
last.

She was asleep from weariness after her long night's watch.  Somehow
the thought that she had passed into the world of dreams comforted me.
For a brief time the dreadful accusation of murder had been lifted from
my head, and my numbed mind was free to follow my will and leave its
mad career of fancy.  I could act now.

Why should I not follow where Pierre had led?  If Leroux had captured
him within his hut, as seemed only too likely, he would never return,
and we should wait in vain.  And with each hour of waiting our chances
to escape grew less.

I resolved to follow the exit for a little distance to see whither it
led, and if I could discover the light of day.

So I took my sword and sallied out through the passage in the cliff.




CHAPTER XX

AT SWORDS' POINTS

I entered the tunnel, sword in hand, keeping both arms stretched out to
feel my way.  I resolved that I would always keep the left hand in
contact with the wall upon that side, so that, in case the tunnel
should divide, by reversing the process I could ensure my safe return.

I had only proceeded a few steps when the air grew cold and sweet.  And
before I had traversed two hundred yards I saw a dim light in the
distance.  This was no candle light, but that of day.  So I had endured
all those agonies of mind with the open air but a short distance away!

As I advanced I fancied that I heard the soft pattering of feet behind
me.

I halted and listened intently.  I crouched against the wall and
waited.  But I heard nothing now except the distant roaring of the
cataracts.  How sweet they sounded now!

I listened intently, leaning against the wall and facing backward,
holding my sword ready to meet any intruder.  But there was no sound
from within, except the soughing which one hears in a tunnel; and
satisfied at last that I had been the victim of an over-wrought
imagination, I pursued my course.

The light grew brighter, but very slowly, until all at once I saw what
seemed to be the gleam of an electric arc-light immediately ahead.  It
dazzled and half blinded me.

I started backward; and then the noble morning star disclosed herself,
swinging in the sky like a blazing jewel in a translucent sea.

Before me was a projecting piece of rock, which had shut off the view,
and but for that warning star I must have gone to my death.  For my
foot was slipping on ice--and I was clinging to the cliff-wall upon the
other side of the tiny platform, where I had stood with Pierre, and the
Old Angel thundered over me.

And, instead of noon, as I had thought it to be, it was only dawn, and
the distant sky was banded with faint bars of yellow and gold, and the
fresh morning air was in my nostrils.

I picked my way back, inch by inch, across the ice which coated the
rocky floor for a few yards within the tunnel, until I stood in safety
again.

The full purport of this discovery now came to me, and it filled me
with frantic joy.  For, since the cave connected with that platform
beneath the cataract, it was evident that by crossing the ledge, a
dangerous but not precarious feat, I should enter the main tunnel again
and come out eventually beyond the hills, even allowing for a
preliminary blunder into the wrong track.

The greatest danger lay in the possibility of Leroux or his aids lying
in wait for me somewhere within the tunnel, and I had not much fear of
that, for I did not believe they suspected that our cave connected with
the main passage.  It was more likely that they would wait in
Duchaine's room till hunger drove us out.

So I started back to Jacqueline.  But I had not gone six paces before I
heard a scream that still rings in my ears to-day, and a shadow sprang
out of the darkness and rushed at me.  It was old Charles Duchaine.
His white hair streamed behind him; his face bore an expression of
indelible horror and rage, and in his hand he held the other sword.

With a madman's proverbial cunning he had pretended to be asleep; then
he must have followed me stealthily as I made my journey of
exploration; and now, doubtless, he ascribed all his wrongs and
sufferings to me and meant to kill me.

His fears had snapped the last frail link that bound him to the world
of sense.

He struck at me, a great sweeping blow which would almost have cut me
in two.  I had just time to parry it, and then he was upon me, raining
blows upon my out-stretched sword.  He was no swordsman, but slashed
and hewed in frenzy, and the steel rang on steel, and the rust from the
blades filled my nostrils with its sting.

But, though his attack was wild, the vigor of his blows almost beat
down my guard.  At last a random blow of mine swept the weapon from his
feeble old hand and sent it whirling down the cataract into the lake
below.

Then he was at my throat, and it was fortunate that there was firm rock
instead of slippery ice beneath us, or we should both have followed the
sword.

He linked his arms around me and wrestled furiously, and his weight and
height so much surpassed my own that they compensated for his weakness.
We swayed backward and forward, and the star dipped and swung over us,
as though we stood upon the deck of a rolling ship.

"Calm yourself, for Heaven's sake, _monsieur_!" I gasped as I gained a
momentary advantage over him.  "Don't you know me?  I am your friend.
I want to save you!"

But he was at me again, trying to lock his hands about my throat; and,
even after I had controlled him and pinned his arms to his sides, he
fought like a fiend, and never ceased to yell.  On either hand the
rocks and tunnel gave back his howls with hideous echoes that rolled
into the distance as though a hundred demons were at strife.

"You shall not take me!  I have done nothing!  It was years ago!  Let
me go!  Let me go!" he screamed.

I released him for a moment, hoping that his disordered brain would
calm enough for him to recognize me, and that, when he saw my motives
were peaceful, he would grow quiet.

But suddenly, with a final howl, he sprang past me, Sweeping me against
the wall, and leaped out on the ledge.

I held my breath.  I expected to see him stagger to his death below.
But he stood motionless in the middle of the little platform and
stretched out his arms toward the raging torrent, as though in
invocation.  Then he leaped across with the agility of a wild sheep and
rushed on into the tunnel beyond.

I drew my breath thickly and leaned against the wall, overcome with
nausea.  The physical shock of the struggle was, however, less
appalling than the thought of Jacqueline.

I had no hope that the old man would ever return, or that his crazed
brain remembered the way home to the cave.  He would wander on through
the tunnels, either to perish in them miserably, or to emerge at last
into the snow beyond and die there.

Unless Leroux found him.

I started back, keeping this time to the right side of the tunnel,
until I heard the gurgling of the brook.  Then I heard Jacqueline's
footstep.

"Who is it?" she called wildly.  "M. Hewlett!  My father!"

I caught her as she swayed toward me.  "He has gone, Jacqueline," I
said.  "I went into the tunnel to try to find the way.  He had been
feigning sleep, and he crept after me.  I tried to stop him.  He was so
frightened that I thought it best to let him go.  He ran on into the
tunnel----"

"We must find him," she said.

"He will come back, Jacqueline."

"He will never come back!" she answered.  "He must have been planning
this and waiting for me to sleep.  For years he brooded over his
danger, suspecting everybody, and the shock of last night unhinged his
mind.  He may be hiding somewhere.  We must search for him."

"Let us go, then, Jacqueline," I answered.

In fact, there seemed to be no use in remaining any longer.  If Pierre
were on his way back, we ought to meet him in the tunnel; and if he had
been captured, delay spelled ruin.

So I led her back into the tunnel on what was to be, I hoped, our final
journey.  We reached the ledge.  The star had faded now, and the whole
sky was bright with the red clouds of dawn.

Very cautiously we picked our way across the platform, clinging to the
wall.  It was a hideous journey over the slippery ice, beneath the
thunder of the cataract; and when at length we reached the tunnel on
the other side, I was shaking like a man with a palsy.

But, thank God, that nightmare was past.  And with renewed confidence I
went on through the darkness, with Jacqueline at my side, feeling my
way by the deeper depression in the ground along the centre of the
tubular passage.

At length I saw daylight ahead of me--and there was no sound of the
torrents.

Fortune had led us where I had wanted her to lead--into the open space
where the gold was.  From there I knew that I could strike the passage
which led into the sleigh road under the hills.  Half an hour's travel
ought to bring us to the rocking stone at the entrance, and safety.

But I found that I had entered the mine from a third point, and that
some forty feet away from the place where I had emerged before.  This
time we were inside the cave in which Leroux and Lacroix had piled the
sacks of earth.

I was looking out beyond them toward the rivulet, and on my right hand
and on my left the tunnel stretched away, leading respectively toward
the _chateau_ and to the rocking stone at the entrance.

I left Jacqueline in the cave for a few moments and went into the
smaller one near by, where I had seen the provisions on the preceding
day.  I found a small box of hard biscuit, with which I stuffed the
pockets of my coat, and, happier still, a small revolver and some
cartridges, to which I helped myself liberally.

Then I went back to Jacqueline.

We must go on.  Half an hour more should see us outside the tunnel
beyond the mountains.  And this was the day on which Pere Antoine would
be expecting me.

It seemed incredible that so much could have happened in
four-and-twenty hours.

But there was no sign of Charles Duchaine.  And I did not intend to
jeopardize our future for the sake of the crazed old man.

"Jacqueline," I said, "let us go on.  Perhaps your father is on his way
outside the tunnel."

She shook her head.  "We must find him first," she answered.

"But that is impossible," I protested.  "How can we go wandering among
these dark passages when we do not know where he has gone?  You know he
is invaluable to Leroux, and he will come to no harm with him.  If we
get free, we can return with aid and rescue him."

"We cannot go without my father," she answered, shaking her head in
determination.

"But----"

"Oh, don't you see that we _must_ find him?" she cried wildly.  "But
_you_ must go.  You cannot be burdened with me.  Give up your hopeless
mission to rescue us, _monsieur_, and save yourself!"

At that my hopes, which had been so high, went crashing down.

"Jacqueline," I said, "if we can find your father you will come with
me?  Because it has occurred to me," I went on, "that if he had come
this way, his footprints would be in the mud beside the stream.  It
would take an hour or two for them to fill up again.  So, perhaps, he
did not come this far, but is hiding in some cave in the tunnel through
which we came.  Will you wait for me here while I go back and search?"

She nodded, and I went back into that interminable tunnel again.




CHAPTER XXI

THE BAIT THAT LURED

I went along the tunnel in the direction of _le Vieil Ange_.  It was
broad day now, and the distance between the cataract and the open
ground where the gold had been mined was sufficiently short for the
whole length of the passage to be faintly visible.

It was a reach of deep twilight, brightening into sunlight at either
end.

I picked my way carefully, peering into the numerous small caves and
fissures in the wall on either hand.  And I was about half-way through
when I saw a shadow running in front of me and making no sound.

It was Duchaine.  There could be no mistaking that tall, gaunt figure,
just visible against the distant day.

He was running in his bare feet and, therefore, in complete silence,
and he leaped across the rocky floor as though he wore moccasins.

I raced along the tunnel after him.  But he seemed to be endowed with
the speed of a deer, for he kept his distance easily, and I would never
have caught him had he not stopped for an instant at the approach of
the ledge.

There, just as he was poising himself to leap, I seized him by the arm.

"M. Duchaine!  M. Duchaine!  Stop!" I implored him.  "Don't you know
that I am your friend and only wish you well?  I am your friend--your
daughter Jacqueline's friend.  I want to save you!"

He did not attempt violence, but gazed at me with hesitation and
pathetic doubt.

"They want to catch me," he muttered.  "They want to hang me.  He has
got a gallows ready for me to swing on, because I killed a soldier in
the Fenian raids.  But it wasn't I," he added with sudden cunning.  "It
was my brother, who looks like me.  He died long ago.  Let me go,
_monsieur_.  I am a poor, harmless old man.  I shall not hurt anybody."

I took his hand in mine.

"M. Duchaine," I answered.  "I wish you everything that is best in the
world.  I am your friend; I want to save you, not to capture you.  Come
back with me, _monsieur_, and I will take you away----"

The wild look came into his eyes again.

"No, no!" he screamed, trying to wrest himself from my grasp and
measuring the distance across the ledge with his eye.  "I will not go
away.  This is my home.  I want to live here in peace.  I want my
wheel!  Monsieur, give me my wheel.  I have perfected a system.
Listen!"  He took me by the arm and spoke in that cunning madman's way:
"I will make your fortune if you will let me go free.  You shall have
millions.  We will go to Quebec together and play at the tables, as I
did when I was a young man.  My system cannot fail!"

"M. Duchaine," I pleaded, "won't you come back with me and let us talk
it over?  Jacqueline is with me----"

"No, no," he cried, laughing.  "You can't catch me with such a trick as
that.  My little daughter has gone to New York to make our fortunes at
M. Daly's gaming-house.  She will be back soon, loaded down with gold."

I saw an opening here.

"She _has_ come back," I answered.  "She is not fifty yards away."

"With gold?" he inquired, looking at me doubtfully.

"With gold," I answered, trying to allure his imagination as Leroux had
done.  "She has rich gold, red gold, such as you will love.  You can
take up the coins in your fingers and let the gold stream slip through
them.  Come with me, _monsieur_."

He hesitated and looked back into the darkness.

"I am afraid!" he exclaimed.  "Listen, _monsieur_!  There is a man
hiding there--a man with a sword.  He tried to capture me to-day.  But
I was too clever for him."  He laughed with senile glee and rubbed his
hands together.  "I was too clever for him," he chuckled.  "No, no,
_monsieur_, I do not know who you are, but I am not going into that
tunnel alone with you.  Perhaps you have a gallows there."

"Do you not want the gold, _monsieur_?" I cried in exasperation.  "Do
you not want to see the gold that your daughter Jacqueline has brought
back from New York for you?"

I grasped him by the arm and tried to lead him with me.  My argument
had moved him; cupidity had banished for the moment the dreadful
picture of the gallows that he had conjured up.  I thought I had won
him.

But just as I started back into the tunnel, holding the arm of the old
man, who lingered reluctantly and yet began to yield, a pebble leaped
from the rocky platform and rebounded from the cliff.  I cast a
backward glance, and there upon the opposite side I saw Leroux standing.

There was something appalling in the man's presence there.  I think it
was his unchanging and implacable pursuit that for the moment daunted
me.  And this was symbolized in his fur coat, which he wore open in the
front exactly as he had worn it that day when we met in the New York
store, and as I had always seen him wear it.

He stood bareheaded, and his massive, lined, hard, weather-beaten face
might have been a sneering gargoyle's, carved out of granite on some
cathedral wall.

He stood half sheltered by the projecting ledge, and his aspect so
fascinated me that I forgot my resolution to shoot to kill.

"_Bonjour_, M. Hewlett," he called across the chasm.  "Don't be afraid
of me any more than I am afraid of you.  Just wait a moment.  I want to
talk business."

"I have no business to talk with you," I answered.

"But I did not say it was with you, _monsieur_," he answered in
sneering tones.  "It is with our friend, Duchaine.  _Hola_, Duchaine!"

At the sound of Leroux's voice the old man straightened himself and
began muttering and looking from the one to the other of us undecidedly.

In vain I tried to drag him within the tunnel.  He shook himself free
from me and sprang out on the icy ledge, and he poised himself there,
turning his head from side to side as either of us spoke.  And he
effectively prevented me from shooting Leroux.

"Don't you know your best friends, Duchaine?" inquired Leroux; and the
white beard was tipped toward the other side of the ledge.

"I don't know who my friends are, Simon," answered Duchaine, in his
mild, melancholy voice.  "What do you want?"

"Why, I want you, Charles, my old friend," replied Leroux in a voice
expressive of surprize.  "You old fool, do you want to die?  If you do,
go with that gentleman.  He comes from Quebec on government business."

But I could plead better than that.  I knew the symbol in his
imagination.

"M. Duchaine!  Come with me!" I cried.  "He has a gallows ready for you
back in that tunnel!"

It was a pitiful scheme, and yet for the life of me I could think of no
other way to win him.  And, as it happened, the word associated itself
in the listener's mind as much with the speaker as with the man spoken
of, for I saw Duchaine start violently and cling to the icy wall.

"No, no!" he cried; "I won't go with either of you.  I am a poor old
man.  It was my brother who shot the soldier, and he is dead.  Go away!"

He burst into senile tears and cowered there, surely the most pitiful
spectacle that fate ever made of a man.  The memories of the past
thronged around him like avenging demons.

Suddenly I saw him turn his head and fix his eyes upon Leroux.  He
craned his neck forward; and then, very slowly, he began to walk toward
his persecutor.  I craned my neck.

Leroux was holding out--the roulette wheel!

"Come along, Charles, my friend," he cried.  "Come, let us try our
fortunes!  Don't you want to stake some money upon your system against
me?"

The old figure leaped forward over the ledge, and in a moment Leroux
had grasped him and pulled him into the tunnel.

I whipped my revolver out and sent shot after shot across the chasm.
The sound of the discharges echoed and re-echoed along the tunnel wall.

But the projecting ledge of rock effectively screened Leroux--and
Duchaine as well, for in my passion I had been firing blindly, and but
for that I should undoubtedly have killed Jacqueline's father.

The mocking laughter of Leroux came back to me in faint and far-away
reply.

I saw the explanation of the man's presence now.  He must have met
Duchaine that morning as the old man was flying or wandering aimlessly
along the tunnel.  They had reached _le Vieil Ange_ together, and
Leroux had probably had little difficulty in inducing the witless old
man to take him back into the secret hiding-place.

It was lucky that we had not been there when Leroux discovered it.  We
must have crossed the ledge only a moment or two before them.

I hastened back to Jacqueline, and encountered her in the passage just
where the light and darkness blended, standing with arms stretched out
against the wall to steady herself; and in her eyes was that look which
tells a man more surely than anything, I think, can, that a woman loves
him.

"Oh, I thought you were dead!" she sobbed and fell into my arms.

I held her tightly to support her, and I led her back to the gold cave.
In a few words I explained what had occurred.

"Now, Jacqueline, you must let me guide you," I said.  "Don't you see
that there is no chance for us unless we leave your father for the
present where he is and make our own escape?  We can reach Pere
Antoine's cabin soon after midday, and we can tell him your father is a
prisoner here.  He would not come with us, Jacqueline, even if he were
here.

"And if he did, he might escape us on the way and wander back into the
tunnels again.  Leroux has no cause to harm him.  Surely you see that,
dear?  He needs him--he needs his signature to the deed which is to
give him your father's share of the seigniory.  Just as he wants you,
Jacqueline.  And he shall never have you, dear.  So I shall not let you
go back, or he would get you in the end.  Unless----"

I stopped.  But she knew what I had thought.

"Unless I kill myself," she answered wildly.  "That is the best way
out, Paul!  I am fated to bring nothing but evil upon every one with
whom I come in contact.  Ah, leave me, Paul, and let me meet my fate,
and save yourself!"

Again I pleaded, and she did not respond.  It was the safety of us two,
and her father's life assured, against a miserable fate for her, and I
knew not what for me, though I thought Leroux would give me little
shrift once I was in his power again.

She was so silent that I thought I had convinced her.  I urged her to
her feet.  But suddenly I heard a stealthy footfall close at hand,
between the cave and the cataract.

I thought it was Charles Duchaine.  I hoped it was Leroux.  I placed my
finger on Jacqueline's lips and crept stealthily to the passage,
revolver in hand.

Then, in the gloom, I saw the villainous face of Jean Petitjean looking
into mine, twelve paces away, and in his hand was a revolver, too.

We fired together.  But the surprize spoiled his aim, for his bullet
whistled past me.  I think my shot struck him somewhere, for he uttered
a yell and began running back along the tunnel as hard as he could.

I followed him, firing as fast as I could reload.  But there was a
slight bend in the passage here, and my bullets only struck the walls.
So fortune helped the ruffian, for when I reached the light he was
scrambling across the ledge, and before I could cover him he had
succeeded in disappearing behind the projecting rock on the other side.

So Leroux had already sealed one exit--that by the Old Angel, where the
road led into the main passage.  God grant that he had not time to
reach the exit by the mine!

If I made haste!  If I made haste!  But I would not argue the matter
any further.  I ran back at full speed.  I reached the cave.

"Jacqueline!  Come, come!" I called.

She did not answer.

I ran forward, peering round me in the obscurity.  I saw her near the
earth-sacks, lying upon her side.  Her eyes were closed, her face as
white as a dead woman's.

White--but her dress was blood-soaked, and there was blood on the sacks
and on the stony floor.  It oozed from her side, and her hand was cold
as the rocks, and there was no flutter at her wrist.

The bullet from Jean Petitjean's revolver that missed me must have
penetrated her body.

She lived, for her breast stirred, though so faintly that it seemed as
though all that remained of life were concentrated in the
faint-throbbing heart-beats.

I raised her in my arms and placed a sack beneath her head, making a
resting-place for her with my fur coat.  Then with my knife I cut away
her dress over the wound.

There was a bullet-hole beneath her breast, stained with dark blood.  I
ran down to the rivulet, risking an ambuscade, brought back cold water,
and washed it, and stanched the flow as best I could, making a bandage
and placing it above the wound.

It was a poor effort at first aid, by one who had never seen a
bullet-wound before, and I was distracted with misery and grief, and
yet I remember how steady my hands were and with what precision and
care I performed my task.

I have a dim remembrance of losing my self-control when this was done,
and clasping her in my arms and pressing my lips to her cold cheek and
begging her to live and praying wildly that she should not die.  Then I
raised her in my arms and was staggering across the cave toward the
tunnel which led to the rocking stone.




CHAPTER XXII

SURRENDER

I saw the light, the sun's rays bright on the cliff tops.  Once in the
tunnel beyond that I could keep my pursuers at bay with my revolver,
even if I had to fight every inch of my way to freedom.

And then, just as I approached the barricade of earth-filled bags,
Leroux and the man Raoul emerged from the tunnel's mouth and ran toward
me.

If I had been alone and unencumbered, I believe I could have spurted
across the open and won free.  But with Jacqueline in my arms it was
impossible.

I stopped behind the barricade.

Even so I was fortunate, for had they gained the cave before I did they
would have had me at their mercy like a rat trapped in a hole.

They saw me and drew back hastily within the tunnel's mouth.  I was
panting with the weight of my unconscious burden, and I did not know
what to do.  My mind was filled with rage against my fate, and I
shouted curses at them and strode up and down, behind the bags.

Presently I saw something white fluttering from the tunnel.  It was a
white handkerchief upon a stick of wood, and slowly and gingerly Raoul
emerged into the open.

At that instant I fired.  The bullet whipped past his face, and with an
oath he dropped the stick and handkerchief too, and scuttled back to
shelter.

Then Leroux's voice hailed me from the tunnel.

"Hewlett!" he called, and there was no trace of mockery in his tones
now, "will you come out and talk with me?  Will you meet me in the
open, if you prefer?"

I fired another shot in futile rage.  It struck the cliff and sent a
stone flying into the stream.

Then silence followed.  And I took Jacqueline and carried her back into
the little hollow place.  I put my hand upon her breast.

It stirred.  She breathed faintly, though she showed no sign of
consciousness.

And then I acted as a trapped animal would act.  I raged up and down
the tunnel from cataract to cave, and at each end I fired wildly,
though there was no sign of any guard.  Why should their guards expose
themselves to fire at me when they had me at their mercy?

They could surprize me from either end, and I suppose I thought by this
trick to maintain the illusion of having some companion.  Heaven knows
what was in my mind.  But now I stood beneath that awful cataract
firing at the blind rock, and now I was back behind the earth-bags
shooting into the tunnel.

And again I was at Jacqueline's side, crouching over her, holding her
hand in mine, pressing my lips to hers, imploring her to live for my
sake, or, if she could not live, to open her eyes once more and speak
to me.

So the afternoon wore away.  The sun had sunk behind the cliffs.  I had
fired away all but six of my cartridges.  Then the memory of my similar
act of folly before came home to me.  I grew more calm.

I understood Leroux's intentions--he meant to surprize me in the night
when I was worn out, or when I made a blind dash in the dark for the
tunnel.

I felt my way around the cave with the faint hope that there might be
some other egress there.

There was none, but I made out a recess which I had not perceived,
about one-half as large as the cave itself, and opening into it by a
small passage just large enough to give admittance to a single person.
Here I should have only one front to defend.

So I carried Jacqueline inside and began laboriously to drag the bags
of earth into this last refuge.  Before it had grown quite dark I had
barricaded Jacqueline and myself within a place the size of a hall
bedroom enclosed upon three sides with rock.

And there I waited for the end.

What an eternity that was!

I strained my ears to hear approaching steps.  I beard the gurgle of
the stream and the slow drip of water from the rocks, but nothing more.
The star-light was just bright enough to prevent an absolute surprize.

But I was utterly fatigued.  My eyes alone, which bore the burden of
the defence, remained awake; the rest of me was dead, from heavy hands
to feet, and the body which I could hardly have dragged down to the
stream again.

I waited for the end.  I sat beside Jacqueline, holding her hand with
one of mine, and my revolver in the other.  There was a faint flutter
at her wrist.  I fancied that it had grown stronger during the past
half-hour.

But I was unprepared to hear her whisper to me, and when she spoke I
was alert in a moment.

"Paul!" she said faintly.

"Jacqueline!"

"Paul!  Bend down.  I want to speak to you.  Do you know I have been
conscious for a long time, my dear?  I have been thinking.  Are you
distressed because of me?"

"My dear!" I said; and that was all that I could say.  I clasped her
cold little hand tightly in mine.

"I don't know whether I shall live, Paul," she went on.  "But now
things have become much clearer than they were.  When you wanted to
take me through the tunnel I knew that you were wrong.  I knew that
even if we found my father I must still send you away, my dear.  God
does not mean for us to be for one another.  Don't you see why?  It is
because there is the blood of a dead man between us that cannot be
wiped away.

"That is the cause of our misfortunes here, and they will never end,
even if you can beat Leroux--because of that.  So it could never have
been.  Yes, I knew that last night when I lay by you, and I was
thinking of it and praying hard that I might see clearly."

Her voice broke off from weakness, and for a long time she lay there,
and I clasped her hand and waited, and my eyes searched the space
beyond the bags.  How long would they delay?

Presently Jacqueline spoke again.

"Do you know, Paul, I don't think life is such a good thing as it used
to seem," she said.  "I think that I could bear a great deal that I
would once have thought impossible.  I think I could yield to Leroux
and be his wife to save your life, Paul."

"No, Jacqueline."

"Yes, Paul.  If I live, my duty is with my father.  He needs me, and he
would never leave the _chateau_ now that his fears have grown so
strong.  And, though he might come to no harm, I cannot leave him.  And
you must leave me, Paul, because--because of what is between us.  You
must go to Leroux and tell him so.  You love me, Paul?"

"Always, Jacqueline," I whispered.

She put her arms about my neck.

"I love you, Paul," she said.  "It seems so easy to say it in the dark,
and it used to be so hard.  And I want to tell you something.  I have
always remembered a good deal more than you believed.  Only it was so
dear, that comradeship of ours, that I would not let myself remember
anything except that I had you.

"And do you know what I admired and loved you for, even when you
thought my mind unstable and empty?  How true you were!  It was that,
dear.  It was your honour, Paul.

"That was why, when I remembered everything that dreadful night in the
snow, the revulsion was so terrible.  I ran away in horror.  I could
not believe that it was true--and yet I knew it was true.

"And Leroux was waiting there and found me.  I did not want to leave
you, but he told me there was Pere Antoine's cabin close by, and that
you would come to no harm.  And he made me believe--you had stolen my
money as well.  But I never believed that, and I only taunted you with
it to drive you away for your own sake."

She drew me weakly toward her and went on:

"Bend lower.  Bend very near.  Do you remember, Paul--in the train
going to Quebec--I lay awake all night and cried, at first for
happiness, to think you loved me, and then for shame, because I had no
right--though I did not remember who he was at the time, the shock had
been so great.  That night--lying in my berth--I was shameless.  I
slipped the wedding ring from my finger and hid it away so that you
should not know--because I loved you, Paul.  And now that we are to
part forever, and perhaps I am to die, I can speak to you from my heart
and tell you, dear.  Kiss me--as though I were your wife, Paul.

"So you will go to Leroux?" she added presently.

"Is that your will, Jacqueline?"

"Yes, dear," she said.  "Because we have fought and now we are beaten,
Paul."

I bowed my head.  I knew that she spoke the truth.  Slowly the passions
cleared from my own heart--passion of hate, passion of love.  I knew at
last that I was vanquished.  For, now that Jacqueline lay there so
weak, so helpless, and thinking all our past was but a dream, there was
nothing but to yield.  I could not fight any more.

Even though, by some miracle, the tunnel lay clear before us, to move
her meant her death.  So I would yield, to save her life, and with me
Leroux might deal as he chose.

So I left her and climbed across the bags and went down toward the
stream.

But before I had reached it a dark figure slipped from among the
shadows of the rocks and came toward me; and by the faint starlight I
saw the face of Pierre Caribou!

I was bewildered, for Pierre seemed like one of those dream figures of
the past; he might have come into my life long ago, but not to-day, nor
yesterday.

He stopped me and held me by both shoulders, and he drew me into the
recesses of the rocks and bent his wizened old face forward toward mine.

"Ah, _monsieur_, so you did not obey old Pierre Caribou and stay in the
cave," he said.

"Pierre, I did not know that you would return," I answered.  "I thought
that we could find the same road that you had taken."

"Never mind," the Indian answered, looking at me strangely.  "All
finish now.  _Diable_ take Leroux.  His time come.  _Diable_ show me!"

"How?" I answered, startled.

"All finish," said Pierre inexorably, and, as I watched him, a
superstitious fear crept over me.  He, who had cringed, even when he
gave the command, now cringed no longer, and there was a look on his
old face that I had only seen on one man's before--on my father's, the
night he died.

"Pierre, where is Leroux?" I whispered.

"No matter," he answered.  "All finish now."

"Shall I surrender to him or shall I fight?"

"No matter," he said once again.  "_M'sieur_, suppose you go back to
ma'm'selle, and soon Simon come.  His _diable_ lead him to you.  His
_diable_ tell you what to say.  All finish now!"

He walked past me noiselessly, a tenuous shadow, and his bearing was as
proud as that of his race had been in the long ago, when they were
lords where their white masters ruled.  He entered the passage at the
back of the mine, through which I had come when I encountered Lacroix
the first time with his gold.

And as he passed I thought I saw Lacroix's face peering out at me
through the shadows of the caves.  I started toward him.  Then I saw
only the face of the cliff.  My mind was playing me tricks; I thought
it had created that apparition out of my thoughts.

I went back to Jacqueline and took my seat upon the earth-bag
barricade.  I had my revolver in my hand, but it was not loaded.  I
threw the cartridges upon the floor.

It seemed only a few minutes before a voice hailed me from the tunnel.

"M. Hewlett!  Are you prepared to speak with M. Leroux?"

It was Raoul's voice, and I answered yes.

A moment later Leroux came from the tunnel toward me.  I got down from
the barricade and met him at the stream.  He stood upon one side and I
at the other, and the stream gurgled and played between us.

"Paul Hewlett," said Leroux, "you have made a good fight.  By God, you
have fought well!  But you are done for.  I offer you terms."

"What terms?" I asked.

"The same as before."

"You planned to murder me," I answered, but with no bitterness.

"Yes, that is true," answered Leroux.  "But circumstances were
different then from what they are tonight.  I am no murderer.  I am a
man of business.  And, within business limits, I keep my word.  If I
proposed to break it, it was because I had no other way.  Besides, you
had me in your power.  Now you are in mine.

"I thought then that you were in Carson's pay.  That if I let you go
you would betray--certain things you might have discovered.  But you
came here because you were infatuated with Mme. d'Epernay.  Well, I can
afford to let you go; for, though my instincts cry out loudly for your
death, I am a business man, and I can suppress them when it has to be
done.  In brief, M. Hewlett, you can go when you choose."

"M. Leroux," I answered, "I will say something to you for your own
sake, and Mme. d'Epernay's, that I would not deign to say to any other
man.  She is as pure as the best woman in the land.  I found her
wandering in the street.  I saved her from the assault of your hired
ruffians.  I tried to procure a room for her at the Merrimac, and when
they refused her, I gave up my own apartment to her and went away."

"But you went back!" he cried.  "You went back, Hewlett!"

"I can tell you no more," I answered.  "Do you believe what I have said
to you?"

He looked hard into my face.

"Yes," he said simply.  "And it makes all the difference in the world
to me."

And at that moment, in spite of all, I felt something that was not far
from affection toward the man.

"Pere Antoine will marry you?" I asked.

"Yes," he replied.

"And her father?"

"Is safe in the _chateau_, playing with his wheel and amassing a
fortune in his dreams."

"One word more," I continued.  "Mme. d'Epernay is very ill.  She was
struck by one of those bullets that you fired through the door.  Wait!"
for he had started.  "I think that she will live.  The wound cannot
have pierced a vital part.  But we must be very gentle in moving her.
You had better bring the sleigh here, and you and I will lift her into
it.  And then--I shall not see her again."




CHAPTER XXIII

LEROUX'S DIABLE

I went back toward the cave.  But I could not bring myself to see
Jacqueline.

Instead, I paced the tunnel to and fro, wondering what my life was
going to be in future.  Less than three weeks before no thought of love
had stirred me, and Jacqueline was undreamed of.  Now she had entered
into my heart and twined herself inextricably around its roots.

That I should love her till I died I did not doubt at all.

Her last words had been in the nature of a farewell.  There was no more
to say.  Not even good-bye.  I must go before that old, insatiable
longing for her arose in me again.

I saw her in my mind's eyes as clearly as though she stood before me.
Her loving, gracious presence, her sweet, pure face, her courage, her
tenderness--all these were for Leroux.  Nothing remained for me, except
my memories.

I should have to make a great deal of my life.  I had always believed
that life was only a prelude to greater and finer things.  I was not
sure; I am not sure to-day; but if the life that is to come is not the
realization of our unfulfilled desires, then nothing matters here.  I
was thinking of that as I paced the tunnel.  And in that way I felt
that, in a measure, Jacqueline was still mine.

"Everything that is free," she had said to me, "thoughts, will and
dreams."  That part was mine; and that could never be taken away.

I had reached the verge of the cataract and stood beside the little
platform, looking down.  There was no star now like that which had
guided me in the morning, but the sky was fair and the air mild.  I
gazed in awe at the great stream of water, sending its ceaseless
current down into the troubled lake below.

How many ages it had done that!  Yet even that must end some day, as
everything ends--even life, thank God!

And then I saw Lacroix again.  I was sure of it now.  He was peering
after me from among the rocks, and, as I turned, he was scuttling away
into the tunnel.

I followed him.  I had always mistrusted the man; more, even, than
Leroux.  I felt that his furtive presence there portended something
more evil than my own fate and Jacqueline's must be.

I followed him hotly; but he must have known every fissure in the
cliff, for he vanished before my eyes, apparently through the solid
rock, and when I reached the place of his disappearance I could find no
sign of any passage there.

Well, there was no use in following him further.  I paced the tunnel
restlessly.  The sleigh ought to be at the mine in five minutes more.
I turned back to take a last look at the cataract.

The sublime grandeur of those thousand tons of water, shot from the
glacier's edge above, still held me in its spell of awe.  I cast my
eyes toward the _chateau_ and over the frozen lake toward the distant,
unknown mountains.

Then I turned resolutely away.

And at that moment I heard Leroux's voice hailing me, and looked round
to see him emerge from the tunnel at my side.  He was staring in
bewilderment at the cataract.

"Hewlett, I don't know what possessed me to take the wrong turn
to-night!" he cried.  "I have come through that tunnel a hundred times
and never missed the path before."

He swung round petulantly, and at that moment a shadow glided out of
the darkness and stood in front of him.  It was Pierre Caribou, lean,
sinewy and old.  He blocked the path and faced Leroux in silence.

Leroux looked at him, and an oath broke from his lips as he read the
other's purpose upon his face.  Squaring his mighty shoulders and
clenching his fists, he leaped at him headlong.

Pierre stepped quietly aside, and Simon measured his full length within
the tunnel.  But, when he had scrambled to his feet with a bellowing
challenge, Pierre was in front of him again.

"What are you here for?" roared Leroux, but in a quavering voice that
did not sound like his own.  "Get out of the way or I'll smash your
face!"

The Indian still blocked the passage.  "Your time come now, Simon.  All
finish now," he answered.

Simon drew back a pace and watched him, and I heard him breathing like
one who has run a race.

"You come here one, two year ago," Pierre continued.  "You eat up home
of M. Duchaine, my master.  Old M. Duchaine my master, too.  I belong
here.  You eat up all, come back, eat up some more.  Then you sell
Mlle. Jacqueline to Louis d'Epernay.  You made her run 'way to New
York.  I ask your _diable_ when your time come.  Your _diable_ he say
wait.  I wait.  Mlle. Jacqueline come back.  I ask your _diable_ again.
He say wait some more.  Now your _diable_ tell me he send you here
to-night because your time come, and all finish now."

The face that Simon turned on me was not in the least like his own.  It
was that of a hopeless man who knows that everything he had prized is
lost.  He had never cowered before anyone in his life, I think, but he
cowered now before Pierre Caribou.

"Hewlett!" he cried in a high-pitched, quavering voice, "help me throw
this old fool out of the way."

I spoke to Pierre.  "Our quarrel is at an end," I said.  "I am going
away.  You must go, too."

Pierre Caribou did not relax an inch of ground.

Then a roar burst from Leroux's lips, and he flung himself upon the
Indian in the same desperate way as I had experienced, and in an
instant the two men were struggling at the edge of the platform.

It was impossible for me to intervene, and I could only stand by and
stare in horror.  And, as I stared, I saw the face of Lacroix among the
rocks again, peering out, with an evil smile upon his lips.

Whether they fought in silence or whether in sound I do not know, for
the noise of the cataract rendered the battle a dumb pantomime.

Pierre had pulled the Frenchman out to the middle of the ledge and was
trying to force him over.  But Leroux was clinging with one hand to the
cliff and with the other he beat savagely upon his enemy's face, so
that the blood covered both of them.  But Pierre did not seem to feel
the blows.

Leroux, one-handed, was at a disadvantage.  He grasped his antagonist
again, and the death-grapple began.

It was a marvel that they could engage in so terrific a fight upon the
ice-coated ledge and hold their balance there.  But I saw that they
were in equipoise, for they were bending all the tension of each muscle
to the fight, so that they remained almost motionless, and, thigh to
thigh, arm to arm, breast to breast, each sought to break the other's
strength.  And I saw that, when one was broken, he would not yield
slowly, but, having spent the last of his strength, would collapse like
a crumpled cardboard figure and go down into the boiling lake.

The cataract's half-sphere of crystal clearness framed them as though
they formed some dreadful picture.

They bent and swayed, and now Leroux was forcing Pierre's head and
shoulders backward by the weight of his bull's body.  But the Indian's
sinews, toughened by years of toil to steel, held fast; and just as
Leroux, confident of victory, shifted his feet and inclined forward,
Pierre changed his grasp and caught him by the throat.

Leroux's face blackened and his eyes started out.  His great chest
heaved, and he tore impotently at his enemy's strong fingers that were
shutting out air and light and consciousness.  They rocked and swayed;
then, with a last convulsive effort, Leroux swung Pierre off his feet,
raised him high in the air, and tried to dash his body against the
projecting rock at the tunnel's mouth.

But still the Indian's fingers held, and as his consciousness began to
fade Leroux staggered and slipped; and with a neighing whine that burst
from his constricted throat, a shriek that pierced the torrent's roar,
he slid down the cataract, Pierre locked in his arms.

I cried out in horror, but leaned forward, fascinated by the dreadful
spectacle.  I saw the bodies glide down the straight jet of water, as a
boy might slide down a column of steel, and plunge into the black
cauldron beneath, around whose edge stood the mocking and fantastic
figures of ice.  The seething lake tossed them high into the air, and
the second cataract caught them and flung them back toward the Old
Angel.

Their waters played with them and spun them round, caught them, and let
them go, and roared and foamed about them as they bobbed and danced
their devil's jig, waist-high, in one another's arms.

At last they slid down into the depths of the dark lake, to lie forever
there in that embrace.  And still the cataracts played on, sounding
their loud, triumphant, never-ending tune.

I was running down the tunnel again.  I was running to Jacqueline, but
something diverted me.  It was the face of Lacroix, peering at me from
among the crevices of the rocks with the same evil smile.  I knew from
the look on it that he had seen all and had been infinitely pleased
thereby.

I caught at him; I wanted to get my hands on him and strangle him, too,
and fling him down, and stamp his features out of human semblance.  But
he eluded me and darted back into the cliff.

I followed him hard.  This time I did not mean to let him go.

Lacroix was running toward the gold-mine.  He made no effort to dodge
into any of the unknown recesses of the caves, but ran at full speed
across the open space and plunged into the tunnel leading to the shore
by the _chateau_.

I caught him near the entrance and held him fast.

He struggled in my grasp and screamed.

"Go back!  For the love of God, go back, _monsieur_!" he shrieked.
"Let me go!  Let me go!"

He fought so desperately that he slipped out of my hands and darted
into the mine again, taking the tunnel which led toward the Old Angel,
and thence wound back toward the _chateau_.

I caught him again before the cave where Jacqueline lay.  I wound my
arms around him.  A dreadful suspicion was creeping into my mind.

He made no attempt to fight me, but only to escape, and his face was
hideously stamped with fear.

"Let me go!" he howled.  "Ah, you will repent it!  _Monsieur_, let me
go!  I will give you a half-share in the gold.  What do you want with
me?"

What did I want?  I did not know.  It must have been the same instinct
that leads one to stamp upon a noxious insect.  I think it was his joy
in the hideous spectacle beneath the cataract that had made me long to
kill him.

But now a dreadful fear was dawning on me.

"Jacqueline!" I screamed.

"I have not seen her," he replied.  "Now let me go!  Ah, _mon Dieu_,
will you never let me go?  It is too late!"

Suddenly he grew calm.

"It is too late," he said in a monotonous voice, "You have killed both
of us!"

And, with the sweat still on his forehead, he stood looking maliciously
at me.

"If you had let me go," he said, "you would have died just as you are
going to die."

I saw the face of the cliff quiver; I saw an immense rock, half-way up,
leap into the air and seem to hang there; then the ground was upheaved
beneath my feet, and with a frightful roar the rocky walls swayed and
fell together.

And the rivulet became a cataract that surged over me and filled my
ears with tumult and sealed my eyes with sleep.




CHAPTER XXIV

FULL CONFESSION

Darkness impenetrable about me, and a thick air that I breathed with
great gasps that hardly brought relief to my choking throat.  And a
voice out of the darkness crying ceaselessly in my ears:

"Help me!  Help me!"

In that nightmare I saw again those awful scenes as vividly as though
they had been etched in phosphorus before my eyes.  I saw the last
struggle of Pierre and Leroux, and I pursued Lacroix along the tunnel.
I saw the cliff toppling forward, and the rock poised in mid-air.

And the voice cried: "Help me!  Help me!" and never ceased.

I raised myself and tried to struggle to my feet.  I found that I could
move my limbs freely, I tried to rise upon my knees, but the roof
struck my head.  I stretched my arms out, and I touched the wall on
either side of me.

I must have been stunned by the concussion of the landslide.  By a
miracle I had not been struck.

"Help me!  Help me!"

I tried to find the voice.  I crawled three feet toward it, and the
wall stopped me.  But the voice was there.  It came from under the
wall.  I felt about me in the darkness, and my hand touched something
damp.  I whipped it back in horror.  It was the face of a man.

There was only the face.  Where the body and limbs ought to have been
was only rock.  The face was on my side of a wall of rock, pinning down
the body that lay outstretched beyond.

I recognized the voice now.  It was that of Philippe Lacroix.

"Ah, _mon Dieu_!  Help me!  Help me!"

He continued to repeat the words in every conceivable tone, and his
suffering was pitiable.  I forgot my own troubles as I tried to aid
him.  All my efforts were vain.  There were tons of rock above him, and
under the inch or two of space where the rock rested above the ground I
felt the edge of a burlap bag.

He had been pinned beneath the bags of earth and gold which he had
prized so dearly; the golden rocks were grinding out his life.  He was
dying--and he could not take his treasures to that place to which he
must go.

I felt one hand come through the tiny opening in the wall and grasp at
me.

"Who is it?" he mumbled.  "Is that you, Hewlett?  For God's sake, kill
me!"

I crouched beside him, but I did not know what to say or do.  I could
only wait there, that he might not die alone.

"Give me a knife!" he mumbled again, clutching at me.  "A knife,
Hewlett!  Don't leave me to die like this!  Bring Pere Antoine and my
mother.  I want to tell her--to tell her----"

He muttered in his delirium until his voice died away.  I thought that
he would never speak again.  But presently he seemed to revive again to
the consciousness of his surroundings.

"Are you with me, Hewlett?" he whispered.

I placed my hand in his, and he clutched at it with feverish force.

"You will have the gold, Hewlett," he muttered, apparently ignorant
that I, too, was a prisoner and in hardly better plight.  "You are the
last of the four.  I tried to kill you, Hewlett."

I said nothing, and he repeated querulously, between his gasps: "I
tried to kill you, Hewlett.  Are you going to leave me to die alone in
the dark now?"

"No," I answered.  "It doesn't matter, Lacroix."  And, really, it did
not matter.

"I wanted to kill you," his voice rambled on.  "Leroux is dead.  I
watched him die.  I thought if--you died, too, no one but I would know
the secret of the gold.  I tried to murder you.  I blew up the tunnel!"

He paused a while, and again I thought he was dying, but once more he
took up the confession.

"There was nearly a quarter of a ton of blasting powder and dynamite in
the cave.  You didn't know.  You went about so blindly, Hewlett.  I
watched you when I talked with you that night here.  How long ago it
must have been!  When was that?"

I did not tell him it was yesterday.  For it seemed immeasurably long
ago to me as well.

"It was stored there," he said.  "We had brought it up from St.
Boniface by sleigh--so carefully.  Leroux intended to begin mining as
soon as Louis returned.  And when he died I meant to kill you both, so
that the gold should all be mine.  I told you it was here because I
thought you meant to kill me, but I meant to kill you when you had made
an end of Leroux.  And you killed me.  Damn you!" he snarled.  "Why did
you not let me go?"

He paused, and I heard him gasp for breath.  His fingers clutched at my
coat-sleeve again and hooped themselves round mine like claws of steel.

"I had a knife--once," he resumed, relapsing into his delirium; "but I
left it behind me and the police got it.  Isn't it odd, Leroux," he
rambled on, "that one always leaves something behind when one has
killed a man?  But the newspapers made no mention about the knife.  You
didn't know he was dead, did you, Leroux, for all your cleverness,
until that fool Hewlett left that paper upon the table?  You knew
enough to send me to jail, but you didn't know that it was I who killed
him.  Help me!" He screamed horribly.  "He is here, looking at me!"

"There is nobody here, Philippe," I said, trying to soothe his agony of
soul.  What a poor and stained soul it was, travelling into the next
world alone!  "There is nobody but me, Philippe!"

"You lie!" he raved.  "Louis is here!  He has come for me!  Give me
your knife, Hewlett.  It is for him, not for me.  He deserved to die.
He tricked me after we had found the gold.  He tricked me twice.  He
told Leroux, thinking that he would win his gratitude and get free from
the man's power.  And the second time he told Carson."

My heart was thumping as he spoke.  I hardly dared to hope his words
were true.

"He was my friend," he mumbled.  "We were friends since we were boys.
We would have kicked Leroux into the street if he had dared to enter
our homes.  But we owed so much money.  And he discovered--what we had
done.  He wanted our family interest; he wanted to make use of us.  And
when we found the mine, Louis thought we would never be in need of
money again.  But Leroux was pressing him, threatening him.  And so he
told him.  Then there were three of us in the secret.

"Leroux had formed a lumber company with Carson, but he did not tell
him about the gold.  He formed his scheme with Louis.  They said
nothing to me; they wanted to leave me out.  Louis was to get the girl
and sell his rights to Simon.  But afterward, when he had spent the
money Simon had given him, he thought he could get more out of Carson.
So he went to him and told the secret.  That made four of us--four of
us, where there should have been only two."

"What did you do?" I asked, though it was like conducting a postmortem
upon a murderer's corpse.

"I went to New York to get my share.  I wasn't going to be ousted, I,
who had been one of the discoverers.  I don't know how much Carson paid
Louis, but I meant to demand half.  I thought he had the money in his
pocket.

"I followed him all that afternoon after he had left Carson's office.
I watched him in the street.  At night he went to a room somewhere--at
the top of a tall building.  I followed him.  When I got in I found a
woman there.  Louis was talking to her and threatening her.  He said
she was his wife.  How could she be his wife when he had married
Jacqueline Duchaine?

"I didn't care--it was no business of mine.  I couldn't see them,
because there was a curtain in the way.  There was no light in the
bedroom.  There was a light in the room in which I was.  I put it out,
so that neither of them should see my face.  She might have betrayed
me, you know, Simon.

"He spun round when the light went out, and pushed the curtain aside.
I was waiting for that.  I had calculated my blow.  I stabbed him.  It
was a good blow, though it was delivered in the dark.  He only cried
out once.  But the woman screamed, and a dog flew at me, and I couldn't
find his money.  So I ran away.

"And then there were only three of us who knew the secret.  Then Simon
died and there were only two, and now there are only Hewlett and I, and
he is dead, poor fool, and I have my gold here.  For God's sake give me
a knife, Simon!"

His fingers tore at my sleeve in his last agony, and I was tempted
sorely.  And it was his own knife that I had.  The irony of it!

He muttered once or twice and cried out in fear of the man whom he had
slain.  I heard him gasp a little later.  Then the hand fell from my
sleeve.  And after that there was no further sound.


"Paul!"

It was the merest whisper from the wall.  I thought it was a trick of
my own mind.  I dared not hope.

"Paul!  Dearest!"

This was no fancy born of a delirious brain and the thick fumes of
dynamite.  It came from the wall a little way ahead of me.  I crawled
the three feet that the little cave afforded and put my hands upon the
rock, feeling its surface inch by inch.  There was a crevice there, not
large enough to have permitted a bird to pass--the merest fissure.

"Jacqueline!  Is that you, dear?" I called.

"Where are you, Paul?" she whispered back.

"Behind the wall," I answered.  "You are not hurt, Jacqueline?"

"I am lying where you left me, dear.  Paul, I--I heard."

"You heard?" I answered dully.  What did it matter now?

"Why didn't you tell me, Paul?  But never mind.  I am so glad, dearest!
Can you come through to me?"

I struggled to tear the rocks away; I beat and bruised my hands in vain
against them.

"Soon," I muttered.  "Soon.  Can you breathe well, Jacqueline?"

"It is all open, Paul.  It is nearly dawn now."

"I will come when it grows light, Jacqueline," I babbled.  "When it
grows light!"

She did not know that it would never grow light for me.  Again I flung
myself against the walls of my prison, battering at them till the blood
dripped from my hands.  Again and again I flung myself down hopelessly,
and then I tried again, clutching at every fragment that protruded into
the cave.

And at last, when my despair had mastered me--it grew light.

For a sunbeam shot like a finger through the crevice and quivered upon
the floor of the cave.  And overhead, where I had never thought to
seek, where I had thought three hundred feet of eternal rock pressed
down on me, I saw the quiver of day through half a dozen feet of
tight-packed debris from the glacier's mouth.

I raised myself and tore at it and sent it flying.  I thrust my hands
among the stones and tore them down like the tiles from a rotten roof.

I heard a shout; hands were reached down to me and pulled me up, and I
was on my feet upon a hillside, looking into the keen eyes of Pere
Antoine and the face of the Indian squaw.

And the Eskimo dog was barking at my side.




CHAPTER XXV

THE END OF THE CHATEAU

Only one thing marred the happiness of our reunion, and that was the
loss of Jacqueline's father.

We had talked much over what had happened, and ten days later, when
Jacqueline had recovered from the shock and from what proved to be,
after all, only a flesh-wound, we had visited the scene of our rescue
by the old priest.

The Indian woman had met him as she was returning home, and had told
him of our danger, and he had started out before dawn, to find that
there was no longer any entrance to the tunnel.  Wandering in
bewilderment upon the mountains, he had reached the place where I was
buried at the moment of my final effort to break through the debris
overhead.

Although the explanation seemed an impossible one, there was none other.

The cliff, riddled with tunnels and eaten out by its numerous
subterranean streams, had fallen.  The charge of dynamite exploded, as
it happened, beneath that part which buttressed the entire structure,
combining with the pressure of the glacier above, had thrown the
mountain on its side, filling the lake with several million tons of ice
and obliterating all traces of the _chateau_, which lay buried beneath
its waters.

That was Pere Antoine's explanation, and we realized at once that it
was useless to search for Charles Duchaine.  The whole aspect of the
region had been changed; there was neither glacier nor cataract, and
the lake, swollen to twice its size and height, slept peacefully
beneath its covering of ice and snow.


When we returned to the cabin we were amazed to see a sleigh standing
outside, and dogs feeding.  Two men were seated at the priests table,
smoking.

"_Diable, monsieur_, don't you keep a stove in your house?" shouted a
well-known voice to Pere Antoine.  Then, as Jacqueline and I approached
the entrance, the man turned and sprang toward us with outstretched
hands that gripped ours and wrung them till we cried out in pain.

It was Alfred Dubois.

But I was stupefied to see the second man who rose and advanced toward
me with a shrewd smile.  For it was Tom Carson!

Presently I was telling my story--except for that part which more
intimately concerned myself and Jacqueline, and the narrative of the
murder, which I gave only as Lacroix had confessed it to me.

A look of incredulity deepened on Tom's shrewd old face till, at the
end, he burst out explosively at me:

"Hewlett, I didn't think I was a damned fool before--I beg your pardon,
miss.  If any man had told me that I would have knocked him down.  But
I am, I am, and want you to be my manager."

"Do you mean that I have lied to you?" I asked indignantly.

"Every word, Hewlett--every word, my son.  That is why I want you back
with me.  First you leave my employment without offering any reason;
then you take hold of my business affairs and try to pull off a deal
over my head, and then you tell me a yarn about a castle falling into a
lake."

"But, M. Carson," interposed the priest, "I myself have seen this
_chateau_ many times.  And I have gone to the entrance and looked from
the mountain, too, and it is no longer there."

"Never was," said Carson.  "You fellows get so lonesome up in these
wilds that you have to see things."

"But I heard the explosion."

"Artillery practice down the Gulf."

"Listen to me, M. Carson!" exploded Dubois.  "Did I not say that I
would drive you here myself because I was anxious about a friend of
mine and his young bride who were in the clutches of that scoundrel,
Simon Leroux, who killed my brother?  And did I not say that they were
in the _Chateau Duchaine_?"

"Well, there may be a _chateau_, somewhere," Carson replied.  "In fact,
there probably is.  This man, d'Epernay, who is said to be dead now,
wanted to sell me the biggest gold mine in the world for fifty thousand
dollars, and from what I know of Leroux I am ready to believe that he
would try to hog it if it really exists.  So, as I wanted to see how
our lumber development at St. Boniface was getting along, I thought I'd
come up here and investigate."

"But how about Leroux?" I cried, more amused now than vexed.

"That," answered Tom, "is precisely why I want to get hold of you
again, Mr. Hewlett."

"But here is Mlle. Duchaine!" shouted the old priest in despair.

Tom Carson raised his fat old body about five inches and made
Jacqueline what he took to be a bow.

"Pleased to make your acquaintance, miss," he replied.  "Ah, well, it
doesn't matter.  I guess that man, d'Epernay, was lying to me.  He
wanted to get a cash advance, and I got a little suspicious of him just
about then.  However, I am ready to look at your gold mine if you want
me to."

"You'll have to do some blasting then," I said, nettled.  "It's just
about two hundred feet below the ground."

"Never mind," said Tom.  "Lumber is better than gold.  Next time I'm
here I shall be glad to have another look around.  And now, Hewlett, if
you want a job at five thousand a year to start--to start, mind you,
you play fair and tell me where Leroux is hiding himself."

I was too mortified to answer him.  But I felt Jacqueline slip her hand
into mine, and suddenly the memory of the past made Tom's raillery an
insignificant affair.

"Mind you," he pursued, "he'll turn up soon.  He's got to turn up,
because the lumber company's all organized now and in fine running
order.  What do you say, Hewlett?"

"Nothing," I answered.

"All right," he said, turning away with a shrug of his shoulders.
"Unpractical as ever, ain't you?  Think it over, my son.  Glad to have
met you, Mr. Priest, and as I'm always busy I guess Dubois and I will
start for home this afternoon."

Jacqueline looked at me, and I shook my head.  I didn't want Tom to
witness it.  But a word from Pere Antoine changed the hostile tenor of
my thoughts to warm and human ones.

"Messieurs," he said, "doubtless you know what day this is?"

Tom started.  "Why, good Lord, it--it's Christmas Day, isn't it?" he
asked, a little sheepishly.

"It's a bigger day for us," I said to Tom.

He squinted at me in his shrewd manner; and then he got up from the
table and wrung my hand.

"Good luck to you both," he said.  "Say, Mr. Dubois, I guess we can
pitch our tent here to-night--don't you?"

Alfred Dubois was grappling with our hands again; but his onset was
less ferocious, because he had to loose us every now and then to slap
me on the back and blow his nose.

"If only _la petite Madeleine_ could be here!" he shouted.  And I am
sure that was his dinner voice I heard.




THE END











End of Project Gutenberg's Jacqueline of Golden River, by H. M. Egbert

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK JACQUELINE OF GOLDEN RIVER ***

***** This file should be named 16771.txt or 16771.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/6/7/7/16771/

Produced by Al Haines

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
