The Project Gutenberg eBook, The Heart of the Desert, by Honoré Willsie
Morrow, Illustrated by V. Herbert Dunton


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net





Title: The Heart of the Desert
       Kut-Le of the Desert


Author: Honoré Willsie Morrow



Release Date: September 30, 2005  [eBook #16777]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HEART OF THE DESERT***


E-text prepared by Al Haines



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustration.
      See 16777-h.htm or 16777-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/1/6/7/7/16777/16777-h/16777-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/1/6/7/7/16777/16777-h.zip)





THE HEART OF THE DESERT

(Kut-Le of the Desert)

by

HONORE WILLSIE

Author of "Still Jim"

With Frontispiece in Colors by V. Herbert Dunton

A. L. Burt Company, Publishers
114-120 East Twenty-third Street ---- New York
Published by Arrangement with Frederick A. Stokes Company

1913







[Frontispiece: Side by side, they rode off into the desert sunset.]





CONTENTS

CHAPTER

     I  THE VALLEY OF THE PECOS
    II  THE CAUCASIAN WAY
   III  THE INDIAN AND CAUCASIAN
    IV  THE INDIAN WAY
     V  THE PURSUIT
    VI  ENTERING THE DESERT KINDERGARTEN
   VII  THE FIRST LESSON
  VIII  A BROADENING HORIZON
    IX  TOUCH AND GO
     X  A LONG TRAIL
    XI  THE TURN IN THE TRAIL
   XII  THE CROSSING TRAILS
  XIII  AN INTERLUDE
   XIV  THE BEAUTY OF THE WORLD
    XV  AN ESCAPE
   XVI  ADRIFT IN THE DESERT
  XVII  THE HEART'S OWN BITTERNESS
 XVIII  THE FORGOTTEN CITY
   XIX  THE TRAIL AGAIN
    XX  THE RUINED MISSION
   XXI  THE END OF THE TRAIL




The Heart of the Desert


CHAPTER I

THE VALLEY OF THE PECOS

Rhoda hobbled through the sand to the nearest rock.  On this she sank
with a groan, clasped her slender foot with both hands and looked about
her helplessly.

She felt very small, very much alone.  The infinite wastes of yellow
desert danced in heat waves against the bronze-blue sky.  The girl saw
no sign of living thing save a buzzard that swept lazily across the
zenith.  She turned dizzily from contemplating the vast emptiness about
her to a close scrutiny of her injured foot.  She drew off her thin
satin house slipper painfully and dropped it unheedingly into a bunch
of yucca that crowded against the rock.  Her silk stocking followed.
Then she sat in helpless misery, eying her blue-veined foot.

In spite of her evident invalidism, one could but wonder why she made
so little effort to help herself.  She sat droopingly on the rock,
gazing from her foot to the far lavender line of the mesas.  A tiny,
impotent atom of life, she sat as if the eternal why which the desert
hurls at one overwhelmed her, deprived her of hope, almost of
sensation.  There was something of nobility in the steadiness with
which she gazed at the melting distances, something of pathos in her
evident resignation, to her own helplessness and weakness.

The girl was quite unconscious of the fact that a young man was
tramping up the desert behind her.  He, however, had spied the white
gown long before Rhoda had sunk to the rock and had laid his course
directly for her.  He was a tall fellow, standing well over six feet
and he swung through the heavy sand with an easy stride that covered
distance with astonishing rapidity.  As he drew near enough to perceive
Rhoda's yellow head bent above her injured foot, he quickened his pace,
swung round the yucca thicket and pulled off his soft felt hat.

"Good-morning!" he said.  "What's the matter?"

Rhoda started, hastily covered her foot, and looked up at the tall
khaki-clad figure.  She never had seen the young man before, but the
desert is not formal.

"A thing like a little crayfish bit my foot," she answered; "and you
don't know how it hurts!"

"Ah, but I do!" exclaimed the young man.  "A scorpion sting!  Let me
see it!"

Rhoda flushed.

"Oh, never mind that!" she said.  "But if you will go to the Newman
ranch-house for me and ask them to send the buckboard I'll be very
grateful.  I--I feel dizzy, you know."

"Gee whiz!" exclaimed the young man.  "There's no time for me to run
about the desert if you have a scorpion sting in your foot!"

"Is a scorpion sting dangerous?" asked Rhoda.  Then she added,
languidly, "Not that I mind if it is!"

The young man gave her a curious glance.  Then he pulled a small case
from his pocket, knelt in the sand and lifted Rhoda's foot in one
slender, strong, brown hand.  The instep already was badly swollen.

"Hold tight a minute!" said the young man.

And before Rhoda could protest he had punctured the red center of the
swelling with a little scalpel, had held the cut open and had filled it
with a white powder that bit.  Then he pulled a clean handkerchief from
his pocket and tore it in two.  With one half he bound the ankle above
the cut tightly.  With the other he bandaged the cut itself.

"Are you a doctor?" asked Rhoda faintly.

"Far from it," replied the young man with a chuckle, tightening the
upper bandage until Rhoda's foot was numb.  "But I always carry this
little outfit with me; rattlers and scorpions are so thick over on the
ditch.  Somebody's apt to be hurt anytime.  I'm Charley Cartwell, Jack
Newman's engineer."

"Oh!" said Rhoda understandingly.  "I'm so dizzy I can't see you very
well.  This is very good of you.  Perhaps now you'd go on and get the
buckboard.  Tell them it's for Rhoda, Rhoda Tuttle.  I just went out
for a walk and then--"

Her voice trailed into nothingness and she could only steady her
swaying body with both hands against the rock.

"Huh!" grunted young Cartwell.  "I go on to the house and leave you
here in the boiling sun!"

"Would you mind hurrying?" asked Rhoda.

"Not at all," returned Cartwell.

He plucked the stocking and slipper from the yucca and dropped them
into his pocket.  Then he stooped and lifted Rhoda across his broad
chest.  This roused her.

"Why, you can't do this!" she cried, struggling to free herself.

Cartwell merely tightened his hold and swung out at a pace that was
half run, half walk.

"Close your eyes so the sun won't hurt them," he said peremptorily.

Dizzily and confusedly, Rhoda dropped her head back on the broad
shoulder and closed her eyes, with a feeling of security that later on
was to appall her.  Long after she was to recall the confidence of this
moment with unbelief and horror.  Nor did she dream how many weary days
and hours she one day was to pass with this same brazen sky over her,
this same broad shoulder under her head.

Cartwell looked down at the delicate face lying against his breast, at
the soft yellow hair massed against his sleeve.  Into his black eyes
came a look that was passionately tender, and the strong brown hand
that supported Rhoda's shoulders trembled.

In an incredibly short time he was entering the peach orchard that
surrounded the ranch-house.  A young man in white flannels jumped from
a hammock in which he had been dozing.

"For heaven's sake!" he exclaimed.  "What does this mean?"

Rhoda was too ill to reply.  Cartwell did not slack his giant stride
toward the house.

"It means," he answered grimly, "that you folks must be crazy to let
Miss Tuttle take a walk in clothes like this!  She's got a scorpion
sting in her foot."

The man in flannels turned pale.  He hurried along beside Cartwell,
then broke into a run.

"I'll telephone to Gold Rock for the doctor and tell Mrs. Newman."

He started on ahead.

"Never mind the doctor!" called Cartwell.  "I've attended to the sting.
Tell Mrs. Jack to have hot water ready."

As Cartwell sprang up the porch steps, Mrs. Newman ran out to meet him.
She was a pretty, rosy girl, with brown eyes and curly brown hair.

"Rhoda!  Kut-le!" she cried.  "Why didn't I warn her!  Put her on the
couch here in the hall, Kut-le.  John, tell Li Chung to bring the
hot-water bottles.  Here, Rhoda dear, drink this!"

For half an hour the three, with Li Chung hovering in the background,
worked over the girl.  Then as they saw her stupor change to a natural
sleep, Katherine gave a sigh that was almost a sob.

"She's all right!" she said.  "O Kut-le, if you hadn't come at that
moment!"

Cartwell shook his head.

"It might have gone hard with her, she's so delicate.  Gee, I'm glad I
ran out of tobacco this morning and thought a two-mile tramp across the
desert for it worth while!"

The three were on the porch now.  The young man in flannels, who had
said little but had obeyed orders explicitly eyed Cartwell curiously.

"You're Newman's engineer, aren't you?" he asked.  "My name's DeWitt.
You've put us all under great obligations, this morning."

Cartwell took the extended hand.

"Well, you know," he said carefully, "a scorpion sting may or may not
be serious.  People have died of them.  Mrs. Jack here makes no more of
them than of a mosquito bite, while Jack goes about like a drunken
sailor with one for a day, then forgets it.  Miss Tuttle will be all
right when she wakes up.  I'm off till dinner time, Mrs. Jack.  Jack
will think I've reverted!"

DeWitt stood for a moment watching the tall, lithe figure move through
the peach-trees.  He was torn by a strange feeling, half of aversion,
half of charm for the dark young stranger.  Then:

"Hold on, Cartwell," he cried.  "I'll drive you back in the buckboard."

Katherine Newman, looking after the two, raised her eyebrows, shook her
head, then smiled and went back to Rhoda.

It was mid-afternoon when Rhoda woke.  Katherine was sitting near by
with her sewing.

"Well!" said Rhoda wonderingly.  "I'm all right, after all!"

Katherine jumped up and took Rhoda's thin little hand joyfully.

"Indeed you are!" she cried.  "Thanks to Kut-le!"

"Thanks to whom?" asked Rhoda.  "It was a tall young man.  He said his
name was Charley Cartwell."

"Yup!" answered Katherine.  "Charley Cartwell!  His other name is
Kut-le.  He'll be in to dinner with Jack, tonight.  Isn't he
good-looking, though!"

"I don't know.  I was so dizzy I couldn't see him.  He seemed very
dark.  Is he a Spaniard?"

"Spaniard!  No!"  Katherine was watching Rhoda's languid eyes half
mischievously.  "He's part Mescallero, part Pueblo, part Mohave!"

Rhoda sat erect with flaming face.

"You mean that he's an Indian and I let him carry me!  Katherine!"

The mischief in Katherine's brown eyes grew to laughter.

"I thought that would get a rise out of you, you blessed tenderfoot!
What difference does that make?  He rescued you from a serious
predicament; and more than that he's a fine fellow and one of Jack's
dearest friends."

Rhoda's delicate face still was flushed.

"An Indian!  What did John DeWitt say?"

"Oh!" said Katherine, carelessly, "he offered to drive Kut-le back to
the ditch, and he hasn't got home yet.  They probably will be very
congenial, John being a Harvard man and Kut-le a Yale!"

Rhoda's curved lips opened, then closed again.  The look of interest
died from her eyes.

"Well," she said in her usual weary voice, "I think I'll have a glass
of milk, if I may.  Then I'll go out on the porch.  You see I'm being
all the trouble to you, Katherine, that I said I would be."

"Trouble!" protested Katherine.  "Why, Rhoda Tuttle, if I could just
see you with the old light in your eyes I'd wait on you by inches on my
knees.  I would, honestly."

Rhoda rubbed a thin cheek against the warm hand that still held hers,
and the mute thanks said more than words.

The veranda of the Newman ranch-house was deep and shaded by green
vines.  From the hammock where she lay, a delicate figure amid the
vivid cushions, Rhoda looked upon a landscape that combined all the
perfection of verdure of a northern park with a sense of illimitable
breathing space that should have been fairly intoxicating to her.  Two
huge cottonwoods stood beside the porch.  Beyond the lawn lay the peach
orchard which vied with the bordering alfalfa fields in fragrance and
color.  The yellow-brown of tree-trunks and the white of grazing sheep
against vegetation of richest green were astonishing colors for Rhoda
to find in the desert to which she had been exiled, and in the few days
since her arrival she had not ceased to wonder at them.

DeWitt crossed the orchard, quickening his pace when he saw Rhoda.  He
was a tall fellow, blond and well built, though not so tall and lithe
as Cartwell.  His dark blue eyes were disconcertingly clear and direct.

"Well, Rhoda dear!" he exclaimed as he hurried up the steps.  "If you
didn't scare this family!  How are you feeling now?"

"I'm all right," Rhoda answered languidly.  "It was good of you all to
bother so about me.  What have you been doing all day?"

"Over at the ditch with Jack and Cartwell.  Say, Rhoda, the young
fellow who rescued you is an Indian!"

DeWitt dropped into a big chair by the hammock.  He watched the girl
hopefully.  It was such a long, long time since she had been interested
in anything!  But there was no responsive light in the deep gray eyes.

"Katherine told me," she replied.  Then, after a pause, as if she felt
it her duty to make conversation, "Did you like him?"

DeWitt spoke slowly, as if he had been considering the matter.

"I've a lot of race prejudice in me, Rhoda.  I don't like niggers or
Chinamen or Indians when they get over to the white man's side of the
fence.  They are well enough on their own side.  However, this Cartwell
chap seems all right.  And he rescued you from a beastly serious
situation!"

"I don't know that I'm as grateful for that as I ought to be," murmured
Rhoda, half to herself.  "It would have been an easy solution."

Her words stung DeWitt.  He started forward and seized the small thin
hands in both his own.

"Rhoda, don't!" he pleaded huskily.  "Don't give up!  Don't lose hope!
If I could only give you some of my strength!  Don't talk so!  It just
about breaks my heart to hear you."

For a time, Rhoda did not answer.  She lay wearily watching the eager,
pleading face so close to her own.  Even in her illness, Rhoda was very
lovely.  The burnished yellow hair softened the thinness of the face
that was like delicately chiseled marble.  The finely cut nose, the
exquisite drooping mouth, the little square chin with its cleft, and
the great gray eyes lost none of their beauty through her weakness.

"John," she said at last, "why won't you look the truth in the face?  I
never shall get well.  I shall die here instead of in New York, that's
all.  Why did you follow me down here?  It only tortures you.  And,
truly it's not so bad for me.  You all have lost your realness to me,
somehow.  I shan't mind going, much."

DeWitt's strong face worked but his voice was steady.

"I never shall leave you," he said simply.  "You are the one woman in
the world for me.  I'd marry you tomorrow if you'd let me."

Rhoda shook her head.

"You ought to go away, John, and forget me.  You ought to go marry some
fine girl and have a home and a family.  I'm just a sick wreck."

"Rhoda," and DeWitt's earnest voice was convincing, "Rhoda, I'd pass up
the healthiest, finest girl on earth for you, just sick you.  Why,
can't you see that your helplessness and dependence only deepen your
hold on me?  Who wants a thing as fragile and as lovely as you are to
make a home!  You pay your way in life just by living!  Beauty and
sweetness like yours is enough for a woman to give.  I don't want you
to do a thing in the world.  Just give yourself to me and let me take
care of you.  Rhoda, dear, dear heart!"

"I can't marry unless I'm well," insisted Rhoda, "and I never shall be
well again.  I know that you all thought it was for the best, bringing
me down to the desert, but just as soon as I can manage it without
hurting Katherine's and Jack's feelings too much, I'm going back to New
York.  If you only knew how the big emptiness of this desert country
adds to my depression!"

"If you go back to New York," persisted DeWitt, "you are going back as
my wife.  I'm sick of seeing you dependent on hired care.  Why, Rhoda
dear, is it nothing to you that, when you haven't a near relative in
the world, I would gladly die for you?"

"Oh!" cried the girl, tears of weakness and pity in her eyes, "you know
that it means everything to me!  But I can't marry any one.  All I want
is just to crawl away and die in peace.  I wish that that Indian hadn't
come upon me so promptly.  I'd just have gone to sleep and never
wakened."

"Don't!  Don't!" cried DeWitt.  "I shall pick you up and hold you
against all the world, if you say that!"

"Hush!" whispered Rhoda, but her smile was very tender.  "Some one is
coming through the orchard."

DeWitt reluctantly released the slender hands and leaned back in his
chair.  The sun had crossed the peach orchard slowly, breathlessly.  It
cast long, slanting shadows along the beautiful alfalfa fields and
turned the willows by the irrigating ditch to a rosy gray.  As the sun
sank, song-birds piped and lizards scuttled along the porch rail.  The
loveliest part of the New Mexican day had come.

The two young Northerners watched the man who was swinging through the
orchard.  It was Cartwell.  Despite his breadth of shoulder, the young
Indian looked slender, though it was evident that only panther strength
could produce such panther grace.  He crossed the lawn and stood at the
foot of the steps; one hand crushed his soft hat against his hip, and
the sun turned his close-cropped black hair to blue bronze.  For an
instant none of the three spoke.  It was as if each felt the import of
this meeting which was to be continued through such strange
vicissitudes.  Cartwell, however, was not looking at DeWitt but at
Rhoda, and she returned his gaze, surprised at the beauty of his face,
with its large, long-lashed, Mohave eyes that were set well apart and
set deeply as are the eyes of those whose ancestors have lived much in
the open glare of the sun; with the straight, thin-nostriled nose; with
the stern, cleanly modeled mouth and the square chin, below.  And
looking into the young Indian's deep black eyes, Rhoda felt within
herself a vague stirring that for a second wiped the languor from her
eyes.

Cartwell spoke first, easily, in the quiet, well-modulated voice of the
Indian.

"Hello!  All safe, I see!  Mr. Newman will be here shortly."  He seated
himself on the upper step with his back against a pillar and fanned
himself with his hat.  "Jack's working too hard.  I want him to go to
the coast for a while and let me run the ditch.  But he won't.  He's as
pig-headed as a Mohave."

"Are the Mohaves so pig-headed then?" asked DeWitt, smiling.

Cartwell returned the smile with a flash of white teeth.

"You bet they are!  My mother was part Mohave and she used to say that
only the Pueblo in her kept her from being as stiff-necked as yucca.
You're all over the dizziness, Miss Tuttle?"

"Yes," said Rhoda.  "You were very good to me."

Cartwell shook his head.

"I'm afraid I can't take special credit for that.  Will you two ride to
the ditch with me tomorrow?  I think Miss Tuttle will be interested in
Jack's irrigation dream, don't you, Mr. DeWitt?"

DeWitt answered a little stiffly.

"It's out of the question for Miss Tuttle to attempt such a trip, thank
you."

But to her own as well as DeWitt's astonishment Rhoda spoke
protestingly.

"You must let me refuse my own invitations, John.  Perhaps the ditch
would interest me."

DeWitt replied hastily, "Good gracious, Rhoda!  If anything will
interest you, don't let me interfere."

There was protest in his voice against Rhoda's being interested in an
Indian's suggestion.  Both Rhoda and Cartwell felt this and there was
an awkward pause.  This was broken by a faint halloo from the corral
and DeWitt rose abruptly.

"I'll go down and meet Jack," he said.

"We'll do a lot of stunts if you're willing," Cartwell said serenely,
his eyes following DeWitt's broad back inscrutably.  "The desert is
like a story-book if one learns to read it.  If you would be interested
to learn, I would be keen to teach you."

Rhoda's gray eyes lifted to the young man's somberly.

"I'm too dull these days to learn anything," she said.  "But I--I
didn't used to be!  Truly I didn't!  I used to be so alive, so strong!
I believed in everything, myself most of all!  Truly I did!"  She
paused, wondering at her lack of reticence.

Cartwell, however, was looking at her with something in his gaze so
quietly understanding that Rhoda smiled.  It was a slow smile that
lifted and deepened the corners of Rhoda's lips, that darkened her gray
eyes to black, an unforgetable smile to the loveliness of which Rhoda's
friends never could accustom themselves.  At the sight of it, Cartwell
drew a deep breath, then leaned toward her and spoke with curious
earnestness.

"You make me feel the same way that starlight on the desert makes me
feel."

Rhoda replied in astonishment, "Why, you mustn't speak that way to me!
It's not--not--"

"Not conventional?" suggested Cartwell.  "What difference does that
make, between you and me?"

Again came the strange stirring in Rhoda in response to Cartwell's
gaze.  He was looking at her with something of tragedy in the dark
young eyes, something of sternness and determination in the clean-cut
lips.  Rhoda wondered, afterward, what would have been said if
Katherine had not chosen this moment to come out on the porch.

"Rhoda," she asked, "do you feel like dressing for dinner?  Hello,
Kut-le, it's time you moved toward soap and water, seems to me!"

"Yessum!" replied Cartwell meekly.  He rose and helped Rhoda from the
hammock, then held the door open for her.  DeWitt and Newman emerged
from the orchard as he crossed to Katherine's chair.

"Is she very sick, Mrs. Jack?" he asked.

Katherine nodded soberly.

"Desperately sick.  Her father and mother were killed in a railroad
wreck a year ago.  Rhoda wasn't seriously hurt but she has never gotten
over the shock.  She has been failing ever since.  The doctor feared
consumption and sent her down here.  But she's just dying by inches.
Oh, it's too awful!  I can't believe it!  I can't realize it!"

Cartwell stood in silence for a moment, his lips compressed, his eyes
inscrutable.

Then, "I've met her at last," he said.  "It makes me believe in Fate."

Katherine's pretty lips parted in amazement.

"Goodness!  Are you often taken this way!" she gasped.

"Never before!" replied Cartwell serenely.  "Jack said she'd broken her
engagement to DeWitt because of her illness, so it's a fair war!"

"Kut-le!" exclaimed Katherine.  "Don't talk like a yellow-backed novel!
It's not a life or death affair."

"You can't tell as to that," answered Cartwell with a curious little
smile.  "You mustn't forget that I'm an Indian."

And he turned to greet the two men who were mounting the steps.




CHAPTER II

THE CAUCASIAN WAY

When Rhoda entered the dining-room some of her pallor seemed to have left
her.  She was dressed in a gown of an elusive pink that gave a rose flush
to the marble fineness of her face.

Katherine was chatting with a wiry, middle-aged man whom she introduced
to Rhoda as Mr. Porter, an Arizona mining man.  Porter stood as if
stunned for a moment by Rhoda's delicate loveliness.  Then, as was the
custom of every man who met Rhoda, he looked vaguely about for something
to do for her.  Jack Newman forestalled him by taking Rhoda's hand and
leading her to the table.  Jack's curly blond hair looked almost white in
contrast with his tanned face.  He was not as tall as either Cartwell or
DeWitt but he was strong and clean-cut and had a boyish look despite the
heavy responsibilities of his five-thousand-acre ranch.

"There," he said, placing Rhoda beside Porter; "just attach Porter's
scalp to your belt with the rest of your collection.  It'll be a new
experience to him.  Don't be afraid, Porter."

Billy Porter was not in the least embarrassed.

"I've come too near to losing my scalp to the Apaches to be scared by
Miss Tuttle.  Anyhow I gave her my scalp without a yelp the minute I laid
eyes on her."

"Here!  That's not fair!" cried John DeWitt.  "The rest of us had to work
to get her to take ours!"

"Our what?" asked Cartwell, entering the room at the last word.  He was
looking very cool and well groomed in white flannels.

Billy Porter stared at the newcomer and dropped his soup-spoon with a
splash.  "What in thunder!" Rhoda heard him mutter.

Jack Newman spoke hastily.

"This is Mr. Cartwell, our irrigation engineer, Mr. Porter."

Porter responded to the young Indian's courteous bow with a surly nod,
and proceeded with his soup.

"I'd as soon eat with a nigger as an Injun," he said to Rhoda under cover
of some laughing remark of Katherine's to Cartwell.

"He seems to be nice," said Rhoda vaguely.  "Maybe, though, Katherine
_is_ a little liberal, making him one of the family."

"Is there any hunting at all in this open desert country?" asked DeWitt.
"I certainly hate to go back to New York with nothing but sunburn to show
for my trip!"

"Coyotes, wildcats, rabbits and partridges," volunteered Cartwell.  "I
know where there is a nest of wildcats up on the first mesa.  And I know
an Indian who will tan the pelts for you, like velvet.  A jack-rabbit
pelt well tanned is an exquisite thing too, by the way.  I will go on a
hunt with you whenever the ditch can be left."

"And while they are chasing round after jacks, Miss Tuttle," cut in Billy
Porter neatly, "I will take you anywhere you want to go.  I'll show you
things these kids never dreamed of!  I knew this country in the days of
Apache raids and the pony express."

"That will be fine!" replied Rhoda.  "But I'd rather hear the stories
than take any trips.  Did you spend your boyhood in New Mexico?  Did you
see real Indian fights?  Did you--?"  She paused with an involuntary
glance at Cartwell.

Porter, too, looked at the dark young face across the table and something
in its inscrutable calm seemed to madden him.

"My boyhood here?  Yes, and a happy boyhood it was!  I came home from the
range one day and found my little fifteen-year-old sister and a little
neighbor friend of hers hung up by the back of their necks on butcher
hooks.  They had been tortured to death by Apaches.  I don't like
Indians!"

There was an awkward pause at the dinner table.  Li Chung removed the
soup-plates noiselessly.  Cartwell's brown fingers tapped the tablecloth.
But he was not looking at Porter's scowling face.  He was watching
Rhoda's gray eyes which were fastened on him with a look half of pity,
half of aversion.  When he spoke it was as if he cared little for the
opinions of the others but would set himself right with her alone.

"My father," he said, "came home from the hunt, one day, to find his
mother and three sisters lying in their own blood.  The whites had gotten
them.  They all had been scalped and were dead except the baby, three
years old.  She--she--my father killed her."

A gasp of horror went round the table.

"I think such stories are inexcusable here!" exclaimed Katherine
indignantly.

"So do I, Mrs. Jack," replied Cartwell.  "I won't do it again."

Porter's face stained a deep mahogany and he bowed stiffly to Katherine.

"I beg your pardon, Mrs. Newman!"

"I feel as if I were visiting a group of anarchists," said Rhoda
plaintively, "and had innocently passed round a bomb on which to make
conversation!"

Jack Newman laughed, the tension relaxed, and in a moment the dinner was
proceeding merrily, though Porter and Cartwell carefully avoided speaking
to each other.  Most of the conversation centered around Rhoda.
Katherine always had been devoted to her friend.  And though men always
had paid homage to Rhoda, since her illness had enhanced her delicacy,
and had made her so appealingly helpless, they were drawn to her as
surely as bee to flower.  Old and young, dignified and happy-go-lucky,
all were moved irresistibly to do something for her, to coddle her, to
undertake impossible missions, self-imposed.

Porter from his place of vantage beside her kept her plate heaped with
delicacies, calmly removed the breast of chicken from his own plate to
hers, all but fed her with a spoon when she refused to more than nibble
at her meal.

DeWitt's special night-mare was that drafts were blowing on her.  He kept
excusing himself from the table to open and close windows and doors, to
hang over her chair so as to feel for himself if the wind touched her.

Katherine and Jack kept Li Chung trotting to the kitchen for different
dainties with which to tempt her.  Only Cartwell did nothing.  He kept up
what seemed to be his usual fire of amiable conversation and watched
Rhoda constantly through inscrutable black eyes.  But he made no attempt
to serve her.

Rhoda was scarcely conscious of the deference showed her, partly because
she had received it so long, partly because that detached frame of mind
of the hopeless invalid made the life about her seem shadowy and unreal.
Nothing really mattered much.  She lay back in her chair with the little
wistful smile, the somber light in her eyes that had become habitual to
her.

After dinner was finished Katherine led the way to the living-room.  To
his unspeakable pride, Rhoda took Billy Porter's arm and he guided her
listless footsteps carefully, casting pitying glances on his less favored
friends.  Jack wheeled a Morris chair before the fireplace--desert nights
are cool--and John DeWitt hurried for a shawl, while Katherine gave every
one orders that no one heeded in the least.

Cartwell followed after the others, slowly lighted a cigarette, then
seated himself at the piano.  For the rest of the evening he made no
attempt to join in the fragmentary conversation.  Instead he sang softly,
as if to himself, touching the keys so gently that their notes seemed
only the echo of his mellow voice.  He sang bits of Spanish love-songs,
of Mexican lullabies.  But for the most part he kept to Indian
melodies--wistful love-songs and chants that touched the listener with
strange poignancy.

There was little talk among the group around the fire.  The three men
smoked peacefully.  Katherine and Jack sat close to each other, on the
davenport, content to be together.  DeWitt lounged where he could watch
Rhoda, as did Billy Porter, the latter hanging on every word and movement
of this lovely, fragile being, as if he would carry forever in his heart
the memory of her charm.

Rhoda herself watched the fire.  She was tired, tired to the inmost fiber
of her being.  The only real desire left her was that she might crawl off
somewhere and die in peace.  But these good friends of hers had set their
faces against the inevitable and it was only decency to humor them.
Once, quite unconscious that the others were watching her, she lifted her
hands and eyed them idly.  They were almost transparent and shook a
little.  The group about the fire stirred pityingly.  John and Katherine
and Jack remembered those shadowy hands when they had been rosy and full
of warmth and tenderness.  Billy Porter leaned across and with his hard
brown palms pressed the trembling fingers down into Rhoda's lap.  She
looked up in astonishment.

"Don't hold 'em so!" said Billy hoarsely.  "I can't stand to see 'em!"

"They _are_ pretty bad," said Rhoda, smiling.  It was her rare, slow,
unforgetable smile.  Porter swallowed audibly.  Cartwell at the piano
drifted from a Mohave lament to _La Paloma_.

  "The day that I left my home for the rolling sea,
  I said, 'Mother dear, O pray to thy God for me!'
  But e'er I set sail I went a fond leave to take
  Of Nina, who wept as if her poor heart would break!"

The mellow, haunting melody caught Rhoda's fancy at once, as Cartwell
knew it would.  She turned to the sinewy figure at the piano.  DeWitt was
wholesome and strong, but this young Indian seemed vitality itself.

  "Nina, if I should die and o'er ocean's foam
  Softly at dusk a fair dove should come,
  Open thy window, Nina, for it would be
  My faithful soul come back to thee----"

Something in Cartwell's voice stirred Rhoda as had his eyes.  For the
first time in months Rhoda felt poignantly that it would be hard to be
cut down with all her life unlived.  The mellow voice ceased and
Cartwell, rising, lighted a fresh cigarette.

"I am going to get up with the rabbits, tomorrow," he said, "so I'll trot
to bed now."

DeWitt, impelled by that curious sense of liking for the young Indian
that fought down his aversion, said, "The music was bully, Cartwell!" but
Cartwell only smiled as if at the hint of patronage in the voice and
strolled to his own room.

Rhoda slept late the following morning.  She had not, in her three nights
in the desert country, become accustomed to the silence that is not the
least of the desert's splendors.  It seemed to her that the nameless
unknown Mystery toward which her life was drifting was embodied in this
infinite silence.  So sleep would not come to her until dawn.  Then the
stir of the wind in the trees, the bleat of sheep, the trill of
mocking-birds lulled her to sleep.

As the brilliancy of the light in her room increased there drifted across
her uneasy dreams the lilting notes of a whistled call.  Pure and
liquidly sweet they persisted until there came to Rhoda that faint stir
of hope and longing that she had experienced the day before.  She opened
her eyes and finally, as the call continued, she crept languidly from her
bed and peered from behind the window-shade.  Cartwell, in his khaki
suit, his handsome head bared to the hot sun, leaned against a peach-tree
while he watched Rhoda's window.

"I wonder what he wakened me for?" she thought half resentfully.  "I
can't go to sleep again, so I may as well dress and have breakfast."

Hardly had she seated herself at her solitary meal when Cartwell appeared.

"Dear me!" he exclaimed.  "The birds and Mr. DeWitt have been up this
long time."

"What is John doing?" asked Rhoda carelessly.

"He's gone up on the first mesa for the wildcats I spoke of last night.
I thought perhaps you might care to take a drive before it got too hot.
You didn't sleep well last night, did you?"

Rhoda answered whimsically.

"It's the silence.  It thunders at me so!  I will get used to it soon.
Perhaps I ought to drive.  I suppose I ought to try everything."

Not at all discouraged, apparently, by this lack of enthusiasm, Cartwell
said:

"I won't let you overdo.  I'll have the top-buggy for you and we'll go
slowly and carefully."

"No," said Rhoda, suddenly recalling that, after all, Cartwell was an
Indian, "I don't think I will go.  Katherine will have all sorts of
objections."

The Indian smiled sardonically.

"I already have Mrs. Jack's permission.  Billy Porter will be in, in a
moment.  If you would rather have a white man than an Indian, as escort,
I'm quite willing to retreat."

Rhoda flushed delicately.

"Your frankness is almost--almost impertinent, Mr. Cartwell."

"I don't mean it that way at all!" protested the Indian. "It's just that
I saw so plainly what was going on in your mind and it piqued me.  If it
will be one bit pleasanter for you with Billy, I'll go right out and hunt
him up for you now."

The young man's naivete completely disarmed Rhoda.

"Don't be silly!" she said.  "Go get your famous top-buggy and I'll be
ready in a minute."

In a short time Rhoda and Cartwell, followed by many injunctions from
Katherine, started off toward the irrigating ditch.  At a slow pace they
drove through the peach orchard into the desert.  As they reached the
open trail, thrush and to-hee fluttered from the cholla.  Chipmunk and
cottontail scurried before them.  Overhead a hawk dipped in its reeling
flight.  Cartwell watched the girl keenly.  Her pale face was very lovely
in the brilliant morning light, though the somberness of her wide, gray
eyes was deepened.  That same muteness and patience in her trouble which
so touched other men touched Cartwell, but he only said:

"There never was anything bigger and finer than this open desert, was
there?"

Rhoda turned from staring at the distant mesas and eyed the young Indian
wonderingly.

"Why!" she exclaimed, "I hate it!  You know that sick fear that gets you
when you try to picture eternity to yourself?  That's the way this
barrenness and awful distance affects me.  I hate it!"

"But you won't hate it!" cried Cartwell.  "You must let me show you its
bigness.  It's as healing as the hand of God."

Rhoda shuddered.

"Don't talk about it, please!  I'll try to think of something else."

They drove in silence for some moments.  Rhoda, her thin hands clasped in
her lap, resolutely stared at the young Indian's profile.  In the unreal
world in which she drifted, she needed some thought of strength, some
hope beyond her own, to which to cling.  She was lonely--lonely as some
outcast watching with sick eyes the joy of the world to which he is
denied.  As she stared at the stern young profile beside her, into her
heart crept the now familiar thrill.

Suddenly Cartwell turned and looked at her quizzically.

"Well, what are your conclusions?"

Rhoda shook her head.

"I don't know, except that it's hard to realize that you are an Indian."

Cartwell's voice was ironical.

"The only good Indian is a dead Indian, you know.  I'm liable to break
loose any time, believe me!"

Rhoda's eyes were on the far lavender line where the mesa melted into the
mountains.

"Yes, and then what?" she asked.

Cartwell's eyes narrowed, but Rhoda did not see.

"Then I'm liable to follow Indian tradition and take whatever I want, by
whatever means!"

"My!  My!" said Rhoda, "that sounds bludgy!  And what are you liable to
want?"

"Oh, I want the same thing that a great many white men want.  I'm going
to have it myself, though!"  His handsome face glowed curiously as he
looked at Rhoda.

But the girl was giving his words small heed.  Her eyes still were turned
toward the desert, as though she had forgotten her companion.  Sand
whirls crossed the distant levels, ceaselessly.  Huge and menacing, they
swirled out from the mesa's edge, crossed the desert triumphantly, then,
at contact with rock or cholla thicket, collapsed and disappeared.
Endless, merciless, hopeless the yellow desert quivered against the
bronze blue sky.  For the first time dazed hopelessness gave way in Rhoda
to fear.  The young Indian, watching the girl's face, beheld in it what
even DeWitt never had seen there--beheld deadly fear.  He was silent for
a moment, then he leaned toward her and put a strong brown hand over her
trembling little fists.  His voice was deep and soft.

"Don't," he said, "don't!"

Perhaps it was the subtle, not-to-be-fathomed influence of the desert
which fights all sham; perhaps it was that Rhoda merely had reached the
limit of her heroic self-containment and that, had DeWitt or Newman been
with her, she would have given way in the same manner; perhaps it was
that the young Indian's presence had in it a quality that roused new life
in her.  Whatever the cause; the listless melancholy suddenly left
Rhoda's gray eyes and they were wild and black with fear.

"I can't die!" she panted.  "I can't leave my life unlived!  I can't
crawl on much longer like a sick animal without a soul.  I want to live!
To live!"

"Look at me!" said Cartwell.  "Look at me, not at the desert!"  Then as
she turned to him, "Listen, Rhoda!  You shall not die!  I will make you
well!  You shall not die!"

For a long minute the two gazed deep into each other's eyes, and the
sense of quickening blood touched Rhoda's heart.  Then they both woke to
the sound of hoof-beats behind them and John DeWitt, with a wildcat
thrown across his saddle, rode up.

"Hello!  I've shouted one lung out!  I thought you people were
petrified!"  He looked curiously from Rhoda's white face to Cartwell's
inscrutable one.  "Do you think you ought to have attempted this trip,
Rhoda?" he asked gently.

"Oh, we've taken it very slowly," answered the Indian.  "And we are going
to turn back now."

"I don't think I've overdone," said Rhoda.  "But perhaps we have had
enough."

"All right," said Cartwell.  "If Mr. DeWitt will change places with me,
I'll ride on to the ditch and he can drive you back."

DeWitt assented eagerly and, the change made, Cartwell lifted his hat and
was gone.  Rhoda and John returned in a silence that lasted until DeWitt
lifted Rhoda from the buggy to the veranda.  Then he said:

"Rhoda, I don't like to have you go off alone with Cartwell.  I wish you
wouldn't."

Rhoda smiled.

"John, don't be silly!  He goes about with Katherine all the time."

John only shook his head and changed the subject.  That afternoon,
however, Billy Porter buttonholed DeWitt in the corral where the New
Yorker was watching the Arizonian saddle his fractious horse.  When the
horse was ready at the post, "Look here, DeWitt," said Billy, an
embarrassed look in his honest brown eyes, "I don't want you to think I'm
buttin' in, but some one ought to watch that young Injun.  Anybody with
one eye can see he's crazy about Miss Rhoda."

John was too startled to be resentful.

"What do you mean?" he exclaimed.  "Cartwell is a great friend of the
Newmans'."

"That's why I came to you.  They're plumb locoed about the fellow, like
the rest of the Easterners around here."

"Do you know anything against him?" insisted DeWitt.

"Why, man, he's an Injun, and half Apache at that!  That's enough to know
against him!"

"What makes you think he's interested in Miss Tuttle?" asked John.

Porter flushed through his tan.

"Well," he said sheepishly, "I seen him come down the hall at dawn this
morning.  Us Westerners are early risers, you know, and when he reached
Miss Turtle's door, he pulled a little slipper out of his pocket and
kissed it and put it in front of the sill."

DeWitt scowled, then he laughed.

"He's no worse than the rest of us that way!  I'll watch, him, though
perhaps it's only your prejudice against Indians and not really a matter
to worry about."

Porter sighed helplessly.

"All right!  All right!  Just remember, DeWitt, I warned you!"

He mounted, then held in his horse while the worried look gave place to
one so sad, yet so manly, that John never forgot it.

"I hope you appreciate that girl, DeWitt.  She--she's a thoroughbred!  My
God!  When you think of a sweet thing like that dying and these Injun
squaws living!  I hope you'll watch her, DeWitt.  If anything happens to
her through you not watching her, I'll come back on you for it!  I ain't
got any rights except the rights that any living man has got to take care
of any white thing like her.  They get me hard when they're dainty like
that.  And she's the daintiest I ever seen!"

He rode away, shaking his head ominously.




CHAPTER III

INDIAN AND CAUCASIAN

DeWitt debated with himself for some time as to whether or not he ought
to speak to Jack of Porter's warning.  Finally he decided that Porter's
suspicions would only anger Jack, who was intensely loyal to his
friends.  He determined to keep silence until he had something more
tangible on which to found his complaint than Billy's bitter prejudice
against all Indians.  He had implicit faith in Rhoda's love for
himself.  If any vague interest in life could come to her through the
young Indian, he felt that he could endure his presence.  In the
meantime he would guard Rhoda without cessation.

In the days that followed, Rhoda grew perceptibly weaker, and her
friends went about with aching hearts under an assumed cheerfulness of
manner that deceived Rhoda least of any one.  Rhoda herself did not
complain and this of itself added a hundredfold to the pathos of the
situation.  Her unfailing sweetness and patience touched the healthy,
hardy young people who were so devoted to her more than the most
justifiable impatience on her part.

Time and again Katherine saw DeWitt and Jack leave the girl's side with
tears in their eyes.  But Cartwell watched the girl with inscrutable
gaze.

Rhoda still hated the desert.  The very unchanging loveliness of the
days wearied her.  Morning succeeded morning and noon followed noon,
with always the same soft breeze stirring the orchard, always the clear
yellow sunlight burning and dazzling her eyes, always the unvarying
monotony of bleating sheep and lowing herds and at evening the hoot of
owls.  The brooding tenderness of the sky she did not see.  The
throbbing of the great, quiet southern stars stirred her only with a
sense of helpless loneliness that was all but unendurable.  And still,
from who knows what source, she found strength to meet the days and her
friends with that unfailing sweetness that was as poignant as the
clinging fingers of a sick child.

Jack, Katherine, DeWitt, Cartwell, all were unwearying in their effort
to amuse her.  And yet for some reason.  Cartwell alone was able to
rouse her listless eyes to interest.  Even DeWitt found himself eagerly
watching the young Indian, less to guard Rhoda than to discover what in
the Apache so piqued his curiosity.  He had to admit, however
reluctantly, that Kut-le, as he and Rhoda now called him with the
others, was a charming companion.

Neither DeWitt nor Rhoda ever before had known an Indian.  Most of
their ideas of the race were founded on childhood reading of Cooper.
Kut-le was quite as cultured, quite as well-mannered and quite as
intelligent as any of their Eastern friends.  But in many other
qualities he differed from them.  He possessed a frank pride in himself
and his blood that might have belonged to some medieval prince who
would not take the trouble outwardly to underestimate himself.  Closely
allied to this was his habit of truthfulness.  This was not a blatant
bluntness that irritated the hearer but a habit of valuing persons and
things at their intrinsic worth, a habit of mental honesty as bizarre
to Rhoda and John as was the young Indian's frank pride.

His attitude toward Rhoda piqued her while it amused her.  Since her
childhood, men had treated her with deference, had paid almost abject
tribute to her loveliness and bright charm.  Cartwell was delightfully
considerate of her.  He was uniformly courteous to her.  But it was the
courtesy of _noblesse oblige_, without a trace of deference in it.

One afternoon Kut-le sat alone on the veranda with Rhoda.

"Do you know," he said, rumpling his black hair, "that I think DeWitt
has decided that I will bear watching!"

"Well," answered Rhoda idly, "and won't you?"

Kut-le chuckled.

"Would you prefer that I show the lurking savage beneath this false
shell of good manners?"

Rhoda smiled back at him.

"Of course you are an Indian, after all.  It's rather too bad of you
not to live up to any of our ideals.  Your manners are as nice as John
DeWitt's.  I'd be quite frantic about you if you would drop them and go
on the war-path."

Kut-le threw back his head and laughed.

"Oh, you ignorant young thing!  It's lucky for you--and for me--that
you have come West to grow up and complete your education!  But DeWitt
needn't worry.  I don't need watching yet!  First, I'm going to make
you well.  I know how and he doesn't.  After that is done, he'd better
watch!"

Rhoda's eyebrows began to go up.  Kut-le never had recalled by word or
look her outburst in the desert the morning of their first ride
together, though they had taken several since.  Rhoda seldom mentioned
her illness now and her friends respected her feeling.  But now Kut-le
smiled at her disapproving brows.

"I've waited for the others to get busy," he said, "but they act
foolish.  Half the trouble with you is mental.  You need a boss.  Now,
you don't eat enough, in spite of the eggs and beef and fruit that that
dear Mrs. Jack sets before you.  See how your hands shake this minute!"

Rhoda could think of no reply sufficiently crushing for this forward
young Indian.  While she was turning several over in her mind, Kut-le
went into the house and returned with a glass of milk.

"I wish you'd drink this," he said.

Rhoda's brows still were arched haughtily.

"No, thank you," she said frigidly; "I don't wish you to undertake the
care of my health."

Kut-le made no reply but held the glass steadily before her.
Involuntarily, Rhoda looked up.  The young Indian was watching her with
eyes so clear, so tender, with that strange look of tragedy belying
their youth, with that something so compelling in their quiet depths,
that once more her tired pulses quickened.  Rhoda looked from Kut-le
out to the twisting sand-whirls, then she took the glass of milk and
drank it.  She would not have done this for any of the others and both
she and Kut-le knew it.  Thereafter, he deliberately set himself to
watching her and it seemed as if he must exhaust his ingenuity devising
means for her comfort.  Slowly Rhoda acquired a definite interest in
the young Indian.

"Are you really civilized, Kut-le?" she asked one afternoon when the
young man had brought a little white desert owl to her hammock for her
inspection.

Kut-le tossed the damp hair from his forehead and looked at the sweet
wistful face against the crimson pillows.  For a moment Rhoda felt as
if his young strength enveloped her like the desert sun.

"Why?" he asked at last.  "You said the other day that I was too much
civilized."

"I know, but--" Rhoda hesitated for words, "I'm too much civilized
myself to understand, but sometimes there's a look in your eyes that
something, I suppose it's a forgotten instinct, tells me means that you
are wild to let all this go--" she waved a thin hand toward cultivated
fields and corral--"and take to the open desert."

Kut-le said nothing for a moment, though his face lighted with joy at
her understanding.  Then he turned toward the desert and Rhoda saw the
look of joy change to one so full of unutterable longing that her heart
was stirred to sudden pity.  However, an instant later, he turned to
her with the old impassive expression.

"Right beneath my skin," he said, "is the Apache.  Tell me, Miss Rhoda,
what's the use of it all?"

"Use?" asked Rhoda, staring at the blue sky above the peach-trees.  "I
am a fit person to ask what is the use of anything!  Of course,
civilization is the only thing that lives.  I can't get your point of
view at all."

"Huh!" sniffed Kut-le.  "It's too bad Indians don't write books!  If my
people had been putting their internal mechanism on paper for a
thousand years, you'd have no more trouble getting my point of view
than I do yours."

Rhoda's face as she eyed the stern young profile was very sympathetic.
Kut-le, turning to her, surprised upon her face that rare, tender smile
for which all who knew her watched.  His face flushed and his fine
hands clasped and unclasped.

"Tell me about it, Kut-le, if you can."

"I can't tell you.  The desert would show you its own power if you
would give it a chance.  No one can describe the call to you.  I
suppose if I answered it and went back, you would call it
retrogression?"

"What would you call it?" asked Rhoda.

"I don't know.  It would depend on my mood.  I only know that the ache
is there."  His eyes grew somber and beads of sweat appeared on his
forehead.  "The ache to be there--free in the desert!  To feel the hot
sun in my face as I work the trail!  To sleep with the naked stars in
my face!  To be--  Oh, I can't make you understand, and I'd rather you
understood than any one in the world!  You could understand, if only
you were desert-taught.  When you are well and strong--"

"But why don't you go back?" interrupted Rhoda.

"Because," replied Kut-le slowly, "the Indian is dying.  I hope that by
living as a white, I may live.  Up till recently I have worked blindly
and hopelessly, but now I see light."

"Do you?" asked Rhoda with interest.  "What have you found?"

"It isn't mine yet."  Kut-le looked at the girl exultantly and there
was a triumphant note in his voice.  "But it shall be mine!  I will
make it mine!  And it is worth the sacrifice of my race."

A vague look of surprise crossed Rhoda's face but she spoke calmly:

"To sacrifice one's race is a serious thing.  I can't think of anything
that would make that worth while.  Here comes Mr. DeWitt.  It must be
dinner time.  John, come up and see a little desert owl at close range.
Kut-le has all the desert at his beck and call!"

Kut-le persuaded Rhoda to change the morning rides, which seemed only
to exhaust her, to the shortest of evening strolls.  Nearly always
DeWitt accompanied them.  Sometimes they went alone, though John was
never very far distant.

One moonlit night Kut-le and Rhoda stood alone at the corral bars.  The
whole world was radiant silver moonlight on the desert, on the
undulating alfalfa; moonlight filtering through the peach-trees and
shimmering on Rhoda's drooping head as she leaned against the bars in
the weary attitude habitual to her.  Kut-le stood before her, erect and
strong in his white flannels.  His handsome head was thrown back a
little, as was his custom when speaking earnestly.  His arms were
folded across his deep chest and he stood so still that Rhoda could see
his arms rise and fall with his breath.

"It really is great work!" he was saying eagerly.  "It seems to me that
a civil engineer has tremendous opportunities to do really big things.
Some of Kipling's stories of them are bully."

"Aren't they!" answered Rhoda sympathetically.

"There is a big thing in my favor too.  The whites make no
discrimination against an Indian in the professions.  In fact every one
gives him a boost in passing!"

"Why shouldn't they?  You have as good a brain and are as attractive as
any man of my acquaintance!"

The young man drew a quick breath.

"Do you really mean that?"

"Of course!  Why shouldn't I?  Isn't the moonlight uncanny on the
desert?"

But Kut-le did not heed her attempt to change the subject.

"There are unlimited opportunities for me to make good, now that the
government is putting up so many dams.  I believe that I can go to the
top with any man, don't you, Miss Rhoda?"

"I do, indeed!" replied Rhoda sincerely.

"Well, then, Miss Rhoda, will you marry me?"

Rhoda raised her head in speechless amazement.

Kut-le's glowing eyes contracted.

"You are not surprised!" he exclaimed a little fiercely, "You must have
seen how it has been with me ever since you came.  And you have been
so--so bully to me!"

Rhoda looked helplessly into the young man's face.  She was so fragile
that she seemed but an evanescent part of the moonlight.

"But," she said slowly, "you must know that this is impossible.  I
couldn't think of marrying you, Kut-le!"

There was a moment's silence.  An owl called from the desert.  The
night wind swept from the fragrant orchard.  When he spoke again,
Kut-le's voice was husky.

"Is it because I am an Indian?"

"Yes," answered Rhoda, "partly.  But I don't love you, anyhow."

"But," eagerly, "if you did love me, would my being an Indian make any
difference?  Isn't my blood pure?  Isn't it old?"

Rhoda stood still.  The pain in Kut-le's voice was piercing through to
the shadow world in which she lived.  Her voice was troubled.

"But I don't love you, so what's the use of considering the rest?  If I
ever marry any one it will be John DeWitt."

"But couldn't you," insisted the tragically deep voice, "couldn't you
ever love me?"

Rhoda answered wearily.  One could not, it seemed, even die in peace!

"I can't think of love or marriage any more.  I am a dying woman.  Let
me go into the mist, Kut-le, without a pang for our friendship, with
just the pleasant memory of your goodness to me.  Surely you cannot
love me as I am!"

"I love you for the wonderful possibilities I see in you.  I love you
in spite of your illness.  I will make you well before I marry you.
The Indian in me has strength to make you well.  And I will cherish you
as white men cherish their wives."

Rhoda raised her hand commandingly and in her voice was that boundless
vanity of the white, which is as old as the race.

"No!  No!  Don't speak of this again!  You are an Indian but one
removed from savagery.  I am a white!  I couldn't think of marrying
you!"  Then her tender heart failed her and her voice trembled.  "But
still I am your friend, Kut-le.  Truly I am your friend."

The Indian was silent so long that Rhoda was a little frightened.  Then
he spoke slowly.

"Yes, you are white and I am red.  But before all that, you are a woman
of exquisite possibilities and I am a man who by all of nature's laws
would make a fitting mate for you.  You can love me, when you are well,
as you could love no other man.  And I--dear one, I love you
passionately!  I love you tenderly!  I love you enough to give up my
race for you.  I am an Indian, Rhoda, but first of all I am a man.
Rhoda, will you marry me?"

A thrill, poignant, heart-stirring, beat through Rhoda's veins.  For
one unspeakable moment there swept through her spirit a vision of
strength, of beauty, of gladness, too wild and sweet for words.  Then
came the old sense of race distaste and she looked steadily into the
young man's face.

"I cannot marry you, Kut-le," she said.

Kut-le said nothing more.  He stood staring at the far desert, his fine
face somber and with a look of determination in the contracted eyes and
firm-set lips that made Rhoda shiver, even while her heart throbbed
with pity.  Tall, slender, inscrutable, as alien to her understanding
as the call of the desert wind or the moon-drenched desert haze, she
turned away and left him standing there alone.

She made her slow way to the ranch-house.  Kut-le did not follow.
Rhoda went to bed at once.  Yet she could not sleep, for through the
silence Kut-le's deep voice beat on her ears.

"I love you passionately!  I love you tenderly!  I am an Indian, but
first of all I am a man!"

The next day and for the three or four days following, Kut-le was
missing.  The Newmans were worried.  The ditch needed its engineer and
never before had Kut-le been known to neglect his work.  Once a year he
went on a long hunt with chosen friends of his tribe, but never until
his work was finished.

Rhoda confided in no one regarding her last interview with the Indian.
She missed Kut-le, but DeWitt was frankly relieved.  For the first time
since Porter's warning he relaxed his vigilance.  On the fifth evening
after Kut-le's disappearance, Jack and DeWitt rode over to a
neighboring ranch.  Katherine was lazy with a headache.  So Rhoda took
her evening stroll alone.  For once, she left the orchard and wandered
out into the open desert, moved by an uncanny desire to let the full
horror of the desert mystery sweep over her.

How long she sat on a rock, gazing into infinity, she did not know.  It
seemed to her that her whole shivering, protesting body was being
absorbed into the strange radiance of the afterglow.  At last she rose.
As she did so, a tall figure loomed silently before her.  Rhoda was too
startled to scream.  The figure was that of an Indian, naked save for
high moccasins and a magnificently decorated loin-cloth.  The man
looked down at her with the smile of good fellowship that she knew so
well.  It was Kut-le, standing like a young bronze god against the
faint pink of the afterglow.

"Hello!" he said nonchalantly.  "I've been watching for you."

"What do you want!" gasped Rhoda.  "What do you mean by coming before
me in--in--"

"You mean when I'm dressed as a chief on the warpath?  Well, you said
you'd be keen about me this way; so here I am.  I tried all the white
methods I knew to win you and failed.  Now the only thing left is the
Indian method."

Rhoda moved uneasily.

Kut-le went on:

"As a white man I can no longer pester you.  As an Indian I can steal
you and marry you."

Rhoda struggled to make him and his words seem real to her.

"You aren't going to be so absurd as to try to steal me, I hope!" she
tried to laugh.

"That's just what I'm going to do!" answered Kut-le.  "If I steal as a
white would steal, I would be caught at once.  If I use Apache methods,
no white on earth can catch me."

Rhoda gasped as the Indian's evident sincerity sank in on her.

"But," she pleaded, fighting for time, "you can't want to marry me by
force!  Don't you know that I shall grow to loathe you?"

"No!  No!" answered the Indian earnestly.  "Not after I've shown you
life as I have seen it."

"Nonsense!" cried Rhoda.  "Don't you realize that the whole county will
be after you by morning?"

Kut-le laughed, deliberately walked up to the girl and lifted her in
his arms as he had on the morning of their meeting.  Rhoda gave one
scream and struggled frantically.  He slid a hand over her lips and
tightened his hold.  For a moment Rhoda lay motionless in abject fear,
then, with a muffled cry of utter helplessness, a cry that would have
driven a white man mad with pity, she slipped into unconsciousness.
Kut-le walked on for a short distance to a horse.  He put Rhoda in the
saddle and fastened her there with a blanket.  He slipped off the
twisted bandana that bound his short black hair, fillet wise, and tied
it carefully over Rhoda's mouth.  Then with one hand steadying the
quiet shoulders, he started the horse on through the dusk.




CHAPTER IV

THE INDIAN WAY

It was some time before the call of a coyote close beside her
penetrated Rhoda's senses.  At its third or fourth repetition, she
sighed and opened her eyes.  Night had come, the luminous lavender
night of the desert.  Her first discovery was that she was seated on a
horse, held firmly by a strong arm across her shoulders.  Next she
found that her uneasy breathing was due to the cloth tied round her
mouth.  With this came realization of her predicament and she tossed
her arms in a wild attempt to free herself.

The arm about her tightened, the horse stopped, and the voice went on
repeating the coyote call, clearly, mournfully.  Rhoda ceased her
struggling for a moment and looked at the face so close to her own.  In
the starlight only the eyes and the dim outline of the features were
visible, and the eyes were as dark and menacing to her as the desert
night that shut her in.

Mad with fear, Rhoda strained at the rigid arm.  Kut-le dropped the
reins and held her struggling hands, ceased his calling and waited.
Off to the left came an answering call and Kut-le started the pony
rapidly toward the sound.  In a few moments Rhoda saw a pair of
horsemen.  Utterly exhausted, she sat in terror awaiting her fate.
Kut-le gave a low-voiced order.  One of the riders immediately rode
forward, leading another horse.  Kut-le slipped another blanket from
this and finished binding Rhoda to her saddle so securely that she
scarcely could move a finger.  Then he mounted his horse, and he and
one of the Indians started off, leading Rhoda's horse between them and
leaving the third Indian standing silently behind them.

Rhoda was astride of the pony, half sitting, half lying along his neck.
The Indians put the horses to a trot and immediately the discomfort of
her position was made agony by the rough motion.  But the pain cleared
her mind.

Her first thought was that she never would recover from the disgrace of
this episode.  Following this thought came fury at the man who was so
outraging her.  It only he would free her hands for a moment she would
choke him!  Her anger would give her strength for that!  Then she
fought against her fastenings.  They held her all but motionless and
the sense of her helplessness brought back the fear panic.  Utterly
helpless, she thought!  Flying through darkness to an end worse than
death!  In the power of a naked savage!  Her fear almost robbed her of
her reason.

After what seemed to her endless hours, the horses were stopped
suddenly.  She felt her fastenings removed.  Then Kut-le lifted her to
the ground where she tumbled, helpless, at his feet.  He stooped and
took the gag from her mouth.  Immediately with what fragment of
strength remained to her, she screamed again and again.  The two
Indians stood stolidly watching her for a time, then Kut-le knelt in
the sand beside her huddled form and laid his hand on her arm.

"There, Rhoda," he said, "no one can hear you.  You will only make
yourself sick."

Rhoda struck his hand feebly.

"Don't touch me!" she cried hoarsely.  "Don't touch me, you beast!  I
loathe you!  I am afraid of you!  Don't you dare to touch me!"

At this Kut-le imprisoned both her cold hands in one of his warm palms
and held them despite her struggles, while with the other hand he
smoothed her tumbled hair from her eyes.

"Poor frightened little girl," he said, in his rich voice.  "I wish I
might have done otherwise.  But there was no other way.  I don't know
that I believe much in your God but I guess you do.  So I tell you,
Rhoda, that by your faith in Him, you are absolutely safe in my hands!"

Rhoda caught her breath in a childlike sob while she sstill struggled
to recover her hands.

"I loathe you!" she panted.  "I loathe you!  I loathe you!"

But Kut-le would not free the cold little hands.

"But do you fear me, too?  Answer me!  Do you fear me?"

The moon had risen and Rhoda looked into the face that bent above hers.
This was a naked savage with hawk-like face.  Yet the eyes were the
ones that she had come to know so well, half tragic, somber, but clear
and, toward her, tender, very, very tender.  With a shuddering sigh,
Rhoda looked away.  But against her own volition she found herself
saying:

"I'm not afraid now!  But I loathe you, you Apache Indian!"

Something very like a smile touched the grim mouth of the Apache.

"I don't hate you, you Caucasian!" he answered quietly.

He chafed the cold hands for a moment, in silence.  Then he lifted her
to her saddle.  But Rhoda was beyond struggle, beyond even clinging to
the saddle.  Kut-le caught her as she reeled.

"Don't tie me!" she panted.  "Don't tie me!  I won't fight!  I won't
even scream, if you won't tie me!"

"But you can't sit your saddle alone," replied Kut-le.  "I'll have to
tie you."

Once more he lifted her to the horse.  Once more with the help of his
silent companion he fastened her with blankets.  Once more the journey
was begun.  For a little while, distraught and uncertain what course to
pursue, Rhoda endured the misery of position and motion in silence.
Then the pain was too much and she cried out in protest.  Kut-le
brought the horses to a walk.

"You certainly have about as much spunk as a chicken with the pip!" he
said contemptuously.  "I should think your loathing would brace you up
a little!"

Stung by the insult to a sudden access of strength, as the Indian had
intended her to be, Rhoda answered, "You beast!" but as the horses
swung into the trot she made no protest for a long hour.  Then once
more her strength failed her and she fell to crying with deep-drawn
sobs that shook her entire body.  After a few moments of this, Kut-le
drew close to her.

"Don't!" he said huskily.  "Don't!"  And again he laid his hand on her
shoulder.

Rhoda shuddered but could not cease her sobs.  Kut-le seemed to
hesitate for a few moments.  Then he reached over, undid Rhoda's
fastenings and lifted her limp body to the saddle before him, holding
her against his broad chest as if he were coddling a child.  Then he
started the horses on.  Too exhausted to struggle, Rhoda lay sobbing
while the young Indian sat with his tragic eyes fastened steadily on
the mysterious distances of the trail.  Finally Rhoda sank into a
stupor and, seeing this, Kut-le doubled the speed of the horses.

It was daylight when Rhoda opened her eyes.  For a time she lay at ease
listening to the trill of birds and the trickle of water.  Then, with a
start, she raised her head.  She was lying on a heap of blankets on a
stone ledge.  Above her was the boundless sapphire of the sky.  Close
beside her a little spring bubbled from the blank wall of the mountain.
Rhoda lay in helpless silence, looking about her, while the appalling
nature of her predicament sank into her consciousness.

Against the wall squatted two Indian women.  They were dressed in rough
short skirts, tight-fitting calico waists and high leather moccasins.
Their black hair was parted in the middle and hung free.  Their swarthy
features were well cut but both of the women were dirty and ill kept.
The younger, heavier squaw had a kindly face, with good eyes, but her
hair was matted with clay and her fingers showed traces of recent
tortilla making.  The older woman was lean and wiry, with a strange
gleam of maliciousness and ferocity in her eyes.  Her forehead was
elaborately tattooed with symbols and her toothless old jaws were
covered with blue tribal lines.

Kut-le and his friend of the night lounged on a heap of rock at the
edge of the ledge.  The strange Indian was well past middle age, tall
and dignified.  He was darker than Kut-le.  His face was thin and
aquiline.  His long hair hung in elf locks over his shoulders.  His
toilet was elaborate compared with that of Kut-le, for he wore a pair
of overalls and a dilapidated flannel shirt, unbelted and fluttering
its ends in the morning breeze.  As if conscious of her gaze, Kut-le
turned and looked at Rhoda.  His magnificent height and proportions
dwarfed the tall Indian beside him.

"Good-morning, Rhoda!" he said gravely.

The girl looked at the beautiful naked body and reddened.

"You beast!" she said clearly.

Kut-le looked at her with slightly contracted eyes.  Then he spoke to
the fat squaw.  She rose hastily and lifted a pot from the little fire
beside the spring.  She dipped a steaming cup of broth from this and
brought it to Rhoda's side.  The girl struck it away.  Kut-le walked
slowly over, picked up the empty cup at which the squaw stood staring
stupidly and filled it once more at the kettle.  Then he held it out to
Rhoda.  His nearness roused the girl to frenzy.  With difficulty she
brought her stiffened body to a sitting position.  Her beautiful gray
eyes were black with her sense of outrage.

"Take it away, beast!" she panted.

Kut-le held her gaze.

"Drink it, Rhoda!" he said quietly.

The girl returned his look for a moment then, hating herself for her
weakness, she took the cup and drained it.  Kut-le tossed the cup to
the squaw, pushed Rhoda back to her blankets and covered her very
gently.  Then he went back to his boulder.  The girl lay staring up at
the sky.  Utterly merciless it gleamed above her.  But before she could
more than groan she was asleep.

She slept as she had not slept for months.  The slanting rays of the
westering sun wakened her.  She sat up stiffly.  The squaws were
unpacking a burlap bag.  They were greasy and dirty but they were women
and their nearness gave Rhoda a vague sense of protection.  They in
turn gazed at the tangled glory of her hair, at the hopeless beauty of
her eyes, at the pathos of the drooping mouth, with unfeigned curiosity.

Kut-le still was watching the desert.  The madness of the night before
had lifted a little, leaving Rhoda with some of her old poise.  After
several attempts she rose and made her staggering way to Kut-le's side.

"Kut-le," she said, "perhaps you will tell me what you mean by this
outrage?"

The young Indian, turned to her.  White and exhausted, heavy hair in
confusion, Rhoda still was lovely.

"You seem to have more interest in life," he said, "than you have had
since I have known you.  I thought the experiment would have that
effect!"

"You brute!" cried Rhoda.  "Can't you see how silly you are?  You will
be caught and lynched before the day is passed."

Kut-le smiled.

"Pshaw!  Three Apaches can outwit a hundred white men on the trail!"

Rhoda caught her breath.

"Oh, Kut-le, how could you do this thing!  How could you!  I am
disgraced forever!  Let me go, Kut-le!  Let me go!  I'll not even ask
you for a horse.  Just let me go by myself!"

"You are better off with me.  You will acknowledge that, yourself,
before I am through with you."

"Better off!"  Rhoda's appalled eyes cut the Indian deeper than words.
"Better off!  Why, Kut-le, I am a dying woman!  You will just have to
leave me dead beside the trail somewhere.  Look at me!  Look at my
hands!  See how emaciated I am!  See how I tremble!  I am a sick wreck,
Kut-le.  You cannot want me!  Let me go!  Try, try to remember all that
you learned of pity from the whites!  O Kut-le, let me go!"

"I haven't forgotten what I learned from the whites," replied the young
man.  He looked off at the desert with a quiet smile.  "Now I want the
whites to learn from me.

"But can't you see what a futile game you are playing?  John DeWitt and
Jack must be on your trail now!"

There was a cruel gleam in the Apache's eyes.

"Don't be too sure!  They are going to spend a few days looking for the
foolish Eastern girl who took a stroll and lost her way in the desert.
How can they dream that you are stolen?"

Rhoda wrung her hands.

"What shall I do!  What shall I do!  What an awful, awful thing to come
to me!  As if life had not been hard enough!  This catastrophe!  This
disgrace!"

Kut-le eyed her speculatively.

"It's all race prejudice, you know.  I have the education of the white
with the intelligence and physical perfection of the Indian; DeWitt is
nowhere near my equal."

Rhoda's eyes blazed.

"Don't speak of DeWitt!  You're not fit to!"

"Yet," very quietly, "you said the other night that I had as good a
brain and was as attractive as any man of your acquaintance!"

"I was a fool!" exclaimed Rhoda.

Kut-le rose and took a stride or two up and down the ledge.  Then he
folded his arms across his chest and stopped before Rhoda, who leaned
weakly against the boulder.

"I am going to tell you what my ideas are," he said.  "You are
intelligent and will understand me no matter how bitter my words may
make you at first.  Now look here.  Lots of white men are in love with
you.  Even Billy Porter went off his head.  But I guess DeWitt is a
pretty fair sample of the type of men you drew, well educated, strong,
well-bred and Eastern to the backbone.  And they love you as you are,
delicate, helpless, appealing, thoroughbred, but utterly useless!

"Except that they hate to see you suffer, they wouldn't want you to
change.  Now I love you for the possibilities that I see in you.  I
wouldn't think of marrying you as you are.  It would be an insult to my
good blood.  Your beauty is marred by your illness.  You have
absolutely no sense of responsibility toward life.  You think that life
owes everything to you, that you pay your way with your beauty.  If you
didn't die, but married DeWitt, you would go on through life petted and
babied, bridge-playing and going out to lectures, childless,
incompetent, self-satisfied--and an utter failure!

"Now I think that humans owe everything to life and that women owe the
most of all because they make the race.  The more nature has done for
them, the more they owe.  I believe that you are a thousand times worth
saving.  I am going to keep you out here in the desert until you wake
to your responsibility to yourself and to life.  I am going to strip
your veneering of culture from you and make you see yourself as you are
and life as it is--life, big and clean and glorious, with its one big
tenet: keep body and soul right and reproduce your kind.  I am going to
make you see bigger things in this big country than you ever dreamed
of."

He stopped and Rhoda sat appalled, the Indian watching her.  To relieve
herself from his eyes Rhoda turned toward the desert.  The sun had all
but touched the far horizon.  Crimson and gold, purple and black,
desert and sky merged in one unspeakable glory.  But Rhoda saw only
emptiness, only life's cruelty and futility and loneliness.  And once
more she wrung her feeble hands.

Kut-le spoke to Molly, the fat squaw.  She again brought Rhoda a cup of
broth.  This time Rhoda drank it mechanically, then sat in abject
wretchedness awaiting the next move of her tormentor.  She had not long
to wait.  Kut-le took a bundle from his saddle and began to unfasten it
before Rhoda.

"You must get into some suitable clothes," he said.  "Put these on."

Rhoda stared at the clothing Kut-le was shaking out.  Then she gave him
a look of disgust.  There was a pair of little buckskin breeches,
exquisitely tanned, a little blue flannel shirt, a pair of high-laced
hunting boots and a sombrero.  She made no motion toward taking the
clothes.

"Can't you see," Kut-le went on, "that, at the least, you will be in my
power for a day or two, that you must ride and that the clothes you
have on are simply silly?  Why not be as comfortable as possible, under
the circumstances?"

The girl, with the conventions of ages speaking in her disgusted face,
the savage with his perfect physique bespeaking ages of undistorted
nature, eyed each other narrowly.

"I shall keep on my own clothes," said Rhoda distinctly.  "Believe me,
you alone give the party the primitive air you admire!"

Kut-le's jaw hardened.

"Rhoda Tuttle, unless you put these clothes on at once I shall call the
squaws and have them put on you by force."

Into Rhoda's face came a look of despair.  Slowly she put out a shaking
hand and took the clothes.

"I can't argue against a brute," she said.  "The men I have known have
been gentlemen.  Tell one of your filthy squaws to come and help me."

"Molly!  _Pronto_!"  Like a brown lizard the fat squaw scuttled to
Rhoda's side.

In a little dressing-room formed by fallen rock, Rhoda put on the boy's
clothing.  Molly helped the girl very gently.  When she was done she
smoothed the blue-shirted shoulder complacently.

"Heap nice!" she said.  "Make 'em sick squaw heap warm.  You no 'fraid!
Kut-le say cut off nose, kill 'em with cactus torture, if Injuns not
good to white squaw."

The touch was the touch of a woman and Molly, though a squaw, had a
woman's understanding.  Rhoda gave a little sob.

"Kut-le, he good!" Molly went on.  "He a big chief's son.  He strong,
rich.  You no be afraid.  You look heap pretty."

Involuntarily Rhoda glanced at herself.  The new clothes were very
comfortable.  With the loveliness and breeding that neither clothing
nor circumstance could mar, Rhoda was a fascinating figure.  She was
tall for a woman, but now she looked a mere lad.  The buckskin clung
like velvet.  The high-laced boots came to her knees.  The sombrero
concealed all of the golden hair save for short curling locks in front.
She would have charmed a painter, Kut-le thought, as she stepped from
her dressing-room; but he kept his voice coolly impersonal.

"All right, you're in shape to travel, now.  Where are your other
clothes?  Molly, bring them all here!"

Rhoda, followed the squaw and together they folded the cast-off
clothing.  Rhoda saw that her scarf had blown near the canon edge.  A
quick thought came to her.  Molly was fully occupied with muttering
adoration of the dainty underwear.  Rhoda tied a pebble into the scarf
and dropped it far out into the depths below.  Then she returned to
Molly.




CHAPTER V

THE PURSUIT

As twilight deepened, Katherine lay in the hammock thankful for the
soothing effect of the darkness on her aching eyes.  She felt a little
troubled about Kut-le.  She was very fond of the young Indian.  She
understood him as did no one else, perhaps, and had the utmost faith in
his honor and loyalty.  She suspected that Rhoda had had much to do
with the young Indian's sudden departure and she felt irritated with
the girl, though at the same time she acknowledged that Rhoda had done
only what she, Katherine, had advised--had treated Kut-le as if he had
been a white man!

She watched the trail for Rhoda's return but darkness came and there
was no sign of the frail figure.  A little disturbed, she walked to the
corral bars and looked down to the lights of the cowboys' quarters.  If
only John DeWitt and Jack would return!  But she did not expect them
before midnight.  She returned to the house and telephoned to the ranch
foreman.

"Don't you worry, ma'am," he answered cheerily.  "No harm could come to
her!  She just walked till it got dark and is just starting for home
now, I bet!  She can't have got out of sight of the ranch lights."

"But she may have!  You can't tell what she's done, she's such a
tenderfoot," insisted Katherine nervously.  "She may have been hurt!"

It was well that Katherine could not see the foreman's face during the
conversation.  It had a decided scowl of apprehension, but he managed a
cheerful laugh.

"Well, you _have_ got nervous, Mrs. Newman!  I'll just send three or
four of the boys out to meet her.  Eh?"

"Oh, yes, do!" cried Katherine.  "I shall feel easier.  Good-by!"

Dick Freeman dropped the receiver and hurried into the neighboring
bunk-house.

"Boys," he said quietly, "Mrs. Newman just 'phoned me that Miss Tuttle
went to walk at sunset, to be gone half an hour.  She ain't got back
yet.  She is alone.  Will some of you come with me?"

Every hand of cards was dropped before Dick was half through his
statement.  In less than twenty minutes twenty cowboys were circling
slowly out into the desert.  For two hours Katherine paced from the
living-room to the veranda, from the veranda to the corral.  She
changed her light evening gown to her khaki riding habit.  Her
nervousness grew to panic.  She sent Li Chung to bed, then she paced
the lawn, listening, listening.

At last she heard the thud of hoofs and Dick Freeman dismounted in the
light that streamed from the open door.

"We haven't found her, Mrs. Newman.  Has Mr. Newman got back?  I think
we must get up an organized search."

Katherine could feel her heart thump heavily.

"No, he hasn't.  Have you found her trail?"

"No; it's awful hard to trail in the dark, and the desert for miles
around the ranch is all cut up with footprints and hoof-marks, you
know."

Katherine wrung her hands.

"Oh, poor little Rhoda!" she cried.  "What shall we do!"

"No harm can come to her," insisted Dick.  "She will know enough to sit
tight till daylight, then we will have her before the heat gets up."

"Oh, if she only will!" moaned Katherine.  "Do whatever you think best,
Dick, and I'll send Jack and John DeWitt to you as soon as they return."

Dick swung himself to the saddle again.

"Better go in and read something, Mrs. Newman.  You mustn't worry
yourself sick until you are sure you have something to worry about."

How she passed the rest of the night, Katherine never knew.  A little
after midnight, Jack came in, his face tense and anxious.  Katherine
paled as she saw his expression.  She knew he had met some of the
searchers.  When Jack saw the color leave his wife's pretty cheeks, he
kissed her very tenderly and for a moment they clung to each other
silently, thinking of the delicate girl adrift on the desert.

"Where is John DeWitt?" asked Katherine after a moment.

"He's almost crazy.  He's with Dick Freeman.  Only stopped for a fresh
horse."

"They have no trace?" questioned Katherine.

Jack shook his head.

"You know what a proposition it is to hunt for as small an object as a
human, in the desert.  Give me your smelling salts and the little
Navajo blanket.  One--one can't tell whether she's hurt or not."

Katherine began to sob as she obeyed.

"You are all angel good not to blame me, but I know it's my fault.  I
shouldn't have let her go.  But she is so sensible, usually."

"Dear heart!" said Jack, rolling up the Navajo.  "Any one that knows
dear old Rhoda knows that what she will, she will, and you are not to
blame.  Go to bed and sleep if you can."

"Oh, Jack, I can't!  Let me go with you, do!"

But Jack shook his head.

"You aren't strong enough to do any good and some one must stay here to
run things."

So again Katherine was left to pace the veranda.  All night the search
went on.  Jack sent messages to the neighboring ranches and the
following morning fifty men were in the saddle seeking Rhoda's trail.
Jack also sent into the Pueblo country for Kut-le, feeling that his aid
would be invaluable.  It would take some time to get a reply from the
Indians and in the meantime the search went on rigorously, with no
trace of the trail to be found.

John DeWitt did not return to the ranch until the afternoon after
Rhoda's disappearance.  Then, disheveled, with bloodshot eyes, cracked
lips and blistered face, he dropped exhausted on the veranda steps.
Katherine and Jack greeted him with quiet sympathy.

"I came in to get fixed up for a long cruise," said John.  "My pony
went lame, and I want a flannel shirt instead of this silk thing I had
on last night.  I wish to God Kut-le would come!  I suppose he could
read what we are blind to."

"You bet!" cried Jack.  "I expect an answer from his friends this
afternoon.  I just had a telegram from Porter, in answer to one I sent
him this morning.  I caught him at Brown's and he will be here this
afternoon.  He knows almost as much as an Indian about following a
trail."

They all spoke in the hushed tones one employs in the sick-room.  Jack
tried to persuade DeWitt to eat and sleep but he refused, his forced
calm giving way to a hoarse, "For heaven's sake, can I rest when she is
dying out there!"

John had not finished his feverish preparations when Billy Porter
stalked into the living-room.  As he entered, the telephone rang and
Jack answered it.  Then he returned to the eager group.

"Kut-le has gone on a long hunt with some of his people.  They don't
know where he went and refuse to look for him."

Billy Porter gave a hard, mirthless laugh.

"Why certainly!  Jack, you ought to have a hole bored into your head to
let in a little light.  Kut-le gone.  Can't find Rhoda's trail.  Kut-le
in love with Rhoda.  Kut-le an Indian.  Rhoda refuses him--he goes
off--gets some of his chums and when he catches Rhoda alone he steals
her.  He will keep a man behind, covering his trail.  Oh, you easy
Easterners make me sick!"

The Newmans and DeWitt stood staring at Porter with horror in their
eyes.  The clock ticked for an instant then DeWitt gave a groan and
bowed his head against the mantelpiece.  Katherine ran to him and tried
to pull his head to her little shoulder.

"O John, don't!  Don't!  Maybe Billy is right.  I'm afraid he is!  But
one thing I do know.  Rhoda is as safe in Kut-le's hands as she would
be in Jack's.  I know it, John!"

John did not move, but at Katherine's words the color came back into
Jack Newman's face.

"That's right!" he said stoutly.  "It's a devilish thing for Kut-le to
do.  But she's safe, John, old boy, I'm sure she is."

Billy Porter, conscience-stricken at the effect of his words, clapped
John on the shoulder.

"Aw shucks!  I let my Injun hate get the best of my tongue.  Of course
she's safe enough; only the darn devil's got to be caught before he
gets to Mexico and makes some padre marry 'em.  So it's us to the
saddle a whole heap."

"We'd better get an Indian to help trail," said Jack.

"You'll have a sweet time getting an Injun to trail Kut-le!" said
Porter.  "The Injuns half worship him.  They think he's got some kind
of strong medicine; you know that.  You get one and he'll keep you off
the trail instead of on.  I can follow the trail as soon as he quits
covering it.  Get the canteens and come on.  We don't need a million
cowboys running round promiscuous over the sand.  Numbers don't help in
trailing an Injun.  It's experience and patience.  It may take us two
weeks and we'll outfit for that.  But we'll get him in the end.  Crook
always did."

There was that in Billy Porter's voice which put heart into his
listeners.  John DeWitt lifted his head, and while his blue eyes
returned the gaze of the others miserably, he squared his shoulders
doggedly.

"I'm ready," he said briefly.

"Oh, let me come!" cried Katherine.  "I can't bear this waiting!"

Billy smiled.

"Why, Mrs. Jack, you'd be dried up and blowed away before the first day
was over."

"But Rhoda is enduring it!" protested Katherine, with quivering lips.

"God!" John DeWitt muttered and flung himself from the house to the
corral.  The other two followed him at once.

It was mid-afternoon when the three rode into the quivering yellow haze
of the desert followed by a little string of pack horses.  It was now
nearing twenty-four hours since Rhoda had disappeared and in that time
there had been little sand blowing.  This meant that the trail could be
easily followed were it found.  The men rode single file, Billy Porter
leading.  All wore blue flannel shirts and khaki trousers.  John DeWitt
rode Eastern park fashion, with short stirrup, rising from the saddle
with the trot.  Jack and Billy rode Western fashion, long stirrup, an
inseparable part of their horses, a fashion that John DeWitt was to be
forced to learn in the fearful days to come.

Billy Porter declaimed in a loud voice from the head of the procession.

"Of course, Kut-le has taken to the mountains.  He'll steer clear of
ranches and cowboys for a while.  Our chance lies in his giving up
covering his trail after he gets well into the ranges.  We will get his
trail and hang on till we can outwit him.  If he was alone, we'd never
get him, barring accident.  But he will be a lot hampered by Miss Rhoda
and I trust to her to hamper him a whole lot after she gets her hand
in."

All the rest of the burning afternoon they moved toward the mountains.
It was quite dusk when they entered the foothills.  The way, not good
at best, grew difficult and dangerous to follow.  Billy led on,
however, until darkness closed down on them in a little cactus-grown
canon.  Here he halted and ordered camp for a few hours.

"Lord!" exclaimed DeWitt.  "You're not going to camp!  I thought you
were really going to do something!"

Billy finished lighting the fire and by its light he gave an impatient
glance at the tenderfoot.  But the look of the burned, sand-grimed
face, the bloodshot eyes, blazing with anxiety, caused him to speak
patiently.

"Can't kill the horses, DeWitt.  You must make up your mind that this
is going to be a hard hunt.  You got to call out all the strength
you've been storing up all your life, and then some.  We've got to use
common sense.  Lord, I want to get ahead, don't I!  I seen Miss Rhoda.
I know what she's like.  This ain't any joy ride for me, either.  I got
a lot of feeling in it."

John DeWitt extended his sun-blistered right hand and Billy Porter
clasped it with his brown paw.

Jack Newman cleared his throat.

"Did you give your horse enough rope, John?  There is a good lot of
grass close to the canon wall.  Quick as you finish your coffee, old
man, roll in your blanket.  We will rest till midnight when the moon
comes up, eh, Billy?"

DeWitt, finally convinced of the good sense and earnestness of his
friends, obeyed.  The canon was still in darkness when Jack shook him
into wakefulness but the mountain peak above was a glorious silver.
Camp was broken quickly and in a short time Billy was leading the way
up the wretched trail.  DeWitt's four hours of sleep had helped him.
He could, to some degree, control the feverish anxiety that was
consuming him and he tried to turn his mind from picturing Rhoda's
agonies to castigating himself for leaving her unguarded even though
Kut-le had left the ranch.  Before leaving the ranch that afternoon he
had telegraphed and written Rhoda's only living relative, her Aunt
Mary.  He had been thankful as he wrote that Rhoda had no mother.  He
had so liked the young Indian; there had been such good feeling between
them that he could not yet believe that Porter's surmise was wholly
correct.

"Supposing," he said aloud, "that you are wrong, Porter?  Supposing
that she's--she's dying of thirst down there in the desert?  You have
no proof of Kut-le's doing it.  It's only founded on your Indian hate,
you say yourself."

"That's right," said Newman.  "Are you sure we aren't wasting time,
Billy?"

Billy turned in the saddle to face them.

"Well, boys," he said, "you've got half the county scratching the
desert with a fine-tooth comb.  I don't see how we three can help very
much there.  On the other hand we might do some good up here.  Now I'll
make a bargain with you.  If by midnight tonight we ain't struck any
trace of her, you folks can quit."

"And what will you do?" asked Jack.

"Me?"  Billy shrugged his shoulders.  "Why, I'll keep on this trail
till my legs is wore off above my boots!" and he turned to guide his
pony up a little branch trail at the top of which stood a tent with the
telltale windlass and forge close by.

Before the tent they drew rein.  In response to Billy's call a
rough-bearded fellow lifted the tent flap and stood suppressing a yawn,
as if visitors to his lonely claim were of daily occurrence.

"Say, friend," said Billy, "do you know Newman's ranch?"

"Sure," returned the prospector.

"Well, this is Mr. Newman.  A young lady has been visiting him and his
wife.  She disappeared night before last.  We suspicion that Cartwell,
that educated Injun, has stole her.  We're trying to find his trail.
Can you give us a hunch?"

The sleepy look left the prospector's eyes.  He crossed the rocks to
put a hand on Billy's pommel.

"Gee!  Ain't that ungodly!" he exclaimed.  "I ain't seen a soul.  But
night before last I heard a screaming in my sleep.  It woke me up but
when I got out here I couldn't hear a thing.  It was faint and far away
and I decided it was a wildcat.  Do you suppose it was her?"

DeWitt ground his teeth together and his hands shook but he made no
sound.  Jack breathed heavily.

"You think it was a woman?" asked Billy hoarsely.

The prospector spoke hesitatingly.

"If I'd been shore, I'd a gone on a hunt.  But it was all kind of in my
sleep.  It was from way back in the mountain there."

"Thanks," said Billy, "we'll be on our way."

"It's four o'clock.  Better stop and have some grub with me, then I'll
join in and help you."

"No!" cried DeWitt, breaking his silence.  "No!"

"That's the young lady's financier," said Billy, nodding toward John.

"Sho!" said the prospector sympathetically.

Billy lifted his reins.

"Thanks, we'll be getting along, I guess.  Just as much obliged to you.
We'll water here in your spring."

They moved on in the direction whither the prospector had pointed.
They rode in silence.  Dawn came slowly, clearly.  The peaks lifted
magnificently, range after range against the rosy sky.  There was no
trail.  They followed the possible way.  The patient little cow ponies
clambered over rocks and slid down inclines of a frightful angle as
cleverly as mountain goats.  At ten o'clock, they stopped for breakfast
and a three hours' sleep.  It was some time before DeWitt could be
persuaded to lie down but at last, perceiving that he was keeping the
others from their rest, he took his blanket to the edge of the ledge
and lay down.

His sleepless eyes roved up and down the adjoining canon.  Far to the
south, near the desert floor, he saw a fluttering bit of white.  Now a
fluttering bit of white, far from human byways, means something!
Tenderfoot though he was, DeWitt realized this and sleep left his eyes.
He sat erect.  For a moment he was tempted to call the others but he
restrained himself.  He would let them rest while he kept watch over
the little white beacon, for so, unaccountably, it seemed to him.  He
eyed it hungrily, and then a vague comfort and hopefulness came to him
and he fell asleep.

Jack's lusty call to coffee woke him.  DeWitt jumped to his feet and
with a new light in his eyes he pointed out his discovery.  The meal
was disposed of very hurriedly and, leaving Jack to watch the camp,
John and Billy crossed the canon southward.  After heavy scrambling
they reached the foot of the canon wall.  Twenty feet above them
dangled a white cloth.  Catching any sort of hand and foot hold, John
clambered upward.  Then he gave a great shout of joy.  Rhoda's neck
scarf with the pebble pinned in one end was in his hands!  DeWitt slid
to the ground and he and Billy examined the scarf tenderly, eagerly.

"I told you!  I told you!" exulted Billy hoarsely.  "See that weight
fastened to it?  Wasn't that smart of her?  Bless her heart!  Now we
got to get above, somehow, and find where she dropped it from!"




CHAPTER VI

ENTERING THE DESERT KINDERGARTEN

"We'll start now," said Kut-le.

Alchise led out the horses.  The squaws each threw an emancipated,
sinewy leg across a pony's back and followed Alchise's fluttering shirt
up the mountain.  Kut-le stood holding the bridle of a sedate little
horse on which he had fastened a comfortable high-backed saddle.

"Come, Rhoda," he said.  "I'll shorten the stirrups after you are
mounted."

Rhoda stood with her back to the wall, her blue-veined hands clutching
the rough out-croppings on either side, horror and fear in her eyes.

"I can't ride cross-saddle!" she exclaimed.  "I used to be a good
horsewoman in the side-saddle.  But I'm so weak that even keeping in
the side-saddle is out of the question."

"Anything except cross-saddle is utterly out of the question," replied
the Indian, "on the sort of trails we have to take.  You might as well
begin to control your nerves now as later.  I'm going to have an expert
rider in you by the time you have regained your strength.  Come, Rhoda."

The girl turned her face to the afterglow.  Remote and pitiless lay the
distant crimson ranges.  She shuddered and turned back to the young
Indian who stood watching her.  For the moment all the agony of her
situation was concentrated in horror of another night in the saddle.

"Kut-le, I _can't_!"

"Shall I pick you up and carry you over here?" asked Kut-le patiently.

In her weakness and misery, Rhoda's cleft chin quivered.  There was
only merciless determination in the Indian's face.  Slowly the girl
walked to his side.  He swung her to the saddle, adjusted the stirrups
carefully, then fastened her securely to the saddle with a strap about
her waist.  Rhoda watched him in the silence of utter fear.  Having
settled the girl to his satisfaction, he mounted his own horse, and
Rhoda's pony followed him tractably up the trail.

The trail rose steeply.  After the first few dizzy moments, Rhoda,
clinging to the saddle with hands and knees, was thankful for the
security of her new seat.  The scenery was uncanny to her terrorized
eyes.  To the left were great overhanging walls with cactus growing
from every crevice; to the right, depth of canon toward which she dared
not look but only trusted herself prayerfully to her steady little
horse.

As the trail led higher and darkness settled, the cold grew intense and
Rhoda cowered and shivered.  Yet through her fear and discomfort was
creeping surprise that her strength had endured even this long.  In a
spot where the trail widened Kut-le dropped back beside her and she
felt the warm folds of a Navajo blanket about her shoulders.  Neither
she nor the Indian spoke.  The madness of the night before, the fear
and disgust of the afternoon gave way, slowly, to a lethargy of
exhaustion.  All thought of her frightful predicament, of her friends'
anxiety, of Kut-le's treachery, was dulled by a weariness so great that
she could only cling to the saddle and pray for the trail to end.

Kut-le, riding just ahead, glanced back constantly at the girl's dim
figure.  But Rhoda was beyond pleading or protesting.  The trail
twisted and undulated on and on.  Each moment Rhoda felt less certain
of her seat.  Each moment the motion of the horse grew more painful.
At last a faint odor of pine-needles roused her sinking senses and she
opened her heavy eyes.  They had left the sickening edge of the canon
and Alchise was leading them into a beautiful growth of pines where the
mournful hooting of owls gave a graveyard sadness to the moon-flecked
shadows.

Here, in a long aisle of columnar pines, Kut-le called the first halt.
Rhoda reeled in her saddle.  Before her horse had stopped, Kut-le was
beside her, unfastening her waist strap and lifting her to the ground.
He pulled the blanket from his own shoulders and Molly stretched it on
the soft pine-needles.  Rhoda, half delirious, looked up into the young
Indian's face with the pathetic unconsciousness of a sick child.  He
laid her carefully on the blanket.  The two squaws hurriedly knelt at
Rhoda's side and with clever hands rubbed and manipulated the slender,
exhausted body until the girl opened her languid eyes.

Kut-le, while this was being done, stood quietly by the blanket, his
fine face stern and intent.  When Rhoda opened her eyes, he put aside
the two squaws, knelt and raised the girl's head and held a cup of the
rich broth to her lips.  It was cold, yet it tasted good, and Rhoda
finished the cup without protest, then struggled to a sitting position.
After a moment Kut-le raised her gently to her feet.  Here, however,
she pushed him away and walked unsteadily to her horse.  Kut-le's hands
dropped to his side and he stood in the moonlight watching the frail
boyish figure clamber with infinite travail into the saddle.

From the pine wood, the trail led downward.  The rubbing and the broth
had put new life into Rhoda, and for a little while she kept a clear
brain.  For the first time it occurred to her that instead of following
the Indians so stupidly she ought to watch her chance and at the first
opportunity make a wild dash off into the darkness.  Kut-le was so sure
of her weakness and cowardice that she felt that he would be taken
completely by surprise and she might elude him.  With a definite
purpose in her mind she was able to fight off again and again the blur
of weakness that threatened her.

As the trail widened in the descent, Kut-le rode in beside her.

"Feeling better?" he asked cheerfully.

Rhoda made no reply.  Such a passion of hatred for the man shook her
that words failed her.  She turned a white face toward him, the eyes
black, the nostrils quivering with passion.

Kut-le laughed softly.

"Hate me, Rhoda!  Hate me as much as you wish!  That's a heap more
hopeful than indifference.  I'll bet you aren't thinking of dying of
ennui now!"

What fiend, thought Rhoda, ever had induced her to make a friend of
this savage!  She clung to the pommel of her saddle, her eyes fastened
on him.  If only he would drop dead as he sat!  If only his Indians
would turn on him and kill him!

They were riding through the desert now, desert thick-grown with cactus
and sage-brush.  Suddenly a far away roar came to Rhoda's ears.  There
was a faint whistle repeated with increasing loudness.  Off to the
north appeared a light that grew till it threw a dazzling beam on the
strange little waiting group.  The train passed, a half-dozen dimly
lighted Pullmans.  The roaring decreased, the whistle sounded lower and
lower and the night was silent.  Rhoda sat following the last dim light
with burning eyes.  Kut-le led the way from the difficult going of the
desert to the road-bed.  As Rhoda saw the long line of rails the panic
of the previous night overwhelmed her.  Like a mad thing, unmindful of
the strap about her waist she threw herself from the saddle and hung
against the stolid pony.  Kut-le dismounted and undid the strap.  The
girl dropped to the ties and lay crouched with her face against the
steel rail.

"O John!  O John DeWitt!" she sobbed.

"Alchise, go ahead with the horses," said Kut-le.  "Wait for me at the
painted rock."

Then as the Indians became indistinguishable along the track he lifted
Rhoda to her feet.

"Walk for a while," he said.  "It will rest you.  Poor little girl!  I
wish I could have managed differently but this was best for you.  Come,
don't be afraid of me!"

Some savage instinct stirred in Rhoda.  For the first time in her life
she felt an insane joy in anger.

"I'm not afraid of you, you Apache Indian!" she said clearly.  "I
loathe you!  Your touch poisons me!  But I'm not afraid of you!  I
shall choke myself with my bare hands before you shall harm me!  And if
you keep me long enough I shall try to kill you!"

Kut-le gave a short laugh.

"Listen, Rhoda.  Your protests show that you are afraid of me.  But you
need not be.  Your protection lies in the fact that I love you--love
you with all the passion of a savage, all the restraint of a Caucasian.
I'd rather die than harm you!  Why, girl, I'm saving you, not
destroying you!  Rhoda!  Dear one!"  He paused and Rhoda could hear his
quickened breath.  Then he added lightly, "Let's get on with our little
stroll!"

Rhoda wrung her hands and groaned.  Only to escape--to escape!
Suddenly turning, she ran down the track.  Kut-le watched her,
motionless, until she had run perhaps a hundred yards, then with a few
mighty leaps he overtook her and gathered her to his great chest.
Moaning, Rhoda lay still.

"Dear," said Kut-le, "don't exert yourself foolishly.  If you must
escape, lay your plans carefully.  Use your brain.  Don't act like a
child.  I love you, Rhoda!"

"I loathe you!  I loathe you!" whispered the girl.

"You don't--ah--"  He stopped abruptly and set the girl on the ground.
They were standing beside a side-track near a desert water-tank.  "I've
caught my foot in a switch-frog," muttered Kut-le, keeping his hold on
Rhoda with one hand while with the other he tugged at his moccasined
foot.

Rhoda stood rigid.

"I hear a train!" she cried.  "O dear God, I hear a train!"  Then, "The
other Indians are too far away to reach you before the train does," she
added calmly.

"But I'll never loose my grip on you," returned the Indian grimly.

He tore at the imprisoned foot, ripping the moccasin and tearing at the
road bed.  The rails began to sing.  Far down the track they saw a star
of light Rhoda's heart stood still.  This, then, was to be the end!
After all the months of distant menace, death was to be upon her in a
moment!  This, then, was to be the solution!  And with all the horror
of what life might mean to her, she cried out with a sob:

"Oh, not this way!  Not this way!"

Kut-le gave her a quick push.

"Hurry," he said, "and try to remember good things of me!"

With a cry of joy, Rhoda jumped from the track, then stopped.  There
flashed across her inner vision the face of young Cartwell, debonair
and dark, with unfathomable eyes; young Cartwell who had saved her life
when the scorpion had stung her, who had spent hours trying to lead her
back to health.  Instantly she turned and staggered back to the Indian.

"I can't let a human being die like a trapped animal!" she panted, and
she threw herself wildly against him.

Kut-le fell at the unexpected impact of her weight and his foot was
freed!  He lifted Rhoda, leaped from the track, and the second section
of the tourist train thundered into the west.

"You are as fine as I thought you were--" he began.  But Rhoda was a
limp heap at his feet.

The girl came to her senses partially when Kut-le set her in the saddle
and fastened her there with strap and blanket.  But happily she was
practically unconscious for the hour or two that remained till dawn.
Just as day was breaking the Indians made their way across an arroyo
and up a long slope to a group of cottonwoods.  Here Rhoda was put to
bed on a heap of blankets.

Sometime in the afternoon she woke with a clear head.  It was the first
time in months that she had wakened without a headache.  She stared
from the shade of the cottonwoods to the distant lavender haze of the
desert.  There was not a sound in all the world.  Mysterious, remote,
the desert stared back at her, mocking her little grief.  More terrible
to her than her danger in Kut-le's hands, more appalling than the death
threat that had hung over her so long, was this sense of awful space,
of barren nothingness with which the desert oppressed her.
Instinctively she turned to look for human companionship.  Kut-le and
Alchise were not to be seen but Molly nodded beside Rhoda's blankets
and the thin hag Cesca was curled in the grass near by, asleep.

"You awake?  Heap hungry?" asked Molly suddenly.

Rhoda sat up, groaning at the torturing stiffness of her muscles.

"Where is Kut-le?" she asked.

"Gone get 'em supper.  Alchise gone too."

"Molly," Rhoda took the rough brown hand between both her soft cold
palms, "Molly, will you help me to run away?"

Molly looked from the clasping fingers up to Rhoda's sweet face.  Molly
was a squaw, dirty and ignorant.  Rhoda was the delicate product of a
highly cultivated civilization, egoistic, narrow-viewed, self-centered.
And yet Rhoda, looking into Molly's deep brown eyes, saw there that
limitless patience and fortitude and gentleness which is woman's
without regard to class or color.  And not knowing why, the white girl
bowed her head on the squaw's fat shoulder and sobbed a little.  A
strange look came into Molly's face.  She was childless and had worked
fearfully to justify her existence to her tribe.  Few hands had touched
hers in tenderness.  Few voices had appealed to her for sympathy.
Suddenly Molly clasped Rhoda in her strong arms and swayed back and
forth with her gently.

"You no cry!" she said.  "You no cry, little Sun-head, you no cry!"

"Molly, dear kind Molly, won't you help me to get back to my own
people?  Suppose it was your daughter that a white man had stolen!  O
Molly, I want to go home!"

Molly still rocked and spoke in the singsong voice one uses to a
sobbing child.

"You no run 'way!  Kut-le catch right off!  Make it all harder for you!"

Rhoda shivered a little.

"If I once get away, Kut-le never will catch me alive!"

Molly chuckled indulgently.

"How you run?  No _sabe_ how eat, how drink, how find the trail!
Better stay with Molly."

"I would wait till I thought we were near a town.  Won't you help me?
Dear, kind Molly, won't you help me?"

"Kut-le kill Molly with cactus torture!"

"But you go with me!"  The sobs ceased and Rhoda sat back on her
blankets as the idea developed.  "You go with me and I'll make you--"

Neither noticed the soft thud of moccasined feet.  Suddenly Alchise
seized Molly's black hair and with a violent jerk pulled the woman
backward.  Rhoda forgot her stiffened muscles, forgot her gentle
ancestry.  She sprang at Alchise with catlike fury and struck his
fingers from Molly's hair.

"You fiend!  I wish I could shoot you!" she panted, her fingers
twitching.

Alchise retreated a step.

"She try help 'em run!" he said sullenly.

"She was not!  And no matter if she was!  Don't you touch a woman
before me!"

A swift shadow crossed the camp and Alchise was hurled six feet away.

"What's the matter!" cried Kut-le.  "Has he laid finger on you, Rhoda?"
He strode to her side and looked down at her with eyes in which
struggled anger and anxiety.

"No!" blazed Rhoda.  "But he pulled Molly over backward by her hair!"

"Oh!" in evident relief.  "And what was Molly doing?"

"She maybe help 'em run," said Alchise, coming forward.

The relief in Kut-le's voice increased Rhoda's anger.

"No such thing!  She was persuading me not to go!  Kut-le, you give
Alchise orders not to touch Molly again.  I won't have it!"

"Oh, that's not necessary," said Kut-le serenely.  "Indians are pretty
good to their women as a general thing.  They average up with the
whites, I guess.  Molly, get up and help Cesca with these!"  He flung
some newly killed rabbits at the gaping squaw, who still lay where she
had fallen.

Rhoda, trembling and glowering, walked unsteadily up and down beneath
the cottonwoods.  The details of her new existence, the dirt, the
roughness, were beginning to sink in on her.  She paced back and forth,
lips compressed, eyes black.  Kut-le stood with his back against a
cottonwood eying the slender figure with frank delight.  Now and again
he chuckled as he rolled a cigarette with his facile finger.  His hands
were fine as only an Indian's can be: strong and sinewy yet supple with
slender fingers and almond-shaped nails.

He smoked contentedly with his eyes on the girl.  Inscrutable as was
his face at a casual glance, had Rhoda observed keenly she might have
read much in the changing light of his eyes.  There was appreciation of
her and love of her and a merciless determination to hold her at all
costs.  And still as he gazed there was that tragedy in his look which
is part and portion of the Indian's face.

Silence in the camp had continued for some time when a strange young
Indian strode up the slope, nodded to the group in the camp, and
deliberately rolled himself in a blanket and dropped to sleep.  Rhoda
stared at him questioningly.

"Alchise's and Cesca's son," said Kut-le.  "His job is to follow us at
a distance and remove all trace of our trail.  Not an overturned pebble
misses his eye.  I'll need him only for a day or two."

"Kut-le," said Rhoda suddenly, "when are you going to end the farce and
let me go?"

The young man smiled.

"You know the way the farce usually ends!  The man always gets the girl
and they live happily forever after!"

"What do you suppose Jack and Katherine think of you?  They have loved
and trusted you so!"

For the first time the Indian's face showed pain.

"My hope is," he said, "that after they see how happy I am going to
make you they will forgive me."

Rhoda controlled her voice with difficulty.

"Can't you see what you have done?  No matter what the outcome, can you
believe that I or any one that loves me can forgive the outrage to me?"

"After we have married and lived abroad for a year or two people will
remember only the romance of it!".

"Heavens!" ejaculated Rhoda.  She returned to her angry walking.

Molly was preparing supper.  She worked always with one eye on Rhoda,
as if she could not see enough of the girl's fragile loveliness.  With
her attention thus divided, she stumbled constantly, dropping the pots
and spilling the food.  She herself was not at all disturbed by her
mishaps but, with a grimace and a chuckle, picked up the food.  But
Cesca was annoyed.  She was tending the fire which by a marvel of skill
she kept always clear and all but smokeless.  At each of Molly's
mishaps, Cesca hurled a stone at her friend's back with a savage
"Me-yah!" that disturbed Molly not at all.

Mercifully night was on the camp by the time the rabbits were cooked
and Rhoda ate unconscious of the dirt the food had acquired in the
cooking.  When the silent meal was finished, Kut-le pointed to Rhoda's
blankets.

"We will start in half an hour.  You must rest during that time."

Too weary to resent the peremptory tone, Rhoda obeyed.  The fire long
since had been extinguished and the camp was dark.  The Indians were to
be located only by faint whispers under the trees.  The opportunity
seemed providential!  Rhoda slipped from her blankets and crept through
the darkness away from the camp.




CHAPTER VII

THE FIRST LESSON

After crawling on her hands and knees for several yards, Rhoda rose and
started on a run down the long slope to the open desert.  But after a
few steps she found running impossible, for the slope was a wilderness
of rock, thickly grown with cholla and yucca with here and there a
thicker growth of cat's-claw.

Almost at once her hands were torn and bleeding and she thought
gratefully for the first time of her buckskin trousers which valiantly
resisted all detaining thorns.  The way dropped rapidly and after her
first wild spurt Rhoda leaned exhausted and panting against a boulder.
She had not the vaguest idea of where she was going or of what she was
going to do, except that she was going to lose herself so thoroughly
that not even Kut-le could find her.  After that she was quite willing
to trust to fate.

After a short rest she started on, every sense keen for the sound of
pursuit, but none came.  As the silent minutes passed Rhoda became
elated.  How easy it was!  What a pity that she had not tried before!
At the foot of the slope, she turned up the arroyo.  Here her course
grew heavier.  The arroyo was cut by deep ruts and gullies down which
the girl slid and tumbled in mad haste only to find rock masses over
which she crawled with utmost difficulty.  Now and again the stout
vamps of her hunting boots were pierced by chollas and, half frantic in
her haste, she was forced to stop and struggle to pull out the thorns.

It was not long before the girl's scant strength was gone, and when
after a mad scramble she fell from a boulder to the ground, she was too
done up to rise.  She lay face to the stars, half sobbing with
excitement and disappointment.  After a time, however, the sobs ceased
and she lay thinking.  She knew now that until she was inured to the
desert and had a working knowledge of its ways, escape was impossible.
She must bide her time and wait for her friends to rescue her.  She had
no idea how far she had come from the Indian camp.  Whether or not
Kut-le could find her again she could not guess.  If he did not, then
unless a white stumbled on her she must die in the desert.  Well then,
let it be so!  The old lethargy closed in on her and she lay motionless
and hopeless.

From all sides she heard the night howls of the coyote packs circling
nearer and nearer.  Nothing could more perfectly interpret the horrible
desolation of the desert, Rhoda thought, than the demoniacal,
long-drawn laughter of the coyote.  How long she lay she neither knew
nor cared.  But just as she fancied that the coyotes had drawn so near
that she could hear their footsteps, a hand was laid on her arm.

"Have you had enough, Rhoda?" asked Kut-le.

"No!" shuddered Rhoda.  "I'd rather die here!"

The Indian laughed softly as he lifted her from the ground.

"A good hater makes a good lover, Rhoda," he said.  "I wish I'd had
time to let you learn your lesson more thoroughly.  I haven't been
twenty-five feet away from you since you left the camp.  I wanted you
to try your hand at it just so you'd realize what you are up against.
But you've tired yourself badly."

Rhoda lay mute in the young man's arms.  She was not thinking of his
words but of the first time that the Indian had carried her.  She saw
John DeWitt's protesting face, and tears of weakness and despair ran
silently down her cheeks.  Kut-le strode rapidly and, unhesitatingly
over the course she had followed so painfully and in a few moments they
were among the waiting Indians.

Kut-le put Rhoda in her saddle, fastened her securely and put a Navajo
about her shoulders.  The night's misery was begun.  Whether they went
up and down mountains, whether they crossed deserts, Rhoda neither knew
nor cared.  The blind purpose of clinging to the saddle was the one aim
of the dreadful night.  She was a little light-headed at times and with
her head against the horse's neck, she murmured John DeWitt's name, or
sitting erect she called to him wildly.  At such times Kut-le's fingers
tightened and he clinched his teeth, but he did not go to her.  When,
however, the frail figure drooped silently and inertly against the
waist strap he seemed to know even in the darkness.  Then and then only
he lifted her down, the squaws massaged her wracked body, and she was
put in the saddle again.  Over and over during the night this was
repeated until at dawn Rhoda was barely conscious that after being
lifted to the ground she was not remounted but was covered carefully
and left in peace.

It was late in the afternoon again when Rhoda woke.  She pushed aside
her blankets and tried to get up but fell back with a groan.  The
stiffness of the previous days was nothing whatever to the misery that
now held every muscle rigid.  The overexertion of three nights in the
saddle which the massaging had so far mitigated had asserted itself and
every muscle in the girl's body seemed acutely painful.  To lift her
hand to her hair, to draw a long breath, to turn her head, was almost
impossible.

Rhoda looked dismally about her.  The camp this time was on the side of
a mountain that lay in a series of mighty ranges, each separated from
the other by a narrow strip of desert.  White and gold gleamed the
snow-capped peaks.  Purple and lavender melted the shimmering desert
into the lifting mesas.  Rhoda threw her arm across her eyes to hide
the hateful sight, and moaned in pain at the movement.

Molly ran to her side.

"Your bones heap sick?  Molly rub 'em?" she asked eagerly.

"O Molly, if you would!" replied Rhoda gratefully, and she wondered at
the skill and gentleness of the Indian woman who manipulated the aching
muscles with such rapidity and firmness that in a little while Rhoda
staggered stiffly to her feet.

"Molly," she said, "I want to wash my face."

Molly puckered up her own face in her effort to understand, and
scratched her head.

"Don't _sabe_ that," she said.

"Wash my face!" repeated Rhoda in astonishment.  "Of course you
understand."

Molly laughed.

"No!  You no wash!  No use!  You just get cold--heap cold!"

"Molly!" called Kut-le's authoritative voice.

Molly went flying toward the packs, from which she returned with a
canteen and a tiny pitch-smeared basket.  Kut-le followed with a towel.
He grinned at Rhoda.

"Molly is possessed with the idea that anything as frail as you would
be snuffed out like a candle by a drop of water.  You and I each
possess a lone lorn towel which we must wash out ourselves till the end
of the trip.  The squaws don't know when a thing is clean."

Rhoda took the towel silently, and the young Indian, after waiting a
minute as if in hope of a word from her, left the girl to her difficult
toilet.  When Rhoda had finished she picked up the field-glasses that
Kut-le had left on her blankets and with her back to the Indians sat
down on a rock to watch the desert.

The sordid discomforts of the camp seemed to her unbearable.  She hated
the blue haze of the desert below and beyond her.  She hated the very
ponies that Alchise was leading up from water.  It was the fourth day
since her abduction.  Rhoda could not understand why John and the
Newmans were so slow to overtake her.  She knew nothing as yet of the
skill of her abductors.  She was like an ignorant child placed in a new
world whose very ABC was closed to her.  After always having been cared
for and protected, after never having known a hardship, the girl
suddenly was thrust into an existence whose savage simplicity was
sufficient to try the hardiest man.

Supper was eaten in silence, Kut-le finally giving up his attempts to
make conversation.  It was dusk when they mounted and rode up the
mountain.  Near the crest a whirling cloud of mist enveloped them.  It
became desperately cold and Rhoda shivered beneath her Navajo but
Kut-le gave no heed to her.  He led on and on, the horses slipping, the
cold growing every minute more intense.  At last there appeared before
them a dim figure silhouetted against a flickering light.  Kut-le
halted his party and rode forward; Rhoda saw the dim figure rise
hastily and after a short time Kut-le called back.

"Come ahead!"

The little camp was only an open space at the canon edge, with a
sheepskin shelter over a tiny fire.  Beside the fire stood a
sheep-herder, a swarthy figure wrapped from head to foot in sheepskins.
Over in the darkness by the mountain wall were the many nameless sounds
that tell of animals herding for the night.  The shepherd greeted them
with the perfect courtesy of the Mexican.

"Senors, the camp is yours!"

Kut-le lifted the shivering Rhoda from her horse.  The rain was
lessening but the cold was still so great that Rhoda huddled gratefully
by the little fire under the sheepskin shelter.  Kut-le refused the
Mexican's offer of tortillas and the man sat down to enjoy their
society.  He eyed Rhoda keenly.

"Ah!  It is a senorita!"  Then he gasped.  "It is perhaps the Senorita
Rhoda Tuttle!"

Rhoda jumped to her feet.

"Yes!  Yes!  How did you know?"

Kut-le glared at the herder menacingly, but the little fellow did not
see.  He spoke up bravely, as if he had a message for Rhoda.

"Some people told me yesterday.  They look for her everywhere!"

Rhoda's eyes lighted joyfully.

"Who?  Where?" she cried.

Kut-le spoke concisely:

"You know nothing!" he said.

The Mexican looked into the Apache's eyes and shivered slightly.

"Nothing, of course, Senor," he replied.

But Rhoda was not daunted.

"Who were they?" she repeated.  "What did they say?  Where did they go?"

The herder glanced at Rhoda and shook his head.

"_Quien sabe_?"

Rhoda turned to Kut-le in anger.

"Don't be more brutal than you have to be!" she cried.  "What harm can
it do for this man to give me word of my friends?"

Kut-le's eyes softened.

"Answer the senorita's questions, amigo," he said.

The Mexican began eagerly.

"There were three.  They rode up the trail one day ago.  They called
the dark man Porter, the big blue-eyed one DeWitt, and the
yellow-haired one Newman."

Rhoda clasped her hands with a little murmur of relief.

"The blue-eyed one acted as if locoed.  They cursed much at a name,
Kut-le.  But otherwise they talked little.  They went that way,"
pointing back over the trail.  "They had found a scarf with a stone
tied in it--"

"What's that?" interrupted Kut-le sharply.

Rhoda's eyes shone in the firelight.

"'Not an overturned pebble escapes his eye,'" she said serenely.

"Bully for you!" exclaimed Kut-le, smiling at Rhoda in understanding.
"However, I guess we will move on, having gleaned this interesting
news!"

He remounted his little party.  Rhoda reeled a little but she made no
protest.  As they took to the trail again the sheep-herder stood by the
fire, watching, and Rhoda called to him:

"If you see them again tell them that I'm all right but that they must
hurry!"

Rhoda felt new life in her veins after the meeting with the
sheep-herder and finished the night's trail in better shape than she
had done before.  Yet not the next day nor for many days did they sight
pursuers.  With ingenuity that seemed diabolical, Kut-le laid his
course.  He seldom moved hurriedly.  Indeed, except for the fact that
the traveling was done by night, the expedition had every aspect of
unlimited leisure.

As the days passed, Rhoda forced herself to the calm of desperation.
Slowly she realized that she was in the hands of the masters of the art
of flight, an art that the very cruelty of the country abetted.  But to
her utter astonishment her delirium of physical misery began to lift.
Saddle stiffness after the first two weeks left her.  Though Kut-le
still fastened her to the saddle by the waist strap and rested her for
a short time every hour or so during the night's ride, the hours in the
saddle ceased to tax her strength.  She was surprised to find that she
could eat--eat the wretched cooking of the squaws!

At last she laid out a definite course for herself.  Every night on the
trail and at every camp she tried to leave some mark for the whites--a
scratch on pebble or stone, a bit of marked yucca or a twisted
cat's-claw.  She ceased entirely to speak to Kut-le, treating him with
a contemptuous silence that was torture to the Indian though he gave no
outward sign.

Molly was her devoted friend and Rhoda derived great comfort from this
faithful servitor.  Rhoda sat in the camp one afternoon with the two
squaws while Kut-le and Alchise were off on a turkey hunt.  Some of the
girl's pallor had given way to a delicate tan.  The dark circles about
her eyes had lightened a little.  Molly was busily pounding grass-seeds
between two stones.  Rhoda watched her idly.  Suddenly a new idea sent
the blood to her thin cheeks.

Why shouldn't she learn to make seed meal, to catch and cook rabbits,
to distinguish edible cactus from inedible?  Then indeed she would be
able to care for herself on the trail!  To Rhoda, who never had worked
with her hands, who indeed had come to look on manual labor as
belonging to inferiors, the idea was revolutionary.  For a long time
she turned it over in her mind, watching Molly the while.  The most
violent housewifely task that Rhoda ever had undertaken had been the
concocting of chafing-dish messes at school.

"Molly," she said suddenly, "teach me how to do that!"

Molly paused and grinned delightedly.

"All right!  You come help poor Molly!"

With Cesca looking on sardonically, Molly poured fresh seeds on her
rude metate and showed Rhoda the grinding roll that flattened and broke
the little grains.  Despite her weak fingers Rhoda took to the work
easily.  As she emptied out the first handful of meal, a curious sense
of pleasure came to her.  Squatting before the metate, she looked at
the little pile of bruised seeds with the utmost satisfaction.  Molly
poured more seeds on the metate and Rhoda began again.  She was hard at
her task, her cheeks flushed with interest, when Kut-le returned.
Rhoda did not see the sudden look of pleasure in his eyes.

"You will tire yourself," he said.

Rhoda did not answer, but poured another handful of seed on the metate.

"You'll begin to like the life," he went on, "by the time you are
educated enough to leave us."  He turned teasingly to Cesca.  "You
think the white squaw can cross the desert soon by herself?"

Cesca spat disdainfully.

"No!  White squaw no good!  All time sit, sit, no work!  Kut-le heap
fool!"

"Oh, Cesca," cried Rhoda, "I'm too sick to work!  And see this meal
I've made!  Isn't it good?"

Cesca glanced disdainfully at the little heap of meal Rhoda had bruised
out so painfully.

"Huh!" she grunted.  "Feed 'em to the horses.  Injuns no eat 'em!"

Rhoda looked from the meal to her slender, tired fingers.  Cesca's
contempt hurt her unaccountably.  In her weakness her cleft chin
quivered.  She turned to Molly.

"Do you think it's so bad, Molly?"

That faithful friend grunted with rage and aimed a vicious kick at
Cesca.  Then she put a protecting arm about Rhoda.

"It's heap fine!  Cesca just old fool.  You love Molly.  Let Cesca go
to hell!"

Kut-le had been watching the little scene with tender eyes.  Now he
stooped and lifted Rhoda to her feet, then he raised one of the
delicate hands and touched it softly with his lips.

"Leave such work to the squaws, dear!  You aren't built for it.  Cesca,
you old lobster, you make me tired!  Go fix the turkeys!"

Cesca rose with dignity, flipped away her cigarette and walked with a
sniff over to the cooking-pot.  Rhoda drew her hands from the young
Indian's clasp and walked to the edge of the camp.  The hot pulse that
the touch of Kut-le's lips sent through her body startled her.

"I hate him!" she said to herself.  "I hate him!  I hate him!"

The trail that night was unusually difficult and Rhoda had to be rested
frequently.  At each stop, Kut-le tried to talk to her but she
maintained her silence.  They paused at dawn in a pocket formed by the
meeting of three divergent canons.  Far, far above the desert as they
were, still farther above them stretched the wonderful barren ridges,
snow-capped and silent.  As Rhoda stood waiting for the squaws to
spread her blankets the peaks were lighted suddenly by the rays of the
still unseen sun.  For one unspeakable instant their snow crowns
flashed a translucent scarlet that trembled, shimmered, then melted to
a pink, then to a white so pure, so piercing that Rhoda trembled with
sudden awe.  Then as she looked, the sun rolled into view, blinding her
eyes, and she turned to her waiting blankets.

She had slept for several hours when she was wakened by a soft tap on
her shoulder.  She opened her eyes and would have risen but a voice
whispered:

"Hush!  Don't move!"




CHAPTER VIII

A BROADENING HORIZON

Rhoda lay stiffly, her heart beating wildly.  Kut-le and the squaws,
each a muffled, blanketed figure, lay sleeping some distance away.  Old
Alchise stood on solitary guard at the edge of the camp with his back
to her.

"Make as if you wanted to shift your blankets toward the cat's-claw
bush behind you!" went on the whispered voice.

Obediently, Rhoda sat erect.  Alchise turned slowly to light a
cigarette out of the wind.  Rhoda yawned, rose sleepily, looked under
her blanket and shook her, head irritably, then dragged her blankets
toward the neighboring cat's-claw.  Again she settled herself to sleep.
Alchise turned back to his view of the desert.

"I'm behind the bush here," whispered the voice.  "I'm a prospector.
Saw you make camp.  I don't know where any of the search parties are
but if you can crawl round to me I'll guarantee to get you to 'em
somehow.  Slip out of your blankets and leave 'em, rounded up as if you
was still under 'em.  Quick now and careful!"

Rhoda, her eyes never leaving Alchise's impassive back, drew herself
silently and swiftly from her blankets and with a clever touch or two
rounded them.  Then she crept around the cat's-claw, where a man
squatted, his eyes blazing with excitement.  He put up a sinewy, hand
to pull her from sight when, without warning, Rhoda sneezed.

Instantly there was the click of a rifle and Alchise shouted:

"Stop!"

"Confound it!" growled the man, rising to full view, "why didn't you
swallow it!"

"I couldn't!" replied Rhoda indignantly.  "You don't suppose I wanted
to!"

She turned toward the camp.  Alchise was standing stolidly covering
them with his rifle.  Kut-le was walking coolly toward them, while the
squaws sat gaping.

"Well!" exclaimed Kut-le.  "What can we do for you, Jim?"

The stranger, a rough tramp-like fellow in tattered overalls, wiped his
face, on which was a week's stubble.

"I'd always thought you was about white, Cartwell," he said, "but I see
you're no better than the rest of them.  What are you going to do with
me?"

Kut-le eyed his unbidden guest speculatively.

"Well, we'll have something to eat first.  I don't like to think on an
empty stomach.  Come over to my blanket and sit down, Jim."

Ignoring Rhoda, who was watching him closely, Kut-le seated himself on
his blanket beside Jim and offered him a cigarette, which was refused.

"I don't want no favors from you, Cartwell."  His voice was surly.
There was something more than his rough appearance that Rhoda disliked
about the man but she didn't know just what it was.  Kut-le's eyes
narrowed, but he lighted his own cigarette without replying.  "You're
up to a rotten trick and you know it, Cartwell," went on Jim.  "You
take my advice and let me take the girl back to her friends and you
make tracks down into Mexico as fast as the Lord'll let you."

Kut-le shifted the Navajo that hung over his naked shoulders.  He gave
a short laugh that Rhoda had never heard from him before.

"Let her go with you, Jim Provenso!  You know as well as I do that she
is safer with an Apache!  Anything else?"

"Yes, this else!"  Jim's voice rose angrily.  "If ever we get a chance
at you, we'll hang you sky high, see?  This may go with Injuns but not
with whites, you dirty pup!"

Suddenly Kut-le rose and, dropping his blanket, stood before the white
man in his bronze perfection.

"Provenso, you aren't fit to look at a decent woman!  Don't put on dog
just because you belong to the white race.  You're disreputable, and
you know it.  Don't speak to Miss Tuttle again; you are too rotten!"

The prospector had risen and stood glaring at Kut-le.

"I'll kill you for that yet, you dirty Injun!" he shouted.

"Shucks!" sniffed the Indian.  "You haven't the nerve to injure
anything but a woman!"

Jim's face went purple.

"For two bits I'd knock your block off, right now."

"There isn't a cent in the camp." Kut-le turned to Rhoda.  "You get the
point of the conversation, I hope?"

Rhoda's eyes were blazing.  She had gotten the point, and yet--Jim was
a white man!  Anything white was better than an Indian.

"I'd take my chances with Mr. Provenso," she said, joyfully conscious
that nothing could have hurt Kut-le more than this reply.

Kut-le's lips stiffened.

"Lunch is ready," he said.

"None of _your_ grub for mine," remarked Jim.  "What are you going to
do with me?"

"Alchise!" called Kut-le.  "Eat something, then take this fellow out
and lose him.  Take the rest of the day to it.  You know the next camp!"

Then he folded his arms across his chest and waited for Alchise to
finish his meal.  Jim stood in sullen silence for a minute.  Then he
seated himself on a nearby rock.

"No, you don't," he said.  "If you get me out of here, you'll have to
use force."

Kut-le shrugged his shoulders.

"A gun at your back will move you!"

Rhoda was looking at the white man's face with a great longing.  He was
rough and ugly, but he was of her own breed.  Suddenly the longing for
her own that she was beginning to control surged to her lips.

"I can't bear this!" she cried.  "I'm going mad!  I'm going mad!"

All the camp turned startled faces toward the girl, and Rhoda recovered
her self-possession.  She ran to Kut-le and laid her hand on his arm,
lifting a lovely, pleading face to his.

"O Kut-le!  Kut-le!" in the tone that she had used to Cartwell.  "Can't
you see that it's no use?  He is white, Kut-le!  Let me go with him!
Let me go back to my own people!  O Kut-le, let me go!  O let me go!"

Kut-le looked down at the hand on his arm.  Rhoda was too excited to
notice that his whole body shook at this unwonted touch.  His voice was
caressing but his face remained inscrutable.

"Dear girl," he answered, "he is not your kind!  He might originally
have been of your color, but now he's streaked with yellow.  Let him
go.  You are safer here with me!"

Rhoda turned from him impatiently.

"It's quite useless," she said to Jim; "no pleading or threat will move
him.  But I do thank you--" her voice breaking a little.  "Go back with
Alchise and tell them to come for me quickly!"

Some responsive flash of sympathy came to Jim's bleared eyes.

Rhoda stood watching Alchise marshall him out of the camp.  She moaned
helplessly:

"O my people, my own people!" and Kut-le eyed her with unfathomable
gaze.

As soon as lunch was finished, camp was broken.  All the rest of the
day and until toward midnight they wound up a wretched trail that
circled the mountain ranges, For hours, Kut-le did not speak to Rhoda.
These days of Rhoda's contempt were very hard on him.  The touch of her
hand that morning, the old note in her voice, still thrilled him.  At
midnight as they watched the squaws unroll her blankets, he touched her
shoulder.

"Dear," he said, in his rich voice, "it is in you to love me if only I
am patient.  And--God, but it's worth all the starvation in the
meantime!  Won't you say good-night to me, Rhoda?"

Rhoda looked at the stalwart figure in the firelight.  The young eyes
so tragic in their youth, the beautiful mouth, sad in its firm curves,
were strangely appealing.  Just for an instant the horrors of the past
weeks vanished.

"Good-night!" said Rhoda.  Then she rolled herself in her blankets and
slept.  By the next morning, however, the old repulsion had returned
and she made no response to Kut-le's overtures.

Day succeeded day now, until Rhoda lost all track of time.  Endlessly
they crossed desert and mountain ridges.  Endlessly they circled
through dusky canon and sun-baked arroyo.  Always Rhoda looked forward
to each new camping-place with excitement.  Here, the rescuers might
stumble upon them!  Always she started at each unexpected shadow along
the trail.  Always she thrilled at a wisp of smokelike cloud beyond the
canon edge.  Always she felt a quiver of certainty at sudden break of
twig or fall of stone.  But the days passed and gradually hope changed
to desperation.

The difficulties of the camp life would have been unbearable to her had
not her natural fortitude and her intense pride come to her rescue.
The estimate of her that Kut-le had so mercilessly presented to her the
first day of her abduction returned to her more and more clearly as the
days wore on.  At first she thought of them only with scorn.  Then as
her loneliness increased and she was forced back upon herself she grew
to wonder what in her had given the Indian such an opinion.  There was
something in the nakedness of the desert, something in its piercing
austerity that forced her to truthfulness with herself.  Little by
little she found herself trying to acquire Kut-le's view of her.

Her liking for Molly grew.  She spent long afternoons with the squaw,
picking up desert lore.

"Do you like to work, Molly?" she asked the squaw one afternoon, as she
sorted seed for Molly to bruise.

"What else to do?" asked Molly.  "Sit with hands folded on stomach, so?
No!  Still hands make crazy head.  Now you work with your hands you no
so sorry in head, huh?"

Rhoda thought for a moment.  There was a joy in the rude camp tasks
that she had assumed that she never had found in golf or automobiling.
She nodded, then said wistfully:

"You think I'm no good at all, don't you, Molly?"

Molly shrugged her shoulders.

"Me not got papooses.  You not got papooses.  Molly and you no good!
Molly is heap strong.  What good is that?  When she die she no has
given her strength to tribe, no done any good that will last.  You are
heap beautiful.  What good is that?  You no give your face to your
tribe.  What good are you?  Molly and you might as well die tomorrow.
Work, have papooses, die.  That all squaws are for.  Great Spirit says
so.  Squaw's own heart says so."

Rhoda sat silently looking at the squaw's squat figure, the
toil-scarred fingers, the good brown eyes out of which looked a woman's
soul.  Vaguely Rhoda caught a point of view that made her old ideals
seem futile.  She smoothed the Indian woman's hands.

"I sometimes think you are a bigger woman than I am, Molly," she said
humbly.

"You are heap good to look at."  Molly spoke wistfully.  "Molly heap
homely.  You think that makes any difference to the Great Spirit?"

Rhoda's eyes widened, a little.  Did it make any difference?  After
all, what counted with the Great Spirit?  She stared at the barren
ranges that lifted mute peaks to the silent heavens.  Always, always
the questions and so vague the answers!  Suddenly Rhoda knew that her
beauty had counted greatly with her all her life, had given her her
sense of superiority to the rest of the world.  Rhoda squirmed.  She
hated this faculty of the Indians and the desert to make her seem
small.  She never had felt so with her own kind.  Her own kind!  Would
she never again know the deference, the gentleness, the loving
tenderness of her own people?  Rhoda forgot Molly's wistful question.

"O Molly!" she cried.  "I can't stand this!  I want my own people!  I
want my own people!"

Molly's eyes filled with tears.

"No!  No cry, little Sun-streak!" she pleaded, putting an arm around
Rhoda and holding her to her tenderly.  "Any peoples that loves you is
your own peoples.  Kut-le loves you.  Molly loves you.  We your peoples
too!"

"No!  No!  Never!" sobbed Rhoda.  "Molly, if you love me, take me back
to my own kind!  You shall never leave me, Molly!  I do love you.  You
are an Indian but somehow I have a feeling for you I never had for any
one else."

A sudden light of passionate adoration burned in Molly's eyes, a light
that never was to leave them again when they gazed on Rhoda.  But she
shook her head.

"You ask Molly to give up her peoples but you don't want to give up
yours.  You stay with Molly and Kut-le.  Learn what desert say 'bout
life, 'bout people.  When you _sabe_ what the desert say 'bout that you
_sabe_ almost much as Great Spirit!"

"Molly, listen!  When Kut-le and Alchise go off on one of their hunts
and Cesca goes to sleep, you and I will steal off and hide until night,
and you will show me how to get home again.  O Molly, I'll be very good
to you if you will do this for me!  Don't you see how foolish Kut-le
is?  I can never, never marry him!  His ways are not my ways.  My ways
are not his!  Always I will be white and he Indian.  He will get over
this craze for me and want one of his own kind.  Molly, listen to your
heart!  It must tell you white to the white, Indian to the Indian.
Dear, dear Molly, I want to go home!"

"No!  No!  Molly promise Kut-le to keep his white squaw for him.
Injuns they always keep promises.  And Molly _sabe_ some day when you
learn more you be heap glad old Molly keep you for Kut-le."

Rhoda turned away with a sigh at the note of finality in Molly's voice.
Kut-le was climbing the trail toward the camp with a little pile of
provisions.  So far he had not failed to procure when needed some sort
of rations--bacon, flour and coffee--though since her abduction Rhoda
had seen no human habitation, Cesca was preparing supper.  She was
pounding a piece of meat on a flat stone, muttering to herself when a
piece fell to the ground.  Sometimes she wiped the sand from the fallen
bit on her skirt.  More often she flung it into the stew-pot unwiped.

"Cesca!" cried Rhoda, "do keep the burro out of the meat!"  The burro
that Kut-le recently had acquired was sniffing at the meat.

Cesca gave no heed except to murmur, "Burro heap hungry!"

"I am going to begin to cook my own meals, Molly," said Rhoda.  "I am
strong enough now, and Cesca is so dirty!"

Kut-le entered the camp in time to hear Rhoda's resolution.

"Will you let me eat with you?" he asked courteously.  "I don't enjoy
dirt, myself!"

Rhoda stared at the young man.  The calm effrontery of him, the
cleverness of him, to ask a favor of her!  She turned from him to the
distant ranges.  She did not realize how much she turned from the
roughness of the camp to the far desert views!  Brooding, aloof, how
big the ranges were, how free, how calm!  For the first time her
keeping Kut-le in Coventry seemed foolish to her.  Of what avail was
her silence, except to increase her own loneliness?  Suddenly she
smiled grimly.  The game was a good one.  Perhaps she could play it as
well as the Indian.

"If you wish, you may," she said coldly.

Then she ignored the utter joy and astonishment in the young man's face
and set about roasting the rabbit that Molly had dressed.  She tossed
the tortillas as Molly had taught her and baked them over the coals.
She set forth the cans and baskets that formed the camp dinner-set and
served the primitive meal.  Kut-le watched the preparations silently.
When the rabbit was cooked the two sat down on either side of the flat
rock that served as a table while the other three squatted about
Cesca's stew-pot near the fire.

It was the first time that Rhoda and Kut-le had eaten tete-a-tete.
Hitherto Rhoda had taken her food off to a secluded corner and eaten it
alone.  There was an intimacy in thus sitting together at the meal
Rhoda had prepared, that both felt.

"Are you glad you did this for me, Rhoda?" asked Kut-le.

"I didn't do it for you!" returned Rhoda.  "I did it for my own
comfort!"

Something in her tone narrowed the Indian's eyes.

"Why should you speak as a queen to a poor devil of a subject?  By what
particular mark of superiority are you exempt from work?  For a time
you have had the excuse of illness, but you no longer have that.  I
should say that making tortillas was better than sitting in sloth while
they are made for you!  Do you never have any sense of shame that you
are forever taking and never giving?"

Rhoda answered angrily.

"I'm not at all interested in your opinions."

But the young Apache went on.

"It makes me tired to hear the white women of your class talk of their
equality to men!  You don't do a thing to make you equal.  You live off
some one else.  You don't even produce children.  Huh!  No wonder
nature kicks you out with all manner of illness.  You are mere cloggers
of the machinery.  For heaven's sake, wake up, Rhoda!  Except for your
latent possibilities, you aren't in it with Molly!"

"You have some touchstone, I suppose," replied Rhoda contemptuously,
"by which you are made competent to sit in judgment on mankind?"

"I sure have!" said Kut-le.  "It is that you so live that you die
spiritually richer than you were born.  Life is a simple thing, after
all.  To keep one's body and soul healthy, to bear children, to give
more than we take.  And I believe that in the end it will seem to have
been worth while."

Rhoda made no answer.  Kut-le ate on in silence for a time, then he
said wistfully:

"Don't you enjoy this meal with me, just a little?"

Rhoda glanced from Kut-le's naked body to her own torn clothing, then
at the crude meal.

"I don't enjoy it, no," she answered quietly.

Something in the quiet sincerity of the voice caused Kut-le to rise
abruptly and order the Indians to break camp.  But on the trail that
night he rode close beside her whenever the way permitted and talked to
her of the beauty of the desert.  At last, lashed to desperation by her
indifference, he cried:

"Can't you see that your silence leads to nothing--that it maddens me!"

"That is what I want it to do," returned Rhoda calmly.  "I shall be so
glad if I can make you suffer a touch of what I am enduring!"

Kut-le did not reply for a moment, then he began slowly:

"You imagine that I am not suffering?  Try to put yourself in my place
for a moment!  Can't you see how I love you?  Can't you see that my
stealing was the only thing that I could do, loving you so?  Wouldn't
you have done the same in my place?  If I had been a white man I
wouldn't have been driven to this.  I would have had an equal chance
with DeWitt and could have won easily.  But I had all the prejudice
against my alien race to fight.  There was but one thing to do: to take
you to the naked desert where you would be forced to see life as I see
it, where you would be forced to see me, the man, far from any false
standards of civilization."

Rhoda would have replied but Kut-le gave her no chance.

"I know what white conventions demand of me.  But, I tell you, my love
is above them.  I, not suffer!  Rhoda!  To see you in pain!  To see
your loathing of me!  To have you helpless in my arms and yet to keep
you safe!  Rhoda!  Rhoda!  Do you believe I do not suffer?"

Anger died out of Rhoda.  She saw tragedy in the situation, tragedy
that was not hers.  She saw herself and Kut-le racially, not
individually.  She saw Kut-le suffering all the helpless grief of race
alienation, saw him the victim of passions as great as the desires of
the alien races for the white always must be.  Rhoda forgot herself.
She laid a slender hand on Kut-le's.

"I am sorry," she said softly.  "I think I begin to understand.  But,
Kut-le, it can never, never be!  You are fighting a battle that was
lost when the white and Indian races were created.  It can never, never
be, Kut-le."

The strong brown hand had closed over the small white one instantly.

"It must be!" he said hoarsely.  "I put my whole life on it!  It must
be!"

Rhoda pulled her hand away gently.

"It never, never can be!"

"It shall be!  Love like this comes but seldom to a human.  It is the
most potent thing in the world.  It shall--"

"Kut-le!"  Alchise rode forward, pointing to the right.

Rhoda followed his look.  It was nearly dawn.  At the right was the
sheer wall of a mesa as smooth and impregnable to her eyes as a wall of
glass.  Moving toward them, silent as ghosts in the veil-like dawn, and
cutting them from the mesa, was a group of horsemen.




CHAPTER IX

TOUCH AND GO

The John DeWitt who helped break camp after finding Rhoda's scarf was a
different man from the half-crazed person of the three days previous.
He had begun to hope.  Somehow that white scarf with Rhoda's perfume
clinging to it was a living thing to him, a living, pulsing promise
that Rhoda was helping him to find her.  Now, while Jack and Billy were
feverishly eager, he was cool and clear-headed, leaving the leadership
to Billy still, yet doing more than his share of the work in preparing
for the hard night ahead of them.  The horses were well watered, their
own canteens were filled and saturated and food so prepared that it
could be eaten from the saddle.

"For," said Porter, "when we do hit the little girl's trail, starvation
or thirst or high hell ain't goin' to stop us!"

It was mid-afternoon when they started down the mountainside.  There
was no trail and going was painful but the men moved with the care of
desperation.  Once in the canon they moved slowly along the wall and
some two miles from where the scarf had been found, they discovered a
fault where climbing was possible.  It was nearing sundown when they
reached a wide ledge where the way was easy.  Porter led the way back
over this to the spot below which fluttered a white paper to mark the
place where the scarf had been found.  The ledge deepened here to make
room for a tiny, bubbling spring.  Giant boulders were scattered across
the rocky floor.

The three men dismounted.  The ledge gave no trace of human occupancy
and yet Porter and Jack nodded at each other.

"Here was his camp, all right.  Water, and no one could come within a
mile of him without his being seen."

"He's still covering his traces carefully," said Jack.

"Not so very," answered Porter.  "He's banking a whole lot on our
stupidity, but Miss Tuttle beat him to it with her scarf."

The three men treated the ledge to a microscopic examination but they
found no trace of previous occupation until Billy knelt and put his
nose against a black outcropping of stone in the wall.  Then he gave a
satisfied grunt.

"Come here, Jack, and take a sniff."

Jack knelt obediently and cried excitedly:

"It smells of smoke, by Jove!  Don't it, John, old scout!"

"They knew smoke wouldn't show against a black outcrop, but they didn't
bank on my nose!" said Billy complacently.  "Come ahead, boys."

A short distance from the spring they found a trail which led back up
the mountain, and as dusk came on they followed its dizzy turns until
darkness forced them to halt and wait until the moon rose.  By its
light they moved up into a pinon forest.

"Let's wait here until daylight," suggested Jack.  "It's a good place
for a camp."

"No, it's too near the ledge," objected Billy.  "Of course we are
working on faith mostly.  I'm no Sherlock Holmes.  We'll keep to the
backbone of this range for a while.  It's the wildest spot in New
Mexico.  Kut-le will avoid the railroad over by the next range."

So Billy led his little band steadfastly southward.  At dawn they met a
Mexican shepherd herding his sheep in a grassy canon.  Jack Newman
called to him eagerly and the Mexican as eagerly answered.  A visitor
was worth a month's pay to the lonely fellow.  The red of dawn was
painting the fleecy backs of his charges as the tired Americans rode
into his little camp.

"Seen anything of an Injun running away with a white girl?" asked Billy
without preliminaries.

The Mexican's jaw dropped.

"_Sacra Maria_!" he gasped.  "Not I!  Who is she?"

"Listen!" broke in Jack.  "You be on the watch.  An educated Indian has
stolen a young lady who was visiting my wife.  I own the Newman ranch.
That Indian Cartwell it was, three days ago."

John DeWitt interrupted.

"If you can catch that Indian, if you can give us a clue to him, you
needn't herd sheep any more.  Lord, man, speak up!  Don't stand there
like a chump!"

"But, senors!" stammered the poor fellow to whom this sudden torrent of
conversation was as overwhelming as a cloudburst.  "But I have not
seen--"

Billy Porter spoke again.

"Hold up, boys!  We are scaring the poor devil to death.  Friend
pastor," he said, "we'll have breakfast here with you, if you don't
object, and tell you our troubles."

The shepherd glowed with hospitality.

"Yonder is good water and I have tortillas and frijoles."

Unshaven and dirty, gaunt from lack of sleep, the three men dismounted
wearily and gladly turned their coffee and bacon over to the herder to
whom the mere odor of either was worth any amount of service.  As they
ate, Jack and Billy quizzed the Mexican as to the topography of the
surrounding country.  The little herder was a canny chap.

"He will not try to cover his trail carefully now," he said, swallowing
huge slabs of bacon.  "He has a good start.  You will have to fool him.
He sleeps by day and travels by night, you will see.  You are working
too hard and your horses will be dead.  You should have slept last
night.  Now you will lose today because you must rest your horses."

Porter looked at his two companions.  Jack was doing fairly well, but
the calm that DeWitt had found with Rhoda's scarf had deserted him.  He
was eating scarcely anything and stared impatiently at the fire,
waiting for the start.

"I'm a blamed double-action jackass, with a peanut for a mind!"
exclaimed Porter.  "Taking on myself to lead this hunt when I don't
_sabe_ frijoles!  We take a sleep now."

DeWitt jumped to his feet, expostulating, but Jack and Billy laid a
hand on either of his shoulders and forced him to lie down on his
blanket.  There nature claimed her own and in a short time the poor
fellow was in the slumber of exhaustion.

"Poor old chap!" said Jack as he spread his own blanket.  "I can't help
thinking all the time 'What if it were Katherine!'  Dear old Rhoda!
Why, Billy, we used to play together as kids!  She's slapped my face,
many a time!"

"Probably you deserved it!" answered Billy in an uncertain voice.  "By
the limping piper!  I'm glad I ain't her financier.  I'm most crazy, as
it is!"

The sheep herder woke the sleepers at noon.  After a bath at the
spring, and dinner, the trio felt as if reborn.  They left the herder
with minute directions as to what he was to do in case he heard of
Rhoda.  Then they rode out of the canon into the burning desert.

And now for several days they lost all clues.  They beat up and down
the ranges like tired hunting-dogs, all their efforts fruitless.
Little by little, panic and excitement left them.  Even DeWitt realized
that the hunt was to be a long and serious one as Porter told of the
fearful chases the Apaches had led the whites, time and again.  He
began to realize that to keep alive in the terrible region through
which the hunt was set he must help the others to conserve their own
and his energies.  To this end they ate and slept as regularly as they
could.

Occasionally they met other parties of searchers, but this was only
when they beat to the eastward toward the ranch, for most of the
searchers were now convinced that Kut-le had made toward Mexico and
they were patrolling the border.  But Billy insisted that Kut-le was
making for some eerie that he knew and would ensconce himself there for
months, if need be, till the search was given up.  Then and then only
would he make for Mexico.  And John DeWitt and Jack had come to agree
with Billy.

"He'll keep her up in some haunt of his," said Jack, again and again,
"until he's worn her into consenting to marry him.  And before that
happens, if I know old Rhoda, we'll find them."

"He's mine when we do find him, remember that," John DeWitt always said
through his teeth at this point in the discussion.

It was on the twelfth day of the hunt that the sheep-herder found them.
They were cinching up the packs after the noon rest when he rode up on
a burro.  He was dust-coated and both he and the burro were panting.

"I've seen her!  I've seen the senorita!" he shouted as he clambered
stiffly from the burro.

The three Americans stood rigid.

"Where?  How?  When?" came from three heat-cracked mouths.

The Mexican started to answer, but his throat was raw with alkali dust
and his voice was scarcely audible.  DeWitt impatiently thrust a
canteen into the little fellow's hands.

"Hurry, for heaven's sake!" he urged.

The Mexican took a deep draught.

"The night after you left I moved up into the peaks, intending to cross
the range to lower pastures next day.  A big storm came up and I made
camp.  Then an Indian in a blanket rode up to me and asked me if I was
alone.  I _sabed_ him at once.  'But yes, senor,'" I answered, "'except
for the sheep!'"

"But Miss Tuttle!  The senorita!" shouted DeWitt.

The Mexican glanced at the tired blue eyes, the strained face,
pityingly.

"She was well," he answered.  "Be patient, senor.  Then there rode up
another Indian, two squaws and what looked to be a young boy.  The
Indian lifted the boy from the saddle so tenderly, senors.  And it was
your senorita!  She did not look strong, yet I think the Indian is
taking good care of her.  They sat by the fire till the storm was over.
The senorita ignored Kut-le as if he had been a dog."

Porter clinched his teeth at this, while Jack murmured with a gleam of
savage satisfaction in his eyes, "Old Rhoda!"  But DeWitt only gnawed
his lip, with his blue eyes on the Mexican.

"The Indian said I was to say nothing, but the senorita made him let me
tell about you after I said I had seen you.  She--she cried with
happiness.  They rode away in a little while but I followed as long as
I dared to leave my sheep.  They were going north.  I think they were
in the railroad range the night you were with me, then doubled back.  I
left my sheep the next day with the salt-boy who came up.  I tramped
twenty miles to the rancho and got a burro and left word about the
senorita.  Then I started on your trail.  Everyone I met I told.  I
thought that my news was not worth much except that the senor there
would be glad to know that the Indian is tender to his senorita."

DeWitt turned to Porter and Newman.

"Friends, perhaps she is being taken care of!" he said.  "Perhaps that
devil is trying to keep her health, at least.  God!  If nothing worse
has befallen her!"

He stopped and drew his wrist across his forehead.  Something like
tears shone in Jack's eyes, and Porter coughed.  John turned to the
Mexican and grasped the little fellow's hand.

"My boy," he said, "you'll never regret this day's work.  If you have a
senorita you know what you have done for me!"

The Mexican looked up into DeWitt's face seriously.

"I have one.  She has a dimple in her chin."

John turned abruptly and stood staring into the desert while tears
seared his eyes.  Billy hastily unpacked and gave Carlos and his burro
the best that the outfit afforded.

"Can the salt-boy stay on with the sheep while you come with us?" asked
John DeWitt.  "I'll pay your boss for the whole flock if anything goes
wrong."  He wanted the keen wit of the herder on the hunt.

The Mexican nodded eagerly.

"I'll stay!"

Shortly the four were riding northward across the desert.  They were in
fairly good shape for a hard tide.  Two days before, they had stopped
at Squaw Spring ranch and re-outfitted.  With proper care of the horses
they were good for three weeks away from supplies.  And for two weeks
now they scoured the desert, meeting scarcely a human, finding none of
the traces that Rhoda was so painfully dropping along her course.  The
hugeness, the cruelty of the region drove the hopelessness of their
mission more and more deeply into DeWitt's brain.  It seemed impossible
except by the merest chance to find trace of another human in a waste
so vast.  It seemed to him that it was not skill but the gambler's
instinct for luck that guided Carlos and Billy.

They rode through open desert country one afternoon, the only mountains
discernible being a far purple haze along the horizon.  For hours the
little cavalcade had moved without speech.  Then to the north, Porter
discerned a dot moving toward them.  Gradually under their eager eyes
the dot grew into a man who staggered as he walked.  When he observed
the horsemen coming toward him he sat down and waited.

"Jim Provenso!  By the limping Piper!" cried Billy.  "Thought you was
in Silver City."

Jim was beyond useless speech.  He caught the canteen which Jack swung
to him and drank deeply.  Then he said hoarsely:

"I almost got away with the Tuttle girl last week!"

Every man left his saddle as if at a word of command.  Jim took another
drink.

"If I catch that Injun alone I'll cut his throat!"

"Was Miss Tuttle bad off?" gasped Porter.

"She?  Naw; she looked fine.  He sassed me, though, as I won't take it
from any man!"

"Tell us what happened, for heaven's sake," cried DeWitt, eying
Provenso disgustedly.

Jim told his story in detail.

"That Injun Alkus," he ended, "he tied a rag over my eyes, tied my
hands up and, say, he lost me for fair!  He took all day to it.  At
night he tied me up to a tree and I stood there all night before I got
my hands loose.  I was sure lost, now, I can tell you!  I struck a
cowman up on the range the next night.  He give me some grub and a
canteen and I made out pretty good till yesterday, working south all
the time.  Then I got crazy with thirst and threw my canteen away.
Found a spring last night again, but I'm about all in."

"How did Miss Tuttle seem?" asked John with curious quietness.  It
seemed to him the strangest thing of all that first the Mexican, then
this coarse, tramp-like fellow, should have talked to Rhoda while he
could only wander wildly through the Hades of the desert without a
trace of her camp to solace him.

"Say, she was looking good!  She thanked me and told me to tell you all
to hurry."

They gave to Provenso a burro whose pack was nearly empty, what food
and water they could spare, and he left them.  They started on
dejectedly.  Provenso had told them where Kut-le had camped ten days
before.

They could only find that spot and attempt to pick up the trail from
there.

"Just the same," said Billy, "it's just as well he didn't get away with
Miss Rhoda.  He's a tough pill, that Provenso.  She'd better be with
the Injun than him!"

"Provenso must be a bad lot," said Jack.

"He is!" replied Billy grimly.

The camp was made that night near a smooth-faced mesa.  Before dawn
they had eaten breakfast and were mounting, when Carlos gave a low
whistle.  Every ear was strained.  On the exquisite stillness of the
dawn sounded a woman's voice which a man's voice answered.




CHAPTER X

A LONG TRAIL

Rhoda gave a cry of joy.  From the horsemen rose a sudden shout.

"Spread!  Spread!  There they are!"

"Don't shoot!"  It was Porter's voice, shrill and high with excitement.
"That's her, the boy there!  Rhoda!  Rhoda!  We're coming!"

With a quick responsive cry, Rhoda struck her horse.  With the blow,
Kut-le leaned from his own horse and seized her bridle, turning her
horse with his own away from the mesa and to the left.  The other
Indians followed and with hoarse cries of exultation the rescuers took
up the pursuit.

Rhoda looked back.

"Shoot!" she screamed.  "Shoot!"

Before the second scream had left her lips she was lifted bodily from
the saddle to Kut-le's arms where, understanding his device, she
struggled like a mad woman.  But she only wasted her strength.  Without
a glance at her, Kut-le turned his pony almost in its tracks and made
for the mesa.

"Cut him off!  He'll get away from us!"  It was DeWitt's voice, and
"John!  John DeWitt!"  Rhoda cried.

But the young Indian had gaged his distance well.  He brought his horse
to its haunches and with Rhoda in his arms was running into a fissure
seemingly too narrow for human to enter, while the pursuers were still
a hundred yards away.

"Hold 'em, Alchise!" he said briefly as he ran.

Alchise, with rifle cocked, stopped by the opening.  The fissure
widened immediately into a narrow passageway.  High, high above them
rolled a strip of pink and blue morning sky.  Before them was a
seemingly interminable crevice along which the squaws scuttled.  As
Rhoda watched them they disappeared around a sudden curve.  When Kut-le
reached this point with his burden, the squaws were climbing like
monkeys up the wall which here gave back, roughly, ending the fissure
in a rude chimney which it seemed to Rhoda only a bear or an Apache
could have climbed.  Kut-le set Rhoda on her feet.  She looked up into
his face mockingly.  To her mind she was as good as rescued.  But the
young Apache seemed in no wise hurried or excited.

"Our old friends seem to want something!" he commented with his boyish
grin.

"What are you going to do now?" asked Rhoda, with calm equal to the
Apache's.

"I can't carry you up this wall," suggested Kut-le.

"Very well!" returned Rhoda pleasantly.  "I am quite willing that you
should leave me here."

Kut-le's eyes glittered.

"Rhoda, you must climb this wall with me!"

"I won't!" replied Rhoda laconically.

"Then I shall force you to," said the Indian, shifting his rifle and
prodding Rhoda ever so gently with the barrel.

Rhoda gave Kut-le a look of scorn that he was not soon to forget and
slowly mounted the first broken ledge.  The wall was composed of a
series of jutting rocks and of ledges that barely offered hand or foot
hold.  Up and up and up!  Kut-le was now beside her, now above her, now
lifting, now pulling.  Half-way to the top, Rhoda stopped, dizzy and
afraid.  Kneeling on the ledge above, with one hand thrust down to lift
her, Kut-le looked into her eyes almost pleadingly.  That handsome face
so close to hers affected Rhoda strangely.

"Don't be afraid," whispered Kut-le.  "Nothing can happen to you while
I am taking care of you."

Rhoda looked into his eyes proudly.

"I am not afraid," she said, reaching for a fresh handhold with
trembling fingers.

The jutting rocks were sharp.  Kut-le from his ledge saw Rhoda look at
her hold then turn white.  Her nails were torn to the quick and
bleeding.  She swayed with only an atom of gravity lacking to send her
to death below.  Instantly Kut-le was back beside her, his sinewy hand
between her shoulders, supporting and lifting her to the ledge above.
As they neared the top the broken surface became prickly with cactus
and Rhoda winced with misery as the thorns pierced and tore her flesh.
But finally, in what actually had been an incredibly short time, they
emerged on the plateau, where the two squaws huddled high above the
pursuers.

"They think they have you now!" said Kut-le, as Rhoda dropped panting
to the ground.  "We must move out of here before they investigate the
mesa top."

He allowed, however, a few minutes' breathing spell for Rhoda.  She sat
quietly, though her gray eyes were brilliant with excitement.  It
seemed to her but a matter of a few hours now when she would be with
her own.  Yet she could not but notice with that curious observance of
detail which comes at moments of intensest excitement the varied colors
of the distances that opened before her.  The great mesa on which she
sat was a mighty peninsula of chalcedony that stretched into the
desert.  It was patched by rocks of lavender, of yellow, and of green,
and belled over by the intensity of the morning blue above.

"Come!" said Kut-le.  "There will be little rest for us today."

Rhoda rose, took a few staggering steps, then sat down.

"I can't start yet," she said.  "I'm too worn out."

Kut-le's expression was amused while it was impatient.

"I suppose you may be sleepy, but I think you can walk a little way.
Hurry, Rhoda!  Hurry!"

Rhoda sat staring calmly into the palpitating blue above.

"I hate to have you carry me," she said after a moment, "but I don't
feel at all like walking!"

Her tired face was irresistibly lovely as she looked up at the Apache,
but by an effort he remained obdurate.

"You must walk as long as you can," he insisted.  "We have got to
hustle today!"

"I really don't feel like hustling!" sighed Rhoda.

"Rhoda!" cried Kut-le impatiently, "get up and walk after me!  Cesca,
see that the white squaw keeps moving!" and he handed his rifle to the
brown hag who took it with evident pleasure.  Molly ran forward as if
to protest but at a look from Kut-le she dropped back.

Rhoda rose slowly, with her lower lip caught between her teeth.  She
followed silently after Kut-le, Cesca and the rifle at her shoulder and
Molly in the rear.  It seemed to the girl that of all the strange
scenes through which the past weeks had carried her this was of all the
most unreal.  All about her was a world of vivid rock heaps so
intensely colored that she doubted her vision.  Away to the south lay
the boundless floor of the desert, a purple and gold infinity that
rolled into the horizon.  Far to the north mountains were faintly blue
in the yellow sunlight.

Kut-le headed straight for the mountains.  His pace was swift and
unrelenting.  Almost immediately Rhoda felt the debilitating effects of
overheat.  The sun, now sailing high, burned through her flannel shirt
until her flesh was blistered beneath it.  The light on the brilliantly
colored rocks made her eyes blink with pain.  Before long she was
parched with thirst and faint with hunger.  This was her first
experience in tramping for any distance under the desert sun.  But
Kut-le kept the pace long after the two squaws were half leading, half
carrying the girl.

Rhoda had long since learned the uselessness of protesting.  She kept
on until the way danced in reeling colors before her eyes.  Then
without a sound she dropped in the scant shadow of a rock.  At the cry
from Molly, Kut-le turned, and after one glance at Rhoda's white face
and limp figure he knelt in the sand and lifted the drooping, yellow
head.  Molly unslung her canteen and forced a few drops of water
between Rhoda's lips.  Then she tenderly chafed the small hands and the
delicate throat and Rhoda opened her eyes.  Immediately Kut-le lifted
her in his arms and the flight was resumed.

At short intervals during the morning, Rhoda walked, but for the most
part Kut-le packed her as dispassionately as if she had been a lame
puppy.  He held her across his broad chest as if her fragile weight
were nothing.  Lying so, Rhoda watched the merciless landscape or the
brown squaws jogging at Kut-le's heels.  Surely, she thought, the
ancient mesa never had seen a stranger procession or known of a wilder
mission.  She looked up into Kut-le's face and wondered as she stared
at his bare head how his eyes could look so steadily into the
sun-drenched landscape.

As she lay, the elation of the early morning left her.  More and more
surely the conviction came to her that the Apache's boast was true;
that no white could catch him on his own ground.  Dizzy and ill from
the heat, she closed her eyes and lay without hope or coherent thought.

At noon they stopped for a short time that Rhoda might eat.  Their
resting-place was in the shadow of a beetling, weather-beaten rock that
still bore traces of hieroglyphic carvings.  There were broken bits of
clay pots among the tufts of cactus.  Rhoda stared at them languidly
and wondered what the forgotten vessels could have contained in a
region so barren of life or hope.

Kut-le strolled over to a cat's-claw bush at whose base lay a tangle of
dead leaves.  With a bit of stick, he scattered this litter, struck the
ground several good blows and returned with a string of fat desert
mice.  With infinite care Cesca kindled a fire so tiny, so clear, that
scarcely a wisp of smoke escaped into the quivering air.  Into this she
flung the eviscerated mice and in an instant the tiny things were a
delicate brown.  The aroma was pleasant but Rhoda turned whiter still
when Molly brought her the fattest of the mice.

"Take it away!" she whispered.  "Take it away!"

Molly looked at the girl in stupid surprise.

"You must eat, Rhoda girl!" said Kut-le.

Rhoda made no reply but leaned limply against the ancient rock, her
golden hair touching the crude drawings of long ago.  She was a very
different Rhoda from the eager girl of the early morning.  She ignored
every effort Kut-le made to tempt her to eat.  Her tired gaze wandered
to her hands, still blood-grimed, and her cleft chin quivered.  Kut-le
saw the expressive little look.

"I'm sorry," he said simply.

Rhoda looked up at him.

"I don't believe you," she returned calmly.

The Indian's jaw stiffened.

"Come, we'll start now."

The afternoon was like the morning, except that the sun was more
burning overhead, the way more scorching underfoot; except that the
course became more broken, the clambering heavier, the drops more
wracking.  All the afternoon, Kut-le carried Rhoda.  At last the sun
sank below the mesa and the day was ended.

The place of their camping seemed to Rhoda damp and cold.  It was close
beside a spring that gave out a faint, miasmic odor.  The bitter water
was grateful, however.  Again more mice were seered over before the
fire was stamped out hastily.  This time Rhoda forced herself to eat.
Then she drank deeply of the bitter water and lay down on the cold
ground.  Despite the fact that she was shivering with the cold, she
fell asleep at once.  Toward midnight she awoke and moving close to
Molly's broad back for warmth, she looked up into the sky.  For the
first time the great southern stars seemed near and kindly to her and
before she fell asleep again she wondered why.

At earliest peep of dawn the squaws were astir waiting for Kut-le, who
shortly staggered into camp with a load of meat on his shoulder.
Alchise was with him.

"Mule meat!" said Kut-le to Rhoda.  "I went to find horses but there
was nothing but an old lame mule, I brought him back this way!"

"Heavens!" ejaculated Rhoda.

The squaws worked busily, cutting the meat into strips which they hung
over their shoulders to sun dry during the day.  Alchise cleansed a
length of mule's intestine in the spring, to serve as a canteen.  Rhoda
gave small heed to these preparations.  She was too ill and feverish
even to be disgusted by them.  She refused to eat but drank constantly
from the spring.  When at Kut-le's command she took up the march with
the others the young man eyed her anxiously.  He slung Molly's canteen
from his own to Alchise's shoulder and felt Rhoda's pulse.

"This water was bad for you," he said.  "But it was the only spring
within miles.  Perhaps you will throw off the effects of it when we get
into the heat of the sun."

Rhoda made no reply but staggered miserably after Molly.  The spring
lay in a pocket between mountains and mesa.  The mountains seemed
cruelly high to Rhoda as she looked at them and thought of toiling
across them.  With head sunk on her breast and feverishly twitching
hands she followed for half an hour.  Then Kut-le turned.

"I'm going to carry you, Rhoda," he said.

The girl shrank away from him.

"You and Molly and all of them think I'm just a parasite," she
muttered.  "You don't have to do anything for me!  Just let me drop
anywhere and die!"

Kut-le looked at her strangely.  Without comment, he picked her up.
There was a sternly tender look on his face that never had been there
before.  He did not carry her dispassionately today, but very gently.
Something in his manner pierced through Rhoda's half delirium and she
looked up at him with a faint replica of her old lovely smile that
Kut-le had not seen since he had stolen her.  He trembled at its beauty
and started forward at a tremendous pace.

"I'll get you to good water by noon," he said.

At noon they were well up in the mountains by a clear spring fringed
with aspens.  Watercress grew below it, and high above it were pines
and junipers.  It was a spot of surpassing loveliness, but Rhoda,
tossing and panting, could not know it, Kut-le laid his burden on the
ground and Molly drew off her tattered petticoat to lay beneath the
feverish head.  The young Apache stood looking down at the little
figure, so graceful in its boyish abandonment of gesture, so pitiful in
its broken unconsciousness.  Molly bathed the burning face and hands in
the pure cold water, muttering tender Apache phrases.  Kut-le
constantly interrupted her to change the girl's position.  For an hour
or so he waited for the fever to turn.  By three o'clock there was no
change for the better and he left Rhoda's side to pace back and forth
by the spring in anxious thought.

At last he came to a conclusion and with stern set face he issued a few
short orders to his companions.  The canteens were refilled.  Kut-le
lifted Rhoda and the trail was taken to the west.  Alchise would have
relieved him of his burden, willingly, but Kut-le would not listen to
it.  Molly trotted anxiously by the young Apache's side, constantly
moistening the girl's lips with water.

Rhoda was quite delirious now.  She murmured and sometimes sobbed,
trying to free herself from Kut-le's arms.

"I'm not sick!" she said, looking up into the Indian's face with
unseeing eyes.  "Don't let him see that I am sick!"

"No!  No!  Dear one!" answered Kut-le.

"Don't let him see I'm sick!" she sobbed.  "He hurts me so!"

"No!  No!" exclaimed Kut-le huskily.  "Molly, give her a little more
water!"

"Molly!" panted Rhoda, "you tell him how hard I worked--how I earned my
way a little!  And don't let him do anything for me!"




CHAPTER XI

THE TURN IN THE TRAIL

The little group, trudging the long difficult trail along the mountain
was a rich study in degrees: Rhoda, the fragile Caucasian, a product of
centuries of civilization; and Kut-le, the Indian, with the keenness,
the ferocious courage, the cunning of the Indian leavened inextricably
with the thousand softening influences of a score of years' contact
with civilization; then Cesca, the lean and stoical product of an
ancient and terrible savagery; and Alchise, her mate.  Finally
Molly--squat, dirty Molly--the stupid, squalid aborigine, as distinct
from Cesca's type as is the brown snail from the stinging wasp.

Alchise, striding after his chief, was smitten with a sudden idea.
After ruminating on it for some time, he communicated it to his squaw.
Cesca shook her head with a grunt of disapproval.  Alchise insisted and
the squaw looked at Kut-le cunningly.

"_Quien sabe_?" she said at last.

At this Alchise hurried forward and touched Kut-le on the shoulder.

"Take 'em squaw to Reservation.  Medicine dance.  Squaw heap sick.
_Sabe_?"

"Reservation's too far away," replied Kut-le, shifting Rhoda's head to
lie more easily on his arm.  "I'm making for Chira."

Alchise shook his head vigorously.

"Too many mens!  We go Reservation.  Alchise help carry sick squaw."

"Nope!  You're way off, Alchise.  I'm going where I can get some white
man's medicine the quickest.  I'm not so afraid of getting caught as I
am of her getting a bad run of fever.  I have friends at Chira."

Alchise fell back, muttering disappointment.  White man's medicine was
no good.  He cared little about Rhoda but he adored Kut-le.  It was
necessary therefore that the white squaw be saved, since his chief
evidently was quite mad about her.  All the rest of the day Alchise was
very thoughtful.  Late at night the next halt was made.  High up in the
mountain on a sheltered ledge Kut-le laid down his burden.

"Keep her quiet till I get back," he said, and disappeared.

Rhoda was in a stupor and lay quietly unconscious with the stars
blinking down on her, a limp dark heap against the mountain wall.  The
three Indians munched mule meat, then Molly curled herself on the
ground and in three minutes was snoring.  Alchise stood erect and still
on the ledge for perhaps ten minutes after Kut-le's departure.  Then he
touched Cesca on the shoulder, lifted Rhoda in his arms and, followed
by Cesca, left the sleeping Molly alone on the ledge.

Swiftly, silently, Alchise strode up the mountainside, Rhoda making
neither sound nor motion.  For hours, with wonderful endurance the two
Indians held the pace.  They moved up the mountain to the summit, which
they crossed, then dropped rapidly downward.  Just at dawn Alchise
stopped at a gray _campos_ under some pines and called.  A voice from
the hut answered him.  The canvas flap was put back and an old Indian
buck appeared, followed by several squaws and young bucks, yawning and
staring.

Alchise laid Rhoda on the ground while he spoke rapidly to the Indian.
The old man protested at first but on the repeated use of Kut-le's name
he finally nodded and Alchise carried Rhoda into the _campos_.  A squaw
kindled a fire which, blazing up brightly, showed a huge, dark room,
canvas-roofed and dirt-floored, quite bare except for the soiled
blankets on the floor.

Rhoda was laid in the center of the hut.  The old buck knelt beside
her.  He was very old indeed.  His time-ravaged features were lean and
ascetic.  His clay-matted hair was streaked with white; his black eyes
were deep-sunk and his temples were hollow.  But there was a fine sort
of dignity about the old medicine-man, despite his squalor.  He gazed
on Rhoda in silence for some time.  Alchise and Cesca sat on the floor,
and little by little they were joined by a dozen other Indians who
formed a circle about the girl.  The firelight flickered on the dark,
intent faces and on Rhoda's delicate beauty as she lay passing rapidly
from stupor to delirium.

Suddenly the old man raised his lean hand, shaking a gourd filled with
pebbles, and began softly to chant.  Instantly the other Indians joined
him and the _campos_ was filled with the rhythm of a weird song.  Rhoda
tossed her arms and began to cough a little from the smoke.  The chant
quickened.  It was but the mechanical repetition of two notes falling
always from high to low.  Yet it had an indescribable effect of
melancholy, this aboriginal song.  It was as hopeless and melancholy as
all of nature's chants: the wail of the wind, the sob of the rain, the
beat of the waves.

Rhoda sat erect, her eyes wild and wide.  The old buck, without ceasing
his song, attempted to thrust her back with one lean brown claw, but
Rhoda struck him feebly.

"Go away!" she cried.  "Be quiet!  You hurt my head!  Don't make that
dreadful noise!"

The chant quickened.  The medicine-man now rocked back and forth on his
knees, accenting the throb of the song by beating his bare feet on the
earth.  He seemed by some strange suppleness to flatten his instep
paddle-wise and to bring the entire leg from toe to knee at one blow
against the ground.  Never did his glowing old eyes leave Rhoda's face.

The girl, thrown into misery and excitement by the insistence of the
chant, began to wring her hands.  The words said nothing to her but the
rhythmic repetition of the notes told her a story as old as life
itself: that life passes swifter than a weaver's shuttle, and without
hope; that our days are as grass and as the clouds that are consumed
and are no more; that the soul sinks to the land of darkness and of the
shadow of death.  Rhoda struggled, with horror in her eyes, to rise;
but the old man with a hand on her shoulder forced her back on the
blanket.

"Oh, what is it!" wailed Rhoda, clutching at the mass of yellow-brown
hair about her face.  "Where am I?  What are you doing?  Have I died?
Where is Kut-le?  Kut-le!" she screamed.  "Kut-le!"

The medicine-man held her to the blanket and for a time she sat
quiescent.  Then as the Indian lifted his hand from her shoulder the
bewilderment of her gray eyes changed to the wildness of delirium.  She
looked toward the doorway where the dawn light made but little headway
against the dark interior.  With one blue-veined hand on her panting
breast she slowly, stealthily gathered herself together, and with
unbelievable swiftness she sprang for the square of dawn light.  She
leaped almost into the arms of a young buck who sat near the door.  He
bore her back to her place while the chant continued without
interruption.

Exhausted, Rhoda lay listening to the song.  Gradually it began to
exert its hypnotic influence over her.  Its sense of melancholy
enveloped her drug-like.  She lay prone, the tears coursing down her
cheeks, her twitching hands turned upward beside her.  Slowly she
floated outward upon a dark sea whose waves beat a ceaseless requiem of
anguish on her ears.  It seemed to her that she was enduring all the
sorrows of the ages; that she was brain-tortured by the death agonies
of all humanity; that all the uselessness, all the meaninglessness, all
the utter weariness of the death-ridden world pressed upon her,
suffocating her, forcing her to stillness, slowing the beating of her
heart, the intake of her breath.  Slowly her white lids closed, yet
with one last conscious cry for life:

"Kut-le!" she wailed.  "Kut-le!"

A quick shadow filled the doorway.

"Here, Rhoda!  Here!"

Kut-le bounded into the room, upsetting the medicine-man, and lifted
Rhoda in his arms.  She clung to him wildly.

"Take me away, Kut-le!  Take me away!"

He soothed her with great tenderness.

"Dear one!" he murmured.  "Dear one!" and she closed her eyes quietly.

During this time the Indians sat silent and watchful.  Kut-le turned to
Alchise.

"You cursed fool!" he said.

"She get well now," replied Alchise anxiously.   "Alchise save her for
you.  Molly tell you where come."

For a moment Kut-le stared at Alchise; then, as if realizing the
futility of speech, "Come!" he said, and ignoring the other Indians, he
strode from the _campos_.  Alchise and Cesca followed him, and outside
the anxious Molly seized Rhoda's limp hand with a little cry of joy.
Kut-le led the way to a quiet spot among the pines.  Here he laid Rhoda
on a sheepskin and covered her with a tattered blanket, the spoils of
his previous night's trip.

About the middle of the morning Rhoda opened her eyes.  As she stirred,
Kut-le came to her.

"I've had such horrible dreams, Kut-le.  You won't go and leave me to
the Indians again?"

This appeal from Rhoda in her weakness almost overcame Kut-le but he
only smoothed her tangled hair and answered:

"No, dear one!"

"Where are we now?" she asked feebly.

Kut-le smiled.

"In the Rockies."

"I think I am very sick," continued Rhoda.  "Do you think we can stay
quiet in one place today?"

Kut-le shook his head.

"I am going to get you to some quinine as quick as I can.  There is
some about twenty-four hours from here."

Rhoda's eyes widened.

"Shall I be with white people?"

"Don't bother.  You'll have good care."

The light faded from Rhoda's eyes.

"It's hard for me, isn't it?" she said, as if appealing to the college
man of the ranch.

"Rhoda!  Rhoda!" whispered Kut-le, "your suffering kills me!  But I
must have you, I must!"

Rhoda moved her head impatiently, as if the Indian's tense, handsome
face annoyed her.  She refused food but drank deeply of the tepid water
and shortly they were again on the trail.

For several hours Rhoda lay in Kut-le's arms, weak and ill but with
lucid mind.  They were making their way up a long canon.  It was very
narrow.  Rhoda could see the individual leaves of the aspens on the
opposite wall as they moved close in the shadow of the other.  The
floor, watered by a clear brook, was level and green.  On either side
the walls were murmurous with delicately quivering aspens and sighing
pines.

Suddenly Cesca gave a grunt of warning.  Far down the valley a
sheep-herder was approaching with his flocks.  Kut-le turned to the
right and Alchise sprang to his aid.  In the shelter of the trees,
Kut-le twisted a handkerchief across Rhoda's mouth; and in reply to her
outraged eyes, he said:

"I don't mind single visitors as a rule but I haven't time to fuss with
one now."

Together the two men carried Rhoda up the canon-side.  They lifted her
from trunk to trunk, now a root-hold, now a jutting bit of rock, till
far up the sheer wall.  Rhoda lay at last on a little ledge heaped with
pine-needles.  By the time the Indians were settled on the rock Rhoda
was delirious again.  The fever had returned twofold and Molly's entire
efforts were toward keeping the tossing form on the ledge.

Slowly, very slowly, the herder, a sturdy ragged Mexican, moved up the
canon, pausing now and again to scratch his head.  He was whistling _La
Paloma_.  The Indians' black eyes did not leave him and after his
flute-like notes had melted into the distance they still crouched in
cramped stillness on the ledge.

But shortly Kut-le freed Rhoda's mouth, gave Alchise a swift look, and
with infinite care the descent was begun.  Kut-le did not like
traveling in the daylight, for many reasons.  Carefully, swiftly they
moved up the canon, always hugging the wall.  Late in the afternoon
they emerged on an open mesa.  All the wretched day Rhoda had traveled
in a fearsome world of her own, peopled with uncanny figures, alight
with a glare that seared her eyes, held in a vice that gripped her
until she screamed with restless pain.  The song that the shepherd had
whistled tortured her tired brain.

  "The day that I left my home for the rolling sea,
  I said, 'Mother dear, O pray to thy God for me!'
  But e'er we set sail I went a fond leave to take--"

Over and over she sang the three lines, ending each time with a
frightened stare up into Kut-le's face.

"Whom did I say good-by to?  Whom?  But they don't care!"

Then again the tired voice:

  "The day that I left my home for the rolling sea--"

Night came and the weary, weary crossing of a craggy, heavily wooded
mountain.  Kut-le did not relinquish his burden.  He seemed not to tire
of the weight of the slender body that lay now in helpless stupor.  If
the squaws or Alchise felt fatigue or impatience as Kut-le held them to
a pace on the tortuous trail that would nearly have exhausted a
Caucasian athlete, they gave no sign.  All the endless night Kut-le led
the way under the midnight blackness of the pinon or the violet light
of the stars, until the lifting light of the dawn found them across the
ranges and standing at the edge of a little river.

In the dim light there lifted a terraced adobe building with ladders
faintly outlined on the terraces.  There was no sound save the barking
of a dog and the ripple of the river.  With a muttered admonition,
Kut-le left Rhoda to the others and climbed one of the ladders.  He
returned with a blanketed figure that gazed on Rhoda non-committally.
At a sign, Kut-le lifted Rhoda, and the little group moved noiselessly
toward the dwelling, clambered up a ladder, and disappeared.

Rhoda opened her eyes with a sense of physical comfort that confused
her.  She was lying on the floor of a long, gray-walled room.  In one
corner was a tiny adobe fire-place from which a tinier fire threw a jet
of flame color on the Navajo that lay before the hearth.  Along the
walls were benches with splendid Navajos rolled cushion-wise upon them.
Above the benches hung several rifles with cougarskin quivers beneath
them.  A couple of cheap framed mirrors were hung with silver necklaces
of beautiful workmanship.  In a corner a table was set with heavy but
shining china dishes.

Rhoda stared with increasing wonder.  She was very weak and spent but
her head was clear.  She lifted her arms and looked at them.  She was
wearing a loose-fitting gray garment of a strange weave.  She fingered
it, more and more puzzled.

"You wake now?" asked a low voice.

Coming softly down the room was an Indian woman of comely face and
strange garb.  Over a soft shirt of cut and weave such as Rhoda had on,
she wore a dark overdress caught at one shoulder and reaching only to
the knees.  A many-colored girdle confined the dress at the waist.  Her
legs and feet were covered with high, loose moccasins.  Her black hair
hung free on her shoulders.

"You been much sick," the woman went on, "much sick," stooping to
straighten Rhoda's blanket.

"Where am I?" asked Rhoda.

"At Chira.  You eat breakfast?"

Rhoda caught the woman's hand.

"Who are you?" she asked.  "You have been very good to me."

"Me Marie," replied the woman.

"Where are Kut-le and the others?"

"Kut-le here.  Others in mountain.  You much sick, three days."

Rhoda sighed.  Would this kaleidoscope of misery never end!

"I am very tired of it all," she said.  "I think it would have been
kinder if you had let me die.  Will you help me to get back to my white
friends?"

Marie shook her head.

"Kut-le friend.  We take care Kut-le's squaw."

Rhoda turned wearily on her side.

"Go away and let me sleep," she said.




CHAPTER XII

THE CROSSING TRAILS

As Kut-le, with Rhoda in his arms, disappeared into the mesa fissure,
John DeWitt threw himself from his horse and was at the opening before
the others had more than brought their horses to their haunches.

He was met by Alchise's rifle, with Alchise entirely hidden from view.
For a moment the four men stood panting and speechless.  The encounter
had been so sudden, so swift that they could not believe their senses.
Then Billy Porter uttered an oath that reverberated from the rocky wall.

"They will get to the top!" he cried.  "Jack, you and DeWitt get up
there!  Carlos and I will hold this!"

The two men mounted immediately and galloped along the mesa wall,
looking for an ascent.  Neither of them spoke but both were breathing
hard, and through his blistered skin DeWitt's cheeks glowed feverishly.
For a mile up and down from the fissure the wall was a blank, except
for a single wide split which did not come within fifty feet of the
ground.  After over half an hour of frantic search, DeWitt found,
nearly three miles from the fissure, a rough spot where the wall gave
back in a few narrow crumbling ledges.

"We'll have to leave the horses," he said, "and try that."

Jack nodded tensely.  They dismounted, pulled the reins over the
horses' heads and started up the wall, John leading, carefully.  One
bitter lesson the desert was teaching him: haste in the hot country
spells ruin!  So, though Rhoda's voice still rang in his ears, though
the sight of the slender boyish figure struggling in Kut-le's arms
still ravished his eyes, he worked carefully.

The ascent was all but impossible.  The few jutting ledges were so
narrow that foothold was precarious, so far apart that only the slight
backward slant of the wall made it possible for them to flatten their
bodies against the crumbling brown rock and thus keep from falling.
They toiled desperately, silently.  After an hour of utmost effort,
they reached the top, and with an exclamation of exultation started in
the direction of the fissure.  But their exultation was short-lived.
The great split that stopped fifty feet from the desert floor cut them
off from the main mesa.  They ran hastily along its edge but at no
point was it to be crossed.  Shortly DeWitt left Jack to follow it back
and he hastened to the mesa front where he made a perilous descent and
returned with the horses to Porter.

That gentleman forced John to eat some breakfast while Carlos rode
hastily to scour the mesa front to the west.  Porter and the Mexican
had captured two of the horses and the burro that the Indians had left.
The other horses had run out into the desert back to the last spring
they had camped at, Porter said.  To DeWitt's great disappointment, the
horses carried only blankets, and the burro was loaded with bacon and
flour.  There were none of Rhoda's personal belongings.  The animals
were in good condition, however, and the men annexed them to their
outfit gladly.

John was torn betwixt hope and bitter disappointment.

"Do you think they could climb out of the fissure?" he asked half a
dozen times, then without waiting for an answer, "Did you see her face,
Billy?  I had just a glimpse!  Didn't she look well!  Just that one
glance has put new life in me!  I know we will get her!  Even this
cursed desert isn't wide enough to keep me from her!  God help that
Indian when I get him!"

Porter kept his eyes on Alchise's rifle which had never wavered in the
past three hours.

"I've a notion to shoot the barrel off that thing just for luck!" he
growled.  "John, sit down!  You will need all the strength you've got
and then some before you catch that Injun!"

"What are you going to do?" asked John, seating himself in the sand
some few feet from the fissure.

"The big probability is," said Billy, "that they are in the crack.  It
would be just about impossible for a girl to climb out of one of 'em.
If they have got out, though, it's just a matter of finding their trail
again.  We'll have 'em!  It's just this chance crack that saved 'em.
If you're rested, ride along the west wall and try for the top again."

For the next five hours, Porter guarded the mesa front alone.  It was
nearing six o'clock when Jack returned, exhausted and disappointed.  He
had followed the great split back until the mesa top became so cut and
striated with mighty fissures that progress was impossible.

"Isn't it the devil's own luck," he growled to Porter as he ate, "that
we should have let him get into that one crack!  What next!  Unless
they are still in there, we've lost them and are just losing time
squatting here."

As he spoke, there was a sound of voices in the fissure.  The two men
cocked their rifles as John and Carlos emerged from the opening.  John
was scowling and breathless.

"Lost 'em as usual, by our infernal stupidity," he panted, while Carlos
dropped his empty canteen and lifted Porter's to his lips.  "I rode
round to the south of the mesa.  There are a couple of possible ascents
there.  I found Carlos making one.  We followed a dozen fissures before
we located this one.  We got into it about a mile back from here.
Here's a basket we found at the bottom in a burlap bag."

He tossed one of Cesca's pitch baskets at Billy, then threw himself in
the sand.

"They were down off the mesa, I bet," he went on, "before we fools
found the way up, and it was easy for the chap they left guarding the
entrance to avoid us.  The mesa is covered with big rocks."

"He got away within the last half-hour then," said Billy, "for I didn't
stir from this spot until the burro started to eat the grub pack, and I
naturally had to wrestle with him.  And no human being could a got out
the front even then."

"God!  What a country!" groaned DeWitt.  "The Indians outwit us at
every step!"

"Well," Jack answered dejectedly, "tell us what we could have done
differently."

"I'm not blaming any one," replied John.

Billy Porter rose briskly.

"You boys quit your kicking.  The scent is still warm.  You fellows get
a couple of hours' sleep while I take the horses back to Coyote Hole
for water.  By daylight we got to be on the south side of the mesa to
pick up the trail."

Billy's businesslike manner heartened Jack and John DeWitt.  They
turned in beside Carlos, who already was sleeping.

Dawn found them examining the ascents on the south side of the mesa but
they found no traces and as the sun came well up they followed the only
possible way toward the mountains.  At noon they found a low spring in
a pocket between mesa and mountain.  Kut-le was growing either defiant
or careless, for he had left a heap of ashes and a pile of half-eaten
desert mice.  Very much cheered they allowed the horses a fair rest.
They found no further traces of camp or trail that day and made camp
that night in the open desert.

At dawn they were crossing a heavily wooded mountain.  The sun had not
yet risen when they heard a sound of singing.

"What's that?" asked DeWitt sharply, as the four pulled up their horses.

"A medicine cry," answered Jack.  "We must be near some medicine-man's
_campos_."

"Come on," cried DeWitt, "we'll quiz them!"

"Hold up, you chump!" exclaimed Billy.  "If you rush in on a cry that
way you are apt not to come back again.  You've got to go at 'em
careful.  Let me do the talking."

They rode toward the sound of the chant and shortly a dingy _campos_
came into view.  An Indian buck made his way from the doorway toward
them.

"Who is sick, friend?" asked Billy.

"Old buck," said the Indian.

"Apache?" said Billy.

The Indian nodded.

"You _sabe_ Apache named Kut-le?"

The buck shook his head, but Billy went on patiently.

"Yes, you _sabe_ him.  He old Ke-say's son.  Apache chief's son.  He
run off with white squaw.  We want squaw, we no hurt him.  Squaw sick,
no good for Injun.  You tell, have money."  Billy displayed a silver
dollar.

The Indian brightened.

"Long time 'go, some Injun say he _sabe_ Kut-le.  Some Injun say he all
same white man.  Some Injun say he heap smart."  He looked at Billy
inquiringly, and Billy nodded approval.  DeWitt swallowed nervously.
"Come two, three day 'go," the buck went on, his eyes on the silver
dollar, "big Injun, carry white squaw, go by here very fast.  He go
that way all heap fast."  The buck pointed south.

"Did he speak to you?  What did he say?" cried DeWitt.

But the Indian lapsed into silence and refused to speak more.  Porter
felt well rewarded for his efforts and tossed the dollar to the Indian.

"Gee!" said Billy, as they started elated down the mountain.  "I wish
we could overtake him before he outfits again.  That poverty-stricken
lot couldn't have had any horses here for him to use.  I'll bet he
makes for the nearest ranch where he could steal a good bunch.  That
would be at Kelly's, sixty miles south of here.  We'll hike for
Kelly's!"

This idea did not meet with enthusiastic approval from the other three
but as no one had a better suggestion to make, the trail to Kelly's was
taken.  It seemed to John Dewitt that Billy relied little on science
and much on intuition in trailing the Indians.  At first, considering
Porter's early boasts about his skill, DeWitt was much disappointed by
the old-timer's haphazard methods.  But after a few weeks' testing of
the terrible hardships of the desert, after a few demonstrations of the
Apache's cleverness, John had concluded that intuition was the most
reliable weapon that the whites could hope to discover with which to
offset the Indian's appalling skill and knowledge.

It was an exhausted quartet with its string of horses that drew up at
Kelly's dusty corral.  Dick Kelly, a stocky Irishman, greeted the
strangers pleasantly.  When, however, he learned their names he rose to
the occasion as only an Irishman can.

"You gentlemen are at the end of your rope, wid the end frayed at
that!" he said.  "Now come in for a few hours' rest and the Chinaman
will cook you the best meal he knows how."

"Lord, no!" cried Billy.  "We're so close on the track now that we can
hang on to the end.  If you've had no trace here we'll just double back
and start from the mountains again!"

By this time a dozen cowboys and ranch hands were gathered about the
newcomers.  Every one knew about Rhoda's disappearance.  Every one knew
about every man in the little search party.  In the flicker of the
lanterns the men looked pityingly at DeWitt's haggard face.

"Say," said a tall, lank cowman, "if you'll go in and sleep till
daylight, usn'll scour this part of the desert with a fine-tooth comb.
So you all won't lose a minute by taking a little rest.  An' if we find
the Injun we'll string him up and save you the trouble."

DeWitt spoke for the first time.

"If you find the Indian," he said succinctly, "he's mine!"

There was a moment's silence in the crowd.  These men were familiar
with elemental passion.  DeWitt's feeling was perfectly correct in
their eyes.  The pause came as each pictured himself in DeWitt's place
with the image of the delicate Eastern girl suffering who knew what
torments constantly before him.

"If Mr. Kelly can arrange for that," said Jack, "I guess it will about
save our lives.  I'd like a chance to write a letter to my wife."

"You ought to go back to the ditch, Jack," said DeWitt, "Porter and I
will manage somehow."

Jack gave DeWitt a strange look.

"Rhoda's a lifelong friend of mine.  She was stolen from my home by my
friend whom I told her she could trust.  Katherine and the foreman can
run the ranch."

By the time that the four had washed themselves, Kelly had his men
dotted over the surrounding desert.  For the first time in weeks, the
searchers sat down at a table.  DeWitt, Porter and Newman were in
astonishing contrast to the three who had dined at the Newman ranch the
night of Cartwell's introduction to Porter.  Their khaki clothes had
gradually been replaced by nondescript garments picked up at various
ranches.  DeWitt and Porter boasted of corduroy trousers, while Jack
wore overalls.  On the other hand, Jack wore a good blue flannel shirt,
while the other two displayed only faded gingham garments that might
have answered to almost any name.  All of them were a deep mahogany
color, with chapped, split lips and bleached hair, while DeWitt's eyes
were badly inflamed from sun-glare and sand-storm.

They ate silently.  Dick Kelly, sitting at the head of the table, plied
them with food and asked few questions.  DeWitt's shaking hands told
him that questions were torture to the poor fellow.  After the meal
Kelly led them to bed at once, and they slept without stirring until
four o'clock in the morning, when the Chinaman called them.  Breakfast
was steaming on the table.

"Now," said Kelly, as his guests ate, "the boys didn't get a smell for
ye, but we've a suggestion.  Have you been through the Pueblo country
yet?"

"No," said Porter.

"Well," the host went on, "Chira is the only place round here except my
ranch where he could get a new outfit.  He's part Pueblo, you know,
too.  I'd start for there if I was you."

Carlos entered to hear this suggestion.

"I've got a friend at Chira," he said, "who might help us.  He's a
half-breed."

The tired men took eagerly to this forlorn hope.  With all the
population of the ranch, including the cook, gathered to wish them
Godspeed, the four started off before the sun had more than tinted the
east.  Kelly had offered them anything on the ranch, from himself, his
cook and his cowboys, to the choice of his horses.  His guests left as
much heartened by his cheerfulness and good will as they were by the
actual physical comforts he had given them.

The trail to Chira was long and hard.  They reached the little town at
dusk and Carlos set out at once in search of his friend, Philip.  He
found him easily.  He was half Mexican, half Pueblo.  He and Carlos
chatted briskly in hybrid Spanish while the Americans watched the
horses wade in the little river.  Visitors were so common in Chira that
the newcomers attracted little or no attention.

Carlos finally turned from his friend.

"Philip does not know anything about it.  He says for us to come to his
house while he finds out anything.  His wife is a good cook."

The thought of a hot meal was pleasant to the Americans.  They followed
gladly to Philip's adobe rooms.  Here the half-breed left them to his
wife and disappeared.  He was gone perhaps an hour when he returned
with a bit of cloth in his hand, which he handed to Carlos with a few
rapid sentences.  Carlos gave the scrap of cloth to DeWitt, who looked
at it eagerly then gave a cry of joy.  It was Rhoda's handkerchief.

"He found a little girl washing her doll with it at the river," said
Carlos.  "She said she found it blowing along the street this morning."

"Come on!" cried Jack, making for the door.

"Come on where?" said Billy.  "If they are in the village, you don't
want to get away very far.  And if they ain't, which way are you going?"

"Ask Philip where to go, Carlos," said DeWitt.

He held the little moist handkerchief in his hand tightly while his
heart beat heavily.  Once more hope was soaring high.

Philip thought deeply, then he and Carlos talked rapidly together.

"Philip says," reported Carlos, "that you must go out and watch along
the river front so that if they have not gone you can catch them if
they try.  He and I will go visit every family as if I wanted to buy an
outfit."

Darkness had settled on the little town when the three Americans took
up their vigil opposite the open face of the Pueblo along the river.
All that night they stood on guard but not a human being crossed their
line of patrol.




CHAPTER XIII

AN INTERLUDE

Late in the afternoon, Rhoda woke.  Kut-le stood beside her.  His
expression was half eager, half tender.

"How do you feel now?" he asked.

"Quite well," answered Rhoda.  "Will you call Marie?  I want to dress."

"You must rest in bed today," replied the Indian.  "Tomorrow will be
soon enough for you to get up."

Rhoda looked at the young man with irritation.

"Can't you learn that I am not a squaw?  That it maddens me to be
ordered about?  That every time you do you alienate me more, if
possible?"

"You do foolish stunts," said Kut-le calmly, "and I have to put you
right."

Rhoda moaned.

"Oh, how long, how long must I endure this!  How could they be so
stupid as to let you slip through their fingers so!"

Kut-le's mouth became a narrow seam.

"As soon as I can get you into the Sierra Madre, I shall marry you.
You are practically a well woman now.  But I am not going to hurry
overmuch.  You are going to love me first and you are going to love
this life first.  Then we will go to Paris until the storm has passed."

Rhoda did not seem to hear him.  She tossed her arms restlessly.

"Please send Marie to me," she said finally.  "You will permit me to
eat something perhaps?"

Kut-le left the room at once.  In a short time he returned with Marie,
who bore a steaming bowl which he himself flanked with a dish of
luscious melon.  The woman propped Rhoda adroitly to a sitting position
and Kut-le gravely balanced the bowl against the girl's knees.  The
stew which the bowl contained was delicious, and Rhoda ate it to the
last drop.  She ate in silence, while Kut-le watched her with
unspeakable longing in his eyes.  The room was almost dark when the
simple meal was finished.  Marie brightened the fire and smoothed
Rhoda's blankets.

"Kut-le go now," said the Pueblo woman.  "You rest.  In morning, Marie
bring white squaw some clothes."

Rhoda was glad to pillow her head on her arm but it was long before she
slept.  She tried to piece together her faint and distorted
recollection of the occurrences since the morning when the mesa had
risen through the dawn.  But her only clear picture was of John
DeWitt's wild face as she disappeared into the fissure.  She recalled
its look of agony and sobbed a little to herself as she realized what
torture he and the Newmans must have endured since her disappearance.
And yet she was very hopeful.  If her friends could come as close to
her as they did before the mesa, they must be learning Kut-le's
methods.  Surely the next time luck would not play so well for the
Indian.

Rhoda woke in the morning to the sound of song.  Marie knelt on the
ground before a sloping slab of stone and patiently kneeded corn with a
smaller stone.  Her song, a quaint repetition of short mellow syllables
pleased Rhoda's sensitive ear and she lay listening.  When Marie saw
Rhoda's wide eyes she came to the girl's side.

"You feel good now?" she queried.

"Yes, much better.  I want to get up."

The Indian woman nodded.

"Marie clean white squaw's clothes.  White squaw wear Marie's.  Now
Marie help you wash."

Rhoda smiled.

"You are not an Apache if you want me to bathe!"

Marie answered indignantly.

"Marie is Pueblo squaw!"

The clothes that Marie brought, Rhoda thought very attractive.  There
was a soft wool underdress of creamiest tint.  Over this Marie pulled,
fastening it at one shoulder, a gay, many-colored overdress which, like
the one she herself wore, reached to the knees.  Rhoda pulled on her
own high laced boots which had been neatly mended.  Then the two turned
their attention to the neglected braid of hair.

When it was loosened and hung in tangled masses nearly to Rhoda's
knees, Marie's delight in its loveliness knew no expression.  She
fetched a queer battered old comb which she washed and then proceeded
with true feminine rapture to comb the wonderful waving locks.  In the
midst of this Kut-le entered.  He gazed on Rhoda's new disguise with
delight.  Indeed her delicate face, above the many-hued garment, was
like a harebell growing in a gaudy nasturtium bed.

"We can only let you on the roof," said Kut-le, who was carrying
Rhoda's sombrero.

Rhoda made no reply but when Marie had plaited her hair in a rippling
braid she followed Kut-le up the short ladder.  Her sense of
cleanliness after the weeks of disorder was delightful.  As she stepped
on the flat-topped roof and the sweet clear air filled her lungs she
felt as if reborn.  With Navajo blankets, Kut-le had contrived an
awning that not only made a bit of shade but precluded view from below.
The rich tints of the blankets were startlingly picturesque against the
yellow gray of the adobe.  Rhoda, dropped luxuriantly to the heap of
blankets and turned her face toward the mountain, many-colored and bare
toward the base, deep-cloaked with pinon, oak and Juniper on the
uplands.  From its base flowed the little river, gurgling over its
shallow bed of stone and rich with green along its flat banks.  Close
beside the river was the Pueblo village, the many-terraced buildings,
on one of the roofs of which Rhoda sat.

Kut-le, stretched on the roof near by, smoked cigarette after cigarette
as he watched the girl's quiet face, but he did not speak.  For three
or four hours the two sat thus in silence.  Just as the sun sank behind
the mountain, a bell clanged and then fell to tolling softly.  Then
Kut-le broke his silence.

"That's the bell of the old mission.  Some one has been buried, I
guess.  We can look.  There are no tourists now."

There was a sound of wailing: a deep mournful sound that caught Rhoda's
heart to her throat and blanched her face.  It was the sound of the
grief of primitive man, the cry of the forlorn and broken-hearted,
uncloaked by convention.  It touched a primitive chord of response in
Rhoda that set her to trembling.  Surely, when the world was young she
too had wept so.  Surely she too had voiced a poignant, unbearable loss
in just such a wild outpouring of grief!

They moved to the edge of the terrace and looked below into the street.
Down the rocky way a line of Indians was bearing hand-mills and jars
and armloads of ornaments.

"They will take those to the 'killing place' and break them that the
dead owner may have them afterward," explained Kut-le softly.  "It
always makes me think of a verse in the Bible.  I can't recall the
words exactly though."

Rhoda glanced up into the dark face with a look of appreciation.

"'And the grinders shall cease because they are few!'" she said, "'and
those that look out of the windows be darkened.  And the doors shall be
shut in the street when the sound of the grinding is low, because man
goeth to his long home and mourners go about the street.'"

"And there is something else," murmured Kut-le, "about 'the silver
cord.'"

"'Or ever the silver cord be loosed or the golden bowl be broken or the
pitcher be broken at the fountain or the wheel broken at the cistern.
Then shall the dust return to the earth as it was and the spirit to God
who gave it.'"

They stood in silence again.  The wailing died into the distance.  The
sun touched to molten gold the heavy shadows of the mountain arroyos.
Rhoda was deeply moved by the scene below her.  She felt as if she had
been thrust back through the ages to look upon the sorrow of some
little Judean town.  The little rocky street, the vivid robes, the
weird, dying wail, the broken ornaments and utensils that some folded
tired hands would use no more, and, above all, the simple unquestioning
faith, roused in her a sudden longing for a life that she never had
known.  For a long time she stood in thought.  As darkness fell she
roused herself.

"Let me go back to my room," she said.

As they turned, neither noticed that Rhoda's little handkerchief, which
she had carried through all her experiences, fluttered from her sleeve
to the street.

Again it was long before Rhoda slept.  Through her window there floated
the sound of song, the evening singing of Indian lads in the village
street.  There was a vibrant quality in their voices that Rhoda could
liken only to the music of stringed instruments.  There was neither the
mellow smoothness of the negro voice nor the flute-like sweetness of
the white, yet the voices compassed all the mystical appealing quality
of violin notes.

The music woke in Rhoda a longing for she knew not what.  It seemed to
her as if she were peering past a misty veil into the childhood of the
world to whose simple beauty and delights civilization had made her
alien.  The vibrating voices chanted slower and slower.  Rhoda stirred
uneasily.  To be free again as these voices were free!  Not to long for
the civilization she had left but for open skies and trails!  To be
free again!

As the voices melted into silence, a guitar was touched softly under
Rhoda's window and Kut-le's voice rose in _La Golondrina_:

  "Whither so swiftly flies the timid swallow?
  What distant bourne seeks her untiring wing?
  To reach her nest what needle does she follow
  When darkness wraps the poor wee storm-tossed thing?"

Rhoda stirred restlessly and threw her arms above her head.

  "To build her nest near to my couch I'll call her!
  Why go so far dark and strange skies to seek?
  Safe would she be, no evil should befall her,
  For I'm an exile sad, too sad to weep!"

Mist-like floated across Rhoda's mind a memory of the trail with voice
of mating bird at dawn, with stars and the night wind and the open way.
And going before, always Kut-le--Kut-le of the unfathomable eyes, of
the merry smile, of the gentle touch.  The music merged itself into
Rhoda's dreams.

She spent the following day on the roof.  Curled on her Navajo she
watched the changing tones on the mountains and listened to the soft
voices of the Pueblo women in the street below.  Naked brown babies
climbed up and down the ladders and paddled in the shallow river Indian
women with scarlet shawls across their shoulders filled their ollas at
the river and stood gossiping, the brimming ollas on their heads.  In
the early morning the men had trudged to the alfalfa and melon fields
and returned at sundown to be greeted joyfully by the women and
children.

Kut-le spent the day at Rhoda's side.  They talked but little, though
Rhoda had definitely abandoned her rule of silence toward the Indian.
Her mind during most of the day was absorbed in wondering why she so
enjoyed watching the life in this Indian town and why she was not more
impatient to be gone.

As the sun dropped behind the mountain Marie appeared on the roof, her
black eyes very bright.

"Half-breed Philip find white squaw's handkerchief.  Give to white men,
maybe!  Marie see Philip get handkerchief from little girl."

Kut-le gave Rhoda an inscrutable look, but she did not tell him that
she shared his surprise.

"Well," said Kut-le calmly, "maybe we had better mosey along."

They descended to find Marie hastily doing up a bundle of bread and
fruit.  While Kut-le went for blankets Rhoda, at Marie's request,
donned her old clothing of the trail.  She had been wearing the squaw's
holiday outfit.  Very shortly, with a hasty farewell to Marie, they
were in the dusky street.  "Shall I gag you," asked Kut-le, "or will
you give me your word of honor to give neither sign nor sound until we
get to the mountain, and to keep your face covered with your Navajo?"

Rhoda sighed.

"Very well, I promise," she said.

In a very short time they had reached the end of the little street and
were climbing an arroyo up into the mountain.  When they reached the
pinons Kut-le gave the coyote call.  It thrilled Rhoda with the misery
of the night of her capture.  Almost immediately there was an answering
call and close in the shadow of the pinon they found Alchise and the
two squaws.  Molly ran to Rhoda with a squeal of joy and patted the
girl's hand but Alchise and Cesca gave no heed to her greeting.

The ponies were ready and Rhoda swung herself to her saddle, with a
thrill at the touch of the muscular little horse.  And once more she
rode after Kut-le with the mystery of the night trail before her.

The sound of water falling, the cheep of wakening birds, the subtle
odor of moisture-drenched soil roused Rhoda from her half sleep on the
horse's back at the end of the night's journey.  The trail had not been
hard, through an endless pine forest for the most part.  Kut-le drew
rein beside a little waterfall deep in the mountain fastness.  Rhoda
saw a chaos of rock masses huge and distorted, as if an inconceivably
cruel and gigantic hand had juggled with weights seemingly immovable;
about these the loveliness of vine and shrub; above them the towering
junipers dwarfed by the rocks they shaded; and falling softly over the
harsh brown rifts of rock, the liquid green and white of a mountain
brook which, as it reached the level, rushed away in a roar of foam.

Rhoda's horse drank thirstily and she stood beside him watching the
mystical gray of the dawn lift to the riotous rose of the sunrise.  She
wondered at the quick throb of her pulse.  It was very different from
its wonted soft beat.  Then she threw herself on her blanket to sleep.

When Rhoda woke, late in the day, Kut-le had spread Marie's cakes and
fruit on leaves which he had washed in the brook.

"They are quite clean, I think," he said a little anxiously.  "At least
the squaws haven't touched them."

Rhoda and Kut-le sat on a rock and ate hungrily.  When she had finished
Rhoda clasped her hands about her knees.  She looked singularly boyish,
with her sombrero pushed back from her face and short locks of damp
hair curling from beneath the crown.

"Isn't it queer," she said, "that you elude Jack and John DeWitt so
easily?"

"The trouble is," said Kut-le, "that you don't appreciate the prowess
of your captors."

"Humph!" sniffed Rhoda.

"Listen!" cried Kut-le with sudden enthusiasm.  "Once in my boyhood
Geronima and about twenty warriors, with twice as many squaws and
children, fled to the mountains.  They never drew rein until they were
one hundred and twenty miles from the reservation.  Then for six months
they were pursued by two thousand American soldiers and they never lost
a man!"

"How many whites were killed?" asked Rhoda.

"About a hundred!"

"I don't understand yet," Rhoda shook her head, "how savages could
outwit whites for so long a time."

"But it's not a contest of brains.  Whites must travel like whites,
with food and rests.  The Apache travels like the coyote, living off
the country.  Your ancestors have been training your brain for a
thousand years.  Mine have spent centuries of days, twenty-four hours a
day, training the body to endure hardships.  You have had a glimpse of
what the hardships of this country might mean to a white!"

As Kut-le talked, Rhoda sat with her eyes fastened on the rough face of
a distant rock.  As she watched she saw a thick, leafy bush move up to
the rock.  Rhoda caught her breath, glanced at the unconscious Kut-le,
then back at the bush.  It moved slowly back among the trees and after
a moment Rhoda saw the undergrowth far beyond move as with a passing
breeze.  She glanced at the nodding Alchise and the squaws, then smiled
and turned to Kut-le.

"Go on with your boasting, Kut-le.  It's your one weakness, I think."

Kut-le grinned.

"Well now, honestly, what do you think that a lot of Caucasians can do
with an enemy whose existence has always been a fist to fist fight with
nature at her cruelest?  We have fought with our bare hands and we have
won," he continued, half to himself.  "No white man or any number of
whites can capture me on my own ground!"

"Boaster!" laughed Rhoda.

Just beyond the falls an aspen quivered.  John DeWitt stepped into
view.  Haggard and wild-eyed, he stared at Rhoda.  She raised her
finger to her lips, but too late.  Kut-le too looked up, and raised his
gun.  Rhoda hurled herself toward him and struck up the barrel.  Kut-le
dropped the gun and caught Rhoda in his arms.

"The woods are full of them!" he grunted.  With one hand across Rhoda's
mouth, he ran around the falls and dropped six feet to a narrow back
trail.

"My own ground!" Rhoda heard him chuckle.




CHAPTER XIV

THE BEAUTY OF THE WORLD

For many hurrying minutes, Rhoda saw only the passing tree branches
black against the evening sky as she lay across Kut-le's breast.  The
pursuers had made no sound nor had Kut-le broken a single twig.  The
entire incident might have been a pantomime, with every actor
tragically intent.

Having long learned the futility of struggling, Rhoda lay quietly
enough, her ears keen to catch the sound of pursuit.  Kut-le did not
remove his hand from her mouth.  But as he dropped rapidly and
skilfully down the mountainside he whispered:

"My own ground, you see!  It will take them a good while in the dusk to
find that back trail.  Only a few Indians know it."

But Rhoda's heart was beating high.  Let Kut-le boast as he would, she
was sure that Jack and John DeWitt were learning to follow the trail.
The most vivid picture in her mind was of the utter weariness of John's
face.  In the past weeks Rhoda had learned how fearful had been the
hardships that would bring such weariness to a human face.  Tears came
to her eyes.  No one so weak, so useless as herself, she felt, could be
worth such travail.

Silently they moved through the dusk.  Rhoda knew that the other
Indians must be close behind them, yet no sound betrayed their
presence.  After a half-hour or so she struggled to be set down.  But
Kut-le only tightened his hold and it was fully two hours later that he
set her on her feet.

"Don't move," he said.  "We are on a canon edge."

Rhoda swung her blanket to her shoulders, for the night was stinging
sharp.  She was not afraid.  She had grown so accustomed to the night
trail that she moved unhesitatingly along black rims that had at first
paralyzed her with fear.

"Now," said Kut-le, "I'm not going to travel on foot.  The only horses
within easy distance are some that a bunch of Navajos have in the canon
below here.  So we will go down and get them.  We will go together
because I can't risk coming back for you.  We will have to hike
_pronto_ after we get 'em.  Just remember that you are contaminated by
the company you are keeping and that if you make any noise, the Navajos
will shoot you up, with the rest of us!  Keep right behind me."

The little group moved carefully down the canon trail.  In a short time
they reached a growth of trees.  They stole through these, the only
sound Rhoda's panting breaths.  Suddenly Kut-le stopped.

"Wait here!" he breathed in Rhoda's ear, and he and Alchise disappeared.

A hand was laid on her arm and Rhoda knew that Molly and Cesca were
guarding her.  Almost immediately the soft thud of hoofs was upon them.
Kut-le seized Rhoda and tossed her to a pony's back.

"It was dead easy!" he whispered.  "They were all asleep!  I even took
a saddle for you!  Now hike!"

Rhoda gripped her pony with her knees as the little fellow cantered
unerringly through the darkness after Kut-le.  She felt a sudden pride
and exultation in the security she had developed in the saddle during
the travail of her night rides.  She knew that no man of her
acquaintance could ride a horse as she could now.  And with the
exultation she was trembling with excitement.  She knew that none of
them could expect mercy if the Navajos discovered their loss in time to
take up the chase.  All the eagerness of the gambler who stakes his
life on a throw of the dice; all the wild thrill of the chase; all the
trembling of the panting, woodland things that hunt and are hunted,
were Rhoda's as the night wind rushed past her face.  The apathy of
illness was gone.  Tonight she was as wild a thing as the night's birds
that brushed across their trail on sweeping wing.

When they made camp at dawn Rhoda tumbled into her blanket and was
asleep before Alchise finished covering their trail.  When she woke she
found that they were camped in a strange eerie.  They were high up on a
mountain on a shelf that gave back into a shallow cave.  In front,
facing the desert, was a heap of rock that formed a natural rampart.  A
tiny spring bubbled from the cave floor.  Here the little party would
seem as secure in their dizzy seclusion as eagles of the Andes.

It was barely noon and the mountain air was sweet and exhilarating.
Kut-le sat against the rampart, smoking a cigarette, while Molly and
Cesca worked over the fire.  Rhoda lunched on the tortillas to which
Molly had clung through all the vicissitudes of flight.

"Where are the horses?" she asked Kut-le.

"Oh, Alchise took them back.  We must stay here a while till your mob
of friends disperses.  I couldn't feed them and I wanted to pacify the
Navajos and get some supplies from them.  Alchise will fix it up with
them."

And here on this dizzy brink of the desert Kut-le did pause as if for a
long, long holiday.  The wisdom of the proceeding did not trouble him
at all.  The call of the desert was an allurement to which he yielded
unresistingly, trusting to elude capture through his skill and
unfailing good fortune.

To Rhoda the pause was welcome.  She still had faith that the longer
they camped in one spot the surer would be the pursuers to stumble upon
them.  Kut-le began to devote himself entirely to Rhoda's amusement.
He knew all the plant and animal life of the desert, not only as an
Indian but as a college man who had loved biology.  By degrees Rhoda's
good brain began to respond to his vivid interest and the girl in her
stay on the mountain shelf learned the desert as has been given to few
whites to learn it.  Besides what she learned from the men Rhoda became
expert in camp work under Molly's patient teaching.  She could kindle
the tiny, smokeless fire.  She could concoct appetizing messes from the
crude food.  She could detect good water from bad and could find forage
for horses.  The crowning pride of her achievements was learning to
weave the dish basketry.

They had lived in the mountain niche some three weeks when Alchise and
Kut-le left the camp one afternoon, Alchise on a turkey hunt, Kut-le on
one of his mysterious trips for supplies.  Alchise returned at dusk
with a beautiful bird which Rhoda and Molly roasted with enthusiasm.
But Kut-le did not appear at supper time as he had promised.  When the
meal was almost spoiled from waiting, Rhoda and the Indians ate.  As
the evening wore on, Alchise grew uneasy, but he dared not disobey
Kut-le's orders and leave the camp unguarded at night.

Rhoda speculated, torn between hope and fear.  Perhaps the searchers
had captured Kut-le at last.  Perhaps he had given up hope of winning
her love and had gone for good.  Perhaps, somewhere or other, he was
lying badly hurt!  The little group sat up much later than usual, Cesca
silently smoking her endless cigarettes, Alchise and Molly talking now
in Apache, now in English.  Rhoda was convinced that they were puzzled
and worried.

Even after she had lain down on her blankets Rhoda could not sleep.
With Kut-le gone her sense of the camp's security was gone.  She rose
finally and sat beside Alchise who, rifle in hand, guarded the ledge.
There was no moon but the stars were very large and near.  Rhoda was
growing to know the stars.  They were remote in the East; in the desert
they become a part of one's existence.  The sense of stupendous
distance was greater at night than in the daytime.  The infinite
heavens, stretching depth beyond depth, the faint far spaces of the
desert, were as if one looked on the Great Mystery itself.

When dawn came, Alchise wakened Cesca, put the rifle into her hands,
and hurried back up over the mountain.  The purple shadows had
lightened to gray when Rhoda saw Kut-le staggering up the trail from
the desert.  Rhoda gave a little cry and ran down to meet him.

"Kut-le!  What happened to you?  We were so worried!"

There was a bloody rag tied just below the young Indian's knee.  He
paused, supporting himself against a rock.  Across his eyes, drawn and
haggard with pain, flashed a look of joy that Rhoda, eying the bandage,
did not see.

"I was late starting back," he said briefly.  "In the darkness a bit of
the trail gave way, dropped me into a canon and laid my leg open.  I
was unconscious a long time and lost a lot of blood, so it has taken me
the rest of the night to get here.  Would you mind getting Alchise to
help me up the trail?"

"Alchise has gone to look for you.  Lean on me," said Rhoda simply.

Despite his weakness, the dark blood flushed the young man's face,
while Rhoda's utter unconsciousness of her changed manner brought a
smile to his set lips.  Not if the torture of dragging himself up the
trail were to be ten times greater would he now have availed himself of
help from Alchise.

"If you will let me put my arm across your shoulder we can make it," he
said as quietly as though his heart were not leaping.

Rhoda's squaring of her slender shoulders was distractingly boyish.
Utterly heedless of the pain which each step cost him, Kut-le made his
way slowly to the ledge, ordering back the flustered squaws and leaning
on Rhoda only enough to feel the tender girlish shoulders beneath the
worn blue blouse.

In the camp, Rhoda assumed command while Kut-le lay on his blanket
watching her in silent content.  She put one of Alchise's two calico
shirts on to boil over the breakfast fire.  She washed out the nasty
cut and bandaged it with strips from the sterilized shirt.  She brought
Kut-le's breakfast and her own to his blanket side and coaxed the young
man to eat, he assuming great indifference merely for the happiness of
being urged.  Rhoda was so energetic and efficient that the sun was
just climbing from behind the far peaks when Kut-le finished his bacon
and coffee.  The girl stood looking at him, hands on hips, head on one
side, with that look in her eyes of superiority, maternity and
complacent tenderness which a woman can assume only when she has
ministered to the needs of a helpless masculine thing.

"There!" she said with a sigh of satisfaction.

"Rhoda," said Kut-le, hoping that the heavy thumping of his heart did
not shake his whole broad chest, "how long ago was it that you were a
helpless, dying little girl without strength to cut up your own food?
How long since you have served any one but yourself?"

Rhoda drew a quick breath.  She stood staring from the Indian to the
desert, to her slender body, and back again.  She held out her hands
and looked at them.  They were scratched and brown and did not tremble.
Then she looked at the young Indian and he never was to forget the
light in her eyes.

"Kut-le!" she cried.  "Kut-le!  I am well again!  I am well again!"

She paced back and forth along the ledge.  Through the creamy tan her
cheeks flushed richly crimson.  Finally she stopped before the Apache.

"You have outraged all my civilized instincts," she said slowly, "yet
you have saved my life and given me health.  Whatever comes, Kut-le, I
never shall forget that!"

"I have changed more than that," said Kut-le quietly.  "Where is your
old hatred of the desert?"

Rhoda turned to look.  At the edge of the distant ranges showed a rim
of red.  Crimson spokes of fire flashed to the zenith.  The sky grew
brighter, more translucent, the ranges melted into molten gold.  The
sun, hot and scarlet, rolled into view.  Into Rhoda's heart flooded a
sense of infinite splendor, infinite beauty, infinite peace.

"Why!" she gasped to Kut-le, "it is beautiful!  It's not terrible!
It's unadorned beauty!"

The Indian nodded but did not speak.  Rhoda never was to forget that
day.  Long years after she was to catch the afterglow of that day of
her rebirth.  Suddenly she realized that never could a human have found
health in a setting more marvelous.  The realization was almost too
much.  Kut-le, with sympathy for which she was grateful, did not talk
to her much.  Once, however, as she brought him a drink and
mechanically smoothed his blanket he said softly:

"You who have been served and demanded service all your life, why do
you do this?"

Rhoda answered slowly.

"I'm not serving you.  I'm trying to pay up some of the debt of my
life."

Kut-le was about in a day or so and by the end of the week he was quite
himself.  He resumed the daily expeditions with Rhoda and Alchise which
provided text for the girl's desert learning.  Rhoda's old despondency,
her old agony of prayer for immediate rescue had given way to a strange
conflict of desires.  She was eager for rescue, was conscious of a
constant aching desire for her own people, and yet the old sense of
outrage, of grief, of hopelessness was gone.

Of a sudden she found herself pausing, thrusting back the problems that
confronted her while she drank to the full this strange mad joy of life
which she felt must leave her when she left the desert.  She knew only
that the fear of death was gone.  That hours of fever and pain were no
more.  That her mind had found its old poise but with an utterly new
view-point of life.  Her blood ran red.  Her lungs breathed deep.  Her
eyes saw distances too big for their conception, beauties so deep that
her spirit had to expand to absorb them.

The silent nights of stars, the laborious crests that tossed sudden and
unspeakable views before the eyes, the eternal canons that led beneath
ranges of surpassing majesty, roused in her a passion of delight that
could find expression only in her growing physical prowess.  She lived
and ate like a splendid boy.  Day after day she scaled the ranges with
Kut-le and Alchise; tenderly reared creature of an ultracivilization as
she was, she learned the intricate lore of the aborigines, learned what
students of the dying people would give their hearts to know.

Kut-le wakened Rhoda at dawn one day.  She prepared the breakfast of
coffee, bacon and tortilla.  Alchise shared this eagerly with Rhoda and
Kut-le, though already he had eaten with the squaws.  The day was still
gray when the three set out on a long day's trip in search of game.
The way this morning led up a canon deep and quiet, with the night
shadows still dark and cool within it.  The air was that of a northern
day of June.

Rhoda tramped bravely, up and up, from cactus to bear grass, from bear
grass to stunted cedar, from cedar to pines that at last rose
triumphant at the crest of a great ridge.  Here Rhoda and Kut-le flung
themselves to the ground to rest while Alchise prowled about
restlessly.  Across a hundred miles of desert rose faint snow-capped
peaks.

Kut-le watched Rhoda's rapt face for a time.  Then, as if unable to
keep back the words, he said softly:

"Rhoda!  Stay here, always!  Marry me and stay here always!"

Rhoda looked at the beautiful pleading eyes.  She stirred restlessly;
but before she could frame an answer Alchise appeared, followed by a
lean old Indian all but toothless who wore a pair of tattered overalls
and a gauze shirt.  The two Indians stopped before Kut-le, and Alchise
jerked a thumb at the stranger.

"_Sabe_ no white talk," he said.

Kut-le passed the stranger a cigarette, which he accepted without
comment.  A rapid conversation followed between the three Indians.

"He is an Apache," explained Kut-le, finally, to Rhoda.  "His name is
Injun Tom.  He says that Newman and Porter hired him to trail us but he
is tired of the job.  They foolishly advanced him five dollars.  He
says they are camping in the valley right below here."

Rhoda sprang to her feet.

"Where are you going?" smiled Kut-le.  "He says they are going to shoot
me on sight!"

Under her tan Rhoda's face whitened.

"Would they shoot you, Kut-le, even if I told them not to?"

At the sight of the paling face the young man murmured, "You dear!"
under his breath.  Then aloud, "Not if I were your husband."

"How can I marry a savage?" cried Rhoda.

Kut-le put his hand under the cleft chin and lifted the sweet face till
it looked directly into his.  His gaze was very deep and clear.

"Am I nothing but a naked savage, Rhoda?" he said.  "Am I?"

Rhoda's eyes did not leave his.

"No!" she said softly, under her breath.

Kut-le's eyes deepened.  He turned and picked up his rifle.

"Bring your friend back to dinner, Alchise," he said.  "Our little
holiday must end right here."

They reached the camp at noon and while the squaws made ready for
breaking camp, Rhoda sat deep in thought.  Before her were the burning
sky and desert, with hawk and buzzard circling in the clear blue.
Where had the old hatred of Kut-le gone?  Whence came this new trust
and understanding, this thrill at his touch?  Kut-le, who had been
watching her adoringly, rose and came to her side.  The rampart hid the
two from the others.  Kut-le took one of Rhoda's hands in his firm
fingers and laid his lips against her palm.  Rhoda flushed and drew her
hand away.  But Kut-le again put his hand beneath her cleft chin and
lifted her face to his.

Just as the brown face all but touched hers a voice sounded from behind
the rampart:

"Hello, you!  Where's Kut-le?"




CHAPTER XV

AN ESCAPE

Rhoda sprang away from Kut-le and they both ran to the other side of
the rampart.  Billy Porter, worn and tattered but still looking very
well able to hold his own, stood staring into the cave where the squaws
eyed him open-mouthed and Alchise, his hand on his rifle, scowled at
him aggressively.  Porter's eye fell on Injun Tom.

"U-huh!  You pison Piute, you!  I just nacherally snagged your little
game, didn't I?"

"Billy!" cried Rhoda.  "O Billy Porter!"

Porter jumped as if at a blow.  Rhoda stood against the rock in her
boyish clothes, her beautiful braid sweeping her shoulder, her face
vivid.

"My God!  Miss Rhoda!" cried Billy hoarsely, as he ran toward her with
outstretched hands.  "Why, you are well!  What's happened to you!"

Here Kut-le stepped between the two.

"Hello, Mr. Porter," he said.

Billy stepped back and a look of loathing and anger took the place of
the joy that had been in his eyes before.

"You Apache devil!" he growled.  "You ain't as smart as you thought you
were!"

Rhoda ran forward and would have taken Porter's hand but Kut-le
restrained her with his hand on her shoulder.

"Where did you come from, Billy?" cried Rhoda.  "Where are the others?"

Billy's face cleared a little at the sound of the girl's voice.

"They are right handy, Miss Rhoda."

"I'll give you a few details, Rhoda," said Kut-le coolly.  "You see he
is without water and his mouth is black with thirst.  He started to
trail Injun Tom but got lost and stumbled on us."

Rhoda gave a little cry of pity and running into the cave she brought
Billy a brimming cup of water.

"Is that true, Billy?" she asked.  "Are the others near here?"

Billy nodded then drained the cup and held it out for more.

"They are just around the corner!" with a glance at Kut-le, who smiled
skeptically.

"Oh!" exclaimed Rhoda.  "What terrible trouble I have made you all!"

"You made!" said Porter.  "Well that's good!  Still, that Apache devil
doesn't seem to have harmed you.  Just the same, he'll get his!  If I
shot him now, the other Injuns would get me and God knows what would
happen to you!"

"Whom do you call an Apache devil?" asked Kut-le.  Rhoda never had seen
him show such evident anger.

"You, by Judas!" replied Porter, looking into the young Indian's face.

For a strained moment the two eyed each other, hatred glaring at
hatred, until Rhoda put a hand on Kut-le's arm.  His face cleared at
once.

"So that's my reputation now, is it?" he said lightly.

"_That's_ your reputation!" sneered Billy.  "Do you think that's _all_?
Why, don't you realize that you can't live in your own country again?
Don't you know that the whites will hunt you out like you was a rat?
Don't you realize that the folks that believed in you and was fond of
you has had to give up their faith in you?  Don't you understand that
you've lost all your white friends?  But I suppose that don't mean
anything to an Injun!"

A look of sadness passed over Kut-le's face.

"Porter," he said very gently, "I counted on all of that before I did
this thing.  I thought that the sacrifice was worth while, and I still
think so.  I'm sorry, for your sake, that you stumbled on us here.  We
are going to start on the trail shortly and I must send you out to be
lost again.  I'll let Alchise help you in the job.  As you say, I have
sacrificed everything else in life; I can't afford to let anything
spoil this now.  You can rest for an hour.  Eat and drink and fill your
canteen.  Take a good pack of meat and tortillas.  You are welcome to
it all."

The Indian spoke with such dignity, with such tragic sincerity, that
Porter gave him a look of surprise and Rhoda felt hot tears in her
eyes.  Kut-le turned to the girl.

"You can see that I can't let you talk alone with Porter, but go ahead
and say anything you want to in my hearing.  Molly, you bring the white
man some dinner and fix him some trail grub.  Hurry up, now!"

He seated himself on the rampart and lighted a cigarette.  Porter sat
down meditatively, with his back against the mountain wall.  He was
discomfited.  Kut-le had guessed correctly as to the circumstances of
his finding the camp.  He had no idea where his friends might have gone
in the twenty-four hours since he had left them.  When he stumbled on
to Kut-le he had had a sudden hope that the Indian might take him
captive.  The Indian's quiet reception of him nonplussed him and roused
his unwilling admiration.

Rhoda sat down beside Porter.

"How is John?" she asked.

"He is pretty good.  He has lasted better than I thought he would."

"And Katherine and Jack?"  Rhoda's voice trembled as she uttered the
names.  It was only with the utmost difficulty that she spoke
coherently.  All her nerves were on the alert for some unexpected
action on the part of either Billy or the Indians.

"Jack's all right," said Billy.  "We ain't seen Mrs. Jack since the day
after you was took, but she's all to the good, of course, except she's
been about crazy about you, like the rest of us."

"Oh, you poor, poor people!" moaned Rhoda.

Porter essayed a smile with his cracked lips.

"But, say, you do look elegant, Miss Rhoda.  You ain't the same girl!"

Rhoda blushed through her tan.

"I forgot these," she said; "I've worn them so long."

"It ain't the clothes," said Billy, "and it ain't altogether your fine
health.  It's more--I don't know what it is!  It's like the desert!"

"That's what I tell her," said Kut-le.

"Say," said Billy, scowling, "you've got a nerve, cutting in as if this
was a parlor conversation you had cut in on casual.  Just keep out of
this, will you!"

Rhoda flushed.

"Well, as long as he can hear everything, it's a good deal of a farce
not to let him talk," she said.

"Farce!" exclaimed Billy.  "Say, Miss Rhoda, you ain't sticking up for
this ornery Piute, are you?"

Rhoda looked at the calm eyes of the Indian, at the clean-cut
intelligence of his face, and she resented Porter's words.  She
answered him softly but clearly.

"Kut-le did an awful and unforgivable thing in stealing me.  No one
knows that better than I do.  But he has treated me with respect and he
has given me back my health.  I thank him for that and--and I do
respect him!"

Kut-le's eyes flashed with a deep light but he said nothing.  Porter
stared at the girl with jaw dropped.

"Good Lord!" he cried.  "Respect him!  Wouldn't that come and get you!
Do you mean that you want to stay with that Injun?"

A slow flush covered Rhoda's tanned cheeks.  Her cleft chin lifted a
little.

"At the very first chance," she replied, "I shall escape."

Porter sighed in great relief.

"That's all right, Miss Rhoda," he said leniently.  "Respect him all
you want to.  I don't see how you can, but women is queer, if you don't
mind my saying so.  I don't blame you for feeling thankful about your
health.  You've stood this business better than any of us.  Say, that
squaw seems to be puttin' all her time on making up my pack.  Can't I
negotiate for something to eat right now?  Tell her not to put pison
into it."

Kut-le grinned.

"Maybe Miss Tuttle will fix up something for you, so you can eat
without worrying."

"Well, she won't, you know!" growled Porter.  "_Her_ wait on me!  She
ain't no squaw!"

"Oh, but," cried Rhoda, "you don't know how proud I am of my skill!  I
can run the camp just as well as the squaws."  Then, as Porter scowled
at Kut-le, "He didn't make me!  I wanted to, so as to be able to take
care of myself when I escaped.  When you and I get away from him," she
looked at the silent Indian with an expression of daring that brought a
glint of amusement to his eyes, "I'll be able to live off the trail
better than you!"

"Gee!" exclaimed Porter admiringly.

"Of course, in one way it's no credit to me at all," Rhoda went on,
stirring the rabbit stew she was warming up.  "Kut-le--" she paused.
Of what use was it to try to explain what Kut-le had done for her!

She toasted fresh tortillas and poured the stew over them and brought
the steaming dish to Porter.  He tasted of the mess tentatively.

"By Hen!" he exclaimed, and he set upon the stew as if half starved,
while Rhoda watched him complacently.

Seeing him apparently thus engrossed, Kut-le turned to speak to
Alchise.  Instantly Porter dropped the stew, drew a revolver and fired
two rapid shots, one catching Alchise in the leg, the other Injun Tom.
Before he could get Kut-le the young Indian was upon him.

"Run, Rhoda, run!" yelled Porter, as he went down, under Kut-le.

Rhoda gave one glance at Injun Tom and Alchise writhing with their
wounds, at Porter's fingers tightening at Kut-le's throat, then she
seized the canteen she had filled for Porter and started madly down the
trail.  The screaming squaws gave no heed to her.

She ran swiftly, surely, down the rocky way, watching the trail with
secondary sense, for every other was strained to catch the sounds from
above.  But she heard nothing but the screams of the squaws.  The trail
twisted violently near the desert floor.  She sped about one last
jutting buttress, then stopped abruptly, one hand on her heaving breast.

A man was running toward the foot of the trail.  He, too, stopped
abruptly.  The girl seemed a marvel of beauty to him.  With the curly
hair beneath the drooping sombrero, the tanned, flushed face, the
parted scarlet lips, the throat and tiny triangle of chest disclosed by
the rough blue shirt with one button missing from the top, and the
beautiful lithe legs in the clinging buckskins, Rhoda was a wonderful
thing to come upon unexpectedly.  As John DeWitt took off his hat, his
haggard face went white, his stalwart shoulders heaved.

"O John!  Dear John DeWitt!" cried Rhoda.  "Turn back with me quick!  I
am running away while Mr. Porter holds Kut-le!"

DeWitt held out his shaking hands to her, unbelieving rapture growing
in his eyes.




CHAPTER XVI

ADRIFT IN THE DESERT

Rhoda put her hands into the outstretched, shaking palms.

"Rhoda!  Sweetheart!  Sweetheart!" DeWitt gasped.  Then his voice
failed him.

For an instant Rhoda leaned against his heaving chest.  She felt as if
after long wandering in a dream she suddenly had stepped back into
life.  But it was only for the instant that she paused.  Her face was
blazing with excitement.

"Come!" she cried.  "Come!"

"Take my arm!  Or had I better carry you?" exclaimed DeWitt.

"Huh!" sniffed Rhoda.  "Just try to keep up with me, that's all!"

DeWitt, despite the need for haste, stopped and stared at the girl,
open-mouthed.  Then as he realized what superb health she showed in
every line of face and body, he cried:

"You are well!  You are well!  O Rhoda, I never thought to see you this
way!"

Rhoda squeezed his fingers joyfully.

"I am so strong!  Hurry, John!  Hurry!"

"Where are the Indians?" panted DeWitt, running along beside her.
"What were those shots?"

"Billy Porter found our camp.  He shot Alchise and Injun Tom and he and
Kut-le were wrestling as I ran."  Then Rhoda hesitated.  "Perhaps you
ought to go back and help Billy!"

But John pulled her ahead.

"Leave you until I get you to safety?  Why, Billy himself would half
murder me if I thought of it!  Our camp is over there, a three hours'
trip."  DeWitt pointed to a distant peak.  "If we swing around to the
left, the Indians won't see us!"

Hand in hand the two settled to a swinging trot.  The dreadful fear of
pursuit was on them both.  It submerged their first joy of meeting, and
left them panic-stricken.  For many minutes they ran without speaking.
At last, when well out into the burning heat of the desert, they could
keep up the pace no longer and dropped to a rapid walk.  Still there
came no sound of pursuit.

"Was Porter hurt?" panted John.

"Not when I left," answered Rhoda.

"I wonder what his plan is?" said John.  "He left the camp yesterday to
trail Injun Tom.  We'll go back for him as quick as I can get you to
camp."

Rhoda looked up at DeWitt anxiously.

"You are very tired and worn, John," she said.

"And you!" cried the man, looking down at the girl with the swinging,
tireless stride.  "What miracle has come to you?"

"I never dreamed that there could be health like this!  I--"  She
stopped, with head to one side.  "Do you hear anything?  What do you
suppose they are doing to each other?  Oh, I hope neither of them will
get killed!"

"I hope--  They have all promised to let me deal with Kut-le!" said
DeWitt grimly, pausing to listen intently.  But no sound came across
the burning sands.

Rhoda started at DeWitt's words.  Suddenly her early sense of the
appalling nature of her experience returned to her.  She looked with
new eyes at DeWitt's face.  It was not the same face that she had last
seen at the Newman ranch.  John had the look of a man who has passed
through the fire of tragedy.  She gripped his burned fingers with both
her slender hands.

"O John!" she cried, "I wasn't worth it!  I wasn't worth it!  Let's get
to the camp quickly, so that you can rest!  It would take a lifetime of
devotion to make up for that look in your face!"

John's quiet manner left him.

"It was a devilish thing for him to do!" he said fiercely.  "Heaven
help him when I get him!"  Then before Rhoda could speak he smiled
grimly.  "This pace is fearful.  If you keep it up you will have
sunstroke, Rhoda.  And at that, you're standing it better than I!"

They slowed their pace.  DeWitt was breathing hard as the burning lava
dust bit into his throat.

"I haven't minded the physical discomfort," he went on.  "It's the
mental torture that's been killing me.  We've pushed hot on your trail
hour after hour, day in and day out.  When they made me rest, I could
only lie and listen to you sob for help until--O my love!  My love!--"

His voice broke and Rhoda laid her cheek against his arm for a moment.

"I know!  O John dear, I know!" she whispered.

They trudged on in silence for a time, both listening for the sound of
pursuit.  Then DeWitt spoke, as if he forced himself to ask for an
answer that he dreaded.

"Rhoda, did they torture you much?"

"No!  There was no torture except that of fearful hardships.  At
first--you know how weak and sick I was, John--at first I just lived in
an agony of fear and anger--sort of a nightmare of exhaustion and
frenzy.  Then at Chira I began to get strong and as my health came, the
wonder of it, the--oh, I can't put it into words; Kut-le was--"  Rhoda
paused, wondering at the reluctance with which she spoke the young
Indian's name.  "You missed us so narrowly so many times!"

"The Indian had the devil's own luck and we always blundered," said
DeWitt.  "I have had the feeling lately that my bones would be
bleaching on this stretch of Hades before you ever were heard of.
Rhoda, if I can get you safely to New York again I'll shoot the first
man who says desert to me!"

Rhoda became strangely silent, though she clung to John's hand and now
and again lifted it against her cheek.  The yellow of the desert reeled
in heat waves about them.  The deep, intensely deep blue of the sky
glowed silently down on them.  Never to see them again!  Never to waken
with the desert stars above her face or to make camp with the crimson
dawn blinding her vision!  Never to know again the wild thrill of the
chase!  Finally Rhoda gave herself a mental shake and looked up into
John's tired face.

"How did you come to leave the camp, John?" she asked gently.

"It's all been luck," said John.  "With the exception of a little trail
wisdom that Billy or Carlos raked up once in a while it's just been
hit-or-miss luck with us.  We suspected that Billy had gone on Injun
Tom's trail, so we made camp on the spot so he wouldn't lose us.  I
stood guard this morning while Jack and Carlos slept and then I thought
that that was fool nonsense, as Kut-le never traveled by day.  So I
started on a hunt along Billy's trail--and here we are!"

"Are there any other people hunting for me?"

"Lord, yes!  At first they were fairly walking over each other.  But
the ranchers had to go back to their work and the curious got tired.
Most of those that are left are down along the Mexican border.  They
thought of course that Kut-le would get off American territory as soon
as he could.  Must we keep such a pace, Rhoda girl?  You will be half
dead before we can reach the camp!"

Rhoda smiled.

"I've followed Kut-le's tremendous pace so many miles that I doubt if I
shall ever walk like a perfect lady again!"

"I thought that I would go off my head," DeWitt went on, dropping into
a walk, "when I saw you there at Dead Man's Mesa and you escaped into
that infernal crevice!  Gee, Rhoda, I can't believe that this really is
you!"

The sun was setting as they climbed through a wide stretch of
greasewood to the first rough rock heaps of the mountains.  Then DeWitt
paused uncertainly.

"Why, this isn't right!  I never was here before!"

Rhoda spoke cheerfully.

"Perhaps you have the right mountain but the wrong trail!"

"No!  This is altogether wrong.  I remember this peak now, with a sort
of saw edge to the top.  What a chump I am!  I distinctly remember
seeing this mountain from the trail this morning."

"How did it lie?" asked Rhoda, sitting down on a convenient stone.

"Gee, I can't remember whether to the right or left!"

Rhoda clasped and unclasped her hands nervously.

"I hate to stop.  One can't tell what Kut-le is up to!"

DeWitt squared his broad shoulders.

"Don't you worry, little girl.  If he does find us he'll have to take
us both!  We'll just have to rest here for a moment.  There's no use
starting till we have our sense of direction again."

Rhoda raised her eyebrows.  After all the fearful lessons, DeWitt had
not yet come to a full realization of the skill and resourcefulness of
Kut-le.  The girl said nothing, however, but left the leadership to
DeWitt.  The sun was setting, turning to clear red and pale lavender a
distant peak that then merged with the dusk, one could not tell when
nor how.  Rhoda and DeWitt sat at the foot of an inhospitable crag
whose distant top, baring itself to the heavens, was a fearful climb
above them.

Rhoda watched the sunset a little wistfully.  She must impress on her
memory every one that she saw now.  She felt that her days in the
desert were numbered.

DeWitt shook his empty canteen.

"It was mighty clever of you to bring a canteen.  We've got to be
careful of the water question.  Of course, I'm confident we will reach
camp this evening, but you can't be too careful of water anyhow.  Lord!
Think of Jack Newman's face when we come strolling in!  We ought to be
back at the ranch in five days."

"Do you know it's going to be strange to talk with Katherine!"
exclaimed Rhoda.  "She's a white woman, you know!"

DeWitt took both of Rhoda's brown little hands in his.

"I'm not appearing very sympathetic, sweetheart," he said.  "But I'm so
crazy with joy at having you again and of finding you so well that I
don't know what I'm saying."

"John," said Rhoda slowly, "I don't need any sympathy!  I tell you that
this has been the most wonderful experience that ever came into my
life.  I have suffered!"  Her voice trembled and John's hold on her
hands tightened.  "God only knows how I have suffered!  But I have
learned things that were worth the misery!"

DeWitt looked at her wide-eyed.

"You're a wonder!" he exclaimed.

Rhoda laughed softly.

"You ought to hear the Indians' opinion of me!  Do you know what I've
thought of lots of times lately?  You know that place on the Hudson
where men go when they are nervous wrecks and the doctor cures them by
grilling them mentally and physically clear beyond endurance?  Well,
that's the sort of cure I've had, except that I've had two doctors, the
Indian and the desert!"

DeWitt answered slowly.

"I don't quite see it!  But I know one thing.  You are about the gamest
little thoroughbred I ever heard of!"

The moon was rising and DeWitt watched Rhoda as she sat with her hands
clasping her knee in the boyish attitude that had become a habit.

"You are simply fascinating in those clothes, Rhoda.  You are like a
beautiful slender boy in them."

"They are very comfortable," said Rhoda, in such a sedate
matter-of-fact tone despite her blush that DeWitt chuckled.  He threw
his arm across her shoulder and hugged her to him ecstatically.

"Rhoda!  Rhoda!  You are the finest ever!  I can't believe that this
terrible nightmare is over!  And to think that instead of finding you
all but dead, you are a thousand times more fit than I am myself.
Rhoda, just think!  You are going to live!  To live!  You will not be
my wife just for a few months, as we thought, but for years and years!"

They stood in silence for a time, each one busy with the picture
DeWitt's words had conjured.  Then DeWitt emptied the pipe he had been
smoking.

"Yonder is our peak, by Jove!  It looked just so in the moonlight last
night.  I didn't recognize it by daylight.  If you're rested, we'll
start now.  You must be dead hungry!  I know I am!"

Refreshed and hopeful, they swung out into the wonder of the moonlit
desert.  They soon settled to each other's pace and with the full moon
glowing in their faces they made for the distant peak.

"Now," said John, "tell me the whole story!"

So Rhoda, beginning with the moment of her abduction, told the story of
her wanderings, told it simply though omitting no detail.  Nothing
could have been more dramatic than the quiet voice that now rose, now
fell with intensity of feeling.  DeWitt did not interrupt her except
with a muttered exclamation now and again.

"And the actual sickness was not the worst," Rhoda continued after
describing her experiences up to her sickness at Chira; "it was the
delirium of fear and anger.  Kut-le forced me beyond the limit of my
strength.  Night after night I was tied to the saddle and kept there
till I fainted.  Then I was rested only enough to start again.  And it
angered and frightened me so!  I was so sick!  I loathed them all
so--except Molly.  But after Chira a change came.  I got stronger than
I ever dreamed of being.  And I began to understand Kut-le's methods.
He had realized that physically and mentally I was at the lowest ebb
and that only heroic measures could save me.  He had the courage to
apply the measures."

"God!" muttered John.

Rhoda scarcely heeded him.

"It was then that I began to see things that I could not see before and
to think thoughts that I could not have thought before.  It was as if I
had climbed a mental peak that made my old highest ideals seem like
mere foothills!"

The quiet voice led on and on, stopping at last with Porter's advent
that afternoon.  Then Rhoda looked up into DeWitt's face.  It was drawn
and tense.  His eyes were black with feeling and his close-pressed lips
twitched.

"Rhoda," he said at last, "I thought most of the savage had been
civilized out of me.  But I tell you now that if ever I get a chance I
shall kill that Apache with my bare hands!"

Rhoda laid her hand on DeWitt's arm.

"Kut-le, after all, has done me only a great good, John!"

"But think how he did it!  The devil risked killing you!  Think what
you and we all have suffered!  God, Rhoda, think!"  And DeWitt threw
his arm across his face with a sob that wrenched his shoulders.

Inexpressibly touched, Rhoda stopped and drew John's face down to hers,
rubbing it softly with her velvet cheek.

"There, dear, there!  I can't bear to see you so!  My poor tired boy!
You have all but killed yourself for me!"

DeWitt lifted the slender little figure and held it tensely in his arms
a moment, then set her gently down.

"A woman's magnanimity is a strange thing," he said.

"Kut-le will suffer," said Rhoda.  "He risked everything and has lost.
He has neither friends nor country now."

"Much he cares," retorted DeWitt, "except for losing you!"

Rhoda made no answer.  She realized that it would take careful pleading
on her part to win freedom for Kut-le if ever he were caught.  She
changed the subject.

"Have you found living off the desert hard?  I mean as far as food was
concerned?"

"Food hasn't bothered us," answered John.  "We've kept well supplied."

Rhoda chuckled.

"Then I can't tempt you to stop and have some roast mice with me?"

"Thank you," answered DeWitt.  "Try and control your yearning for them,
honey girl.  We shall be at camp shortly and have some white man's
grub."

"How long since you have eaten, John?" asked Rhoda.  She had been
watching the tall fellow's difficult and slacking steps for some time.

"Well, not since last night, to tell the truth.  You see I was so
excited when I struck Porter's trail that I didn't go back to the camp.
I just hiked."

"So you are faint with hunger," said Rhoda, "and your feet are
blistered, for you have done little tramping in the hot sand before
this.  John, look at that peak!  Are you sure it is the right one?"

DeWitt stared long and perplexedly.

"Rhoda girl," he said, "I don't believe it is, after all.  I am the
blamedest tenderfoot!  But don't you worry.  We will find the camp.
It's right in this neighborhood."




CHAPTER XVII

THE HEART'S OWN BITTERNESS

"I'm not worrying," answered Rhoda stoutly, "except about you.  You are
shaking with exhaustion while I am as fit as can be."

"Oh, don't bother about me!" exclaimed John.  "I'm just a little tired."

But Rhoda was not to be put off.

"How much did you sleep last night?"

"Not much," admitted DeWitt.  "I haven't been a heavy sleeper at times
ever since you disappeared, strange as that may seem!"  Then he
grinned.  It was pleasant to have Rhoda bully him.

Yet the big fellow actually was sinking with weariness.  The fearful
hardships that he had undergone had worked havoc with him.  Now that
the agonizing nerve-strain was lifted he was going to pieces.  He stood
wavering for a minute, then he slowly sat down in the sand.

Rhoda stood beside him uncertainly and looked from the man to the
immovably distant mountain peak.  She realized that, in stopping, the
risk of recapture was great, yet her desert experiences told her that
John must regain some of his strength before the sun caught them.  She
had little faith that they would tumble upon the camp as easily as John
thought, and wanted to prepare for a day of desert heat.

"If we were sure just where the camp lay," she said, "I would go on for
help.  But as we aren't certain, I'm afraid to be separated from you,
John."

John looked up fiercely with his haggard eyes.

"Don't you dare to move six inches from me, Rhoda.  It will kill me to
lose you now."

"Of course I won't," said Rhoda.  "I've had my lesson about losing
myself in the desert.  But you must have some sleep before we go any
farther."

Rhoda spoke with a cheerfulness she did not feel.  She looked about for
a comfortable resting-place but the desert was barren.

"There's no use trying to find a comfortable bed," she said.  "You had
better lie down right where you are."

"Honey," said John, "I've no idea of sleeping.  It will be time enough
for that when we reach camp.  But if you think you could stand guard
for just ten minutes I will lie flat in the sand and rest.  You take my
watch and time me."

"That's splendid!" said Rhoda, helping him to clear of rocks and cactus
a space long enough to lie in.

"Just ten minutes," said DeWitt, and as he spoke he sank to sleep.

Rhoda stood in the moonlight looking into the man's unconscious face.
His new-grown beard gave him a haggard look that was enhanced by the
dark circles under his eyes.  That wan face touched Rhoda much more
than the healthy face of former days.  The lines of weariness and pain
that never could be fully erased were all for her, she thought with a
little catch of her breath.  Then with a pitying, affectionate look at
the sleeping man came a whimsical smile.  Once she had thought no one
could equal John in physical vigor.  Now she pictured Kut-le's panther
strength and endurance, and smiled.

She looked at the watch.  Five hours till dawn.  She would let John
have the whole of that time in which to sleep.  His ten minutes would
be worse than useless, while to find the camp after the moon had set
would be quite out of the question.  Her own eyes were wide and
sleepless.  She sat in the sand beside DeWitt until driven by the cold
to pace back and forth.  John slept without stirring; the sleep of
complete exhaustion.  Rhoda was not afraid, nor did she feel lonely.
The desert was hers now.  There was no wind, but now and again the
cactus rustled as if unseen wings had brushed it.  The dried heaps of
cholla stirred as if unseen paws had pressed them.  From afar came the
demoniacal laughter of coyotes on their night hunts.  But still Rhoda
was not afraid.

At first, in the confusion of thoughts that the day's events had
crowded on her, her clearest sense was of thankfulness.  Then she fell
to wondering what had happened to Porter and Kut-le.  Suddenly she
caught her breath with a shiver.  If Porter won there could be but one
answer as to Kut-le's fate.  John's attitude of mind told that.  Rhoda
twisted her hands together.

"I will not have him killed!" she whispered.  "No!  No!  I will not
have him killed!"

For many minutes she paced back and forth, battling with her fears.
Then she suddenly recalled the fact that vengeance was to be saved for
John.  This uncanny thought comforted her.  She had little fear but
that she could manage John.

And then in the utter silence of the desert night, staring at the
sinking moon, Rhoda asked herself why, when she should have been mad
with joy over her own rescue, she was giving all her thoughts to
Kut-le's plight!  For a moment the question brought a flood of
confusion.  Then, standing alone in the night beauty of the desert, the
girl acknowledged the truth that she had denied even to herself so
long.  The young Indian's image returned to her endowed with all the
dignity of his remarkable physical perfection.  She knew now that from
the first this physical beauty of his had had a strong appeal to her.
She knew now that all his unusual characteristics that at first had
seemed so strange to her were the ones that had drawn her to him.  His
strange mental honesty, his courage, his brutal incisiveness, all had
fascinated her.  All her days with him returned to her, days of
weakness, of anger, then the weeks on the ledge, and the day when she
had found the desert, and finally the day just past, to the very moment
when Billy Porter had come upon them on the ledge.

Rhoda stood with unseeing eyes while before her inward vision passed a
magnificent panorama of the glories through which Kut-le had led her.
Chaos of mountain and desert, resplendent with color; cool, sweet depth
of canon; burning height of tortured peak; slope of pungent pinon
forest--all wrapped in the haze which is the desert's own.

Rhoda knew the truth; knew that she loved Kut-le!  She knew that she
loved him with all the passionate devotion for which her rebirth had
given her the capacity.

With this acknowledgment, all her calm was swept away.  With fingers
clasped against her breast, with wide eyes on the brooding night, she
wished that she might tell him this that had come to her.  If only once
more the inscrutable tenderness of his black eyes were upon her!  If
the deep imperative voice were but sounding in her ears again!  If only
she could feel now the touch of his powerful arms as he carried her the
long sick miles to Chira.  Trembling with longing, her gaze fell upon
the man sleeping at her feet.  She drew a sudden troubled breath.  Must
she renounce this new rapture of living?  Must she?

"Have I found new life in the desert only to lose it?" she whispered.
"O Kut-le!  Kut-le!"

DeWitt slept on, unmoving, and Rhoda watched him with tragedy-stricken
eyes.

"What shall I do!" she whispered, lips quivering, shaking hands
twisting together.  "Oh, what shall I do!"

She tried to picture a future with Kut-le.  She saw his tenderness, his
purposefulness, the bigness of his mind and spirit.  Then with a cold
clutch at her throat came the thought of race barrier, and in a moment
Rhoda was plunged into the oldest, the most hopeless, the least
solvable of all love's problems.  Minute after minute went by and the
girl, standing by the sleeping man, fought a fight that shook her
slender body and racked her soul.  At last she raised her face to the
sky.

"I want to do what is right!" she said piteously.  "It doesn't matter
about me, if only I can decide what is right!"  Then after, a pause, "I
will marry John!  I will!" like a child that has been punished and
promises to be good.  Still another pause, then, "So that part of me is
dead!" and she put her fingers before her eyes and fell to crying, not
with the easy tears of a woman but with the deep, agonizing sobs of a
man over his dead.

"Kut-le, I wanted you!  I wanted you for my mate!  If I could have
heard you, seen you, felt you once more!  Nothing else would have
mattered.  I wanted you!"

A long hour passed in which Rhoda sat in the sand, limp and quiescent,
as though all but wrecked by the storm through which she had passed.
Dawn came at last.  The air was pregnant with new hope, with a vague
uplifting of sense and being that told of the coming of a new day.  The
east quivered with prismatic colors and suddenly the sun appeared.

Rhoda rose and stooped over DeWitt to smooth the hair back from his
forehead.

"Come," she said softly.  "It's breakfast time!"

DeWitt sat up bewildered.  Then his senses returned.

"Rhoda," he exclaimed, "what do you mean by this!"

Rhoda's smile was a little wan.

"You needed the rest and I didn't!"

DeWitt rose and shook himself like a great dog, then looked at Rhoda
wonderingly.

"And you don't look much done up!  But you had no right to do such a
thing!  I told you to give me ten minutes.  I feel like a brute.  Lie
down now and get a little sleep yourself."

"Lie in the sun?  Thank you, I'd rather push on to the camp and have
some breakfast.  How do you feel?"

"Much better!  It was fine of you, dear, but it wasn't a fair deal."

"I'll be good from now on!" said Rhoda meekly.  "What would you like
for breakfast?"

DeWitt looked about him.  Already the desert was assuming its brazen
aspect.

"Water will be enough for me," he answered, "and nothing else.  I am
seriously considering a rigid diet for a time."

They both drank sparingly of the water in Rhoda's canteen.

"I have three shots in my Colt," said DeWitt, "but I want to save them
for an emergency.  But if we don't strike camp pretty soon, I'll try to
pot a jack-rabbit."

"We can eat desert mice," said Rhoda.  "I know how to catch and cook
them!"

"Heaven forbid!" ejaculated DeWitt.  "Let's start on at once, if you're
not too tired."

So they began the day cheerfully.  As the morning wore on and they
found no trace of the camp, they began to watch the canteen carefully.
Gradually their thirst became so great that the desire for food was
quite secondary to it and they made no attempt to hunt for a rabbit.
They agreed toward noon to save the last few drops in the canteen until
they could no longer do without it.

Hour after hour they toiled in the blinding heat, the strange deep blue
of the sky reflecting the brazen light of the desert.  In their careful
avoiding of the mountain where they had rested at sunset the night
before, they gradually worked out into a wide barren space with dunes
and rock heaps interchanging.

"This won't do at all," said Dewitt at last, wearily.  "We had better
try for any old mountain at all in the hope of finding water."

They stood panting, staring at the distant haze of a peak.  Trackless
and tortuous, the way underfoot was incredibly difficult.  Yet the
distances melted in ephemeral slopes as lovely in their tints as they
were accursed in their reality of cruelty.  Rhoda, unaccustomed to day
travel, panted and gasped as they walked.  But she held her own fairly
well, while DeWitt, sick and overstrained at the start, was failing
rapidly.

"It's noon now," said John a little thickly.  "You had better lie in
the shade of that rock for an hour."

"You sleep too!" pleaded Rhoda.

"I'm too hot to sleep.  I'll wake you in an hour."

When Rhoda awoke it was to see DeWitt leaning against the rock heap,
his lips swollen, his eyes uncertain.

Weak and dizzy herself, she rose and laid her hand on John's, every
maternal instinct in her stirring and speaking in her gray eyes.

"Come, dear boy, we mustn't give up so easily."

John lifted the little hand to his cheek.

"I won't give up," he said uncertainly.  "I'll take care of you, honey
girl!"

"Come on, then!" said Rhoda.  "You see that queer bunch of cholla
yonder?  Let's get as far as that before we stop again!"

With a great effort, DeWitt gathered himself together and, fixing his
eyes on the fantastic cactus growth, he plodded desperately through the
sand.  At the cholla bunch, Rhoda pointed to a jutting lavender rock.

"At that we'll rest for a minute.  Come on, John!"

John's sick eyes did not waver but his trembling legs described many
circles in their journey to the jutting rock.  Distances were so many
times what they seemed that Rhoda's little scheme carried them over a
mile of desert before DeWitt sank to his knees.

"I'm a sick man," he said huskily as he fell in a limp heap.

Nothing could have appeared more opportunely than this new hardship to
take Rhoda's mind off her misery of the night.  Nothing could have
brought John so near to her as this utter helplessness brought about
through his toiling for her.  She looked at him with tears of pity in
her eyes, while her heart sank with fright.  She knew the terrible
danger that menaced them.  But she closed her lips firmly and looked
thoughtfully at the mite of water that remained to them.  Then she held
the canteen to DeWitt's lips.  He pushed it away from him and in
another moment or so he rose.

Rhoda, fastening their hopes to another distant cholla, led the way on
again.  But she too was growing a little light-headed.  The distant
cactus danced grotesquely and black spots flitted between her and the
molten iron over which, her fancy said they traveled.  Suddenly she
laughed crazily:

  "'Twas brillig, and the slythy toves
  Did gyre and gimble in the wabe;
  All mimsy were the borogoves,
  And the mome raths outgrabe!"

DeWitt laughed hoarsely.

"That's just the way it looks to me, Rhoda.  But you're just as crazy
as I am."

Rhoda jerked herself together and tried to moisten her lips with her
swollen tongue.

"We must take it turn about.  When you are crazy I must try to be sane!"

"Good idea!" croaked DeWitt, "only I'm crazy all the time!"

  "'O frabjous day!  Calloo! Collay!
  He chortled in his joy!'"

Rhoda patted his hand.

"Poor John!  Oh, my poor John!  I was not worth all this.  You may not
have an Apache's strength, but your heart is right!"  Two great tears
rolled down her cheeks.

DeWitt looked at her seriously.

"You aren't as dry as I am.  I haven't enough moisture in me to moisten
my eyeballs, let alone cry!  I am so cracked and dry that you will have
to soak me in the first spring we come to before I'll hold water."

Rhoda laughed weakly and John turned away with a hurt look.

"It's not a joke!" he said.

How long they were, in their staggering, circuitous course, in reaching
their goal of cholla, Rhoda never knew.  She knew that each heavy foot,
tingling and scorched, seemed to drag her back a step for every one
that she took forward.  She knew that she repeatedly offered the last
of their water to John and that he repeatedly refused it, urging it on
her.  She knew that the pulp of the barrel cactus that she tried to
chew turned to bitter sawdust in her mouth and sickened her.  Then
suddenly, as she struggled to refocus her wandering wits on the cholla,
it appeared within touch of her hand.

Afraid to pause, she adopted a new goal in a far mesa, and clutching
DeWitt's unresponsive fingers she struggled forward.

And so on and on toward a never nearing goal; now falling, now rising,
now pausing to strive to hush Dewitt's cracked voice that wandered
aimlessly through all the changes of verse that seemed to his delirium
appropriate to the occasion.  It seemed to Rhoda that her own brain was
reeling as she watched the illimitable space through which they moved.
John's voice did not cease.

  "Alone!  Alone!  All, all, alone!
  Alone on a wide, wide sea!
  So lonely 'twas that God himself,
  Scarce seemed there to be!"

"Hush, John!  Hush!" pleaded Rhoda.

  "Alone!  Alone!  All, all alone!"

repeated the croaking voice.

"But I'm with you, John!" Rhoda pleaded, but DeWitt rambled on
unheeding.

The way grew indescribably rough.  The desert floor became a series of
sand dunes, a rise and fall of sea-like billows over which they climbed
like ants over a new-plowed field.  In the hollow of each wave they
rested, sinking in the sand, where, breathless and scorching, the air
scintillated above their motionless forms.  At the crest of each they
rested again, the desert wind hurtling the hot sand against their
parched skins.  Frequently John refused to rise and Rhoda in her half
delirium would sink beside him until the mist lifted from her brain and
once more the distant mesa forced itself upon her vision.

"Come, John, we will soon be there.  We can't keep on this way forever
and not reach some place.  Please come, dear!"

"'He maketh me to lie down in green pastures.  He leadeth me beside
still waters.  He restoreth my soul--'"

"Perhaps there will be water there!  O John, dear John, if you love me,
come!"

"I don't love you, little boy!  I love Rhoda Tuttle.

  "O for a draught of vintage that hath been
  Cooled a long age in deep delved earth!"

"Please, John!  I'm so sick!"

The man, after two or three attempts, staggered to his feet and stood
swaying.

"God help me!" he said.  "I can do no more!"

"Yes, you can, John!  Yes, you can!  Perhaps there is a whole fountain
of water there on the mesa!"

The glazed look returned to DeWitt's eyes.

"'Or the pitcher be broken at the fountain,'" he muttered, "'or the
wheel broken at the cistern--or the pitcher broken at the fountain, or
the wheel--'"

Rhoda threw her arm across her eyes.

"Oh, not that, John!  I can't bear that one!"

Again, she stood upon the roof at Chira, looking up into Kut-le's face.
Again the low wailing of the Indian women and the indescribable depth
and hunger of those dear black eyes.  Again the sense of protection and
content in his nearness.

"O Kut-le!  Kut-le!" she moaned.

Instantly sanity returned to John's eyes.

"Why did you say Kut-le?" he demanded thickly.

"Were you thinking of him?"

"Yes," answered Rhoda simply.  "Come on, John!"

DeWitt struggled on bravely to the crest of the next dune.

"I hate that Apache devil!" he muttered.  "I am going to kill him!"

Rhoda quickly saw the magic of Kut-le's name.

"Why should you want to kill Kut-le?" she asked as Dewitt paused at the
top of the next dune.  Instantly he started on.

"Because I hate him!  I hate him, the devil!"

"See how near the mesa is, John!  Only a little way!  Kut-le would say
we were poor stuff!"

"No doubt!  Well, I'll let a gun give him my opinion of him!"

The sand dunes had indeed beaten themselves out against the wall of a
giant mesa.  Rhoda followed blindly along the wall and stumbled upon a
precipitous trail leading upward.




CHAPTER XVIII

THE FORGOTTEN CITY

Up this tortuous trail Rhoda staggered, closely followed by DeWitt.  At
a level spot the girl paused.

"Water, John!  Water!" she cried.

The two threw themselves down and drank of the bubbling spring until
they could hold no more.  Then Rhoda lay down on the sun-warmed rocks
and sleep overwhelmed her.

She opened her eyes to stare into a yellow moon that floated liquidly
above her.  Whether she had slept through a night and a day or whether
but a few hours had elapsed since she had staggered to the spring
beside which she lay, she could not tell.  She lay looking up into the
sky languidly, but with clear mind.  A deep sigh roused her.  DeWitt
sat on the other side of the spring, rubbing his eyes.

"Hello!" he said in a hoarse croak.  "How did we land here?"

"I led us here sometime in past ages.  When or how, _quien sabe_?"
answered Rhoda.  "John, we must find food somehow."

"Drink all the water you can, Rhoda." said DeWitt; "it helps some, and
I'll pot a rabbit.  What a fool I am.  You poor girl!  More hardships
for you!"

Rhoda dipped her burning face into the water, then lifted it, dripping.

"If only you won't be delirious, John, I can stand the hardships."

DeWitt looked at the girl curiously.

"Was I delirious?  And you were alone, leading me across that Hades out
there?  Rhoda dear, you make me ashamed of myself!"

"I don't see how you were to blame," answered Rhoda stoutly.  "Think
what you have been doing for me!"

John rose stiffly.

"Do you feel equal to climbing this trail with me, to find where we
are, or had you rather stay here?"

"I don't want to stay here alone," answered Rhoda.

Very slowly and weakly they started up the trail.  The spring was on a
broad stone terrace.  Above it rose another terrace weathered and
disrupted until in the moonlight it looked like an impregnable castle
wall, embattled and embuttressed.  But clinging to the seemingly
invulnerable fortress was the trail, a snake-like shadow in the
moonlight.

"Perhaps we had better stay at the spring until morning," suggested
Rhoda, her weak legs flagging.

"Not with the hope of shelter a hundred feet above us," answered John
firmly.  "This trail is worn six inches into the solid rock.  My guess
is that there are some inhabitants here.  It's queer that they haven't
discovered us."

Slowly and without further protest, Rhoda followed DeWitt up the trail.
Deep-worn and smooth though it was, they accomplished their task with
infinite difficulty.  Rhoda, stumbling like a sleep-sodden child,
wondered if ever again she was to accomplish physical feats with the
magical ease with which Kut-le had endowed her.

"If he were here, I'd know I was to tumble into a comfortable camp,"
she thought.  Then with a remorseful glance at DeWitt's patient back,
"What a selfish beast you are, Rhoda Tuttle!"

She reached John's side and together they paused at the top of the
trail.  Black against the sky, the moon crowning its top with a
frost-like radiance, was a huge flat-topped building.  Night birds
circled about it.  From black openings in its front owls hooted.  But
otherwise there was neither sight nor sound of living thing.  The
desert far below and beyond lay like a sea of death.  Rhoda
unconsciously drew nearer to DeWitt.

"Where are the dogs?  At Chira the dogs barked all night.  Indians
always have dogs!"

"It must be very late," whispered DeWitt.  "Even the dogs are asleep!"

"And at Chira," went on Rhoda, whispering as did DeWitt, "owls didn't
hoot from the windows."

"Let's go closer," suggested John.

Rhoda thrust cold little fingers into his hand.

The doors were empty and forlorn.  The terraced walls, built with the
patient labor of the long ago, were sagged and decayed.  Riot of
greasewood crowned great heaps of debris.  A loneliness as of the end
of the world came upon the two wanderers.  Sick and dismayed, they
stood in awe before this relic of the past.

"_Whoo_!  _Whoo_!" an owl's cry sounded from the black window openings.

DeWitt spoke softly.

"Rhoda, it's one of the forgotten cities!"

"Let's go back!  Let's go back to the spring!" pleaded Rhoda.  "It is
so uncanny in the dark!"

"No!"  DeWitt rubbed his aching head wearily.  "I must contrive some
sort of shelter for you.  Almost anything is better than another night
in the open desert.  Come on!  We will explore a little."

"Let's wait till morning," begged Rhoda.  "I'm so cold and shivery."

"Dear sweetheart, that's just the point.  You will be sick if you don't
have some sort of shelter.  You have suffered enough.  Will you sit
here and let me look about?"

"No!  No!  I don't want to be left alone."

Rhoda followed John closely up into the mass of fallen rock.

DeWitt smiled.  It appealed to the tenderest part of his nature that
the girl who had led him through the terrible experiences of the desert
should show fear now that a haven was reached.

"Come on, little girl," he said.

Painfully, for they both were weak and dizzy, they clambered to a gaunt
opening in the gray wall.  Rhoda clutched John's arm with a little
scream as a bat whirred close by them.  Within the opening DeWitt
scratched one of his carefully hoarded matches.  The tiny flare
revealed a small adobe-walled room, quite bare save for broken bits of
pottery on the floor.  John lighted a handful of greasewood and by its
brilliant light they examined the floor and walls.

"What a clean, dry little room!" exclaimed Rhoda.  "Oh, I am so tired
and sleepy!"

"Let's look a little farther before we stop.  What's on the other side
of this broken wall?"

They picked their way across the litter of pottery and peered into
another room, the duplicate of the first.

"How will these do for our respective sleeping-rooms?" asked DeWitt.

Rhoda stared at John with horror in her eyes.

"I'd as soon sleep in a tomb!  Let's make a fire outside and sleep
under the stars.  I'd rather have sleep than food just now."

"It will have to be just a tiny smudge, up behind this debris, where
Kut-le can't spot it," answered DeWitt.  "I won't mind having a red eye
of fire for company.  It will help to keep me awake."

"But you must sleep," protested Rhoda.

"But I mustn't," answered John grimly.  "I've played the baby act on
this picnic as much as I propose to.  It is my trick at the wheel."

Too weary to protest further, Rhoda threw herself down with her feet
toward the fire and pillowed her head on her arm.  DeWitt filled his
pipe and sat puffing it, with his arms folded across his knees.  Rhoda
watched him for a moment or two.  She found herself admiring the full
forehead, the lines of refinement about the lips that the beard could
not fully conceal.

"He's not as handsome as Kut-le," she thought wearily, "but
he's--he's--" but before her thought was completed she was asleep.

Rhoda woke at dawn and lay waiting for the stir of the squaws about the
morning meal.  Then with a start she rose and looked soberly about her.
Suddenly she smiled.

"Tenderfoot!" she murmured.

DeWitt lay fast asleep by the ashes of the fire.

"If Kut-le," she thought.  Then she stopped abruptly and stamped her
foot.  "You are not even to think of Kut-le any more!"  And with her
cleft chin very firm she descended the trail to the spring.  When she
returned, DeWitt was rising stiffly to his feet.

"Hello!" he cried.  "I was good this time.  I never closed my eyes till
dawn.  I'm so hungry I could eat greasewood.  How do you feel?"

"Weak with hunger but otherwise very well.  Go wash your face, Johnny."

DeWitt grinned and started down the trail obediently.  But Rhoda laid a
detaining hand on his arm.  The sun was but a moment high.  All the
mesa front lay in purple shadows, though farther out the desert glowed
with the yellow light of a new day.

"I think animals come to the spring to drink," said Rhoda.  "There were
tiny wet footmarks there when I went down to wash my face."

"Bully!" exclaimed John.  "Wait now, let's watch."

The two dropped to the ground and peered over the edge of the upper
terrace.  The spring bubbled forth serenely, followed its shallow
trough a short distance, then disappeared into the insatiable floor of
the desert.  For several moments the two lay watching until at last
Rhoda grew restless.  DeWitt laid a detaining hand on her arm.

"Hush!" he whispered.

A pair of jack-rabbits loped up the trail, sniffed the air tentatively,
then with forelegs in the water drank greedily.  DeWitt's right arm
stiffened, there were two puffs of smoke and the two kicking rabbits
rolled into the spring.

"I'm beginning to have a little self-respect as the man of the party,"
said DeWitt, as he blew the smoke from his Colt.

Rhoda ran down to the spring and lifted the two wet little bodies.
John took them from her.

"If you'll find some place for a table, I'll bring these up in no time."

When DeWitt came up from the spring with the dressed rabbits, he found
a little fire glowing between two rocks.  Near by on a big flat-topped
stone were set forth two earthen bowls, with a brown water-jar in the
center.  As he stared, Rhoda came out of the building with interested
face.

"Look, John!  See what I found on a little corner shelf!"  She held in
her outstretched hand a tiny jar no bigger than a wine-glass.  It was
of an exquisitely polished black.  "Not even an explorer can have been
here, or nothing so perfect as this would have been left!  What hands
do you suppose made this!"

But DeWitt did not answer her question.

"Now, look here, Rhoda, you aren't to do anything like starting a fire
and lugging these heavy jars again!  You're not with the Indians now.
You've got a man to wait on you!"

Rhoda looked at him curiously.

"But I've learned to like to do it!" she protested.  "Nobody can roast
a rabbit to suit me but myself," and in spite of DeWitt's protests she
spitted the rabbits and would not let him tend the fire which she said
was too fine an art for his untrained hands.  In a short time the rich
odor of roasting flesh rose on the air and John watched the pretty cook
with admiration mingled with perplexity.  Rhoda insisting on cooking a
meal!  More than that, Rhoda evidently enjoying the job!  The idea left
him speechless.

An hour after Rhoda had spitted the game, John sighed with contentment
as he looked at the pile of bones beside his earthen bowl.

"And they say jacks aren't good eating!" he said.  "Why if they had
been salted they would have been better than any game I ever ate!"

"You never were so hungry before," said Rhoda.  "Still, they were well
roasted, now weren't they?"

"Your vanity is colossal, Miss Tuttle," laughed John, "but I will admit
that I never saw better roasting."  Then he said soberly, "I believe we
had better not try the trail again today, Rhoda dear.  We don't know
where to go and we've no supplies.  We'd better get our strength up,
resting here today, and tomorrow start in good shape."

Rhoda looked wistfully from the shade of the pueblo out over the
desert.  She had become very, very tired of this endless fleeing.

"I wish the Newman ranch was just over beyond," she said.  "John, what
will you do if Kut-le comes on us here?"

DeWitt's forehead burned a painful red.

"I have a shot left in my revolver," he said.

Rhoda walked ever to John and put one hand on his shoulder as he sat
looking up at her with somber blue eyes.

"John," she said, "I want you to promise me that you will fire at
Kut-le only in the last extremity to keep him from carrying me off, and
that you will shoot only as Porter did, to lame and not to kill."

John's jaws came together and he returned the girl's scrutiny with a
steel-like glance.

"Why do you plead for him?" he asked finally.

"He saved my life," she answered simply.

John rose and walked up and down restlessly.

"Rhoda, if a white man had done this thing I would shoot him as I would
a dog.  What do I care for a law in a case like this!  We were men long
before we had laws.  Why should this Indian be let go when he has done
what a white would be shot for?"

Rhoda looked at him keenly.

"You talk as if in your heart you knew you were going to kill him
because he is an Indian and were trying to justify yourself for it!"

He turned on the girl a look so haunted, so miserable, yet so
determined, that her heart sank.  For a time there was silence, each
afraid to speak.  At last Rhoda said coolly:

"Will you get fresh water while I bank in the fire?"

DeWitt's face relaxed.  He smiled a little grimly.

"I'll do anything for you but that one thing--promise not to kill the
Indian."

"The desert has changed us both, John," said Rhoda.  "It has taken the
veneer off both of us!"

"Maybe so," replied DeWitt.  "I only know that that Apache must pay for
the hell you and I have lived through."

"Look at me, John!" cried Rhoda.  "Can't you realize that the good
Kut-le has done me has been far greater than his affront to me?  Do you
see how well I am, how strong?  Oh, if I could only make you see what a
different world I live in!  You would have been tied to an invalid,
John, if Kut-le hadn't stolen me!  Think now of all I can do for you!
Of the home I can make, of the work I can do!"

DeWitt answered tersely.

"I'm mighty glad you're well, but only for your own sake and because I
can have you longer.  I don't want you to work for me.  I'll do all the
working that's done in our family!"

"But," protested Rhoda, "that's just keeping me lazy and selfish!"

"You couldn't be selfish if you tried.  You pay your way with your
beauty.  When I think of that Apache devil having the joy of you all
this time, watching you grow back to health, taking care of you,
carrying you, it makes me feel like a cave man.  I could kill him with
a club!  Thank heaven, the lynch law can hold in this forsaken spot!
And there isn't a man in the country but will back me up, not a jury
that would find me guilty!"

Rhoda sat in utter consternation.  The power of the desert to lay bare
the human soul appalled her.  This was a DeWitt that the East never
could have shown her.  It sickened her as she realized that no words of
hers could sway this man; to realize that she was trying to stay with
her feeble feminine hands passions that were as old a world-force as
love itself.  All her new-found strength seemed inadequate to solve
this new problem.




CHAPTER XIX

THE TRAIL AGAIN

For a long time Rhoda sat silently considering her problem and John
watched her soberly.  Finally she turned to speak.  As she did so, she
caught on the young man's face a look so weary, so puzzled, so
altogether wretched that the girl's heart smote her.  This was indeed a
poor return for what he had endured for her!  Rhoda jumped to her feet
with resolution in her eyes.  "Are you too tired to explore the ruins?"
she asked.  DeWitt rose languidly.  Rhoda had responded at once to rest
and food but John would need a month of care and quiet in which to
regain his strength.

"I'll do anything you want me to--in that line!"

Rhoda carefully ignored the last phrase.

"Even if we're half dead, it's too bad to miss the opportunity to
examine such a wonderful thing as this.  You couldn't find as glorious
a setting for a ruin anywhere in Europe."

"Oh, yes, you could; lots of 'em," answered DeWitt.  "You can't compare
a ruin like this with anything in Europe.  What makes European ruins
appeal to us is not only their intrinsic beauty but the association of
big ideas with them.  We know that big thoughts built them and perhaps
destroyed them."

"What do you call big thoughts?" asked Rhoda.  "Wasn't it just as great
for these Pueblo Indians to perform such terrible labor in building
this for their families as it was for some old king to work thousands
of slaves to death to build him a monument?"

DeWitt laughed.

"Rhoda, you can love the desert, its Indians and its ruins all you want
to, if you won't ask me to!  I've had all I want of the three of them!
Lord, how I hate it all!"

Rhoda looked at him wistfully.  If only he could understand the
spiritual change in her that was even greater than the physical!  If
only he could see the beauty of those far lavender hazes!  If only he
could understand how even now she was heartsick for the night trail
where one looked up into the sky as into a shadowy opal!  If only he
knew the peace that had dwelt with her on the holiday ledge where there
were tints and beauties too deep for words!  And yet with the
wistfulness came a strange sense of satisfaction that all this new part
of her must belong forever to Kut-le.

John led the way into the dwelling.  All was emptiness and ruin.  All
that remained of the old life within its walls were wonderful bits of
pottery.  Only once did DeWitt give evidence of pleasure.  He was
examining the carefully finished walls of one of the rooms when he
called:

"I say, Rhoda, just look at this bit of humanness!"

Rhoda came to him quickly and he pointed low down on the adobe wall
where was the perfect imprint of a baby's hand.

"The little rascal got spanked, I'll bet, for putting his hand on the
'dobe before it was dry!" commented John.

Rhoda smiled but said nothing.  These departed peoples had become very
real and very pitiable to her.

As soon as he could drag Rhoda from the ancient pots, John led the way
to the top of the ruin.  He was anxious to find if there were more than
the one trail leading from the desert.  To his great satisfaction he
found that the mesa was unscalable except at the point that Rhoda had
found as she staggered up from the desert.

"I'm going to guard that trail tonight," he said.  "It's just possible,
you know, that Kut-le escaped from Porter, though I think if he had he
would have been upon us long before this.  I've been mighty careless.
But my brain is so tired it seems to have been off duty.  I could hold
that trail single-handed from the upper terrace for a week."

"Just remember," said Rhoda quickly, "that I've asked you not to shoot
to kill!"

Again the hard light gleamed in DeWitt's eyes.

"I shall have a few words with him first, then I shall shoot to kill.
There is that between that Indian and me which a woman evidently can't
understand.  I just can't see why you take the stand you do!"

"John dear," cried Rhoda, "put yourself in his place.  With all the
race prejudice against you that he had, wouldn't you have done as he
has?"

"Probably," answered Dewitt calmly.  "I also would have expected what
he is going to get."

A sudden sense of the bizarre nature of their conversation caused Rhoda
to say comically:

"I never knew that you could have such _bloody_ ideas, John!"

DeWitt was glad to turn the conversation.

"I am so only occasionally," he said.  "For instance, instead of
shooting the rabbit for supper, I'm going to try a figure-four trap."

They returned to their little camp on the upper terrace and Rhoda sat
with wistful gray eyes fastened on the desert while John busied himself
with the trap-making.  He worked with the skill of his country boyhood
and the trap was cleverly finished.

"It's evident that I'm not the leader of the expedition any more," said
Rhoda, looking at the trap admiringly.

John shook his head.

"I've lost my faith in myself as a hero.  It's one thing to read of the
desert and think how well you could have managed there, and another
thing to be on the spot!"

The day passed slowly.  As night drew on the two on the mesa top grew
more and more anxious.  There was little doubt but that they could live
for a number of days at the old pueblo, yet it was evident that the
ruin was far from any traveled trail and that chances of discovery were
slight except by Kut-le.  On the other hand, they were absolutely
unprepared for a walking trip across the desert.  Troubled and
uncertain what to do, they watched the wonder of the sunset.  Deeper,
richer, more divine grew the colors of the desert, and in one supreme,
flaming glory the sun sank from view.

DeWitt with his arm across Rhoda's shoulders spoke anxiously.

"Don't you still think we'd better start tomorrow?"

"Yes," she answered, "I suppose so.  What direction shall we take?"

"East," replied DeWitt.  "We're bound to strike help if we can keep
going long enough in one direction.  We'll cook a good supply of
rabbits and I'll fix up one of those bowl-like ollas with my
handkerchief, so we can carry water in it as well as in the two
canteens.  I think you had better sleep in the little room there
tonight and I'll lie across the end of the trail here."

Rhoda sighed.

"I've nothing better to suggest.  As you say, it's all guesswork!"

They set the rabbit trap by the spring, then Rhoda, quite recovered
from her nervousness of the night before, entered her little
sleeping-room and made ready for the night.  The front of the room had
so crumbled away that she could see John's dark form by the trail, and
she lay down with a sense of security and fell asleep at once.

John paced the terrace for a long hour after Rhoda was asleep, trying
to plan every detail for the morrow.  He dared not confess even to
himself how utterly disheartened he felt in the face of this terrible
adversary, the desert.  Finally, realizing that he must have rest if
Rhoda was not to repeat her previous experience in leading him across
the desert he stretched himself on the ground across the head of the
trail.  He must trust to his nervousness to make him sleep lightly.

How long she had slept Rhoda did not know when she was wakened by a
half-muffled oath from DeWitt.  She jumped to her feet and ran out to
the terrace.  Never while life remained to her was she to forget what
she saw there.  DeWitt and Kut-le were wrestling in each other's grip!
Rhoda stood horrified.  As the two men twisted about, DeWitt saw the
girl and panted:

"Don't stir, Rhoda!  Don't call or you'll have his whole bunch up here!"

"Don't worry about that!" exclaimed Kut-le.  "You've been wanting to
get hold of me.  Now we'll fight it out bare-handed and the best man
wins."

Rhoda looked wildly down the trail, then ran up to the two men.

"Stop!" she screamed.  "Stop!"  Then as she caught the look in the
men's faces as they glared at each other she cried, "I hate you both,
you beasts!"

Her screams carried far in the night air, for in a moment Cesca came
panting up the trail.  She lunged at DeWitt with catlike fury, but at a
sharp word from Kut-le she turned to Rhoda and stood guard beside the
girl.  Rhoda stood helplessly watching the battle as one watches the
horrors of a nightmare.

Kut-le and DeWitt now were fighting as two wolves fight.  Both the men
were trained wrestlers, but in their fury all their scientific training
was forgotten, and rolling over and over on the rocky trail each fought
for a hold on the other's throat.  With Kut-le was the advantage of
perfect condition and superior strength.  But DeWitt was fighting for
his stolen mate.  He was fighting like a cave man who has brooded for
months on his revenge, and he was a terrible adversary.  He had the
sudden strength, the fearful recklessness of a madman.  Now rolling on
the edge of the terrace, now high against the crumbling pueblo, the
savage and the civilized creature dragged each other back and forth.
And Rhoda, awed by this display of passions, stood like the First Woman
and waited!

Of a sudden Kut-le disentangled himself and with knees on DeWitt's
shoulders he clutched at the white man's throat.  At the same time,
DeWitt gathered together his recumbent body and with a mighty heave he
flung Kut-le over his head.  Rhoda gave a little cry, thinking the
fight was ended; but as Kut-le gained his feet, DeWitt sprang to meet
him and the struggle was renewed.  Rhoda never had dreamed of a sight
so sickening as this of the two men she knew so well fighting for each
other's throats with the animal's lust for killing.  She did not know
what would be Kut-le's course if he gained the mastery, but as she
caught glimpses of DeWitt's face with its clenched teeth and terrible
look of loathing she knew that if his fingers ever reached Kut-le's
throat the Indian could hope for no mercy.

And then she saw DeWitt's face go white and his head drop back.

"Oh!" she screamed.  "You've killed him!  You've killed him!"

The Indian's voice came in jerks as he eased DeWitt to the ground.

"He's just fainted.  He's put up a tremendous fight for a man in his
condition!"

As he spoke he was tying DeWitt's hands and ankles with his own and
DeWitt's handkerchiefs.  Rhoda would have run to DeWitt's aid but
Cesca's hand was tight on her arm.  Before the girl could plan any
action, Kut-le had turned to her and had lifted her in his arms.  She
fought him wildly.

"I can't leave him so, Kut-le!  You will kill all I've learned to feel
for you if you leave him so!"

"He'll be all right!" panted Kut-le, running down the trail.  "I've got
Billy Porter down here to leave with him!"

At the foot of the trail were horses.  Gagged and bound to his saddle
Billy Porter sat in the moonlight with Molly on guard.  Kut-le put
Rhoda on a horse, then quickly thrust Porter to the ground, where the
man sat helplessly.

"Oh, Billy!" cried Rhoda.  "John is on the terrace!  Find him!  Help
him!"

The last words were spoken as Kut-le turned her horse and led at a trot
into the desert.




CHAPTER XX

THE RUINED MISSION

Rhoda was so confused that for a moment she could only ease herself to
the pony's swift canter and wonder if her encounter with DeWitt had
been but a dream after all.  A short distance from the pueblo Kut-le
rode in beside her.  It was very dark, with the heavy blackness that
just precedes the dawn, but Rhoda felt that the Indian was looking at
her exultingly.

"It seemed as if I never would get Alchise and Injun Tom moved to a
friend's _campos_ so that I could overtake you.  I will say that that
fellow Porter is game to the finish.  It took me an hour to subdue him!
Now, don't worry about the two of them.  With a little work they can
loose themselves and help each other to safety.  I saw Newman's trail
ten miles or so over beyond the pueblo mesa and I told Porter just how
to go to pick him up."

Rhoda laughed hysterically.

"No wonder you have such a hold on your Indians!  You seem never to
fail!  I do believe as much of it is luck as ingenuity!"

Kut-le chuckled.

"What a jolt DeWitt will find when he comes to, and finds Porter!"

"You needn't gloat over the situation, Kut-le!" exclaimed Rhoda, half
sobbing in her conflict of emotions.

"Oh, you mustn't mind anything I say," returned the young Indian.  "I
am crazy with joy at just hearing your voice again!  Are you really
sorry to be with me again?  Did DeWitt mean as much to you as ever?
Tell me, Rhoda!  Say just one kindly thing to me!"

"O Kut-le," cried Rhoda, "I can't!  I can't!  You must help me to be
strong!  You--who are the strongest person that I know!  Can't you put
yourself in my place and realize what a horrible position I am in?"

Kut-le answered slowly.

"I guess I can realize it.  But the end is so great, so much worth
while that nothing before that matters much, to me!  Rhoda, isn't this
good--the lift of the horse under your knees--the air rushing past your
face--the weave and twist of the trail--don't they speak to you and
doesn't your heart answer?"

"Yes," answered Rhoda simply.

The young Indian rode still closer.  Dawn was lifting now, and with a
gasp Rhoda saw what she had been too agonized to heed on the terrace in
the moonlight.  Kut-le was clothed again!  He wore the khaki suit, the
high-laced riding boots of the ranch days; and he wore them with the
grace, the debonair ease that had so charmed Rhoda in young Cartwell.
That little sense of his difference that his Indian nakedness had kept
in Rhoda's subconsciousness disappeared.  She stared at his broad,
graceful shoulders, at the fine outline of his head which still was
bare, and she knew that her decision was going to be indescribably
difficult to keep.  Kut-le watched the wistful gray eyes tenderly, as
if he realized the depth of anguish behind their wistfulness; yet he
watched none the less resolutely, as if he had no qualms over the
outcome of his plans.  And Rhoda, returning his gaze, caught the depth
and splendor of his eyes.  And that wordless joy of life whose thrill
had touched her the first time that she had met young Cartwell rushed
through her veins once more.  He was the youth, the splendor, the vivid
wholesomeness of the desert!  He was the heart itself, of the desert.

Kut-le laid his hand on hers.

"Rhoda," softly, "do you remember the moment before Porter interrupted
us?  Ah, dear one, you will have to prove much to erase the truth of
that moment from our hearts!  How much longer must I wait for you,
Rhoda?"

Rhoda did not speak, but as she returned the young man's gaze there
came her rare slow smile of unspeakable beauty and tenderness.  Kut-le
trembled; but before he could speak Rhoda seemed to see between his
face and hers, DeWitt, haggard and exhausted, expending the last
remnant of his strength in his fight for her.  She put her hands before
her face with a little sob.

Kut-le watched her in silence for a moment, then he said in his low
rich voice:

"Neither DeWitt nor I want you to suffer over your decision.  And
DeWitt doesn't want just the shell of you.  I have the real you!  O
Rhoda, the real you will belong to me if you are seven times DeWitt's
wife!  Can't you realize that forever and ever you are mine, no matter
how you fight or what you do?"

But Rhoda scarcely heard him.  She was with DeWitt, struggling across
the parching sands.

"O Kut-le!  Kut-le!  What shall I do!  What shall I do!"

Kut-le started to answer, then changed his mind.

"You poor, tired little girl," he said.  "You have had a fierce time
there in the desert.  You look exhausted.  What did you have to eat and
how did you make out crossing to the mesa?  By your trail you went
miles out of your way."

Rhoda struggled for calm.

"We nearly died the first day," she said.  "But we did very well after
we reached the mesa."

Kut-le smiled to himself.  It was hard even for him to realize that
this plucky girl who passed so simply over such an ordeal as he knew
she must have endured could be the Rhoda of the ranch.  But he said
only:

"We'll make for the timber line and let you rest for a while."

At mid-morning they left the desert and began to climb a rough mountain
slope.  At the pinon line, Kut-le called a halt.  Never before had
shade seemed so good to Rhoda as it did now.  She lay on the
pine-needles looking up into the soft green.  It was unspeakably
grateful to her eyes which had been so long tortured by the desert
glare.  She lay thus for a long time, her mental pain for a while lost
in the access of physical comfort.  Shortly Molly, who had been working
rapidly, brought her a steaming bowl of stew.  Rhoda ate this, then
with her head pillowed on her arm she fell asleep.

She was wakened by Molly's touch on her arm.  It was late afternoon.
Rhoda looked up into the squaw's face and drew a quick hard breath as
realization came to her.

"Molly!  Molly!" she cried.  "I'm in terrible, terrible trouble, Molly!"

The squaw looked worried.

"You no go away!  Kut-le heap sorry while you gone!"

But Rhoda scarcely heeded the woman's voice.  She rolled over with her
hot face in the fragrant needles and groaned.

"O Molly!  Molly!  I'm in terrible trouble!"

"What trouble?  You tell old Molly!"

Rhoda sat up and stared into the deep brown eyes.  Just as Kut-le had
become to her the splendor of the desert, so had Molly become the
brooding wisdom of the desert.  With sudden inspiration she grasped the
Indian woman's toil-scarred hands.

"Listen, Molly!  Before I knew Kut-le, I was going to marry the white
man, DeWitt.  And after he stole me I hated Kut-le and I hated the
desert.  And now, O Molly, I love both Kut-le and the desert, and I
must marry the white man!"

"Why?  You tell Molly why?"

"Because he is white, Molly, like me.  Because he loves me so and has
done so much for me!  But most of all because he is white!"

Molly scowled.

"Because Kut-le is Injun, you no marry him?"

Rhoda nodded miserably.

"Huh!  And you think you so big, Kut-le so big that Great Spirit care
if you marry white, marry Injun.  All Great Spirit care is for every
squaw to have papoose.  Squaw, she big fool to listen to her head.
Squaw, she must always listen to her heart, that is Great Spirit
talking.  Your heart, it say marry Kut-le!"

Molly paused and looked at the girl, who sat with stormy eyes on the
sinking sun.  And she forgot her hard-earned wisdom and was just a
heart-hungry woman.

"You stay!  Stay with Kut-le and old Molly!  You so sweet!  You like
little childs!  You lie in old Molly's heart like little girl papoose
that never came to Molly.  You stay!  Always, always, Molly will take
care of you!"

Rhoda was deeply touched.  This was the cry of the famished motherhood
of a dying race.  She put her soft cheek on Molly's shoulder and she
could no longer see the sun, for her eyes were tear-blinded.  Kut-le,
standing on the other side of the camp, looked at the picture with
deepening eyes; then he crossed and put his hand on Rhoda's shoulder.

"Dear one," he said, "you must eat your supper, then we must take the
trail."

Rhoda looked up into the young man's face.  She was exquisite in the
failing light.  For a moment it seemed as if Kut-le must fold her in
his arms; but something in her troubled gaze withheld him and he only
smiled at her caressingly.

"Before you eat," he said, "come to the edge of the camp and look
through the glasses."

Rhoda hurried after him, and stared out over the desert.  A short
distance out, vivid in the afterglow, moved two figures.  She
distinguished the short wiry figure of Porter, the gaunt figure of
DeWitt, walking with determined strides.  Waiting till she could
command her voice, Rhoda turned to Kut-le.  He was watching her keenly.

"Will they pick up our trail?  Are the poor things badly lost?"

"Billy Porter lost!  I guess not!  And I gave him enough hints so that
he ought to join Newman in another twenty-four hours."

Rhoda smiled wanly.

"Sometimes you forget to act like a cold-blooded Indian."

Kut-le gave his familiar chuckle.

"Well, you see, I've been contaminated by my long association with the
whites!"

And so again the nights of going.  During her waking hours, Rhoda spent
the greater part of her time considering arguments that would have
weight with Kut-le when the struggle came which she knew was imminent.

If she had suffered before, if the early part of her abduction had been
agony, it had been nothing in comparison with what she was enduring in
putting Kut-le aside for DeWitt.  And, after all, she had no final
guide in holding to her resolution save an instinct that told her that
her course was the right one.  All the arguments that she could put
into words against inter-race marriage seemed inadequate.  This
instinct which was wordless and formless alone remained sufficient.

And with the ill logic of womankind, through all her arguing with
herself there flushed one glad thought.  Kut-le knew that she loved
him, knew that she was suffering in the thought of giving him up!  His
tender, half sad, half triumphant smile proved that, as did his
protective air of ownership.

Rhoda noticed one condition of her keeping to her decision.  She was
very firm in it at night when the desert was dim.  But in the glory of
the dawns and the sunsets, her little arguments seemed strangely small.
Sitting on a mountainside one afternoon, Rhoda watched a rain-storm
sweep across the ranges, across the desert, to the far-lying mesas.
Normally odorless, the desert, after the rain, emitted a faint,
ineffable odor that teased the girl's fancy as if she verged on the
secret of the desert's beauty.  Exquisite violet mists rolled back to
the mountains.  Flashing every rainbow tint from its moistened breast
the desert lay as if breathing the very words of the Great Scheme.

Suddenly to Rhoda her resolution seemed small and futile, and for a
long hour she revelled in the thought of belonging to the man she
loved.  And yet as night descended and the infinite reaches of the
desert receded into darkness, the spell was broken, and the old doubts
and misery returned.

And so again, the nights of going.  But the holiday aspect of the
flight was gone.  Kut-le moved with a grim determination that was not
to be misinterpreted.  Rhoda knew that they were to reach the Mexican
border with all possible speed.  The young Indian drove the little
party to the limit of its endurance.  Rhoda avoided talking to him as
much as she could and Kut-le, seeming to understand her mood, left her
much to herself.

On the fourth day they camped on a canon edge.  After Rhoda had eaten
she walked with Kut-le to the far edge and looked down.  The canon was
very deep and narrow.  Some distance away, near where it opened on the
desert, lay a heap of ruins.

"Is that another pueblo?" asked Rhoda.

"No, it's an old monastery.  Part of the year they have a padre there.
I wish I knew if there was one there now."

"Why?" asked Rhoda suspiciously.

"Don't bother your dear head," answered Kut-le.  Then he went on, as if
half to himself: "There's been an awful lot of fooling on this
expedition.  Perhaps I ought to have made for the Mexican border the
very night I took you."  He looked at Rhoda's wide, troubled eyes.
"But no, then I would have missed this wonderful desert growth of
yours!  But now we are going straight over the border where I know a
padre that will many us.  Then we will make for Europe at once."

The morning sun glinted on the pine-needles.  Old Molly hummed a
singsong air over the stew-pot.  And Rhoda stood with stormy,
tear-dimmed eyes and quivering lips.

"It can never, never be, Kut-le!"

"Why not?"

"We can't solve the problems of race adjustment.  No love is big enough
for that.  I have been civilized a thousand years.  You have been
savage a thousand years.  You can't come forward.  I can't go backward."

"You know well enough, Rhoda," said Kut-le quietly, "that I am
civilized."

"You are externally, perhaps," said the girl.  "But you yourself have
no proof that at heart you are not as uncivilized as your father or
grandfather.  Your stealing me shows that.  Nothing can change our
instinct.  You know that you might revert at any time."

Kut-le turned on her fiercely.

"Do you love me, Rhoda?"

Rhoda stood silently, her cleft chin trembling, her deep gray eyes wide
and grief-stricken.

"Do you love me--and better than you do DeWitt?" insisted the man,

Suddenly Rhoda lifted her head proudly.

"Yes," she said, "I do love you, better than any one in the world; but
I cannot marry you!"

Kut-le took her trembling hands in his.

"Why not, dear one?" he asked.

Still the sun flickered on the pine-needles and still Molly hummed over
her stew-pot.  Still Rhoda stood looking into the eyes of the man she
loved, her scarlet cheeks growing each moment more deeply crimson.

"Because you are an Indian.  The instinct in me against such a marriage
is so strong that I dare not go against it."

Kut-le's mouth closed in the old way.

"And still you shall marry me, Rhoda!"

"I am a white woman, Kut-le.  I can't marry an Indian.  The difference
is too great!"

Kut-le turned abruptly and walked to the canon edge, looking far out to
the desert.  Rhoda, panting and half hysterical, watched him.  The
moment which she had so dreaded had arrived, and she found herself,
after all her planning, utterly unprepared to meet it save with
hackneyed phrases.

It seemed a long time that Kut-le stood staring away from her.  At last
Rhoda could bear the silence no longer.  She ran to him and put her
trembling hand on his arm.  He turned his stern young face to her and
her heart failed her.

"O Kut-le!  Kut-le!" she cried.  "If you won't help me to do right, who
will?  It's not right for us to marry!  Just not right!  That's all I
know about it!"

Kut-le put both hands on her shoulders.

"Look here, Rhoda.  What you call the 'right' instinct is just the
remnant of the old man-made race hatred in you.  It's just a part of
the old conceit of the Caucasian."

Rhoda stirred restlessly, but Kut-le held her firmly and went on.

"I tell you, if we're not to go mad, we've got to believe that great
things come to us for a purpose.  There is no human being who has loved
who does not believe that love is the greatest thing that has been
given to man.  The man who has loved knows that the biggest things in
the world have been done for the love of woman.  Love is bigger than
nations or races.  It's human, not white, or black, or yellow.  It's
above all we can do to tarnish it with our little prejudices.  When it
comes greatly, it comes supremely."

He lifted the girl's face and looked deeply into her eyes.

"Rhoda, if it has come as greatly to you as it has to me, you will not
pause for any sorrow that your coming to me may cost you.  You will
come, in spite of everything.  I believe that if in your smallness and
ignorance you refuse this gift that has come to you and me, you will be
outraging the greatest force in nature."

Rhoda stood sorrow-stricken and confused.  When the deep, quiet voice
ceased, she said brokenly:

"I haven't lived in the desert so long as you.  The way does not lie so
clear to me.  If only I had your conviction, I too could be strong and
walk the path I saw unhesitatingly.  But I see no path!"

"Then," said Kut-le, "because I see, I'll decide for you!  O Rhoda, you
must believe in me!  I have had you in my power and I have kept the
faith with you.  I am going to take you and marry you.  I am going to
make this gift that has come to you and me make us the big man and
woman that nature needs.  Tonight we shall reach the padre who will
marry us."

He watched the girl keenly for a moment, then he again turned from her
deliberately and walked to the edge of the canon, as if he wanted her
to come to her final decision unbiased by his nearness.  But he turned
back to her with a curious expression on his face.

"Come and take a good-by look, Rhoda!  Your friends are below.  I hope
it will be some time before we see them again!"

Rhoda went to him.  Far, far below, she saw little dots of men making
camp beyond the monastery near the desert.  Suddenly Rhoda sank to her
knees with a cry of longing that was heart-breaking.

"O my people!  My own people!" she sobbed, crouching upon the canon
edge.

Kut-le watched the little figure with inscrutable eyes.  Then he lifted
the girl to her feet.

"Rhoda, are you going to eat your heart out for your own kind if you
marry me?  Won't I be sufficient?  It hadn't occurred to me that I
might not be!"

"You haven't given up your people," answered Rhoda.  "You are always
going back to them."

"But you aren't really giving them up," urged Kut-le.  "It really is I
who make the sacrifice of my race!"

"And that is the reason for one of my fears," cried Rhoda.  "I am
afraid that some day you would find the price too great and that our
marriage would be wrecked."

"Even if I went back for a few months each year, would that make you
unhappy?" asked Kut-le.

"Kut-le!" exclaimed Rhoda.  "I am not talking of externals.  I mean
that if your longing for your own kind made you lose your love for me.
Oh, I can't see any of it straight, but I am afraid!"

"Nonsense, Rhoda!  I fought that battle long before I knew you.  There
is absolutely no danger of my reverting.  I am going to spend the rest
of my life among the whites even if you shouldn't marry me, Rhoda.
Rhoda, I wish I had had time to let you grow to it fully!"

Rhoda stood rigidly.  Molly, sensing trouble, hovered restlessly just
out of earshot.

"If you married DeWitt," Kut-le went on, "could you forget me?  Forget
the desert?  Forget our days and nights?  Forget my arms about you?"

"Oh, no!  No!" cried Rhoda.  "You know that I shall love you always!"

"And will DeWitt want what you offer him?" Kut-le went on, mercilessly.

Rhoda winced.

"I wish," said Kut-le huskily, "you never will know how I wish that you
had come to me freely, feeling that the sacrifice was worth while!"

Rhoda looked at him wonderingly.  After all the weeks of iron
determination, was the young giant weakening, was his great heart
failing him!

"I had thought," he went on, "that you were big enough to stand the
test.  That after the travail and the heart scourging, you would
see--and would come to me freely--strong enough to smile at all your
regrets and fears.  That thought steeled me to put you through the
torture.  But if now, at the end, you are coming to me only because you
must!  Rhoda, I don't want you on those terms."

Rhoda gasped.  She felt as one feels when in a dream one falls an
unexpected and endless distance.  The relief from the pressure of
Kut-le's will that had forced her on, for so long, left her weak and
aimless.

Yet somehow she found the strength to say:

"Kut-le, we must give each other up!  I love you so that I can let you
go!  Oh, can't you see how I feel about it!"

Again Kut-le looked far off over vista of mountains and canon.  His
eyes were deep and abstracted, as if he saw into the years ahead with
knowledge denied to Rhoda.  Then he turned to Rhoda and searched her
face with burning gaze.  He eyed her hair, her lovely heart-broken
face, her slender figure.  For a moment his face was tortured by a look
of doubt that was heart-shattering.  He lifted Rhoda across his chest
in the old way and held her to him with passionate tenderness.  He laid
his face against hers and she heard him whisper:

"O my love!  Love of my youth and my manhood!"  Then he set her very
gently to her feet.  "Don't cry," he said.  "I can't bear it!"

Rhoda threw her arms above her head in an abandonment of agony.

"Oh, I cannot, cannot bear this!"  Then she added more calmly: "I
suffer as much as you, Kut-le!"

Again the look of unspeakable grief crossed the young Indian's face,
but it immediately became inscrutable.  He led Rhoda along the canon
edge.

"Do you see that little trail going down?" he said.

"Yes," said Rhoda wonderingly.

"Then go!" said Kut-le quietly.

Rhoda looked up at him blankly.

"Go!" he said sternly.  "Go back to your own kind and I will go on,
alone.  Don't stop to talk any more.  Go now!"

Rhoda turned and looked at Cesca squatting by the horses, at Molly
hovering near by with anxious eyes.  Never to make the dawn camp,
again--never to hear Molly humming over the stew-pot!  Suddenly Rhoda
felt that if she could have Molly with her she would not be so utterly
separated from Kut-le.

"Let Molly go with me!" she said.  "I love Molly!"

"No!" said Kut-le.  "You are to forget the desert and the Indians.  Go
now!"

With awe and grief too deep for words, Rhoda obeyed the young chief's
stern eyes.  She clambered down the rough trail to a break in the canon
wall, then, clinging with hands and feet, down the sheer side.  The
tall figure, beautiful in its perfect symmetry, stood immovable, the
face never turning from her.  Rhoda knew that she never was to forget
this picture of him.  At the foot of the canon wall she stood long,
looking up.  Far, far above, the straight figure stood in lonely
majesty, gazing at the life for which he had sacrificed so much.  Rhoda
looked until, tear-blinded, she turned away.




CHAPTER XXI

THE END OF THE TRAIL

The canon was sandy and rough.  Rhoda could see the monastery set among
olive-trees.  Beyond this where the canon opened to the desert she knew
that the white men's camp lay, though she could not see it.

She had no fear of losing her way, with the canon walls hemming her in.
She still was sobbing softly to herself as she started along the foot
of the wall.  She tramped steadily for a time, then she stopped
abruptly.  She would not go on!  The sacrifice was too much!  She
looked back to the canon top.  Kut-le had disappeared.  Already he must
be only a memory to her!

Then of a sudden Rhoda felt a sense of shame that her strength of
purpose should be so much less than the Indian's.  At least, she could
carry in her heart forever the example of his fortitude.  It would be
like his warm hand guiding and lifting her through the hard days and
years to come.  Strangely comforted and strengthened by this thought,
Rhoda started on through the familiar wilderness of the desert.

This, she thought, was her last moment alone in the desert, for without
Kut-le she would never return to it.  She watched the gray-green cactus
against the painted rock heaps.  She watched the brown, tortured crest
of the canon against the violet sky.  She watched the melting haze
above the monastery, the buzzards sliding through the motionless air,
the far multi-colored ranges, as if she would etch forever on her
memory the world that Kut-le loved.  And she knew that, let her body
wander where it must, her spirit would forever belong to the desert.

Rhoda passed the monastery, where she thought she saw men among the
olive-trees.  But she did not stop.  She gradually worked out into an
easy trail that led toward the open desert.

The little camp at the canon's mouth was preparing to move when Jack
Newman jumped excitedly to his feet.  Coming toward them through the
sand was a boyish figure that moved with a beautiful stride, tireless
and swift.  As the newcomer drew nearer they saw that she was erect and
lithe, slender but full-chested and that her face--

"Rhoda!" shouted John DeWitt.

In a moment, Jack was grasping one of her hands and John DeWitt the
other, while Billy Porter and Carlos shook each other's hands excitedly.

"Gee whiz!" cried Jack.  "John said you were in superb condition, but I
didn't realize that it meant this!  Why, Rhoda, if it wasn't for your
hair and eyes and the dimple in your chin, I wouldn't know you!"

"Are you all right?" asked DeWitt anxiously.  "Where in the world did
you come from?  Where have you been?"

"Were you hurt much in the fight?" cried Rhoda.  "Oh!" looking about at
the eager listeners, "that was the most awful thing I ever saw, that
fight!  And Billy Porter, you are all right, I see.  How shall I ever
repay you all for what you have done for me!"

"Gosh!" exclaimed Porter.  "I'm repaid just by looking at you!  If that
pison Piute hasn't made monkeys of us all, I'd like to know who has!
How did you get away from him?"

"He let me go," answered Rhoda simply.

The men gasped.

"What was the matter with him!" ejaculated Porter, "Was he sick or
dying?"

"No," said Rhoda mechanically; "I guess he saw that it was useless."

"And he dropped you in the desert without water or food or horse!"
cried DeWitt.  "Oh, that Apache cur!"

"No!  No!" exclaimed Rhoda.  "He dropped me not far from here.  We saw
the camp and he sent me to it."

The men looked at each other incredulously.  Jack Newman's face was
puzzled.  He knew Kut-le and it was hard to believe that he would give
up what he already had won.  DeWitt spoke excitedly.

"Then he's still within our reach!  Hurry up, friends!"

Rhoda turned swiftly to the gaunt-faced man.  Then she spoke very
distinctly, with that in her deep gray eyes that stirred each listener
with a vague sense of loss and yearning.

"I don't want Kut-le harmed!  I shan't tell you anything that will help
you locate him.  He did me no harm.  On the contrary, he made me a well
woman, physically and mentally.  If I can forgive his effrontery in
stealing me, surely you all will grant me this favor to top all that
you have done for me."

Porter's under lip protruded with the old obstinate look.

"That fellow's got to be made an example of, Miss Rhoda," he said.  "No
white that's a man can stand for what he's done.  He's bound to be
hunted down, you know.  If we don't, others will!"

Rhoda turned impatiently to DeWitt.

"John, after all our talk, you must understand!  You know what good
Kut-le has done me and how big it was of him to let me go.  Make them
promise to let him alone!"

But there was no answering look of understanding in DeWitt's worn face.

"Rhoda, you haven't any idea what you're asking!  It isn't a question
of forgiveness!  You don't get the point of view that you ought!  Why,
the whole country is worked up over this thing!  The newspapers are
full of it.  Just as Porter says, the Apache's got to be made an
example of.  We will hunt him down, if it takes a year!"

So far Jack Newman had said nothing.  Rhoda looked at him as if he were
her last hope.

"Oh, Jack!" she cried.  "He was your friend, your dearest friend!  And
he sent me back!  Why, you never would have got me if he hadn't
voluntarily let me go!  He is wonderful on the trail!"

"So we found!" said DeWitt grimly.

But Rhoda was watching Jack.

"Rhoda," Jack said at last, "I know how you feel.  I know what a bully
chap Kut-le is.  This just about does me up.  But what he's done can't
be let go.  We've got to punish him!"

"'Punish him!'" repeated Rhoda.  "Just what do you mean by that?"

"We mean," answered DeWitt, "that when we find him, I'll shoot him!"

"No!" cried Rhoda.  "No!  Why he _sent me back_!"

The three men looked at Rhoda uncomfortably and at each other
wonderingly.  A woman's magnanimity is never to be understood by a man!

"Are you tired, Rhoda?" asked DeWitt abruptly.  "Do you feel able to
take to the saddle at once?"

"I'm all right!" exclaimed Rhoda impatiently.  "What are your plans?"

DeWitt pointed out across the sand to the canon wall.  A line of
slender footprints led through the level wastes as plainly as if on
new-fallen snow.

"We will follow your trail," he said.

There was silence for an instant in the little camp while the men eyed
the girlish face, flushed and vivid beneath the tan.  As it had come
when DeWitt had rescued her, the old sense of the appalling nature of
her experience was returning to her again.  With sickening clarity she
was getting the men's view-point.  The old Rhoda would have protested,
would have fought desperately and blindly.  The new Rhoda had lived
through hours of hopeless battle with circumstance.  She had learned
the desert's lesson of patience.

"I have thought," she said slowly, "so much of the joy of my return to
you!  God only knows how the picture of it has kept me alive from day
to day.  All _your_ joy seems swallowed up in your thirst for revenge.
All right, my friends.  Only, wherever you go, I go too!"

Billy Porter shook his head with a muttered "Gosh!" as if the ways of
women were quite beyond him.

"I think you had better ride on to the ranch with Carlos," said DeWitt,
"while we take up Kut-le's trail.  This will be no trip for a woman."

"You're foolish!" exclaimed Jack.  "We'll not let her out of our sight
again.  You can't tell what stunt Kut-le is up to!"

"That's right!" said Porter.  "It'll be hard on her, but she'd better
come with us."

"Don't trouble to discuss the matter," said Rhoda coolly.  "I am coming
with you.  Katherine probably sent some clothing for me, didn't she?"

"Why, yes!" exclaimed Jack.  "That was one of the first things she
thought of.  She sent her own riding things for you.  She spoke of the
little silk dress you had on and said you hadn't anything appropriate
in your trunks for the rough trip you might have to take after we found
you."

Jack was talking rapidly, as if to relieve the tension of the
situation.  He undid a pack that he had kept tied to his saddle during
all the long weeks of pursuit.

"We can rig up a dressing-room of blankets in no time," he went on,
putting a bundle into Rhoda's hands.

Rhoda stood holding the bundle in silence while all hands set to
rigging up her dressing-room.  She felt suddenly cool-headed and
resourceful.  Her mind was forced away from her own sorrow to the
solution of another heavy problem.  In the little blanket tent she
unrolled the bundle and smiled tenderly at the evidence of Katherine's
thoughtfulness.  There were underwear, handkerchiefs, toilet articles
and Katherine's own pretty corduroy divided skirt and Norfolk jacket
with a little blouse and Ascot scarf.

Rhoda took off her buckskins and tattered blue shirt slowly, with lips
that would quiver.  This was the last, the very last of Kut-le!  She
dressed herself in Katherine's clothes, then folded up the buckskins
and shirt.  She would keep them, always!  When she came out from the
tent she stepped awkwardly, for the skirts bothered her, and Jack,
waiting nearby, smiled at her.  At another time Rhoda would have joined
in his amusement, but now she asked soberly:

"Which horse is for me?"

"Rhoda!" cried DeWitt, "I really wouldn't know you!  I thought I never
could want you anything but ethereal, but--Jack!  Isn't she wonderful!"

Jack grinned.  Rhoda, tanned and oval-cheeked, and straight of back and
shoulder, was not to be compared with the invalid Rhoda.

"Gee!" he said.  "Wait till Katherine sees her!"

Rhoda shrugged her shoulders.

"My pleasure in all that is swallowed up by this savage obsession of
yours."

John DeWitt led out Rhoda's pony.

"You don't understand, dear," he said.  "You can't doubt my heavenly
joy at having you safe.  But the outrage of it all--  That Apache
devil!"

"I do understand, John," answered Rhoda wearily.  "Don't try to explain
again.  I know just how you all feel.  Only, I will not have Kut-le
killed."

"Rhoda," said DeWitt hoarsely, "I shall kill him as I would a yellow
dog!"

Rhoda turned away.  The line of march was quickly formed.  Porter led.
Carlos closed the rear.  DeWitt and Newman rode on either side of
Rhoda.  They were not long in reaching the trail down the canon wall.
Here they paused, for the rough ascent was impossible for the horses.
The men looked questioningly at Rhoda but she volunteered no
information.  She believed that Kut-le had left the camp at the top
long since.  If for any reason he had delayed his going, she knew that
he had watched every movement in the white camp and could protect
himself easily.

"We can leave Carlos with the horses," said Porter, "while we climb up
and see where the trail leads."

Rhoda dismounted, still silent, and followed Porter and DeWitt up the
trail.  Jack following her.  The trail had been difficult to descend
and was very hard to ascend.  There was a dumb purposefulness about the
men's movements that sickened Rhoda.  She had seen too much of men in
this mood of late and she feared them, She knew that all the amenities
of civilization had been stripped from them and that she was only
pitting her feeble strength against a world-old instinct.

Her heart was beating heavily as they neared the top, but not from the
hard climb.  She was inured to difficult trails.  There was a sheer
pull, shoulder high, at the top.  The four accomplished it in one
breathless group, then stood as if paralyzed.

Sunlight flickered through the pines.  Molly and Cesca prepared the
trail packs.  And Kut-le sat beside the spring, eying his visitors
grimly.  He looked very cool and well groomed in comparison with his
trail-worn adversaries.

DeWitt pulled out his Colt.

"I think I have you, this time," he said.

"Yes?" asked Kut-le, without stirring.  "And what are you going to do
with me?"

"I'm going to take about a minute to tell you what I think of you, and
give you another minute in which to offer up some sort of an Indian
prayer.  Then I'm going to shoot you!"

Kut-le glanced from DeWitt to Rhoda, thence to Porter and Newman.
Porter's under lip protruded.  Jack looked sick.  Both the men had
their hands on their guns.  Rhoda moistened her lips to speak, but
Kut-le was before her.

"Are you a good shot, DeWitt?" he asked.  "Because I know that Jack and
Porter are sure in their aim."

"You'll never know whether I am or not," replied DeWitt.  "You'd better
be thankful that we are shooting you instead of hanging you, as you
deserve, you cur!  You'd better be glad you're dying!  You haven't a
white friend left in the country!  All your ambition and hard work have
come to this because you couldn't change your Indian hide, after all!
Now then, say your prayers!  Rhoda, cover up your eyes!"

Kut-le rose slowly.  The whites noticed with a little pang of shame
that he made no attempt to touch his gun which lay on the ground beside
him.

"You'd better let Jack and Billy shoot with you," he said quietly.
"You won't like to think about the shot that killed me, afterward.  It
isn't nice, I've heard, the memory of killing a man!"

"I'm shooting an Indian, not a man!" said DeWitt.  "Say your prayers!"

The spell of fear that had paralyzed Rhoda snapped.  Before Jack or
Billy could detain her she ran to DeWitt's side and grasped his arm.

"John!  John!  Listen to me, one moment!  Look at me!  In spite of all,
look, see what he's made of me, for you to reap the harvest!  Look at
me!  I beg of you, do not shoot him!  Let him go!  Make him promise to
leave the country.  Make him promise anything!  He keeps promises
because he is an Indian!  But if you have any love for me, if you care
anything for my happiness, don't kill Kut-le!  I tell you I will never
marry you with his blood on your hands!"

A look curiously hard, curiously suspicious, came to DeWitt's eyes.
Without lowering his gun or looking at the girl, he answered:

"You plead too well, Rhoda!  I want this Indian to pay for more torture
of mine than you can dream of!  Get back out of the way!  Are you
ready, Kut-le?"

Rhoda's slender body was rigid.  She moved away from DeWitt until she
could encompass the four men in her glance.  With arms folded across
her arching chest she spoke with a richness in her voice that none of
her hearers ever could forget.

"Remember, friends, you have forced me to this!  You had me safe, but
you thought more of revenge than you did of my safety!  John, if you
kill Kut-le you will kill the man that I love with all the passion of
my soul!"

DeWitt gasped as if he had been struck.  Newman and Porter stared
dizzily.  Only Kut-le stood composed.  His eyes with the old look of
tragic tenderness were fastened on the girl.

"Are you going to shoot him now, John?"

"Rhoda!" cried DeWitt fiercely.  "Rhoda!  Do you realize what you are
saying?"

"Yes," said Rhoda steadily.  "I realize that a force greater than race
pride, greater than self love, greater than intelligence or fear, is
gripping me!  John, I love this man!  He and I have lived through
experiences together too great for words.  He had me in the hollow of
his hand but he sent me back to you, his enemy.  You say that you love
me.  But you would not listen to my pleading, you would not grant me
the only favor I ever asked you, the granting of which could not have
harmed you."

Her listeners did not stir.  Rhoda moistened her lips.

"Kut-le----  Think what he sacrificed for me.  He gave up his dearest
friendships.  He gave up his honor and his country and risked his life,
for me.  And then when he thought the sacrifice would prove too great
on my part, he gave me up!  I ask you to give him his life, for me.
Because, John, and Billy Porter, and Jack, I tell you that I love him!"

"My God!" panted DeWitt.  "Rhoda, don't!  You don't know what you're
saying!  Rhoda!"

Rhoda looked off where the afternoon sun lay like the very glory of God
upon the chaos of range and desert.  Almost--almost the secret of life
itself seemed to bare itself to the girl's wide eyes.  The white men
watched her aghast.  There was a desperate, hunted look in DeWitt's
tired face.  Rhoda turned back.

"I know what I'm saying," she replied.  "But I tell you that this thing
is bigger than I am!  I have fought it, defied it, ignored it.  It only
grows the stronger!  I know that this comes to humans but rarely.  Yet
it has come to me!  It is the greatest force in the world!  It is what
makes life persist!  To most people it comes only in small degree and
they call that love!  To me, in this boundless country, it has come
boundlessly.  It is greater than what you know as love.  It is greater
than I am.  I don't know what sorrow or what joy my decision may bring
me but--John, I want you to let Kut-le live that I may marry him!"

DeWitt's arm dropped as if dead.

"Rhoda," he repeated, agonizedly, "you don't know what you are saying!"

"Don't I?" asked Rhoda steadily.  "Have I fought my fight without
coming to know the risk?  Don't I know what atavism means, and race
alienation, and hunger for my own?  But this which has come to me is
stronger than all these.  I love Kut-le, John, and I ask you to give
his life to me!"

Still Kut-le stood motionless, as did Jack and Porter.  DeWitt, without
taking his eyes from Rhoda's, slowly, very slowly, slipped his Colt
back into his belt.  For a long moment he gazed at the wonder of the
girl's exalted face.  Then he passed his hands across his eyes.

"I give up!" he said quietly.  Then he turned, walked slowly to the
canon edge, and clambered deliberately down the trail.

Jack and Billy stood dazed for a moment longer, then Porter cleared his
throat.

"Miss Rhoda, don't do this!  Now don't you!  Come with us back to the
ranch.  Just for a month till you get away from this Injun's influence!
Come back and talk to Mrs. Newman.  Come back and get some other
woman's ideas!  For God's sake, Miss Rhoda, don't ruin your life this
way!"

"When Katherine knows it all, she'll understand and agree with me,"
replied Rhoda.  "Jack, try to remember everything I said, to tell
Katherine."

"_I_ tell her!" cried Jack.  "Why can't you tell her yourself?  What
are you planning to do?"

"That is for Kut-le to say," answered Rhoda.

"Rhoda," said Jack, and his voice shook with earnestness, "listen!
Listen to me, your old playmate!  I know how fascinating Kut-le is.
Lord help us, girl, he's been my best friend for years!  And in spite
of everything, he's my friend still.  But, Rhoda, it won't do!  It
won't work out right.  He's a fine man for men.  But as a husband to a
white woman, he's still an Indian; and after the first, that must
always come between you!  Think again, Rhoda!  I tell you, it won't do!"

Rhoda's voice still was clear and high, still bore the note of
exaltation.

"I have thought again and again, Jack.  There could be no end to the
thinking, so I gave it up!"

Kut-le's eyes were on the girl, inscrutable and calm as the desert
itself, but still he did not speak.

Billy Porter wiped his forehead again and again on a cloth that bore no
resemblance to a handkerchief.

"I can't put up any kind of an argument.  All I can say is I don't see
how any one like you could do it, Miss Rhoda!  Just think!  His folks
is Injuns, dirty, blanket Injuns!  They scratch themselves from one
day's end to the other.  They will be your relatives, too!  They'll be
hanging round you all the time.  I'm not a married man but I've noticed
when you marry a man you generally marry his whole darn family.
I--I--oh, there's no use talking to her!  Let's take her away by force,
Jack!"

Rhoda caught her breath and instinctively moved toward Kut-le.  But
Jack did not stir.

"No," he answered; "I've done all the chasing and trying to kidnap that
I care about.  But, Rhoda, once and for all I tell you that I think you
are doing you and yours a deadly wrong!"

"Perhaps I am," replied Rhoda steadily.  "I make no pretense of
knowing.  At any rate, I'm going to stay with Kut-le."

"For heaven's sake, Rhoda," cried Jack, "at least come back to the
ranch and let Katherine give you a wedding.  She'll never forgive me
for leaving you this way!"

Porter turned on Jack savagely.

"Look here!" he shouted.  "Are you crazy too!  You're talking about her
_marrying_ this Apache!"

Jack spoke through his teeth obstinately.

"I've sweated blood over this thing as long as I propose to.  If Rhoda
wants to marry Kut-le, that's her business.  I always did like Kut-le
and I always shall.  I've done my full duty in trying to get Rhoda
back.  Now that she says that she cares for him, it's neither your nor
my business--nor DeWitt's.  But I want them to come back to the ranch
with me and let Katherine give them a nice wedding."

"But--but--" spluttered Porter.  Then he stopped as the good sense of
Jack's attitude suddenly came home to him.  "All right," he said
sullenly.  "I'm like DeWitt.  I pass.  Only--if you try to take this
Injun back to the ranch, he'll never get there alive.  He'll be lynched
by the first bunch of cowboys or miners we strike.  Miss Rhoda nor you
can't stop 'em.  You want to remember how the whole country is worked
up over this!"

Rhoda whitened.

"Do you think that too, Jack and Kut-le?"

For the first time, Jack spoke to Kut-le.

"What do you think, Kut-le?" he said.

"Porter's right, of course," answered Kut-le.  "My plan always has been
to slip down into Mexico and then go to Paris for a year or two.  I've
got enough money for that.  I've always wanted to do some work in the
Sorbonne.  By the end of two years I think the Southwest will be
willing to welcome us back."

Nothing could have so simplified the situation as Kut-le's calm
reference to his plans for carrying on his profession.  He stood in his
well-cut clothes, not an Indian, but a well-bred, clean-cut man of the
world.  Even Porter recognized this, and with a sigh he resigned
himself to the inevitable.

"You folks better come down to the monastery and be married," he said.
"There's a padre down there."

"Gee!  What'll I say to Katherine!" groaned Jack.

"Katherine will understand," said Rhoda.  "Katherine always loved
Kut-le.  Even now I can't believe that she has altogether turned
against him."

Jack Newman heaved a sigh.

"Well," he said, "Kut-le, will you and Rhoda come down to the monastery
with us and be married?"  His young niece was solemn.

"Yes," answered Kut-le, "if Rhoda is agreed."

Rhoda's face still wore the look of exaltation.

"I will come!" she said.

Kut-le did not let his glance rest on her, but turned to Billy.

"Mr. Porter," he said courteously, "will you come to my wedding?"

Billy looked dazed.  He stared from Kut-le to Rhoda, and Rhoda smiled
at him.  His last defense was down.

"I'll be there, thanks!" he said.

"There is a side trail that we can take my horses down," said Kut-le.

They all were silent as Kut-le led the way down the side trail and by a
circuitous path to the monastery.  He made his way up through a rude,
grass-grown path to a cloistered front that was in fairly good repair.
Here they dismounted and waited while Kut-le pulled a long bell-rope
that hung beside a battered door.  There was not long to wait before
the door opened and a white-faced old padre stood staring in amazement
at the little group.

Kut-le talked rapidly, now in Spanish and now in English, and at last
the padre turned to Rhoda with a smile.

"And you?" he asked.  "You are quite willing?"

"Yes," said Rhoda, though her voice trembled in spite of her.

"And you?" asked the padre, turning to Jack and Billy.

The two men nodded.

"Then enter!" said the padre.

And with Cesca and Molly bringing up the rear, the wedding party
followed the padre down a long adobe hallway across a courtyard where
palms still shaded a trickling fountain, into a dim chapel, with grim
adobe walls and pews hacked and worn by centuries of use.

The padre was excited and pleased.

"If," he said, "you all will sit, I will call my two choir-boys who are
at work in the olive orchard.  They are not far away.  We are always
ready to hold service for such as may wish to attend."

He disappeared through the door of the choir loft and returned shortly,
followed by two tall Mexican half-breeds, clad in priceless surplices
that had been wrought in Spain two centuries before.  They lighted some
meager candles before the altar and began their chant in soft,
well-trained voices.

The padre turned and waited.  Kut-le rose and, taking Rhoda's hand, he
led her before the aged priest.

To the two white men the scene was unforgetable.  The dim old chapel,
scene of who could tell what heart-burnings of desert history; the
priest of the ancient religion; standing before him the two young
people, one of a vanishing and one of a conquering race, both
startlingly vivid in the perfection of their beauty; and, looking on,
the two wide-eyed squaws with aboriginal wonder in their eyes.

It was but a moment before Kut-le had slipped a ring on Rhoda's finger;
but a moment before the priest had pronounced them man and wife.

As the two left the priest, Jack kissed Rhoda solemnly twice.

"Once for Katherine," he said, "and once for me.  I don't understand
much how it all has come about, but I know Kut-le, and I'm willing to
trust you to him."

Kut-le gave Jack a clear look.

"Jack, I'll never forget that speech.  If I live long enough, I'll
repay you for it."

"And an Indian keeps his promises," said Rhoda softly.

Billy Porter was not to be outdone.

"Now that it's all over with, I'll say that Kut-le is a good fighter
and that you are the handsomest couple I ever saw."

Kut-le chuckled.

"Cesca, am I such a heap fool?"

Cesca sniffed.

"White squaws no good!  They--"

But Molly elbowed Cesca aside.

"You no listen to her!" she said.

"O Molly!  Molly!" cried Rhoda.  "You are a woman!  I'm glad you were
here!"  And the men's eyes blurred a little as the Indian woman hugged
the white girl to her and crooned over her.

"You no cry!  You no cry!  When you come back, Molly come to your
house, take care of you!"

After a moment Rhoda wiped her eyes, and Kut-le, who had been giving
the old padre something that the old fellow eyed with joy, took the
girl's hand gently.

"Come!" he said.

At the door the others watched them mount and ride away.  The two sat
their horses with the grace that comes of long, hard trails.

"Maybe I've done wrong," said Jack.  "But I don't feel so.  I'm awful
sorry for DeWitt."

"I'm awful sorry for DeWitt," agreed Porter, "but I'm sorrier for
myself.  I'm older than DeWitt a whole lot.  He's young enough to get
over anything."

When they had ridden out of sight of the monastery, Kut-le pulled in
his horse and dismounted.  Then he stood looking up into Rhoda's face.
In his eyes was the same look of exaltation that made hers wonderful.
He put his hand on her knee.

"We've a long ride ahead of us," he said softly.  "I want something
that I can't have on horseback."

Rhoda laid her hand on his.

"You meant it all, Rhoda?  It was not only to save my life?"

"Do you have to ask that?" said Rhoda.

"No!" answered Kut-le simply.  "You see I waited for you.  I knew that
they would bring you back.  And if you had not spoken, I would rather
have died.  I had made up my mind to that.  O my love!  It has come to
us greatly!"

Then, as if the flood, controlled all these months, had burst its
bonds, Kut-le lifted Rhoda from her saddle to his arms and laid his
lips to hers.  For a long moment the two clung to each other as if they
knew that life could hold no moment for them so sweet as this.  Then
they mounted and, side by side, they rode off into the desert sunset.



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HEART OF THE DESERT***


******* This file should be named 16777.txt or 16777.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/1/6/7/7/16777



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.net/fundraising/pglaf.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://www.gutenberg.net/about/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.net/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit:
http://www.gutenberg.net/fundraising/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

