The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Iron Furrow, by George C. Shedd

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Iron Furrow

Author: George C. Shedd

Illustrator: Henry A. Botkin

Release Date: November 18, 2005 [EBook #17088]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE IRON FURROW ***




Produced by David Garcia, Jeannie Howse and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net






       *       *       *       *       *

     +-----------------------------------------------------+
     | Transcriber's Note: A number of very obvious        |
     | typographical errors have been corrected in this    |
     | text. For a complete list please see the bottom of  |
     | the document.                                       |
     +-----------------------------------------------------+

       *       *       *       *       *




[Illustration: "UNDER THE HAT BRIM DRAWN FORWARD TO HIS LINE OF
VISION HIS EYES ... GAZED FORTH KEEN AND OBSERVANT"]




THE IRON
FURROW

BY GEORGE C. SHEDD

FRONTISPIECE BY
HENRY A. BOTKIN

A.L. BURT COMPANY
Publishers  New York

Published by arrangement with Doubleday, Page & Company




COPYRIGHT, 1919, 1920, BY
DOUBLEDAY, PAGE & COMPANY
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED, INCLUDING THAT OF
TRANSLATION INTO FOREIGN LANGUAGES,
INCLUDING THE SCANDINAVIAN

PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES
AT
THE COUNTRY LIFE PRESS, GARDEN CITY, N.Y.




THE IRON FURROW




THE IRON FURROW

CHAPTER I


The Ventisquero Range stretches across the circumference of one's
vision in a procession of mountains that come tall and blue out of the
distant north and seemingly march past to vanish in the remote south
like azure phantoms. The mountains wall the horizon and dominate the
mesa, their black forest-clad flanks crumpled and broken and gashed by
canons, lifting above timber-line peaks of bare brown rock that pierce
the clouds floating along the range. At sunrise they cast immense
shadows upon the mesa spreading westward from their base; and at
sunset they reflect golden and purple glows upon the plain until the
earth appears swimming in some iridescent sea of ether; while over
them from dawn till dusk, traversed by a few fleecy clouds, lies the
turquoise sky of New Mexico.

At a certain point in the range a small canon opens upon the mesa with
a gush of gravel and sand that flows a short way into the sagebrush
and forms a creek bed. Tucked back in the little canon there is a
considerable growth of bushes and trees, cool and fresh-looking in the
shadow of the gorge during the summer season, a splash of vivid green
there at the bottom of the dusty gray mountain, but at the canon's
mouth this verdure ceases.

Only an insignificant stream of water ran, one day, in the stony creek
bed that meandered out upon the mesa, and it appeared under the hot
July sun and among the hot stones for all the world like a rivulet of
liquid glass. That was all the mesa had to show, only its endless gray
sagebrush and the creek bed almost dry--unless one should reckon the
three parched cottonwood trees beside the stream, a little way down
from the canon, and the flat-roofed adobe house near by, and the empty
corral behind built of aspen poles. In that immensity of mountain and
mesa the house looked like a brick of sun-baked mud, the corral like a
child's device of straws, the three cottonwoods like three twigs stuck
in the earth. Or, at any rate, that is how they appeared to a horseman
regarding them from the main mesa trail a mile away.

The rider, a slender tanned young fellow of about twenty-eight, sat in
the saddle with the relaxed ease of habit which allowed his body to
accommodate itself to the steady jogging trot of his horse. A roll
comprising clothes wrapped in a black rubber coat was tied behind the
cantle. His Stetson hat was tilted up at the rear and down in front
almost on his nose--a thin, bony nose, slightly curved and with the
suggestion of a hook in the tip, just the sort of nose to accord with
his lean, sunburnt cheeks and clean-cut chin and straight-lipped
mouth. Under the hat brim drawn forward to his line of vision his
eyes, notwithstanding his air of lounging indolence, gazed forth keen
and observant. He had the appearance of a man who might be seeking a
few stray cattle, or riding to town for mail, and in no particular
hurry about it, either, this hot afternoon; but, for all that, Lee
Bryant was proceeding on important business--important for him,
anyhow. When everything one possesses is about to be risked on a
venture, the matter is naturally vital; and at this moment he was
moving straight to the initiative of his enterprise.

Where the road crossed the creek bed to continue northward, a trail
branched off and followed up the stream to the little ranch house by
the three cottonwood trees. Here the creek had not yet begun to cut an
arroyo and had washed merely a course five or six feet deep and some
fifty feet wide through the mesa, so that from a distance the shallow
gash was invisible and the ground appeared unbroken. It was because of
the flat character of the mesa, too, that Bryant on reaching the bank
of the stream was able to see on the opposite side two persons a
quarter of a mile off riding toward him; women, he perceived. Far
north of them on the road, a black spot in a haze of dust, seemingly
motionless but as one could guess advancing rapidly, was an
automobile.

Bryant rode his horse down into the creek bed and turned him aside to
a small pool on the upper side of the crossing, under the cut-bank,
where the horse thrust his muzzle into the water and drank greedily.
The rider swung himself out of the saddle, knelt a pace beyond, where
the rivulet trickled into the pool, and also drank.

"Wet anyway, even if warm, eh, Dick?" he remarked, when done. "Don't
drink it all, old scout; leave a swallow for the ladies." Still on his
knees he looked appraisingly down the creek and then up it, and added
derisively, "Some stream, this Perro, some stream!"

After rolling and lighting a cigarette, he meditated for a time in
the same kneeling position. His horse finished drinking and moved a
step nearer his master, where he stood with head lowered, water
dripping from his lip, body inert. But presently he pricked his ears
and turning his head toward the other bank gave a low whinny. Bryant
got to his feet.

The two women he had beheld at a distance had now reached the ford.
Their ponies snuffing water immediately dipped into the creek bed and
crossed its sandy bottom with quickened steps. Young women the riders
were, scarcely more than girls, it seemed to Bryant; wearing divided
khaki skirts and white shirt waists and wide-brimmed straw hats tied
with thongs under their chins. In this region where white men were
none too numerous, and women of their own kind scarcer yet, and girls
scarcest of all, the presence here of the pair aroused in the young
fellow a lively interest.

He led Dick aside that their ponies might approach the pool.

"Thank you; they are very thirsty," said the nearer girl, with a nod.
The ponies plunged forefeet into the water and stood thus with noses
buried, drinking with eager gulps. "The afternoon is so hot and the
road so dusty," the speaker continued, "that the poor things were
almost choked."

She was the smaller of the pair, of medium height and having a
graceful, well-molded figure, with frank gray eyes, a nose showing a
few freckles, smooth soft cheeks slightly reddened by sun, and an
expressive mouth. Bryant judged that she had small, firm hands, but
could not see them as she wore gauntlets. He further decided that she
was neither plain nor pretty: just average good-looking, one might
say. An air of friendliness was in her favour, though what might or
might not be a prepossessing trait, depending on circumstances, was
the suggested obstinacy in her round chin.

"Don't you yourselves wish a drink? You must be thirsty, too," Bryant
addressed the young ladies. "If your ponies won't stand, I'll look
after them."

"Oh, they'll not run off, unless we forget to let the reins hang, as
has happened once or twice," said the girl who previously had spoken.
"For they're regular cow-ponies. At first we had a hard time
remembering just to drop the lines when we dismounted instead of tying
them to a post somewhere; and for a while we had a feeling that they
certainly would gallop off if we did let the reins hang, as we'd been
instructed. But they never did." She turned to her companion. "Imo,
aren't you thirsty? I'm going to get down and have a drink." With
which she swung herself down from her saddle upon the sand.

The second girl was tall and thin, lacking both the spirits and
stamina of the other; a crown of fluffy golden hair was hinted by the
little of it the young fellow could see under the brim of her big hat;
her eyes were of a soft blue colour, probably weak; while her face,
the skin of which was exceedingly white with but a tinge of the sun's
fiery burn, was regular of feature and delicately formed.

She walked to the rill languidly, where stooping she drank from her
palm. Most of the water that she dipped escaped before reaching her
lips; and Bryant doubted if she were really successful in quenching
her thirst. The heat, the dust, and the ride appeared to have been
almost too much for her strength, exhausting her slender store of
vitality. The other girl, who had coiled herself down by the
trickling stream and bent forward resting her hands in the water,
drank directly from the rivulet.

"There, that's the way to do it, Imo," she declared, when she had
straightened up, hat-brim, nose, chin, all dripping. "Like the ponies!
I hope I haven't lost my handkerchief." And she began to search about
her waist.

"I'd fall flat in the water if I tried it, as sure as the world," the
taller girl responded.

They rose to their feet and joined Bryant.

"You're the young ladies who are homesteading just south of here,
aren't you?" he inquired, politely.

"Yes, two miles south on Sarita Creek," the smaller answered. Then
after an appraising regard of him she continued, "We took our claims
only last April. And they're not very good claims, either, we're
beginning to fear; the creek goes dry about this time. That's why no
one had filed on the locations before. Have you a ranch somewhere
near?"

"No. That is, not yet. I'm a civil engineer, but I'm thinking strongly
of settling down here. If I do, we shall be neighbours. My name is Lee
Bryant; this is my horse Dick; and I've a dog called Mike, which
stopped aways back on the road to investigate a prairie dog hole. Now
you know who we are," he concluded, with a smile.

The girl thereupon told him her name was Ruth Gardner and that of her
companion Imogene Martin.

"We'll be very glad to have you call at our little ranch when you're
riding by," Ruth Gardner said, graciously. "Aside from Imogene's uncle
and aunt, who live in Kennard and who've come to see us several
times, we've not had a single visitor in the three months and a half
we've been there, except once an old Mexican who was herding sheep
near by and came to ask for matches. Of course, not many people know
we're there, I imagine. From the road one can't see our cabins--we had
to have two, you know, one for each claim, and they sit side by
side--because they're in the mouth of the canon among the trees. It's
really cool and pleasant there during the heat of the day. Any time
you come, you'll be welcome."

"Yes, Mr. Bryant," Imogene Martin affirmed. "A man now and then in the
scenery will help out wonderfully."

"I'll stop the first time I'm passing," he stated.

Lee Bryant understood the significance of the invitation: they were
starved for company and would be grateful for the society of a person
they believed respectable. He had seen a good deal of homesteading
conditions in the West; he knew the hardships involved in "holding
down" claims, of which the dreary monotony and loneliness of the life
were not the least. One earned ten times over every bit one got of a
free government homestead. For men it was bad enough; but for woman,
for girls like these, who had probably come from the East in trustful
ignorance and with rosy visions, the homestead venture impressed him
not only as pitiful but as tragic.

"I'll certainly ride down to see you," he assured them again.

"And perhaps, being an engineer, you'll show us why the water doesn't
run downhill in our bean patch, as it ought to do," Imogene Martin
remarked.

Bryant laughed and nodded agreement.

"You'll find that it's your eyes, and not the water, that have been
playing tricks," he said. "Ground levels and ditch grades are
deceiving things close to the mountains, because the latter tilt one's
natural line of vision. That's why water seems to run uphill when you
look toward the range. I'll soon fix your ditch line when I set an
instrument in your bean patch and sight through it once or twice. The
water will behave after that, I promise you."

They continued to chat of this and of the failing of Sarita Creek,
until the automobile that Bryant had earlier sighted shot into view on
the northern bank of the creek, whence at decreased speed it descended
into the bottom and ground its way across through sand and gravel.
Driving the hooded car was a man of about thirty years, of slim figure
and with a pale olive skin that betrayed an admixture of American and
Mexican blood. Beside him in the front seat sat a girl whose clear
pink complexion made plain that in her was no mingling of races; her
hat held by a streaming blue veil and her form incased in a silk dust
coat. The tonneau was occupied by two men: one an American with a van
dyke beard sprinkled with gray, the other a short, stout, swarthy
Mexican, whose sweeping white moustache was in marked contrast to his
coffee-coloured face.

The car, with radiator steaming and hissing, was stopped at a spot
close to where Lee Bryant and his companions stood. The young man at
the wheel, unlatching the door, stepped out.

"I'll bet the stop-cock of the radiator is open," he addressed the
girl with the blue veil, "or the engine wouldn't be so hot." After
making an examination of the faucet, he returned to the door and
procured a folding canvas bucket, saying, "That's the trouble, and the
radiator is empty."

But the young lady scarcely heeded him. She had loosened the blue veil
knotted at her throat and pushed it back from her cheeks to free them
to the air; she sat regarding with interested eyes the group of three
standing a few paces off by the horses. In her gaze, too, there was a
faint curiosity, as if she wondered who the persons might be, and what
they were doing here, and of what they had been conversing when
interrupted. An exceedingly lovely girl she was, as the engineer had
instantly perceived; her features molded in soft lines and curves that
enchanted, a tint like that of peach petals in her cheeks, with warm,
sensitive lips and brown, shining eyes--a radiant, intelligent face.
Against the background of the place, the creek bed of sand and stones
and the banks fringed with dusty sagebrush, she glowed with the
freshness of a desert rose.

The driver of the car took a step toward Bryant, extending the bucket.

"Dip me some water out of that hole while I look at my tires, will
you?" he said.

At the words, which were rather more of a command than a request, the
engineer regarded him fixedly while the blood stirred beneath his tan,
but finally took the bucket. The other turned back to the car, where
he made a pretense of inspecting a front wheel and then, with a foot
on the running-board and elbow resting on knee, twisting indolently a
point of his small moustache, he began to converse with his companion
of the blue veil.

Bryant filled the radiator. Two trips to the pool were necessary to
obtain enough water for that purpose, but he finished the job with the
same thoroughness that he went through with any business once
undertaken, whether pleasant or otherwise. As he poured the contents
of the bucket into the radiator's spout, he took stock of the
automobile party. His face hardened with a slight contempt when he
considered the effeminate-appearing young Mexican who had bade him
bring water and the girl talking with him; which she must have noticed
and taken to herself, for when their eyes met he saw that a flush dyed
her cheeks and that she bit her lip nervously.

He snapped the radiator cap shut. At the click the man stopped
fingering his moustache, ended his talk, mounted to his seat, and
started the engine. Bryant handed him the bucket, folded flat again,
which the recipient tossed down by his feet.

"Here, my man," said the olive-skinned young fellow at the wheel, with
a forefinger and thumb searching a waistcoat pocket as the car began
slowly to move forward.

He tossed a quarter to the engineer. Bryant instinctively caught it,
as one catches any suddenly thrown object. For an instant he remained
transfixed, incredulous, astounded, then the blood flamed in his face
and he cast the coin back at its donor.

"No Mexican can throw money to me!" he exclaimed.

For answer he received an angry look and snarled word from the driver.
Beyond the man Bryant beheld the startled, embarrassed, and yet
interested face of the girl with the veil, her lips a little parted,
her eyes intent on him. Then the car lurched out of the sand, splashed
through the rivulet, ascended the inclined roadway of the creek bank,
and sped from view.

The sudden spark of antagonism flashing between the engineer and the
young Mexican made the two girls by the ponies acutely aware that the
horseman after all was a stranger, a man of whom they knew nothing, an
unknown quantity. And so the two exchanged a glance and drew on their
gauntlets and said they must be riding home. Thereupon Bryant assisted
them to mount.

As he separated from them to follow the trail up the creek to the
ranch house by the three cottonwoods, Ruth Gardner called to him not
to forget his promised visit to their cabins. He assured them he
should remember. When the girls were some distance off, they waved
across the sagebrush at him and he swung his hat in reply. Off then
the pair went at a gallop, with the automobile on the road far south
of them leaving a hazy streamer of dust above the earth; the riders
going farther and farther away, becoming smaller and smaller on the
mesa, until at last they were but bobbing specks in the golden
sunshine.




CHAPTER II


As Lee Bryant reined his horse to a stop before the small ranch house,
a man seated on a stool just within the open doorway rose and came out
to join him. He was a man of thin, stooped body; his sandy hair
streaked with gray formed a fringe about his bald crown; and on his
lined, sunburnt face there rested a shadow of worry that appeared to
be habitual. Bryant dismounted and shook hands with the ranchman.

"Well, how are you making it, Mr. Stevenson?" he greeted. "As I
promised if I should be riding by this way again, I've stopped to say
'howdy.' Doesn't seem a month has passed since I stayed over night
with you? How's Mrs. Stevenson? Hope you're both well."

"Just feeling fair, just fair. Glad you stopped, Bryant," was the
answer. "My wife was wondering only the other day what had become of
you. Bring your horse around to the corral."

They went behind the house, where the young man removed saddle and
bridle from Dick and turned him into the enclosure. Stevenson gathered
an armful of hay from a small heap near by and tossed it over the
fence to the horse, which began to eat eagerly. Lee glanced about,
gave a sharp whistle; from the trail by the creek a bark answered him.
Then an Airedale came racing through the sagebrush, now and again
leaping high to gain a view of his master and finally breaking out
upon the clear ground about the ranch house.

"Mike, you're too inquisitive about other animals' dwellings," Lee
addressed him as he arrived, wet from an immersion in the creek and
panting from his run. "Some day a rattler in a hole you're digging
into will nip you on the nose and you'll wish you'd been more polite.
Come along now and be good."

He walked with Stevenson back to the house, where leaving the dog to
drop in the shade outside they entered. The interior was cool and dim
after the hot, glaring sunshine; and Bryant, having greeted Mrs.
Stevenson, sat down gratefully in a rocking-chair, glad to avail
himself of the room's comfort. Crude as an adobe house is both in
appearance and in construction, it is admirably adapted to the climate
of the arid Southwest; its flat dirt roof and thick walls built of
sun-baked mud bricks, plastered within and smoothly surfaced without,
defying alike the heat of midsummer and the icy blasts of winter and
lasting in that dry clime half a century. This ranch house of the
Stevensons', originally built by some Mexican, as Bryant judged, had
been standing twenty-five or thirty years and was still tight and
staunch.

"Your creek's pretty dry, I see," the young fellow remarked
afteratime, when they had exchanged news.

"By August there won't be any water in it at all," Stevenson said,
"except a little that always runs in the canon. I'll have to haul it
from there then. You see now why I can't keep stock here."

His wife stopped the needle with which she mended an apron while they
talked, and looked out of a window. On her face was the same tired,
anxious expression that marked her husband's countenance.

"I've barely kept our garden alive," she said, "but it won't be for
much longer."

"That's too bad, Mrs. Stevenson," Lee Bryant replied. "However, one
can't do anything without water. Still, your sheep are doing well, I
suppose; the grass is good on the mountains this summer."

An answer was not immediately forthcoming from the rancher; he sat
staring absently at the backs of his roughened hands, now and again
rubbing one or the other, and enveloped in a gloom that Bryant could
both see and feel. Then all at once Stevenson began to talk, in a
voice querulous and morose.

"We're going to quit here, sell the sheep, and go back East. I was
swindled when I bought this ranch, and I want to get away before I
lose my last cent. Came out to this country five years ago from
Illinois with forty thousand dollars, and now we're going back with
what I can sell my sheep for, maybe twenty-five hundred cash. Menocal
robbed me right at the start, selling me this place for twenty-five
thousand--twenty thousand down and a mortgage for the remaining five
thousand--when the place was just five thousand acres of sagebrush,
with no more water than runs in this creek. I was a tenderfoot all
right! The land agent at Kennard showed it to me in June when the
Perro was booming, and I believed him when he said it ran that way all
the year around. Look at it now! I didn't have sense enough to inquire
and learn about it, being in a hurry to get into the sheep business
and thinking I should be rich in no time. That agent sold it to me for
irrigated land, and a bargain at five dollars an acre. Menocal, who
owned it and deeded it to me, pretends he isn't responsible for what
the man said. Five dollars an acre! It's worth about fifty cents for
winter range, and no more."

"If it could be irrigated, it would be a bargain sure enough at five
dollars," Lee stated. "And there's another water right for the place
you said when I was here before."

"Yes, there is--on paper. Water was appropriated out of the Pinas
River, but that's eight miles north of here, and it would cost a
hundred thousand dollars, if not more, to build a dam and a canal
along the mountain side. No, sir; that appropriation was just some
more of Menocal's tricky work! He jammed it through the land office
thirty years ago and, they say, never did any more to comply with the
law requiring delivery of the water on this ground than to have a man
drive around pouring a bucketful out of a barrel upon each quarter
section."

"Some pretty shady transactions were put across in those early days,"
Bryant commented.

"Well, ain't matters just as bad now?" Stevenson asked, quickly. "He
still has the appropriation, or rather I'm supposed to have it with
this ranch. Because Menocal controls the Mexican vote hereabouts,
which is about all the vote there is, why, nobody has ever disturbed
him about that water right. And he's using that water, belonging to
me, to irrigate a lot of bottom farms along the river, for which no
water can be appropriated, the Pinas not carrying enough. I rode over
one day and looked at those farms--all grain and alfalfa. Well, he'll
get this ranch back, anyway. The mortgage he holds on it is due next
week and I can't pay it. Wouldn't even if I had the money. We're going
to pull up stakes and leave."

Bryant silently regarded the other's haggard face and stooped figure,
whose expression and resigned attitude revealed clearly Stevenson's
surrender. He was a man discouraged, disheartened, whipped.

"What's wrong with the sheep?" he questioned, at length.

"Not much that isn't wrong. When I started five years ago, I invested
in three thousand head. One time I had them increased to fifty-five
hundred--three bands. Thought I was doing first rate; and I was then.
But everything began to go against me. It seemed as if I always got
the worst herders; and not having any water to raise alfalfa I had to
buy winter feed, which was expensive; and a lot of them got the scab
and died; and last year I lost nearly all my lambs at lambing time,
the band being caught out in a storm and being in the wrong place.
Just one thing after another, to break my back. Had trouble about the
range, too. When I started them off this spring, they were down to
seven hundred; and I've been losing some right along from one cause or
another. No lambs, either, this spring, except dead ones. I thought I
could hang on till my luck changed, but losing a hundred head two
weeks ago was the last straw. I'm done now."

"What happened, Stevenson?"

"One of Menocal's herders mixed his flock with my six hundred, did it
deliberately, I'm convinced; there were three thousand head of his.
Billy was tending ours--and Billy is only fourteen, you know. I had
come down here for some supplies and when I returned, I found him
crying. The Mexican had separated the sheep and we were a hundred
short, gone with his, and he would pay no attention to Billy, swearing
he had only his own band. And he drove them away. I went to Menocal,
who was very polite, but he said I must be mistaken as his herders
were all honest men; and I've not got my sheep back, and I'm not
likely to. For that band is now thirty miles away somewhere. No use to
go to court--Menocal owns everything and everybody around here. So I'm
quitting."

"The sheep business isn't all roses, that's certain," Lee Bryant
remarked. "It's hard luck that your band ran down just when the price
of mutton and wool is going up. So you're letting the ranch slide?"

"Yes, I can't pay the mortgage; Menocal would foreclose at once if I
tried to stay. Last time I was in town he asked me about paying it off
and when I told him I shouldn't be able to do that, he said he'd have
me deed it back to him to save foreclosure proceedings. And he was
smiling, too. He knew all the time that he'd get the ranch back; and
when he does, he'll sell it to some other sucker."

"Both of us have wished a hundred times that we'd never sold our
Illinois farm to come here," Mrs. Stevenson said, plaintively. "I
don't know what we'll do when we go back, for that matter. Just rent a
place, I guess. Land is so high-priced there that we'll never be able
to buy a farm again."

"Renting there is better than starving here," her husband declared.
"We'll have a better home, too. When we first came to this place, we
planned on building a fine house, but I never had the money loose, and
we've just kept on from year to year living in this 'dobe hole. Good
thing I didn't have the money, however, for we'd lose the house along
with the ranch if we had built. Well, we're going back East, anyhow,
as soon as I sell the sheep. Graham, who has the big ranch on Diamond
Creek, south of where those girls are homesteading, is coming up in a
day or two to look at them, maybe buy them. You can see Graham's big
white house from the Kennard trail."

Bryant nodded. "I know the place, saw it when passing," said he. Then
he went on, "When I was at the ford watering my horse before coming
here, an auto crossed the creek. In the rear seat were a fat Mexican,
whom I took to be Menocal, and a white man with a pointed beard. The
latter perhaps was Graham?"

"Yes, that must have been him. Which way were they driving?"

"South."

"Going to the Graham ranch, I s'pose."

"There was a slim young fellow driving the car--some Mexican blood in
him," Lee stated.

"Menocal's son, Charlie, a half-breed snippet who puts on airs because
his father's rich," Stevenson said, in a disgusted tone. "A white
woman married Menocal, you know."

"In the front seat with the young fellow was a girl, rather pretty,"
Bryant appended.

"That's Louise, I imagine," Mrs. Stevenson said, reflectively. "Yes,
it must have been her. She's Mr. Graham's daughter. A nice girl, too.
That Menocal boy is crazy to marry her, the talk is."

"And is she crazy to marry him?" Lee inquired, amused by this gossip.

"Well, not exactly crazy, I'd say; I don't see how she could be. But
he'll be worth a lot of money some day, and she may overlook
considerable on that account. Menocal's boy has been to college;
besides, the family goes everywhere with white folks. I guess a
Mexican is supposed to be really white, isn't he?"

"Those having pure Spanish blood," the engineer explained. "Nearly all
the ones around here that I've seen have more Indian in them than
anything else, however, with a dash of other races perhaps. From the
glimpse I had of Menocal, I'll venture to say he has Red men among his
ancestors."

"Mexican or Indian or whatever he is, he can squeeze money out of
nothing, like a Jew," Stevenson complained. "Look how much he has made
out of this ranch; look at what he has made out of me! And it's just
that way with everything he holds. The Mexicans all around this
section sell him their stuff cheap and take what he pays, because they
don't know any better and because he's their leader. He has the big
store at Bartolo, which you've seen, and owns the bank there, and has
any number of farms up and down the Pinas River, and runs I don't know
how many bands of sheep; and besides, he elects the county officers,
and fixes the taxes to suit himself, and recommends the water
inspector for this district, and--and--well, what chance has an
ordinary man to get ahead here?"

Lee Bryant let a pause ensue. He rolled a cigarette and struck a light
and carefully got the tobacco to burning.

"You say you're going to let the ranch go back to Menocal," he stated,
abruptly. "You've made up your mind that you won't keep it, anyway.
All right. Now I've a proposition to make you."

Stevenson looked at him with curiosity.

"A proposition? What is it?" he asked.

"It's this: I've a farm of eighty acres in Nebraska that I'll trade
you for it. I could offer you less, but I won't; you have an equity
here of value, and I'm not the kind of man to beat you down to
nothing. If we deal, you shall have something in return for your
interest. This eighty of mine is worth a hundred dollars an
acre--eight thousand; it's mortgaged for five thousand, which leaves
an equity of three thousand; on it are good buildings and it's rented
until next March. You could then take possession. It's a good farm,
and with the money you'll have from the sale of your sheep you can
make a good start on the place, which is in the corn and wheat
section. My equity of three thousand isn't worth, to be sure, anything
like what you paid Menocal for this ranch, but it's something--and all
that I can afford to give."

The rancher stared at Lee as if he could not credit his ears.

"Are you in earnest?" he demanded, at last. "Why I've just told you
there's no water here. A man can't make a living on the place, and the
mortgage is due next week."

"I'll pay off the mortgage; I've enough money saved up to do that."

"But, man, without water----"

"Listen, Stevenson, I know exactly what I'm about," the engineer
interrupted. "This thing's a gamble with me, I admit, but you needn't
do any worrying on that score. I'm going in with my eyes open; I know
the risks and am willing to take them. What about my offer?"

Stevenson, still gazing at his visitor in wonderment, was at a loss;
he rubbed his knuckles doubtfully, hitched about on his chair and knit
his brows, perplexed, hesitating, as was his manner when presented
with any new affair, even with one palpably to his advantage. It was
clear that in this lack of quick decision lay much of the reason for
his failure.

His wife exclaimed in appeal, "Oh, John, if Mr. Bryant really means
it, why don't you say yes? I can't understand why he makes us such a
fine offer, but he is making it. We can start again; we'll be back in
a farming country like what we're used to, even if it isn't in
Illinois; we'll have a farm of our own, a home of our own, and will
not have to rent. Oh, why don't you say yes?"

The rancher looked from his wife to Bryant and back again, pursing his
lips.

"But I don't understand this," he said.

"You heard what he explained," she replied, anxiously. "He expects to
pay off the mortgage and be rid of Mr. Menocal. Perhaps he knows the
sheep business better than you do; you never did learn it well, John,
and you ought never to have stopped farming. You were a good farmer;
you will be again. We can go on this place in Nebraska and raise corn
and wheat and hogs, and I'll have chickens to help clear the debt.
Why, it's a chance for us to be independent again, and have a home,
and neighbours, and attend church, and--and be happy, John!"

"That's so," her husband agreed.

"We are going to leave here anyway," she continued to urge. "We
wouldn't have had anything but the money from the sheep, but now
you'll be getting a farm, too. I'd think you'd jump at Mr. Bryant's
offer."

"But maybe, after all, the ranch is worth more than I thought,"
Stevenson speculated.

His wife sank back in her seat, picked up her sewing, and tried to
resume her task, but her fingers trembled and her lashes were winking
fast. Lee gazed at her sympathetically. Then he lifted his hat from
the floor and stood up.

"Well, there are other places I can trade for," he remarked. "I
thought I was doing you a good turn in proposing the exchange,
especially as you're about to lose your place. I wouldn't be beating
you out of anything, certainly, and as your wife says, you'd really be
getting something for nothing. The mortgage is due next week, you must
remember."

Stevenson's mind, however, was running in another channel.

"I'll tell you how we can deal," he said, with an assumption of
shrewdness. "You pay me the five thousand you plan to pay off the
mortgage with, and get Menocal to renew the loan. Five thousand--why,
my equity is worth more than that! Besides, you've some scheme for
making money out of this ranch."

"What if I have?"

"That makes a difference when it comes to a deal."

"Not with me," the engineer stated, curtly. "If that's your attitude,
we'll drop the matter. Probably you yourself can arrange an extension
of the mortgage or a renewal, if you're minded to remain."

"You know, John, that you can't; Mr. Menocal has already refused,"
Mrs. Stevenson said, in a low voice.

"I ought to have cash in addition to your farm," her husband insisted.

"You get none," Lee replied. "Well, this trade is what I came to see
you about. From the way you talked when I was here last I supposed you
might consider my offer favourably, but I guess we can't do business.
I'll ride on to Bartolo."

At this statement Mrs. Stevenson wiped her eyes, rose and went into
the inner room, closing the door after her. The engineer moved as if
to depart.

"Now, wait a minute," Stevenson exclaimed.

"Well?"

"I'll take--let me figure a minute."

Bryant tossed his hat on the table in disgust and relighted his
cigarette.

"Stevenson, listen," he began. "You're an older man than I am, but
just the same I'm going to say a few things that you need to hear. I
couldn't say them and wouldn't say them before your wife, but now I'm
going to turn loose. You can do as you damn please about trading, take
my offer or leave it; if you refuse, though, you'll lose both ranch
and farm. The trouble with you is that you can't see the difference
between a good proposition and a bad one. That's why you bought this
ranch on say-so. That's why now you're turning down my offer. You
either jump without first looking, or you wait until it's too late.
You don't pay attention strictly to what's immediately under your
hand, but waste your energy wondering if you can't get rich from
something out of your reach. That's what has been the trouble with you
in the sheep business, I imagine. Here when I offer you a farm for a
ranch that's slipping through your fingers, you at once get greedy.
Most of the time you don't know your own mind; you hesitate and
speculate and vacillate and worry. Why, you deserve to lose your ranch
and your sheep and everything else. And your wife suffers for your
faults! You're a failure, and you've dragged her down with you. If
you're not a failure, and a fool, too, go bring her back into this
room and tell her you're going to make this trade, so you two will
have a farm and the home she wants and so her mind will be easy once
more. You've been thinking of only yourself long enough; now begin to
think of her comfort and happiness."

Stevenson came angrily to his feet.

"No man ever talked to me like that before, I'll have you know!" he
cried.

The engineer kept his place, with no change of countenance.

"Well, one has talked to you like that now and I'm the man," he said.
"And I don't retract a word. It's the truth straight from the
shoulder. What are you going to do about it? Why, nothing, just
nothing. Because I've talked cold, hard facts, and you know it."

The momentary fire died from Stevenson's eyes. He shuffled his feet
for a little, looked about the room with the worried aspect he
usually showed, brushed his lips with the back of his hand.

"You're pretty rough----" he began.

"Don't stand there talking; go get your wife," Bryant said, sharply.

Stevenson turned and walked slowly to the closed door. He cleared his
throat, stared at the panels for a moment, and at last pushed it open.

"Come out, Sarah, we're going to trade," he announced.

The woman came forth. About her eyes was a slight redness, but on her
lips there was a tremulous smile.

"I'm glad," she said, "I'm glad, John."

"Yes, I decided it was a good trade to make," her husband assured her.
"No need to think it over longer."

They came to where Bryant stood, unconcealed pleasure showing on Mrs.
Stevenson's face.

"You may like to see these kodak pictures of the farm and its house,"
the young man said, producing an envelope from a pocket. "Take a chair
here by the window, Mrs. Stevenson, where you'll have the light. See,
this one shows the house, with the trees and lilac bushes in front,
and gives you a glimpse of the flower garden. Pretty, don't you
think?"

She readjusted her spectacles. After a time she gazed from the
pictures through the window at the stretch of sagebrush.

"And I'll have neighbours, too," she said, in an unsteady voice. "The
loneliness here was killing me."

Stevenson considered the backs of his hands in awkward silence.

"Neighbours, lots of them," Bryant affirmed.

"I kind of pity you having to stay," she said, looking up at him with
a smile.

The engineer laughed.

"Why, this country suits me right down to the ground," he replied.
"I've been in the West ten years, wouldn't live anywhere else. And I
don't expect to be lonely; Menocal will probably attend to that.
Besides, there are two good-looking young ladies just south of here,
on Sarita Creek."

"That's so," she said, laughing also.

"First thing we hear, you'll be married," Stevenson remarked, with a
quick grin.

"Oh, I'm safe--there are two of them," Bryant returned, clapping the
rancher on the shoulder.




CHAPTER III


The town of Bartolo slumbered in the July sunshine. Nothing stirred on
its one long street, lined with scarcely a break on either side by
mud-plastered houses that made a continuous brown wall, marked at
intervals by a door or pierced by a window; nothing stirred, neither
in front of Menocal's large frame store at the upper end of it, with
the little bank adjoining, nor before the small courthouse grounds
across the way, where the huge old cottonwoods spread their shade, nor
along the entire length of the beaten street down to Gomez's
blacksmith shop and Martinez's saloon across from each other at the
lower end; nothing, not even the pair of burros drowsing in the shade
of the wall, or the dogs lying before doors, or the goats a-kneel by
the saloon, or the fowls nested down in the dust. Only the Pinas
River, issuing from the black canon a mile or so above, was in motion;
and, indeed, it appeared to partake of the general somnolence, barely
rippling along its gravelly bed, shallow and shrunken, and giving
forth but an indolent glitter as it flowed past the town. The day was
hot and it was the hour of the siesta, therefore everything
slept--everything, man, beast and fowl, from Menocal, who was snoring
in his hammock on the vine-clad veranda of his big stuccoed house just
beyond the store at the head of the street, to the goats at the foot
of it by the silent saloon.

Bryant, descending from the mesa into the river bottom and riding into
the street, had he not known otherwise, might have supposed the
population vanished in a body. But he was aware that it only slept;
and he had no consideration for a siesta that retarded his affairs. He
dismounted before the courthouse and entered the building, whose
corridor and chambers appeared as silent, as lifeless, as forsaken as
the street itself. Coming into the Recorder's office, he halted for a
look about, then pushed through the wicket of the counter and stepped
into an inner room, where he stirred by a thumb in the ribs a thin,
dusky-skinned youth reclining in a swivel chair with feet in repose on
a window-sill, who slept with head fallen back, arms hanging, and
mouth open.

"Come, _amigo_, your dinner's settled by this time," the engineer
stated. "Grab a pen and record this deed."

The clerk sleepily shifted his feet into a more comfortable position.

"We're behind in our work," said he. "Just leave your deed, and the
fee, and we'll get around to it in a few days."

"So you're too busy now, eh?"

"Yes. We've had a good many papers to record this month."

"Where's the Recorder?"

"Not back from dinner yet," was the answer.

The speaker once again prepared to rest. From the outer office the
slow ticking of a clock sounded with lulling effect, while the grassy
yard beyond the window, shaded by the boughs of the cottonwoods,
diffused peace and drowsiness. The clerk closed his eyes.

"Just leave the deed and fee on the desk here," he murmured.

"And tip-toe out, too, I suppose."

"If you feel like it," the young Mexican remarked, with a faint
insolence in his voice, the insolence of a subordinate who believes
himself protected by his place.

Bryant's hand shot swiftly out to the speaker's shoulder. With a snap
that brought him up standing the clerk was jerked from his seat, and
before his startled wits gathered what was happening he was propelled
into the outer office.

"Record this deed, you forty-dollar-a-month penpusher, before I grow
peevish and rearrange your face," Bryant ordered, with his fingers
tightening their grasp on the youth's collar. "You're receiving your
pay from the county, and are presumed to give value received. Anyway,
value received is what I'm going to have now."

"Let go my neck!"

"Let go nothing. When I see you settle down to this big book, then I
let go. No '_manana_' with me, boy; right here and now you're going to
give me an exhibition of rapid penmanship. Savey? Take up your pen;
that's the stuff. Now dip deep in the ink and draw a full breath and
go to it."

Bryant released his hold on the cowed clerk, but remained by his side,
where his presence exerted an amazingly energizing effect upon the
scribe. The pen scratched industriously to and fro across the page,
over which the youth humped himself as if enamoured of the tome, only
at intervals risking a glance at the lean-faced, vigilant American.
When he had finished the transcription, stamped the deed and closed
the book, Bryant handed him the amount of the fee.

"Thank you," the clerk said, with an excess of politeness.

He was still nervous. He furtively observed his visitor stowing the
deed in a pocket, as if expecting Bryant to initiate some new
violence, and resolved on flight if he should.

"There, my friend, that's all you can do for me just now," the
engineer remarked. "But I shall return soon, so keep awake and ready.
When you see me entering, advance _pronto_. If anything annoys me,
it's being kept waiting by a Mexican boy-clerk. Do you get that
clearly?"

"_Si, senor_," the other replied, unconsciously lapsing into his
native tongue.

"_Muy bueno_--and bear it in mind. Now I advise you to get to work on
the documents you've allowed to accumulate; it's half-past two and
you've had enough of a siesta for one noon." With which Bryant took
his departure.

Outside he led his horse across the street to the frame store. Beside
the latter stood Menocal's house, with its smooth green lawn and its
beds of poppies, its trees, its fence massed with sweet peas, and its
vine-covered veranda, where the engineer had a glimpse of a corpulent
figure in a hammock. The only sound from the place was the musical
gurgle of water in a little irrigation ditch bordering the lawn.

Inside the long store Bryant aroused the only man in sight, a Mexican
who slept on the counter with his head pillowed on a pile of overalls.

"Go tell Menocal there's a man here to see him on business," Lee
said.

The awakened sleeper slid off his perch, rubbed his eyes, yawned,
stretched himself, and then shook his head with great gravity.

"Mr. Menocal takes his siesta till three o'clock; you can see him at
that time," he said, in English.

"I'll see him now."

"Impossible! He is very angry when awakened for a small matter."

Bryant went a step nearer to the speaker.

"Where do you get the authority to decide that my business is a small
matter?" he demanded, with a menace of manner that caused the other to
retreat in haste. "Go bring him and make me no more trouble."

The man went. Bryant lighted a cigarette and fell to surveying the
store's merchandise. Several minutes passed before a murmur of voices
apprised him of the coming of the men. Menocal entered the side door
first, approaching heavily and sleepily the spot where the engineer
waited. He had not put on coat or collar; his short figure appeared
more than ever obese; his sweeping white moustache divided his plump,
shiny brown face; and his air was that of one who must put up with
vexatious interruptions because of the important position he filled.

"You wish to speak with me?" he asked, shortly.

"That's why I'm here," Bryant returned.

Menocal gazed at him owlishly for a time.

"You're the man who threw my son's money back at the ford day before
yesterday, aren't you?" he questioned.

"The same."

"Why did you throw it back?"

"Why did he throw it at me in the first place? You should train him to
use better judgment. You yourself wouldn't have done it."

"No," Menocal said. Then, as if the subject were dismissed, he asked,
"What do you wish to see me about?"

"About the mortgage on the Stevenson place: I've bought the ranch.
Stevenson moves off in a few days."

Menocal's brows lifted and remained so, as if fixed in their new
elevation. He slowly rubbed the end of his nose with his forefinger.
The sleepiness had wholly vanished from his countenance.

"Come into the bank," he said, finally; and moved toward the front
door.

The engineer accompanied him. In a space railed off from the cashier's
grille in the little building next door they sat down. The teller was
visible in the cage, where now he appeared very busy though he had
undoubtedly been drowsing when they entered.

"So you've bought the Stevenson ranch," Menocal said.

"Yes. I've just had the deed recorded."

"The mortgage is due in a few days; I told him it wouldn't be renewed
by me."

"Perhaps now that I have the place----"

"No; I've carried that loan long enough. If it isn't paid when due,
I'll start foreclosure proceedings immediately."

Bryant nodded.

"Well, I merely asked out of curiosity," said he. "It's your right to
demand payment--and I'm on hand with the money. Make out a release so
that I can clear the record. Here's a Denver draft for six thousand
dollars--I figure principal and interest at five thousand four hundred
and you can have the balance placed to my credit in the bank. I
shouldn't continue the loan at its present rate of interest in any
case; eight per cent. is too much for money. Besides, I want the ranch
clear of incumbrance."

With an expressionless face Menocal gazed at the draft, turned it
over, examined the back, then at last laid it down on his desk.

"Isidro," he called to the teller, "make out a mortgage release for
the Stevenson place. Copy the description from the mortgage in my file
in the vault. Afterward credit six hundred dollars to--What is your
name?"

"Lee Bryant."

"Six hundred dollars to Lee Bryant, Isidro. Mr. Bryant will give you
his signature." Again facing his visitor, he said, "Do you know that
that ranch has no water to speak of? I'm afraid you may not find the
property what you expect."

"It has a good appropriation from the Pinas River here."

"Ah, but it can't be used," Menocal exclaimed, with a bland smile.

"I propose to use it."

"What!"

Bryant kept his eyes fixed on the amazed banker's orbs.

"Didn't I speak clearly?" he inquired. "I own one hundred and
twenty-five second feet of water in this river and it's my intention
to apply it. I'm going to make a real ranch down there."

A shadow seemed to settle on Menocal's face, leaving it altered, less
placid, more purposeful.

"Considerable capital will be required to build a canal there," he
remarked. "You're certainly not going into this thing on your own
account, are you? Who is putting up the money? Eastern people?"

Bryant smiled, but made no answer. His smile and his silence provoked
an angry gleam from the banker's eyes.

"Well, it doesn't matter," Menocal continued. "But you're going to
discover that you haven't this water right, after all."

"What makes you think so?"

"Because it was never used, because no real canal was ever built, only
a little ditch that doesn't exist now. The right will be cancelled,
and the water will be reappropriated for lands along the river."

"For farms on which you're now using it, you mean?"

"I'm not saying where."

Bryant leaned forward and tapped the banker's desk with a finger-tip.

"Mr. Menocal, don't try to start any trouble with me," he said, with
jaw a little outthrust.

"_Dios!_ You dare talk that way to me?"

"I repeat it, don't attempt to keep something that doesn't belong to
you. You may want to--but don't try it. I know all about the water
appropriation for the ranch I've bought; all about your sworn
affidavit filed thirty years ago, with an accompanying map, certifying
that a canal was built and water delivered to the land. It's a matter
of record. Now you seek to reappropriate this water, or to have the
right cancelled, and see where you wind up. Thirty years ago men
winked at false affidavits, but it's different to-day."

The Mexican's white moustache drew up tight under his thick nose,
disclosing his teeth in a snarl.

"You threaten me--me!"

"I'm not threatening, only warning you. Or if you wish a still milder
word, let me say advising," Bryant rejoined.

The banker's eyes, however, continued to flash at the engineer, as if
alive in their sockets and hunting a mark to strike.

"You accuse me of dishonour!" he exclaimed. "I don't know why I should
pay attention to your charge, which is false. A ditch was built to the
ranch--"

"Mighty small one, then. No trace of it remains."

"One was built, one was built!"

"Very well, Mr. Menocal, grant that it was. It but strengthens my
position. But let us pass to recent times; five years ago you passed
title to Stevenson with the water right as a reality when you sold him
the ranch; your son is water inspector for this district, or was until
a year ago, anyway, making reports to the state. Did he say anything
in them about this canal or water right having ceased to exist? No."

"His reports were largely routine," the other stated, regaining his
composure.

"Still they were official. I'm simply pointing out to you, Mr.
Menocal, why it will be unwise for you to endeavour to have this water
appropriation cancelled. You sold it to Stevenson as a live right--the
deed proves that; and now that I have the property I shall make it
such in fact. You've been using the water for other land, which
possibly will suffer afterward, but that doesn't affect the case in
the least. That water is a valuable property; when it's delivered on
my ranch, the land will be worth fifty dollars an acre. You may have
calculated that no one who got hold of the Perro Creek ranch ever
would or could use the water, but in that you were in error: I can and
will use it, and you must understand that fact."

Menocal fell into consideration. He folded his hands across his
stomach and remained thus, pondering, occasionally lifting his lids
for a scrutiny of Bryant's face.

"I'll give you ten thousand cash for the place as it stands and hand
you my check now," he said, at length.

"Not to-day, thank you," the engineer replied.

"What is your price?"

"The ranch isn't for sale. It'll be worth a quarter of a million when
it's watered. No, it's not on the market at present."

A deep sigh issued from the banker's lips; he blinked slowly several
times before speaking, with a resigned countenance.

"I see you've some capitalists behind you," said he, "for it will take
money to build a dam and a canal. If they saw a reasonable profit
without the trouble of construction, no doubt they would be willing to
sell."

"Put your mind at rest, Mr. Menocal; you have only me to deal with;
there are no capitalists running this show yet. But the water system
will be built, never fear."

Menocal's eyebrows went up. "Ah, so?" he asked, softly.

Then his face smoothed itself out; and Bryant realized that he had
been led into a betrayal of importance.

"You would do well to name a price, Mr. Bryant."

"No; I propose to develop the ranch," the engineer answered, curtly.
"Is the release made out? If it is, I'll be on my way."

"It's too bad you refuse, too bad," Menocal said, with a lugubrious
shake of his head.

He called Isidro. The clerk placed a card before Bryant for his
signature and gave him a check book. Then he laid the mortgage release
in front of Menocal, who signed and passed it to the engineer.

"You'll find it correct," the Mexican stated. "Isidro is a notary and
has filled out the acknowledgment."

Nevertheless, the visitor took care to read the paper and compare it
with his deed before he rose.

"Well, that ends my business for the afternoon," said he, "and I'll
take no more of your time. You understand where I stand, Mr. Menocal."

The latter gave a number of slow nods saying, "I understand, I
understand. Good day, Mr. Bryant. And remember that you have an
account with us and that the bank will be pleased to render you any
service possible."

Sleepily the banker, watching through the bank window, saw the young
man lead his horse across the street and once more disappear within
the courthouse. Then for some minutes he continued in somnolent
contemplation of the courthouse front. At last he called:

"Isidro, Isidro! Go find Joe Garcia and tell him I wish to speak with
him in half an hour in my garden. Look for him at home and in the
saloon, but find him wherever he is. That man who just went out now,
Isidro,----"

"Yes," answered Isidro.

"He's one of those hard, obstinate Americans, Isidro--and his eyes,
they are bad eyes, I don't like them."

"Yes," Isidro concurred, who had not noticed the eyes at all.




CHAPTER IV


Charlie Menocal, who after his sleep had read a few chapters in a
novel, went out of the shaded room where he had reposed and into the
garden. There he discovered his father in talk with Joe Garcia.

"What's going on?" he exclaimed. "Lost a horse, or a wife or
something, Joe?"

"No, Charlie; this is business," Garcia said, with a grin.

Menocal continued to give his instructions to the latter. They had to
do with bringing a few hundred sheep from one of the bands feeding in
the hills. They were to be driven down on the mesa to graze, and kept
moving about near the Stevenson ranch house; Garcia was to observe
what the young man there did, all he did, whom he saw, and as far as
possible where he went. Particularly was he to note if surveyors came
and set to work anywhere. If the young man appeared to be engaged at
any task on the mountain side, Joe was to approach with his sheep. And
he was to report everything he learned.

Charlie's attention became more lively as he listened to his father's
directions to the man, and when Garcia had departed he asked, "Who are
you after? Who's this young fellow you speak of as being at the Perro
Creek ranch? Didn't Stevenson deed the place back?"

Menocal senior twisted an end of his flaring moustache.

"May a thousand damnations fall on him! No, he didn't," he responded,
wrathfully.

"But that only means you'll have to foreclose the mortgage. It will
take longer, that's all."

Charlie was vice-president of his father's bank--his name was so
printed on the stationery, at least--and was familiar with his
parent's affairs, though he was averse to anything like industry. He
much preferred the pursuit of pleasure to work, and his automobile to
the grille of the bank. He was accurately aware, too, of his father's
weakness for him, an only child, and of his father's inclination to
indulge his desires; and shrewdly played upon the fact. Nevertheless,
in matters of business he possessed a certain sharpness.

"Stevenson sold the ranch to this young man Bryant, who just now paid
off the mortgage," Menocal explained.

"Then he was stung," Charlie averred.

"Wait, you don't know all, my son. He plans to build a dam and a canal
and use that old water right out of the Pinas, taking the water with
which we irrigate the farms down at Rosita. It will leave them dry;
the alfalfa will die; no more grain or peas or beans will be raised on
them; they won't have even good pasturage; they will go back to
sagebrush and cactus--all those farms, all those beautiful ranches!
Altogether four or five thousand acres! They are worth two hundred
thousand dollars now--to-morrow worth nothing! Half my winter hay
comes from them; half my peas for fattening lambs. I shall have to
sell part of my sheep. I'm a millionaire now, but I'll be reduced,
I'll be less than a millionaire, and so almost poor again. It's very
bad; it mustn't be; I must stop him using the water."

Even Charlie became solemn at the prospect of losing two hundred
thousand dollars and being less than a millionaire.

"The right hasn't been used; we'll have it cancelled," he said, with
sudden confidence.

"He refused to sell the place to me for ten thousand dollars cash,"
the father stated. "He's no fool--and he's a bad customer, Charlie; he
said he would send me to prison for perjury if I tried to cancel the
right."

"Perjury, pouf!" Charlie sneered.

"He couldn't send me to prison, of course, for I have too much money,
but he might make it unpleasant for me, very unpleasant. Politics are
to be considered; I mustn't get a bad name in the party and in the
state. I must be careful. The records show that the ranch has had the
water, and while in my possession. As he says, that would be difficult
for me to explain if I entered court against him. The matter mustn't
get into court or into the land office. Later we can have the water
right cancelled and reappropriated--later, when he has gone away, when
no dust can be raised about it."

"Is he going away?"

"Don't be stupid, Charlie. He must go away; that is necessary: I'm
considering plans. He must be pursuaded--or----"

"Or forced," said his son, with reckless bright eyes.

"Men generally depart from a locality when public opinion is brought
to bear on them," the elder remarked. "He can be made unpopular until
he desires to leave."

"We'll run him out, just leave that part to me."

"Charlie, nothing rash must be done, remember that, and nothing
illegal. I shall think of some plan soon."

"Nothing rash, but nothing uncertain, father. Two hundred thousand is
a lot of money. I, too, shall plan."

The prospect of ousting an intruder who had challenged his family's
right to control what it wished here, who indeed had the audacity to
attempt to robe the effort under a claim of legality, appealed to
young Menocal as an undertaking most attractive. The fact that all the
advantage was on his side, of influence, of wealth, of race, of power
that might be exerted through ignorant Mexicans in a hundred subtle
and vindictive ways, made the enterprise all the more alluring. The
Indian strain in his blood--a strain which accounts for much that sets
American and Mexican apart, unconsciously in his case gave a tinge of
cruelty to his anticipation. Aspiring himself to pass as an American,
it never failed to please him when he could slight or humiliate an
American; and he lacked his father's restraint of impulses, as he came
short of his sagacity and perseverance. Indeed, secretly the son
believed his father too conservative, too cautious, too old-fashioned
and slow; and at times was exceedingly impatient with methods that he
was confident he could immensely improve.

His father considered him for a time.

"Charlie, you leave this matter alone," he said. "You keep out of it.
Whatever's to be done, I'll do. You would go too far. You can give
your attention to seeing that the crops are watered and the hay cut on
time; you should be down at Rosita now looking after things."

"I'll run down in the car this evening," was the answer. "To-morrow
I'm going to Kennard, where I haven't been for two weeks. The wool in
the warehouse there should be sold, and a buyer from Boston wrote, you
know, that he would be there this week. And I think we can get our
price."

Kennard was the nearest railroad point and forty miles south. It was a
pleasant little city, with some of the attractions of larger places.
Of these Charlie was thinking rather than of the wool. He would attend
to the wool business, of course, but it was an excuse instead of a
reason for the projected visit on the morrow.

"Very well, it's time the wool is sold; the price is good at present,"
his father agreed.

Charlie recurred to the matter of the Stevenson ranch.

"What's this fellow's name who bought out Stevenson?"

"Lee Bryant. A young man. And I don't like him; I'm afraid he's a
trouble-maker. You should remember him, Charlie, for he's the fellow
who filled the radiator of the car at the ford on Perro Creek and who
threw your money back in your face."

Young Menocal's thin figure stiffened, while his small black moustache
rose in two points of ire.

"Him! That scoundrel who insulted me before Louise! That
lamb-stealer!" he shrilled.

"That is the man," his father affirmed.

Charlie spat forth a string of Spanish curses. When he had recovered
from his outburst of passion, he said:

"Well, I'm glad he's the man. He'll pay for that. Louise said nothing,
but she heard him. And now he's trying to steal our water, too! I'd
like to tie him down on a cactus-bed and run a band of sheep over
him."

"Charlie, Charlie, control yourself. Don't exhaust your strength by
being angry; it's bad for you in this heat; sunstrokes are sometimes
brought on that way. Besides, such talk as you uttered is foolish and
dangerous."

"Bah, I'm not afraid of a sunstroke."

"Anyway, it's unwise to be angry," his father warned. "When you're in
a temper, you talk loud; and people may hear it and repeat it, making
trouble. Now I must return to the bank. But remember what I say:
you're not to meddle in this Perro Creek matter. Do you hear?"

"Oh, yes, I hear," said Charlie.

His face as his father walked away did not, however, indicate
acquiescence in this tame course. His heart was full of rancour for
the insulting stranger of the ford; and where the fires of his hatred
blew, his feet would follow.




CHAPTER V


Though Lee Bryant, during his colloquy with Menocal, had spoken
confidently of his ability to obtain money wherewith to construct a
canal system linking the Pinas River and the Perro Creek ranch, he had
no definite promise of funds from any source. Nor would the project be
ripe for financing before he had completed his surveys and made his
cost estimates.

He had become interested in the undertaking in this way. Staying over
night with the Stevensons by chance a month previous, a stranger, his
speculation was aroused when through questions about the ranch he
learned of the unused Pinas River water right, a right valid but
apparently impracticable. Was it indeed impracticable? Would the cost
of bringing water to the land be, after all, prohibitive? In fact, had
a competent engineer ever gone into the matter? He doubted it. The
history of the property, so far as he could glean from Stevenson,
disclosed on the part of no one any serious effort ever to develop the
ranch. In the beginning Menocal had probably had some faint notion of
carrying out the scheme, but if so, had afterward abandoned the
enterprise. The tract of five thousand acres of land had originally
been a small Mexican grant; it lay in the midst of government land;
and when Menocal came into possession of the ranch, some conception of
utilizing water from the Pinas must have inspired him to acquire the
appropriation of one hundred and twenty-five second feet. Well, the
land, theoretically at any rate, had water; and if water actually
could be delivered, an extraordinary value would accrue to the now
nearly worthless tract. It was a problem for engineers; it was one of
the possibilities that if seized might be converted into a fact.
Bryant was an engineer, and he was just then foot-loose.

From the worried ranchman, Stevenson, who appeared glad to talk of his
affairs to someone, he learned that the man was both dissatisfied with
the country and straitened in circumstances. Bryant judged that his
host would consider any offer which would enable him to realize
something on the ranch and to depart; so that particular aspect of the
matter if undertaken, namely, securing title to the land and water
right, seemed favourable. If no insurmountable obstacle stood in the
way of building a dam and a canal, arising from construction elements,
it assuredly looked as if money was to be made out of the project.

With his mind kindling to the idea Bryant rode northward next morning
along the base of the mountains, studying the hillsides where a canal
naturally should run, all the way up to the Pinas River. Afterward he
reconnoitered the mesa, hitting at last on a slight elevation, hardly
to be called a ridge, that projected from a hillside a mile below
Bartolo and curved in a gentle crescent for about three miles from the
range of mountains down the mesa, again bending in toward the hills
close to the north line of the Perro Creek ranch.

Next, he absented himself for a week at the state capital, where he
industriously studied the water and land records pertaining to the
district. When he returned, he brought with him a surveying instrument
and a boy for helper. He pitched a tent out of sight in a hollow at
the foot of a hill, worked early and late running his lines,
establishing a dam site, and surveying the river bottom near the mouth
of Pinas Canon, and remained practically unseen except by a few
incurious Mexicans. His instrument proved the correctness of his
conclusion regarding the crescent-shaped elevation as a practical
grade for a canal, which though necessitating a longer course would
nevertheless immensely lessen the time, expense, and difficulties of
digging when compared with a line along the mountains' flanks with its
danger of washouts and earth slides. Nor did he stop there. He made
rapid but reliable topographical measurements, on a general scale, of
the mesa for five miles out from the mountains, between Bartolo and
Perro Creek, locating among other things a large depression in the
plain, three miles southwest of the town, which might by diking be
converted into a flood water reservoir. Then he folded his tent and
again disappeared for a week. When, finally, he rode to Stevenson's
ranch house that hot July afternoon and made a trade for the five
thousand acres of land, he was the possessor of considerably more
knowledge of the locality and its possibilities than any one would
have guessed.

And now he was owner of the ranch and committed to the enterprise.

A few days after Bryant's visit to Bartolo Stevenson disposed of his
sheep to Graham, the owner of the large ranch on Diamond Creek, loaded
his household goods, except the stove and some of the furniture which
the engineer bought, and with his wife and boy drove away in his sheep
wagon for Kennard and for the new farm in Nebraska. Bryant's own
effects--trunk, bedding, provisions, surveying instruments,
draughting-board, and the like, came up from the railroad town by
wagon, and with them the fourteen-year-old lad, Dave Morris, a
gangling, long-legged boy extremely dependable and extraordinarily
serious, who had carried rod for the engineer during the week of
preliminary surveying.

The man and boy now attacked the canal line in earnest, with Bryant
intent on establishing its course, location, and displacement exactly,
so that he could make necessary blueprints and compile construction
estimates. It was while they were working along the first mile of the
line, where it ran from the Pinas River along the base of a hill to
the low ridge that bore out upon the mesa, that they received their
first interruption. The worst and most expensive part of the canal to
build would be this section, and the engineer was therefore taking
especial care in its surveying; near the river the line traversed
several fenced tracts of ground extending part way up the hillside,
fields owned by natives; and it was one of these Mexicans who slouched
forward to the spot where Bryant and Dave worked and ordered them to
get out of his field.

Bryant straightened up from sighting through his transit, and asked,
"What's on your mind? What's disturbing your brain, _hombre_?"

"You get off," was the unkempt fellow's answer.

"Why?"

"You can't come on my ranch; get off."

The engineer pulled a map from his hip pocket--a copy made from one
filed in the land commissioner's office thirty years previous. He
spread it open before the Mexican.

"See this? Here is Bartolo, here is the river, here is your field," he
said, pointing with a finger. "Now look at that line; it runs across
this field right where we stand. That's the Perro Creek Canal,
extending down to Perro Creek."

The man stared at the earth under his feet.

"No, I see no canal," he stated, now looking right and left as if to
make sure. "There is no canal."

"Yes, there is. But it needs cleaning badly. I'm surveying its banks
again and then I shall clean out the dirt. You can see that it needs
cleaning, because you can scarcely see it at all. Menocal, the banker,
didn't take very good care of the canal after he built it; that's the
trouble. Hello, does that surprise you? Yes, Mr. Menocal got the water
right and dug the ditch in the first place; and he also secured a
right of way across these fields, sixty feet wide, by buying it from
whoever owned the ground at that time, and the right of way is
certified to the state. Now, I own Perro Creek ranch and the Perro
Creek canal and likewise the right of way. So you see, Jose, or
whatever your name is, we're standing on my ground and not yours; I
could even make you take down your fence where it crosses my right of
way."

The Mexican blinked stupidly.

"I was born here; my father was born here; my grandfather lived here,"
he said. "There have been little ditches, many of them, but never a
big canal in this field. You must get off."

"No; you're mistaken. Go see Mr. Menocal and he will set you right."

"I saw Charlie Menocal, who said to drive strangers off."

"Well, Charlie had best keep his fingers out of this dish, or he may
find it full of pepper, and you tell him so next time you talk with
him."

Bryant folded his map and restored it to his pocket, while the Mexican
went away to his house.

That day the engineer worked until darkness shut down. At three
o'clock next morning he routed his young assistant out of bed and by
dawn they were in the fields again. Knowing that the Menocals had set
about impeding and if possible altogether obstructing him, he proposed
to be done, as quickly as careful surveying allowed, with the fenced
part of the hillside where plausible controversies could be invented.

Toward the end of the second day he had progressed into the last tract
of owned ground. He breathed more freely. In his statement to the
Mexican concerning the right of way he had been exactly right; and he
was following to a dot the original course taken by the early ditch.
He could have improved upon this section of the canal by another
survey, but that would have involved him in a host of troubles, very
likely unsolvable ones, in securing title to another strip of ground
across the fields. Without question Menocal's influence would prevent
the owners from selling, even if Bryant had the money with which to
buy a second right of way, which he had not. Dollar for dollar it
would be cheaper in the long run to use the old line. Well, Dave was
already across the last fence with his rod; they would soon be
working entirely on government land; and with that, it did not matter
for the present what the Mexican landowners thought or did.

Bryant had walked fifty yards or so away from his transit to call
something to Dave, when the crack of a rifle sounded from the hillside
and a bullet whined near by. The engineer pivoted about. Another shot
followed, and he beheld a spurt of dust close by his instrument. The
hidden rifleman was not seeking to murder him, but to destroy his
tools.

There were no more shots and he resumed work. Later on, as he neared
the fence and was establishing his last points within the field, a
horseman with a gray moustache came galloping up along the stretch of
barb wire. He nodded, inquired if the engineer was named Bryant, and
announced that he had half a dozen injunctions to serve.

"I expected something like this; glad you didn't arrive any sooner,"
Lee remarked.

"Well, I was away from town, or I'd have been here by noon," the
horseman, an American, stated. "The injunctions cover all these places
between here and the river. You and any one you hire must keep off the
tracts specified until the cases come up before the judge."

"All right, sheriff. Wait till I take a last squint or two and I'll
vacate."

The horseman idly watched the engineer make his final measurements,
then when Bryant had lifted his tripod over the wire and told his
assistant Dave they would call it a day and stop, he dismounted and
sat down for a smoke with the man on whom he had served his papers.

"Looks as if you've stirred up some interest in your doings," he
remarked, expelling a thread of smoke. "All the Mexicans from here
down to Rosita are gabbling about your canal. Don't seem pleased with
you."

"There's one who doesn't, in any case," was the response. "He took a
couple of shots at my instrument a while ago from up yonder in the
sagebrush when I had stepped aside for a moment."

The sheriff gazed at the hillside.

"A few _hombres_ around here will bear watching," said he. For a
little he meditated, then went on, "You're a white man and so am I;
they don't like our colour any too well, at bottom. I s'pose you know
that."

"Yes. But they needn't express their feelings with rifles. As far as
these injunctions are concerned, they'll be dismissed eventually, for
there's no question about my right of way through here. Menocal
secured it himself and it's all a matter of record--the deeds, the
certificate to the state, and the rest."

"Menocal got it, you say?"

"Nobody else. Some time or other he must have expected to water Perro
Creek ranch, which he owned until he sold it to Stevenson."

"I knew he had that place," said the visitor, "but I didn't know it
carried a water right from the Pinas. Where does this move of yours
hit Menocal?"

"In his ranches down the river; he's been using this water for them,"
Bryant explained. "I suppose it's been taken for granted by nearly
everyone that the water belonged to those farms down there, but it
doesn't."

"How much water in this right?"

"Hundred and twenty-five second feet."

"Whew! That takes a chunk out of the Pinas. And I presume that by this
time Menocal knows what you're doing?"

"Oh, yes; I told him. He doesn't like it, of course."

The sheriff turned for a full view of Bryant's face. In respect to
features the two men were not unlike: both had the same thin curving
nose and level eyes and cut of jaw.

"Well, let me say as between man and man," the elder spoke, "that
Menocal won't let you take away that much water from him if he can
help it. And I'll drop you some more news, in addition: several
Mexicans are going to file on homesteads or desert claims along the
base of the hills south of here, scattered along like and running part
way up the mountain sides. I don't know where your canal to Perro
Creek will go, but if its line follows the foot of the range, as may
be likely, it might happen to find those claims in the way."

"Any idea in your mind where those fellows may locate their filings?"

"No; I can't say definitely. Shouldn't be surprised if they began
stringing them along a couple of miles south of here till they reached
Perro Creek."

Bryant gazed at the flank of the mountain. The gentle ridge where his
ditch line left the hillside was but half a mile away. Beyond that the
Mexicans could file to their hearts' content, for they would be left
on one side by the canal. But in all this he perceived Menocal's
cunning hand.

"Much obliged to you, sheriff," said he. "I'll see if I can't find
some way to satisfy those chaps when the time comes."

His visitor rose and put foot in stirrup.

"If any of these Mexicans grow ugly, let me know," he remarked. "I'll
tell them where to head in. Drop in at my office at the courthouse
when you're in town; Winship's my name. I brought these notices over
myself in order to look at you, for they were saying you are a
trouble-maker, but that's what these natives frequently state when
they want to fix an alibi for themselves before they start something.
I'll see if I can learn anything of the fellow who was up yonder
shooting. These _hombres_ are altogether too free with firearms,
anyway. Better feed that lad there with you a few more meals a day;
looks as if he could use them."

Bryant laughed.

"Dave's a little lean, but he's all there. Looks don't count, do they,
partner?"

"I do the best I can," Dave responded, solemnly.

"Not at meal-time, I reckon," the sheriff said. "Feed up and get fat.
A kid like you has no business having so many joints and bones
sticking out."

"I been through a hard winter last winter, and this spring, too, till
Mr. Bryant picked me up."

"How's that?" the horseman inquired.

"My mother died at Kennard. I didn't get on very well after that; not
much there for a boy to work at. And I hadn't any folks."

"Hump. What's your last name?"

"Morris."

"Any relation to Jack Morris?"

"He was my father."

The sheriff nodded. "Knew him well; he died four years ago. And your
mother died last winter? Little woman, I recall."

"Little, but a lot better than plenty of bigger ones I know of," Dave
asserted, stoutly. "She died of pneumonia."

"Boy, I've held you on my knee when you were about as high as my hand.
But I guess you don't remember that, and I'm mighty sorry to learn
your mother's gone. Dave--is that your name? Well, now, Dave, fight
your grub harder from now on."

The speaker gathered his reins, nodded, and rode away along the barb
wire fence.




CHAPTER VI


"When gentlemen of a dark and sinister cast of mind deliberately set
out to frustrate one's legitimate efforts under a misapprehension as
to the course to be pursued, the proper diplomacy in such a case is to
foster the delusion circulating in their craniums as long as possible
and thus divert their attention from the real purpose. Don't you agree
with me, David?" Lee Bryant gravely inquired of his young companion,
as they were about to set forth next morning.

"Yes, sir," Dave affirmed, to whom the statement was so much Greek.

"Then since the vote is unanimous, we'll proceed to run a line along
the mountain side where it will collide with these new homesteads."

The engineer shouldered tripod and rod, whistled Mike to heel, and
with Dave started forward. Half way to Bartolo they perceived three
men busy on the hillside, so Bryant swung up to a point a quarter of a
mile off and began surveying. When he approached the workmen, Mexicans
naturally, he saw that they were engaged in setting fence posts, of
which a row was already in line part way up the hill.

The men dropped their tools and confronted him as he drew near.

"This is my land; you keep away," one exclaimed, with waving arms,
while the other backed him up in a show of force.

"How can I build a canal here if you won't let me go through?" Bryant
demanded.

"No go through, no canal on my claim!"

"Well, just let me run a line, anyhow."

"No. Keep off, keep off," was the obstinate answer.

The engineer continued to argue, now as if in anger and now with a
conciliatory mien, all the while protesting that the homesteader must
not prevent the construction of the canal. But he received only shakes
of the head, short replies, and malicious looks. So at length, with
every pretense of disappointment and dejection, he went down the
hillside.

A mile farther along, where he found two more men occupied at similar
labour, he likewise dissembled his purpose, with the same opposition,
controversy, and retreat. He thereupon led Dave back to the ranch
house, where he prepared and ate dinner with satisfaction. Very likely
Menocal would receive reports that evening faithfully depicting his
chagrin and despair, or whatever were the Mexican equivalents.

Yet while he deluded the banker, he must secretly carry on his actual
surveying on the mesa. Since the men setting fence posts had a fairly
wide view of the plain, he determined to work in the open only for two
or three hours at daybreak before the Mexicans were about. For
Menocal, or any one else, must have no suspicion of his real ditch
line until an application for construction of the project had been
filed in the state engineer's office.

Signs that the banker had taken measures to keep him under
surveillance were not wanting.

"Dave," he said, "have you noticed a sheepherder with a bunch of sheep
hanging around here, when he should be up in the mountains where the
range is good?"

"Yes, I've seen him. And he hasn't a full band, either."

"Looks as if he's grazing down here on the mesa so as to watch us,"
Bryant mused. "When we went north, he and his sheep drifted in that
direction; when we were over on the mountain side, they followed
there. What shall we do about it?"

"I don't see that we can do anything except to watch him, too, and
fool him." The lad took thought for a moment, and then proceeded,
"Somebody was around here yesterday while we were away, for I saw a
brown paper cigarette stub on the ground in front of the door this
morning. You use white papers; it's mostly Mexicans who have those
straw papers."

"Then we had better put an extra nail or two in the windows as a
precaution," Lee stated, "before we go down to Sarita Creek. And I'll
leave Mike here also. If anybody comes fooling around, he'll take a
piece out of the fellow's leg."

In addition to nailing the windows and leaving Mike at the door, much
to his dissatisfaction, Bryant secreted his papers, note-books, and
maps, the theft of which would be an extremely serious loss. Menocal
probably would not instigate open lawlessness, but his hirelings might
break into the house on their own initiative. And this was not
unlikely since a bitter feeling was systematically being aroused
against Bryant and his project among the preponderate Mexican
inhabitants.

But for the time being he dismissed this matter from his thoughts,
when with tripod and rod and a bundle of stakes on Dick's saddle he
and Dave set out for Sarita Creek, leading the horse. Bryant had
postponed, under pressure of work, the business of fixing the feminine
homesteaders' garden ditch, until his conscience began to prick him on
the subject. He had neither seen nor had news of them since the chance
meeting at the ford; but now, as he could survey his canal line on the
mesa only during the early hours, he planned to make frequent visits
to the girls.

That they already had a caller this afternoon he discovered on
arriving at the two little cabins built of boards, peeping forth from
among the trees in the mouth of the canon. The place was indeed
charming, with its grass and shade, with its brook flowing close by
the dwellings, with walls of rock rising behind. Just now an
automobile rested before the trees; and the engineer saw a man sitting
on the grass with Ruth Gardner and Imogene Martin, the three chatting
and laughing gaily. When Bryant got a good look at the other visitor
he gave vent to an ejaculation in which was blended surprise and
contempt. "That magpie! Of all damn impudence!" For the cavalier so
debonairly entertaining the young ladies was none other than the
olive-skinned Charlie Menocal.

A sense of pique was Bryant's succeeding feeling. He would have
disdainfully denied that he was moved by a pang of jealousy. But he
had anticipated finding the girls alone and having a pleasant chat
with them, enjoying their companionship, relaxing from the strain of
arduous work, harkening to their badinage. Indeed, if the interloper
had been someone else, some other man, at least, he would have
experienced a turn of disappointment--but that the individual should
be this tricky, coddled, egotistical Charlie Menocal! Well, he should
align the girls' irrigating ditch and then go about his business.

"I've been delayed in coming to correct your water flow," he remarked,
when the fair homesteaders had given him greeting, "but I'm on hand at
last."

Ruth Gardner, looking prettier and fuller of spirits than ever,
assured him the ditch was behaving no better than before. Her next
words, however, left him with an impression that he and not Charlie
Menocal was the intruder, which hardened his annoyance into a desire
to have done with the matter.

"I wish you had come some other day, for we're just about to depart,"
she exclaimed. "Mr. Menocal is very kindly taking Imo and me in his
car to see the old ruins of a pueblo somewhere over west. We'll be
gone probably all the rest of the afternoon, and there'll be no one to
show you the ditch and what's wrong with it."

"Oh, I'll find out what's wrong and straighten out the trouble," the
engineer replied. "You've a spade or shovel, I suppose? Go right ahead
with your exploring expedition and don't worry about me; the ditch
will be working properly when you return."

"Well, if you don't really need us----"

"Not in the least," was his assurance.

She still hesitated, while her look travelled from Bryant to Menocal
and back again. To the engineer that inclusive regard indicated that
her mind was less concerned with the garden ditch than with a
comparison of her two visitors; and with a sudden feeling of warmth
about his neck Bryant admitted to himself that he presented no
attractions. He wore laced boots, soiled khaki trousers and flannel
shirt, with his hat pulled over one eye against the sun; Menocal was
dressed in light gray clothes, thin and cool, low white shoes, a pale
pink silk shirt (trust a Mexican for colour somewhere!) a vivid
rose-hued scarf, and a white cap. To further emphasize the contrast,
Bryant led a loaded horse and a gangling boy, while Charlie Menocal
leaned at ease against his twin-six. Quite a difference, for a fact.
And it was plain that Ruth Gardner noted it with discrimination.

Imogene Martin now spoke.

"I don't think I'll go, Ruth. I've not been feeling well the last day
or two, as you know, and I'm afraid to risk the sun."

"Oh, come on, Imo. The ride will do you good," her friend replied,
with a trace of impatience.

"No, I told Mr. Menocal when he proposed the expedition that I doubted
if I should go."

"Too bad not to come, Miss Martin," that worthy remarked, without
enthusiasm. Clearly his interest in what company he should have did
not point toward her.

"I'm going, at any rate," Ruth Gardner said. And then, "Oh, dear! I
overlooked altogether introducing you you two gentlemen."

Bryant was human; the opportunity was one he could not let pass. So
smiling broadly he said:

"We've met before, haven't we, Menocal? At Perro Creek ford." And
receiving no response but a scowl, he spoke at large, "Well, I must
get busy if I'm to save those beans."

He led Dick, with Dave at his side, toward the garden on open ground
below the trees, where the bean vines were already turning yellow for
lack of water. He chuckled as he went, for the disappearance of
Charlie Menocal's patronizing air and the sudden thundercloud hanging
on his visage attested that the charge had gone home.

Ten minutes later the automobile passed the garden, but Bryant, who
had set up his tripod and stationed Dave with his rod some distance
off, did not see the hand Ruth Gardner waved. His eye was where an
engineer's eye should be, at his transit.

"She waved at you," Dave called.

"Who?"

"That girl with the Mexican."

"Well, what of it?"

When Bryant used that tone, Dave recognized the wisdom of silence. He
pretended that he had not heard. Even his employer, whom he
worshipped, had strange, mysterious moods.




CHAPTER VII


The defect in the ditch proved to be one of minor character, which
Bryant corrected after a few observations and half an hour's work with
a shovel. While he was thus engaged, Imogene Martin, wearing a
wide-brimmed straw hat, strolled out to watch his operations. She was
in a friendly and talkative mood, and asked questions concerning
ditches and irrigation and surveying, and about Dave, and speculated
on the ruins of the pueblo whither Ruth and Charlie Menocal had gone,
and said she was glad Bryant had bought the ranch just north of their
claims and would be their neighbour. Only, she added, she was sorry to
learn that he was having trouble with the people about; Mr. Menocal
had stated such to be a fact, though what he had further hinted of
Bryant's endeavour to gain property to which he had no title and of
the engineer's being a trouble-maker, she did not for one instant
believe.

"I'll be a trouble-maker for Charlie and his dad if they continue
their present policy," Lee vouchsafed, tossing aside a shovelful of
earth.

Imogene Martin carefully flattened a hill of bean plants for a seat,
sat down, and locked her hands over her knees.

"I think you're to be trusted, so I'll tell you a secret," she
remarked, smiling. "Charlie Menocal doesn't make a 'hit' with me,
either. When you referred to the ford, I could scarcely keep my face
straight; and my feeling ill this afternoon, though partly true, was
also partly manufactured, because I didn't want to go to those old
ruins with him. I don't care for men like him especially. I share the
feeling of my uncle in Kennard--"

"You have an uncle there? I thought you were from the East."

"I am; from Ohio. But I've an uncle and aunt living in Kennard, which
is the reason Ruth and I came to this section for homesteads. Ruth was
crazy to take up a claim, having read how easily one is acquired,
while my health was not very good and the doctor at home thought it
would be improved by being in the open in a high altitude. Uncle said
I'd better stay with him and aunt, but I knew how terribly
disappointed Ruth would be if I did, because she couldn't homestead
alone. So uncle declared that if homesteaders we had to be, then we
must locate near him where he could have me under his eye, so to
speak. I myself am not taking this claim business very seriously. And
now uncle, who once had some controversy with the elder Menocal,
wouldn't be very well pleased if he knew the son was making calls on
us."

"So others besides myself have trouble with the Menocals," Bryant
stated.

"Apparently. I don't know what this particular difficulty was about,
but uncle is president of a bank in Kennard and so it may have been
some financial matter. Or it may have been over politics; both of them
mix in that. Anyway, he doesn't think highly of the elder Menocal,
and has no use at all for the younger; so I know he would be vexed at
Ruth and me for receiving this Charlie."

"You didn't know him that day he and I clashed at the ford," Lee
suggested.

"Oh, no. Our meeting came about one afternoon about a week afterward.
He overtook us on the road a mile or so away from here and politely
offered to bring us home in his car; we were walking and couldn't very
well refuse his courtesy, and then he asked to call and Ruth at once
gave him permission, and that's the way it came about. But I thought
it wise to draw the line at going off miles and miles with him to see
ruins. Of course, Ruth hasn't any uncle to consider, but uncle or no
uncle I should have drawn the line just the same."

"A colour line, eh?" Lee asked, with a lift of his brows.

"Yes, that's it, though I hesitated to put it in just those words,"
she agreed, with a nod, while both her lips and her blue eyes smiled
at him in amusement. "Really, Mexicans are of different blood and
race, you know, and I feel the--gulf. That probably sounds foolish and
ridiculous, still I can't help the feeling. When I look at a man like
Charlie Menocal, I see the Mexican strain uppermost even if his mother
was white; and I think what strange, savage, unguessed traits may lurk
in his blood from a long time back; and I shiver. One dare not say
they have ceased. There may be forces at work in his soul that are
inherited from the very tribesmen who dwelt in that pueblo ages ago,
whose ruins he and Ruth have gone to see. Who knows? And I'm never
able to rid myself of the feeling that such forces exist in him and
his kind."

The engineer thrust his shovel into the earth and seated himself
beside the girl.

"Nor I," said he. "And I suppose that feeling will remain between
persons of different races as long as the races themselves last. Those
who ignore or deny it are simply blind. Why, look, there's antipathy
between even white men of different nationalities! So what else is to
be expected when the question is one of race and colour? Nor will one
or two generations change what is infused in blood and sinew."

"Now, that's what uncle says," Imogene Martin declared, "and asserts
that's the reason why Mexicans born and raised here are in sympathy
with those across the border in any trouble Mexico has with our
country." Her face all at once became amused. "He says craniums were
shaped long before governments."

Bryant laughed on hearing that concise summing up of the case. And
then they continued to talk of this and other subjects, while Dave
Morris drew near and silently drank in the conversation, most of which
passed above his head. As for the engineer, he found in his companion
a peculiar charm that he never would have suspected from their first
meeting at the ford; a pleasure begotten of a quick intelligence and a
keen, trained mind.

"I've delayed you in your work," she exclaimed, at length.

"Except to throw out a few shovelfuls of dirt, and that will take but
a moment. I was done. I didn't sit down until it was practically put
in shape. I hope we shall have another talk soon; this one has been a
great treat for me. Let me help you up."

When he had cleaned the last clods from the ditch, he set off with
tripod and shovel on shoulder to walk with her to the cabins, while
Dave followed with Dick. At the houses Bryant cast an appraising look
at the scanty heap of chopped wood and wound up his visit by seizing
the axe and attacking the store of dry poles hauled from the canon by
the man who had built the cabins.

"There, that will keep you going for awhile," he stated, when he had
produced a large pile of sticks. "I don't believe you're strong enough
to handle an axe, Miss Martin; and it would grieve me deeply to learn
you had removed a toe in the attempt. Really, this homesteading game
isn't for women and girls."

"Oh, we've made out fairly well."

"Your spirit is admirable, but I can't say as much for your judgment
in the matter," he returned, good-naturedly. "Still, we all go hunting
trouble in our own individual fashion; if not in one way, why, then in
another."

It was after five o'clock when Lee Bryant and Dave, once more leading
the loaded horse, took their departure and followed Sarita Creek down
to the mesa trail. When they had struck into the latter and travelled
it for half a mile, they saw a long distance ahead someone walking
toward them, also leading a horse. In a land where men saddle a mount
to ride a few hundred yards, the singular coincidence excited their
curiosity. They wondered why the fellow walked, as doubtless he was
wondering the same thing of them. But as they drew nearer they
perceived the pedestrian to be not a man but a woman; and when they
met Bryant recognized in her the girl who had sat by Charlie Menocal
in his automobile at the ford. Her gray corded riding habit was
dusty; she appeared both hot and tired; and her countenance showed a
deep dejection. The horse she led was limping.

Bryant raised his hat and addressed her.

"Your horse has gone lame, I see. Can I be of any service to you?"

"I'm afraid not; he acts as if he had strained a tendon," she replied.
"So I'm leading him home. Our ranch is on Diamond Creek."

"But you had a fall! There's blood on your glove."

"No, it's not from that," she said, with a shake of her head.

Bryant again remarked the exquisite molding of her face as he had
noted it at their first meeting, and her wide brow and clear brown
eyes and the fineness of her skin, and her warm, sensitive lips, at
this instant moving in the barest tremble imaginable. She was gazing
at him with a curious, troubled look.

"Bring Dick here," Lee bade Dave.

He swiftly untied the ropes and removed tripod, rod, and saddle. Then
he unfastened the hitch of the saddle of the horse the girl led.

"Why, what are you doing?" she exclaimed.

"Giving you a fresh horse. You can ride mine home and send him back to
me to-morrow; I live just ahead on Perro Creek at the Stevenson
place."

"I wondered if you weren't the new owner, for I had learned that the
ranch had been sold by Mr. Stevenson. Father bought his sheep. You are
Mr. Bryant, aren't you? This is most kind to lend me your horse."

"You'll find Dick gentle; and you can lead your own mount. Walking
appears to have exhausted you."

Again she shook her head, with an odd expression growing upon her
face--anxiety, distress, just what Lee could not exactly decide. But
as she made no explanation, he gave her a hand and swung her upon
Dick, after which he handed her the reins and advanced the hope that
she should arrive home without further misadventure.

She made no move to depart, however, but sat regarding the engineer.

"I was at your house," she stated, finally.

"To see me?"

"To find you, or someone, who could help me. When my horse went lame
near the ford, I found that he had picked up a stone which I couldn't
remove. So I led him to your house, seeking assistance. When I reached
there----"

She stopped in her recital, compressing her lips and gazing off across
the sagebrush.

"Well?" the engineer encouraged.

"When I reached there, I heard a dog whining."

Bryant stiffened.

"I left my dog Mike behind," said he.

"The sound was really more like a moaning," she went on. "At first I
could see nothing, but when I looked everywhere I found that it came
from one of the three cottonwood trees. Somebody had hurt him, and the
poor creature was suffering terribly. I--I can hardly tell what had
been done to him!" And she shuddered.

"Mike! They've killed my dog Mike!"

"They nailed him to a cottonwood tree. A nail through each leg. A
nail through his throat. Nails through his body. They had crucified
him. And, oh, his pitiful eyes!"

Lee Bryant stood perfectly still and quiet. Dave was frozen and
horrified. Both gazed fixedly across the mesa to where the cottonwoods
could be seen.

"Is Mike alive yet?" Bryant asked presently, in an unsteady voice.

"No; not now. I found a piece of iron and hammered the nails free.
Then I lifted him down and carried him to the creek and washed his
wounds. But he died. I see his eyes yet, looking up at me." For a
little she was overcome. Then she resumed, "When he was dead, I
carried him up to your door, for I knew you must have loved him."

Bryant glanced up at her.

"Mike would know you were a friend," he said.

She nodded and reined Dick about. Leading the other horse, she rode
away through the sunshine that burnished the mesa.




CHAPTER VIII


July passed. Followed August, with days likewise hot and unvarying
except for a scarcely appreciable retardation of dawn. Perro Creek now
showed no water at all in its shallow bed; the garden planted by the
Stevensons was long dried up; the sagebrush was dustier than ever; and
Bryant and Dave were hauling in a barrel on a sledge water for their
use from a pool in the canon.

From daybreak until about eight o'clock in the morning the engineer
and his assistant worked on the canal line. Bryant had run a
fictitious survey along the mountain side, staking it out
conspicuously for any one to see, to the first of the fenced claims of
the Mexican homesteaders, where it ended as if blocked; but his real
line on the mesa remained unstaked.

To the low ridge, or spur of ground, projecting from the mountain's
base at a point half a mile south of his right of way through the
fields, where the canal began its sweep out upon the plain, he gave
considerable time. The fall of this at first was sharp, and concrete
drops would have to be constructed at intervals for a distance of a
mile or so in order to lower the water. When this section was left
behind, he advanced rapidly along the line, for the surface of the
gentle crescent swell was smooth, its grade fairly regular, and its
contour fixed by nature. Essential points he marked by stones, with
merely their surfaces exposed, so that if noticed they would be
considered scattered pieces of rock from the hills. At the proper time
they would constitute guides for later staking.

Evenings Bryant spent in developing his notes and in making tracings
of the canal sections covered. During the day hours, when he knew
watchful eyes were on him, he made a topographical survey of his
ranch; work that he could carry on openly. The five thousand acres
comprising the tract had a general direction of east and west, being
about four miles long and two miles wide, which for the most part lay
equally on each side of Perro Creek. By using the water of this stream
during the flood season, a period of some weeks in spring and early
summer, Bryant would be able very considerably to augment the supply
from the Pinas. It was necessary to join the two sources in a unified
system of laterals that would efficiently serve the tract; and
therefore the whole enterprise required study, innumerable
measurements, calculations of dirt moving, of water distribution, of
dam, weir, and gate construction, of soil analysis--a cooerdination of
the thousand and one matters concerned in an irrigation project that
are preliminary to breaking ground. So early and late he toiled, and
with him Dave Morris.

The boy indeed did enough for a man. And Bryant would sometimes arise
from his drawing board where he worked after supper until midnight, to
go and affectionately gaze at Dave sleeping the sleep of exhaustion.

One afternoon, when the pair were at work near the southern boundary
of the ranch, Ruth Gardner came through the sagebrush to the spot, a
mile from Sarita Creek.

"I could see you, just black specks, from our cabins; and since you
don't visit us, I made up my mind to visit you," she announced. "I've
noticed you down here for two days past. Days and days have gone by
without you coming to pay another call."

"Well, we've been sticking pretty steadily at our job," Bryant
replied. "Won't you use this bag of stakes for a seat? It will keep
you off the ground."

Ruth accepted the proffered resting place and loosened the thongs of
her hat, inspected her face in a tiny mirror produced from somewhere,
rubbed her nose with a handkerchief, and then gave her attention to
her companions.

"Our garden has grown splendidly since you fixed the ditch," she said.
"Thanks to you. How is yours?"

"It has expired."

"Then you shall have things out of ours--if you'll come get them. See,
I'm using that to decoy you. There are beans, peas, lettuce, radishes,
and new potatoes, not very large yet, of course. I know just what
you're doing: working hard, eating only canned stuff, skimping your
food, and ruining your digestion."

Bryant laughed. Her tone had expressed indignation, while her face was
directly accusatory.

"We seem to have fair health, don't we, Dave?" he remarked.

"You look positively thin," said she. "And as for this poor starved
shadow that you call Dave! Well, I won't say my thoughts. For a penny
I'd invite myself to dinner at your house just to see what you do
have."

At this possibility both the engineer and his young assistant
displayed signs of consternation. Under pressure of work housekeeping
had been an unimportant trifle frequently postponed; last meal's
dishes were washed while the next meal was preparing; clothes were
left where they were carelessly flung; and surveying tools, maps, and
papers littered the rooms. No, it was not a dwelling in which to
entertain a feminine guest.

"Maybe I had better go there and clear up things some," Dave stated,
uneasily. And without awaiting a reply from Bryant, he set off through
the sagebrush for the house.

Ruth began to laugh, resting her cheeks in her hands.

"That poor solemn boy, he took me seriously!" she exclaimed. "I
shouldn't come alone, of course; it wouldn't be proper--and Imo would
be horrified. Well, you may as well sit down and talk to me, Mr.
Bryant, for you can't work alone, and I've come to stay awhile.
Imogene told me what a nice talk she had with you the afternoon I went
to the ruins, and I hoped you'd come soon again, but you never did."

"Perhaps I haven't been exactly neighbourly."

He lowered himself to the ground and sat cross-legged, considering
her.

"I thought that possibly I had offended you in going off so abruptly
with Charlie Menocal," she said, with eyes fastened on his. "You and
he aren't very good friends. I know----"

"We're not friends at all; we're enemies."

"That need not keep you away from us. He has been very civil and kind,
but neither Imogene nor I have any particular fancy for the man.
Besides, I think his chief interest in life centres around a girl
living on Diamond Creek, named Louise Graham; he hinted that they were
as good as engaged. Very likely we shall see little more of him. So if
your dislike at meeting him is the reason for your staying away, you
haven't a good reason at all. Don't you think Imo and I ever tire of
listening to each other? Any two girls would, living alone by
themselves. After your promise at the ford we were delighted--and how
many calls have we had from you? Just one. With me away, too!"

"To-morrow will be Sunday; I'll stop work at noon and come," he
declared.

She pointed a forefinger at him and wiggled her thumb, in imitation of
a pistol.

"Hold up your right hand and swear it," she commanded, "or I'll
shoot." She continued to menace Bryant while he obeyed. "There, now
you're safe. And bring that hungry boy and we'll feed you both; this
is a dinner invitation, understand. Now, tell me about everything."

"Everything?"

"All you're doing with that three-legged telescope and these stakes."

She smoothed her dress and manifested an expectant interest. The
impression Bryant had gained at the first accidental meeting at Perro
Creek, of her good looks, of her vitality and irrepressible spirits,
was heightened. As he recollected his feeling of pique at her visit
with Charlie Menocal to the ruined pueblo, he realized that he had
indulged in a bit of senseless, unwarranted umbrage; and now had, in
consequence, a quick desire to make amends. It was as if he must
reestablish himself in her good opinion and his own.

Their talk ran on from topic to topic. The gaiety of her comments
pleased him; the youthfulness of her was irresistible; and he found
himself observing the changing curves of her throat and cheek as she
turned her head a little aside or raised her chin; found himself
watching for certain unconscious attitudes; awaiting the lift of her
eyes to his, harkening for particular tones of her voice. And Bryant,
who, though he knew it not, was also athirst for companionship, more
and more yielded to her subtle feminine attraction. "She's even
prettier than I supposed," he thought. Her lips, her nose, her eyes of
deep gray with their wonderfully long lashes--each had a particular
charm of its own. He admired the grace of her figure. He felt an odd
surprise at her apparent soft and pliant strength, as at a discovery.
His mind thrilled with delight at her laughter.

"Look where the sun is!" she exclaimed, all at once. "Straight over
our heads--noon. Your David will be wondering where you are, while
Imogene will imagine I'm lost. Let me pick a flower to stick in the
ribbon of your hat and then I'll go."

"Your fingers will suffer; I'll get some," Lee said, quickly. From a
spreading bed of prickly-pear he plucked a dozen of the cactus
blossoms, ranging in colour from a delicate lemon to a deep orange. He
turned to her.

"First I'll decorate you," he said. "Please assume an angelic
expression and gaze straight at the camera."

She tilted her chin upward and thrust her arms downward with all five
fingers of each hand stretched apart. But immediately she began to
laugh. Lee gave her a reproving tap on the uplifted chin and then
fastened the flowers in her hat-band. A thrill like fire ran through
his body at the proximity of that soft, round chin, those red lips,
her eyes gleaming with merriment.

"Now, beauty!" he said, stepping back.

The yellow blossoms made a garland about her hat.

"Do you like them thus?" she asked, delighted.

"Immensely."

"Then they shall stay there. And Imo will die of envy when I tell her
they're yours."

"Nobody ever died of that."

"Perhaps not. But she will suffer extremely. You didn't even put bean
plants in her hat."

Lee was highly amused at this raillery. He began to walk forward by
her side as she moved away from the spot, now addressing her, now
listening to her words, in a desire to stretch the last minute to the
uttermost. Her head came just even with his shoulder, so that she had
to raise her face to gaze at him when he spoke, and in the act there
was something simple, winning, blithe, as likewise in the swing of her
lissom figure beside his own there was an inimitable jauntiness and
cheer. He divined her eager, ardent spirit; and the closeness of her,
this comradeship, set his blood humming.

Abruptly he halted, laying a finger on her arm.

"I mustn't go the whole way, you know," he said, "though I should like
to. For, by heavens, you've opened my eyes! Didn't realize how
satiated with myself I'd become. But I'll make up for that now, Miss
Ruth, and it won't be very long before you and your friend will be
planning how to rid yourselves of me."

"Just try us and see," she exclaimed.

"Well, I shall. Till to-morrow, then."

"Till to-morrow, yes." She moved forward some paces and wheeled about,
pointing her forefinger at his head and working her thumb.
"Beware--and don't forget!" Then after another advance and face about
she concluded by blowing him a kiss off the palm of her hand, with
which performance she did actually start for home, weaving her way
through the sagebrush and going farther and farther off.

"What a pretty little witch she is!" thought Lee; and he, too, made
his way from the spot.

Dave's hot, harassed face greeted him at the door.

"Where is she? Didn't she come?" he cried, peering about everywhere.
"Well, thank goodness for that! But if that isn't the way with a
girl--and after I'd swept up and made the beds and scraped all the
skillets, too!"




CHAPTER IX


That Sunday afternoon at Sarita Creek! The dinner, so savoury, so
delectable; the two girls, arrayed in cool white lawn, rosy-cheeked,
beaming; the gay talk and banter and laughter; the blissful hours
together on the grass beneath the trees, with the wide mesa diffusing
an immense languor, with the mountains bestowing a vast peace, with
the brook at their feet murmuring an accompaniment to their
words--hours to treasure, hours of pure gold: Little wonder that Dave,
lying full length and gazing upward through the boughs at the blue
vault, allowed his eyelids to sink and at last to close. Little wonder
the girls' faces grew dreamy and their voices gentle. And none, none
at all, that Lee succumbed to the spell.

He was still under the enchantment when toward sunset Ruth suggested
they go up the canon. But Imogene, arousing herself, declared that she
had letters to write; and Dave, still fast asleep, was already on
roamings of his own. Ruth and Lee therefore went alone up the path
through the trees and underbrush, until they emerged in the cool,
dusky gorge formed by the contracting of the rocky walls. The brook
rippled by over stones and moss. A few insects hovered over the stream
with their tiny bodies shining like bronze. From somewhere came a
sweet, honeyed smell of flowers.

"Imo writes letters regularly," Ruth explained concerning her friend,
"to an instructor in a university in the East. I don't think they're
exactly affianced, but expect to be. Waiting, apparently. Waiting
until he's a professor--and until her health is better, too, I
imagine. An agreement to let things rest as they are for the present,
one might say. Imogene talks very little about it, and of course I ask
no questions."

She sat down on a fallen tree, patting its trunk to signify a place
for him at her side. Pointing at crevises in the canon wall, she began
to tell him the names she and Imogene had given them--Bandit's Stair,
Devil's Crack, Bear's Hole, and to enumerate those assigned the
jutting points and knobs along the rim that by a stretch of the
imagination bore a resemblance to animals or human heads.

As she talked, with her gray eyes at times turning to his to learn if
he was interested, he felt anew the charm of her youthfulness, of her
vivid personality. It dwelt in her small, firm hands pointing now
here, now there, in her slender, rounded form faced toward him, in her
red lips, her soft smooth cheek, her brow, in her glances and her
animated words. He noted again, as a quality altogether delicious, the
air of unconscious friendliness that he had perceived at their very
first encounter. It quite offset the slight touch of obstinacy in her
chin--but, in truth, did the latter require an offset? He had earlier
thought that with such a trait one could not foretell where its
possessor might go, or what do, or what exact, under stress of
feeling. He smiled at that now. How ridiculous the notion! Why
shouldn't a girl have a bit of determination in her make-up? Well, she
should. It gave force to her character. It made her more individual,
more attractive. It coloured a nature so essentially feminine as Ruth
Gardner's with elusive and delightful possibilities.

"See, up yonder at the top!" she exclaimed. "That piece of rock like a
man's head and shoulders I named Lee Bryant, after you."

"Do I look as block-headed as that?"

"No. It was not because of any resemblance, but because you kept your
back so long toward us. Now, however, since you've repented and ceased
to neglect us, I shall call it after someone else. Perhaps after the
stage-driver who takes our letters down to Kennard; he sits hunched up
like that. I'll seek a much nicer rock to represent you."

"That's wholly unnecessary, for I intend to keep before your eyes in
person."

"Which will be the nicest of all," said she, smiling.

He continued to gaze at her, to listen to her voice, with a pleasure
he made no effort to conceal. And she, on her part, seemed to
surrender herself to the enjoyment of the moment; her eyes remaining
longer on his, her tones softening to a slow, tender utterance almost
carrying a caress, her face keeping its languorous smile; as if the
honey-sweet fragrance from the unseen flowers had invaded her spirit.

A pause came in their talk. They sat unmoving, without stir of hand or
head, quiescent. Then Lee all at once experienced a feeling of
profound compassion for Ruth as he regarded her, a poignant stab in
his breast like pain. Sitting there without movement, with her hands
idle upon her lap, with her face a little lifted and her eyes
wistfully bent on the great wall opposite, she seemed so young and
small to be dwelling at such a place, so helpless, so solitary, that
her presence appeared a cruel irony of fate. Her homesteading was a
desperate clutch at security; and her situation was utterly different
from that of her friend, Imogene Martin, who viewed the matter as in
the nature of a health-seeking holiday, and who was sustained by the
knowledge that she had wealthy relations at Kennard to whom she could
return. Far different, indeed. At the thought of the homesickness that
at times Ruth must know, of the lonesomeness of mountain and mesa from
which she must suffer, of the deprivations, the hard bareness of the
life, the moments of despair, he had a sensation of the bitter
unfairness of things and a desire to snatch her safe away from the
harsh pass in which she stood. It would be only right, it would be
only just.

When presently she looked about and found his eyes rapt on her face, a
quick blush spread over her throat and cheeks.

"I think--think we should go home now," she said, with a catch of her
breath.

"Yes," said he, rising.

He leaped the log on which they had been sitting and then put up a
hand to help her mount. Holding his fingers she raised herself upon
the tree trunk. But suddenly the bark gave way; she slipped, lost her
balance, and pitched forward. Lee caught her in his arms.

For an instant she rested there in his clasp, her surprised eyes
gazing into his. A quiver passed over her form. Her lips were parted,
but she had ceased to breathe. Likewise in Bryant's breast the breath
had stopped. A fierce passion swept him to hold her always thus, warm
and close and secure. His arms trembled at the thought; at which her
eyelashes began to flutter and her breath to come once more, as
hurried as the beat of her heart. And then, yielding utterly to the
swirl of mad impulse, he kissed her--once, twice, and twice again.

Afterward he set her on her feet.

"I guess that ends our friendship," he said, with a wavering smile.
"Lost my head altogether. Couldn't help it. I looked at you and--and
it just happened. All my will and sense vanished in an instant.
Bewitched!"

The colour was still in her face, and her air was uncertain,
disturbed. But at his words, so palpably sincere and self
condemnatory, she began to smile.

"Perhaps--if we just forget----"

The smouldering fire in his eyes flared suddenly.

"Forget? I'll never forget that minute, those kisses," he exclaimed.
"Hanged if I want to, or will!"

"If, then, we don't repeat them, and are more circumspect, why, I'll
overlook it," she said, a little confusedly. "I know you meant no
discourtesy." He gave a savage shake of his head. "And Imogene and I
both prize your friendship."

"Thank you, Ruth. You take an awful load off my heart."

She glanced up at him, now once more composed. Her eyes gleamed with a
veiled impishness.

"No girl ever died from being kissed. But what a splendid lover you
would make!" Away she darted a few steps, to whirl and point and
waggle a finger at the dumfounded youth. "Are you coming? Because I
don't consider this a wise place to be with a flighty, irresponsible
man, first name Lee. Besides, it's beginning to grow dark in here."

Bryant joined her. The glow was still in his eyes, but in all other
respects he was his usual self, calm, collected. Together they went
down the cool, dim canon, with its honey scent of flowers drifting
with them; and though they talked lightly of things of no importance,
there was a little smile on the lips of each and sometimes their eyes
met, as if sharing a new, sweet intimacy.

Thereafter, frequent as were Lee's calls at Sarita Creek of evenings,
he seldom had Ruth to himself and on more than one occasion had to
share her company with Charlie Menocal, much to his impatience. When
Imogene sometimes succeeded in detaining the fellow at her side,
Bryant silently gave her unutterable thanks. And Ruth seemed day by
day more receptive to his passion.

"I think of only two things, my canal and you," he declared to her one
night.

"When you put me first and the canal second, why, who knows what I may
think then?" she said, tantalizingly. "But to esteem an irrigation
ditch before me, the idea! What if you had to choose between us?" And
she continued thus to tease him, fanning the fires hotter in his
breast.

By the end of August Bryant had completed the survey of the canal line
down to a point where it touched the northern boundary of the ranch,
tapping the latter's system of distributing ditches. Pinas River,
Perro Creek, and the tract to be watered were thus united. Though
later, doubtless, it would be necessary to make minor corrections, as
always, the surveying was finished. One tracing showed the entire
irrigation scheme from the dam on the Pinas to the tips of the
laterals branching out in a gridiron over the land. There were other
tracings, too, on a larger scale and of successive sections, ready to
be taken to Kennard in order to make blueprints.

"Town for us to-morrow, Dave," Lee exclaimed one day, as he rolled and
tied his maps in a waterproof canvas. "We're due for a rest; our job
is done for the present. We'll leave the instruments and note-books
with the girls at Sarita Creek, who've agreed to keep them until we
return. The Mexicans are still hanging around."

Toward the middle of the afternoon they appeared at the cabins, where
they disengaged Dick from his burden of freight and turned him out to
graze. Imogene was nursing an obstinate headache in her darkened
bedroom, and Dave immediately settled himself under a tree with a
novel of the girls'. So Ruth and Lee were left to themselves.

"I'm going up the creek to gather raspberries, and you came just in
time to carry the basket," said she. "I discovered a large thicket of
them half way up the canon; the more you pick, the more you'll have
for supper to-night. And if you don't bring Imo and me a box of
chocolates, and a big box, when you come back from wherever you're
going to-morrow, you need never show your lean brown face again at our
doors! I'm dying for some. Oh, Lee, I really am. They help so when
one's lonely."

The pathetic tone in which she uttered the final words sent Bryant off
in a fit of laughter.

"You may count on them," he said, at length.

"Your heart's of stone to laugh like that. Bonbons _do_ help when one
is low-spirited."

Nevertheless, her spirits were high enough on this afternoon. All the
while that they were gathering raspberries she kept up a lively
chatter, and when Lee suggested, now that the basket was full, leaving
it at the spot and making an excursion to the head of the gorge, she
readily assented. The sun was still far from setting; the air between
the rocky walls was pleasant; and the canon held forth a fresh
enticement. They walked for an hour, and though they failed to gain
the end of the long mountain crevice they ascended to where the
springs that fed the brook had their source, and where the rivulet
trickled over ledges and among boulders, finding themselves in the
heavy timber that forested the upper mountains. There they sat on a
rock, Ruth holding the wild flowers she had plucked on the way, and
talked.

"Does your going now have to do with your project?" she questioned.

"Yes; I've finished the preliminary work."

"But Charlie Menocal said you were making no progress, that you were
blocked."

"What Charlie doesn't know would fill lots of space," Lee said. "In
spite of the Menocals' opposition and tricks, I've established my
survey--but don't breathe it yet! And now I'm ready for the financing
of the scheme. When that's done, I'll begin actual work."

Ruth considered him with shining eyes.

"I'm glad you succeeded; I knew you would succeed," she exclaimed.
"You've worked so hard. And I hope that it makes you famous and
wealthy."

"So do I," he laughed. "I need the money."

She nodded.

"One needs money to be happy in this world."

"Oh, I don't know about that," he responded, thoughtfully. "I've
probably been as happy while hammering out this survey as I'll ever
be, that is, happy in my work. Of course, money means comforts and
luxuries. But I doubt if it really ever brings contentment."

The obstinate touch grew in her chin.

"If I had plenty of money I'd have the contentment, or I'd soon find
it," she declared. "Pretty clothes, and fine furniture, and
automobiles, and servants, and parties, and so on, are things--at
least with women--that go a long way toward satisfaction. I sometimes
don't blame girls who marry rich old men; they can put up with them
for the pleasures their money will procure."

"Ruth, Ruth, don't utter such nonsense! At any rate, you've too much
common sense ever to waste yourself on a doddering money bags."

"I'll never have the chance," said she. "But if I had, I'd think it
over carefully. A young man with money I could be especially nice to,
and I might even set out to catch him. You see, I'm quite frank and
open about it."

"Nonsense," he repeated. "You'd marry no one just for his money."

"That depends whether or not he caught me at a moment when I was
feeling sick of everything and reckless. Look at my hands, all
calloused from work. If I have to work, I shall do it for myself; not
marry to work."

Bryant lifted her hands and regarded them.

"They please me immensely as they are; they're lovely hands," he
asserted.

"Then your vision is poor."

"It's clear enough when I look at you, Ruth. And when you talk as you
have, I become impatient because I know you don't mean it. But
nonetheless, you deserve the best that any man can give, and you ought
to have all the comforts and pretty things any woman has, for you're
too sweet and good for a bare, commonplace life." He pressed gently
the fingers he yet retained. "I told you once that you had bewitched
me. It was true; I am bewitched, have been ever since I touched your
dear lips. And I love you. It hurts my heart to think of you at this
homesteading business--"

"What else was there for me?" she asked. "I've had no business
training, nothing but two years in a college, no knowledge of anything
that a girl needs to hold a position. And I'm not even a good
homesteader." Her tone rang with a trace of bitterness.

"You ought not to have to do it--and you shall not, Ruth, if I have my
way. I want to save you from it, and make life pleasant and happy for
you. The money I have now is little, but I'm going ahead; I'm going
ahead, and nothing shall stop me, I tell you. Soon I shall have ample
means. Within a year or two. Already I've told you I love you, though
this you must have known, for I've made no effort to conceal my love.
To me you're the dearest, sweetest girl in the world; and all I ask is
the chance to strive and toil for you, and make a home for you, and
relieve you of anxiety and care, and have you for a joyous companion
and mate."

Ruth closed her hands on his, while her eyes grew wet.

"You mean it, Lee?"

"Ah, I do, I do! I love you; I hold you dearer than anything in the
world."

The smile she gave was tender, trustful.

"I believe you," she said.

She yielded to his arms. Her head fell back upon his shoulder and her
look lifted to his blissfully. When he kissed her a thrill of passionate
desire answered, as when on that fragrant evening in the canon he first
had fiercely pressed her lips. This was happiness--happiness. If it
could but last forever!

"And my love is yours, too, Lee," she exclaimed, so earnestly that he
felt his heart quiver. "I want to be happy; I want to be loved; I
don't want to live a life of just dreary commonplaceness, alone,
uncared for, with no outlook, with no prospect of joys. I want the
most there is in happiness--every girl wants that; and this monotonous
existence has been robbing me, stifling me, until sometimes I've been
wild enough to leap off a high rock. But now!"

Bryant's arms went closer about her.

"It shall be different now," he murmured.

"Yes, yes; it must, it shall. There's no sense in people not being
happy when the world was made for that very purpose."

"Whenever you say, we'll be married," Lee stated.

Ruth was silent for a time, considering this. It, indeed, left her a
little startled.

"But it mustn't be too soon," she replied, at last. "We had best go on
as we are while your project is being started, for I wouldn't be so
selfish as to make a command on your time at a critical moment, Lee
dear. And I must plan clothes and things. Knowing that happiness is
ahead of us, oh, homesteading then will be only a lark! I'll never
need follow it up, but just abandon it when we're ready. Kiss me
again, Lee, and then we must start back."

They retraced their steps down the canon, obtaining the basket of
berries on the way. Once, as they neared the cabins, Ruth paused,
gazing at her lover.

"I had actually come to hate these claims," she said. "I felt chained
to the spot, as if something would keep me in the miserable place for
the rest of my life. Had I known how lonely I should be here, I never
would have come."

"But that's over now, Ruth. A little while longer, that's all."

She gazed at him with an odd, intent, anxious expression upon her
countenance.

"You'll not let your irrigation project keep you here always?" she
asked. "Or live in other places like it? These mountains and this
desolate mesa get on my nerves. If I thought you were going to stay
away from other people, foregoing all the pleasures of cities and the
like, I think I should lose my courage and not be able to love you
enough to stand it. I want you most of all, but shall want other
things, too."

He smiled indulgently.

"A few years perhaps," he replied. "Till I'm solid on my feet--till I
get going well--we're both young--and then----" He dismissed the
matter with a wave of the hand.

But that evening, when Lee and Dave had gone, when Imogene was asleep,
when the soft darkness was thickening over the mesa, Ruth walked forth
to the edge of the sagebrush.

"I wonder," she murmured, leaving her thought unfinished.

The hush of the mountains, the silence of the plain, the vastness, the
emptiness, the seeming purposelessness of it all, irritated and
oppressed her spirit. And she so yearned to be where the world was
alive and throbbing!

"I wonder if I really love him enough, or if I made a little fool of
myself this afternoon?" she muttered to herself. "I wonder!"




CHAPTER X


Charlie Menocal's object in calling upon the young ladies at Sarita
Creek was merely diversion. He was fond of girls, especially lively
ones, and knew a good many here and there within reach of his motor
car, including a number of pretty Mexican maidens of humble parentage.
But his serious attentions centred about Louise Graham of whom in
secret he was very jealous. Whenever he could find an excuse, and
frequently when not, he went to the Graham ranch on Diamond Creek,
five miles south of the girls' claims, where his figure was as
familiar (and of about as much interest) as the magpies in the
pasture. He fully meant to marry Louise, whose beauty and gracious
manner even to the smallest bare-legged Mexican boy on the ranch
captivated him and stirred in his breast a maddening desire for
possession, so that he might cut off the rest of the world from her
sweetness, so that it might alone feed his passion. Yes, he meant to
have Louise.

When he was with her his black eyes would shine and a ruddy tinge
appear in his dusky cheeks that were as soft and smooth as a Mexican
girl's, and he would restlessly finger a point of his little, silky,
black moustache and feel unutterable agitations proceeding in his
heart. Louise Graham did not allow him to declare his adoration, which
he would have done every moment they were together; when he tried,
she walked away. But Charlie counted on his good looks and his
father's wealth to win her in the end. One fear alone lurked in his
heart, that some young American might come along who would win her
interest; and earlier in the summer he had a decided uneasiness lest
Bryant prove to be the man. The scoundrelly engineer, however, had
fallen head over heels in love with Ruth Gardner, so that Charlie's
mind was relieved on that point. To his knowledge, Louise and Bryant
had never met--which was as it should be.

Charlie, having stopped about ten o'clock in the morning at the Graham
ranch for a chat with Louise while on his way to Kennard, was
considerably surprised and exceedingly nettled at beholding the
engineer, with Dave behind him on the horse, presently riding up the
lane between the rows of cottonwoods. Young Menocal had persuaded
Louise to leave her household duties for the moment to sit on the
veranda and talk with him. But now had come this impudent upstart!
Charlie's warning of someone at hand was when Louise ceased to speak
and gazed intently along the lane. His annoyance at the interruption
changed to a quick jealousy as his companion rose, descended the
steps, bade the engineer welcome, and extended her hand in greeting.

Bryant explained that he was dropping Dave here to take the stage for
Kennard when it came along after dinner. He himself was riding on.

"He'll eat dinner with us, of course, and I'll put him aboard the
stage myself," she exclaimed, with a pat on the shoulder of the boy
who had now dismounted. "Won't you stop for a moment, Mr. Bryant?
I'll give you a glass of fresh buttermilk to speed you on your way; a
stirrup cup, we'll call it. The woman has just finished churning."

Lee declared that he would drink a glass with very great pleasure. He
was thirsty, he said, and in addition was fond of buttermilk.

Menocal listened and watched him dismount and ground his teeth. Louise
knew the thief, after all. Where the devil had they become acquainted?
It was but one more instance of the engineer's pushing in where he
wasn't wanted. And she had not invited him, Charlie, to partake of
buttermilk, though, to be sure, she knew he did not like it. He felt
slighted.

When Bryant and Louise ascended the veranda, Dave loitering below, the
engineer said nonchalantly, "Hello, Charlie, how are tricks? Anything
new up your sleeve?"--in a way that set the other's blood boiling; and
when he carelessly added, "What about that story the stage-driver's
telling of you and a senorita going into a ditch with your car at
Rosita the other night?" he was quite ready to murder both Bryant and
the stage-driver.

So upset was Charlie that he was unable to share in the conversation.
He curtly refused a glass when Louise brought a pitcher of buttermilk,
then changed his mind, and ended by choking over the wretched stuff.
The situation was intolerable; his pride was smarting; the others
talked on with unperturbed countenances, ignoring his silence; and his
self-respect required some action in the face of the affront. He
abruptly stood up and announced that he was departing.

In Louise's manner at this news there was no repining that he could
observe. She did not protest. Her words were impersonally pleasant as
ever, but vague; and he perceived that she only half heeded his going;
and that her eyes brightened when once more she turned to her visitor.
This was the final stab. With hatred in his heart and a wicked glitter
in his eyes, Charlie Menocal went down the steps to his automobile,
feeling the need of a victim, preferably the engineer. Bryant had
insulted him at the ford; he was attempting to rob him and his father;
he had insolently threatened the elder Menocal; he stopped at nothing;
and now he was intruding here and deceiving Louise with his arrogant
pretentions. He came on Dave, standing beside the car and examining
the latch of a door.

"Keep your hands off that!" he snapped. At the same time he gave the
boy a cuff that sent him sprawling. "That will teach you!"

In two bounds Lee Bryant was at the spot. He caught the still-extended
hand in an iron grip.

"You miserable coward! Striking a boy!" he said, harshly. "Feeling
that you must vent your spite on someone, you pick on this unoffending
lad. If you ever raise so much as a finger against him again----"

"Let him keep away from my machine! And drop my wrist!" Charlie
Menocal snarled.

"And you leave him alone hereafter, in any case," Lee warned, shoving
the speaker away in disgust. Then he helped Dave to rise.

Charlie straightened his disarranged tie and coat with trembling
fingers. He could scarcely retain his rage; his body shook all over;
his foot slipped twice when he sought to mount into his car. Leaning
forward from his seat, he shook a finger in Bryant's face, exclaiming,
"You'll get what's coming to you! Like your damned dog!" His face was
entirely viperish. His finger came within an inch of the engineer's
nose. His words carried a furious hiss.

Then he whirled his car about and went tearing down the lane with
exhaust wide open and roaring.

When Bryant, leading Dave, rejoined Louise Graham, a flush of
embarrassment dyed his face. She had sprung up at Menocal's blow
knocking the boy over and remained standing, an indignant observer of
the scene. When Menocal had departed, the engineer recalled suddenly
what Ruth had said concerning Charlie and Louise Graham being
practically engaged; and as he now saw her rigid figure and displeased
countenance, he imagined he had lost her friendship. Still, he could
not have acted otherwise.

"I'm very sorry for this occurrence, Miss Graham," he said,
contritely. "Especially as I understand Charlie Menocal is very high
in your esteem."

"Who dares say that!"

"Well, Charlie himself is the authority, I believe," Lee responded,
with a slight smile.

Her eyes flashed at that.

"Well, it's not the case; and if it had been, this exhibition of bad
manners and bad nature on his part would have changed it. Father and I
consider him--well, a nuisance. There, I'm giving you a confidence.
We've tolerated him because Mr. Menocal senior is a gentleman, and a
friend. Now I hope you'll not think me too talkative, but an
explanation was necessary; and as far as Charlie Menocal is concerned,
I'd be pleased if I never saw his face again. To knock your young
friend over so heartlessly! You treated him with altogether too much
leniency, Mr. Bryant."

"I never do my fighting in the presence of ladies," Lee remarked, with
a grin. "In fact, I try to confine my combats to those of wits."

She nodded.

"Of course," said she; and continued, "this is the second time he has
acted disgracefully to you when I've been by. The first occasion was
at Perro Creek ford. I could have sunk into the earth for shame of him
when he knew no better than to fling you money after you had filled
his radiator; it was pure insolence, to begin with, to ask you to do
it when he should have attended to the matter himself. I admired your
conduct and self-control under the circumstances, Mr. Bryant." And
addressing Dave, she asked, "Will you drink another glass of
buttermilk if I pour it?"

Dave could and did, an example Lee followed. The subject of Menocal
was dismissed, and the man and the girl fell into a conversation of
general matters. She assured the engineer, when he inquired, that he
was not detaining her from household affairs; and urged him, on
learning of his prospective absence, to leave Dick at Diamond Creek
and he himself to proceed to Kennard by stage. She owed Dick a return
for the favour of carrying her home that day her own horse went lame;
he could run in the pasture with the other horses, where Bryant would
know he was safe. The plan included Bryant's remaining for dinner,
naturally.

"Have I your permission, Dave?" Lee asked. "Or do you refuse to share
this pleasure with me?"

Dave looked at Louise and blushed furiously.

"I guess you've made your mind up," he said, to Bryant.

"I guess I have," Lee admitted.

Toward noon Mr. Graham joined them and laughingly stated that he was
glad to make the acquaintance of the man who was causing such a furor
among the Mexicans along the Pinas. He asked a number of questions and
listened with interest to the engineer's brief exposition of the plan
to unite the water rights of the Pinas River and of Perro Creek in a
common system, though Bryant disclosed nothing of his survey on the
mesa. Of the opposition Lee had met or might yet encounter the rancher
was aware, for he remarked, "You have a fight on your hands." But that
was his only comment.

After dinner they all continued to talk while the men were smoking
cigars. Graham suggested that if Bryant should need an attorney it
would be well to employ one from Kennard, as those in Bartolo were
nearly all Mexicans. The engineer jotted down the name of one the
rancher recommended, saying that he had his injunction suits to meet
in the September term of court.

"Winship, the sheriff, appears to be one man in Bartolo who's all
right," Lee stated.

"Yes, he's a good man," Graham replied. "Can't be influenced or
bought; and is perfectly square and impartial in the execution of the
duties of his office. He has served twenty years, with exception of
one term when he and Menocal had a disagreement. Menocal controls the
votes in this county, you know; that's general knowledge. But things
became so lax under the Mexican sheriff who displaced him that he was
put back in office. Menocal ordered it; he has much property and
believes in law and order; and there's little or no stealing with
Winship in the sheriff's saddle. I've heard that he first required the
banker to support him unconditionally before resuming the place."

"I can believe that after a look at Winship," Lee said, smiling.

Mr. Graham presently went away to a field where his men were cutting
and stacking alfalfa, after thanking Bryant for rendering assistance
to his daughter on the road and inviting him to call again. Louise
then showed him her flower garden, ablaze with poppies, nasturtiums,
sweet peas, and other blossoms he could not name; and the orchard
where apples and pears and plums weighed the branches. She was
remarkably beautiful, he thought; and was quite sure the roses in the
garden had no petals pinker or softer than her cheeks, and was sure
the water rippling in the little, grassy orchard canals was no clearer
than her brown eyes, or the sky more serene than her brow. She was not
in the least proud or vain or haughty, as he imagined when he first
beheld her at the ford. He had had doubts of that after her kindly
treatment of his dying dog Mike. And now to-day he knew that such an
opinion did her an injustice, was absurd.

Louise, too, was thinking as they strolled about. Which of the two
girls on Sarita Creek did he love? For Charlie Menocal had said that
he was infatuated with one. Charlie Menocal! Her cheeks grew warm.
What he had boasted in regard to herself, and doubtless Mr. Bryant
had softened the truth, filled her with anger. She would treat the
insufferable wretch differently hereafter. And very likely his gossip
of the engineer's feelings for one of the homesteaders was likewise a
falsehood, though there was no reason in the world why Mr. Bryant
shouldn't love one of them if he chose. She had never met them. They
were very nice girls, she imagined. She had intended to call, but
something had always prevented. As for Mr. Bryant, he seemed a very
estimable young man, and good company, and an engineer of ability and
will.

She continued to speculate after he and Dave had departed on the
stage, with a vague sense of missing them. That, she reasoned, was
because Lee Bryant had "personality." And presently her thoughts
followed him. Lee's mind, however, was ranging back to Sarita Creek;
but Dave's was loyally with the lady of Diamond Creek ranch, as was
manifest when he murmured thickly, having fallen asleep during the
warm ride:

"No more chicken, thank you--or jelly--or apple pie."




CHAPTER XI


In Kennard next morning Lee Bryant betook himself to a civil
engineering firm, which he engaged to print a number of sets of
blue-prints from his tracings, one set to be ready for delivery early
that afternoon. Then while his suit of gray clothes, from out of his
suit-case, was being pressed, he and Dave visited a florist, purchased
a wreath of lilies-of-the-valley that Dave chose, and went to the
cemetery to place it on the grave of the lad's mother. After that they
proceeded to a clothier's, where the boy was fitted out with a new
suit, a hat, shirts, underwear, and a tie. All of this caused Dave to
swallow hard--but he swallowed hardest of all when Lee led him to a
horse dealer's and helped him pick out a pony for trial, a gift from
Bryant. He hadn't expected all this. He was too overcome to speak. "By
golly, Lee, I--I----" he stammered; and stopped, and furtively wiped
the moisture from his eyes. Finally they visited a savings-bank, where
the engineer deposited a check to Dave's credit, his wages for a month
and a half, forty-five dollars, to start an account, and the boy
received a small yellow book whose one entry he thereafter studied at
frequent intervals, for it was earning according to Bryant's statement
four per cent a year, though Dave had not the remotest idea of how it
did the earning. Then with all this business transacted they returned
to the hotel, bathed, dressed in their fresh clothes, and went into
luncheon.

"Luncheon, what do they call dinner that for?" Dave whispered to Lee
across the table.

Along in the afternoon Bryant, having obtained a set of blue-prints
and sent his young companion to a "movie" show, called upon the man
that he all the while had had in view, Imogene Martin's uncle. A
large, strong-bodied man, with a deeply lined, determined face, the
latter swept his visitor with a quick, appraising look, invited him to
take a seat, and to state his business.

"In five minutes you can tell," said Lee, "whether or not you wish to
listen longer to my proposition."

"Yes."

"I now own the Perro Creek ranch, of five thousand acres. It was
originally owned by Mr. Menocal, of Bartolo, but recently by a man
named Stevenson, from whom I bought it."

"I know the place, Mr. Bryant. Proceed."

"It's worth possibly three dollars an acre as it stands, or a total of
fifteen thousand dollars," Lee continued. "But it has an unused water
right of one hundred and twenty-five second feet from the Pinas River,
sufficient to water the whole tract. How much will the ranch be worth
when water is actually delivered?"

"A good deal more than fifteen thousand dollars."

"Rather," said the engineer, smiling. "The appropriation was secured
from the state by Mr. Menocal thirty years ago; it's never been
cancelled, and is good to-day. He, however, has been using the water
on ranches he owns down the river. A canal from the Pinas along the
mountain sides to Perro Creek would be expensive to construct,
possibly prohibitive; it appears the natural line; and I suppose this
deterred him. I've located a new and practical course for a ditch on
the mesa, have surveyed and mapped it in detail, calculated the cost,
and compiled a statement of estimates, and can build the project for
sixty thousand dollars. The tract of five thousand acres can then be
sold for fifty dollars an acre, or two hundred and fifty thousand
dollars. Shall I stop, or do you wish to hear more?"

Now it was the banker's turn to smile. This visitor knew how to make a
point.

"Go ahead," he said.

"All right. A Mexican dam across the Pinas, a mile and a half of
hillside canal, some concrete drops, twelve miles of curving mesa
ditch, and the ranch is reached. In addition, the flood water of Perro
Creek can be utilized; I've worked this out, as well as the entire
system of laterals for the land. As stated, the cost of the whole
project will be about sixty thousand dollars, present price of
material and labour. I'm on my way now to the capital to file
application for a change in the present canal line, which, since it
involves only government land, will naturally be allowed. Of course
Mr. Menocal isn't taking kindly to my proposed use of this water." And
Lee paused.

"What has he done? Anything yet?"

"Not much so far, except a little futile skirmishing," the engineer
remarked, with twinkling eyes. "When I paid off his mortgage on the
land, I advised him that I should use the water: and he threatened to
have the water right cancelled. But he backed up on that line when I
promised to lodge him in jail for making false affidavits if he tried
those tactics. Thought I'd head him off in that direction at the
start. I got the jump on him there. Well, now, he's using indirect
means to keep control of the water, sending half a dozen Mexicans to
file claims at the base of the mountains where he imagines the canal
will have to go. He thinks these have blocked me; and I didn't
undeceive him. He knows nothing about my actual line of survey on the
mesa. Of course, the loss of this water that he fancied he had hits
him where it hurts, but from what I can gather Mr. Menocal isn't a man
to resort to illegal methods. He's wily, that's about all. So that's
the situation."

The banker regarded Bryant for a time with a noncommittal face.

"State your proposition now," said he.

"This is it," Bryant went on. "I propose to bond the ranch and water
right for enough to build the project, then construct it, then market
the land in farms at fifty dollars an acre. The canal system can be
completed easily next year, and sales and colonization proceed
immediately when done. Naturally, as a sale is made, the mortgage and
notes will be put up behind the bonds to secure the latter. The
purchasers will pay down some cash, say, ten dollars an acre; that
makes fifty thousand cash and two hundred thousand dollars in notes
against sixty thousand dollars in bonds. A visible profit of one
hundred and ninety thousand. That amount will be covered by a stock
issue. I shall set aside sixty thousand of it as a bonus to whoever
purchases the bonds. Thirty thousand more shall go to whoever markets
the bonds, as a commission. The remaining hundred thousand of
stock----"

"Goes to you, I presume."

"Yes; I keep that. It's payment for the ranch and water right, for my
developing the scheme and building the project. What I need is someone
to sell the bonds; I'll take care of everything else. And because you,
Mr. McDonnell, know the character of the land hereabouts and know
water rights, the fertility of the soil when watered, and the
soundness of a proper irrigation project as an investment, I've come
first to you. Millions aren't involved; it's a small project; the cost
is uncommonly cheap and the security therefore exceptional; you know
the property personally; I, as builder, and having everything at
stake, would see that the construction is right. So small an issue of
bonds should be quickly placed in the East. And the commission isn't
to be sneezed at."

Mr. McDonnell's features relaxed into a smile.

"I never saw an irrigation scheme yet that didn't look a money-maker
on paper," he stated, "nevertheless, seventy-five per cent. of them
wind up in the hands of a receiver."

"Because of faulty estimates and wasteful construction, yes. Because
they're generally too big, and the interest eats them up before the
land is sold. Because some start building on a shoestring. Or because
of changes in the projects that are costly, or rows in the management,
or insufficient water, or bad land titles--I know, I know. I've
studied and analyzed their troubles. And I propose that this Perro
Creek scheme of mine shall be one irrigation project that shall
succeed."

"And you think you've taken all precautions?"

"Yes."

"With Mr. Menocal, even?"

"Even with Mr. Menocal, yes. Once my application for changes has been
approved and I have the money to build, what can he do?"

"You seem quite sure of yourself."

"I'm sure of this irrigation project, anyway. I'm going to build it."
Conviction absolutely dominated his lean brown face; and the banker
looking at the speaker's chin, his firm mouth, curving nose, and gray
eyes full of purpose, wondered if Menocal had met his match.

"Well, suppose you leave your maps and estimates for me to look over,"
he said. "When do you go to the capital?"

"This evening."

"See me again on your return. My attorney will examine your title to
the land and the water right. How are the young ladies on Perro Creek
getting along?"

"They have plenty of fresh air and scenery," Lee responded, relaxing
from the tension under which he had been.

"It was rather a wild notion, their taking claims, but they wanted the
experience. I hope my niece is benefited in respect to her health. My
wife and I run up once in a while to see if they're comfortable." Then
he added, "Perhaps I had best confess that Imogene had told me of what
you were at up there, and of your involvement with Mr. Menocal. So
this thing isn't wholly new to me."

Bryant returned to the hotel, well satisfied with the progress he had
made. In the lobby of the hotel he ran across Charlie Menocal, who
gave him a venomous look and passed into the bar without speaking.
What the young fellow might feel or think gave Lee no concern, though
he might have taken warning from that hostile regard. For it was by
Charlie's instructions that a short, stout, swart Mexican went from a
native saloon to the depot that evening, where he presently identified
Bryant and lounged nearer the spot. Dave at length noticed him and
called Lee's attention to the fellow, whose face had a particularly
sinister cast and whose eyes were fixed upon the engineer in a stony,
unblinking stare. That look gave one the sensation of being gazed at
by something poisonous in a clump of sagebrush. But the feeling was
forgotten when the train came in on which they were departing and
Bryant and Dave mounted the steps of a coach.

The Mexican, on his part, returned to the saloon, where eventually he
was joined by Charlie Menocal. Charlie's face was flushed and his
breath alcoholic; he was a little drunk. At a corner table they
conferred, drinking whisky.

"You will know him now, the snake!" Charlie asked.

"I would know him in the dark, senor," was the reply.

They spoke in Spanish, since young Menocal's companion knew no other
tongue. The latter was a newcomer to Kennard, of the name of Alvarez.
He had come up from across the line, where he had been first with
Carranza, and then with Zapata in his black troop, and then with
Pancho Villa. He already had considerable reputation in the low
Mexican quarter of the town: he had participated in many fights and
raids "down there"; he was fearless; he could use a gun; he had many
killings to his credit. When earlier in the day Charlie had made
private inquiry of the saloon-keeper, an old friend, concerning a man
of nerve that he could engage who would ask no questions, Alvarez was
pointed out to him.

Presently an agreement was reached between them and Charlie produced
his check-book and a fountain-pen.

"Here's a check for one hundred dollars," he said, writing. "Come to
Bartolo, get you some blankets and food, and camp somewhere near. From
time to time we'll meet and I'll tell you what's to be done. There's a
saloon at Bartolo, if you get thirsty. Another hundred dollars will be
yours when the job is finished, perhaps more. Meantime, you will act
before others as if you did not know me. Here's the check."

Alvarez rose and walked to the bar.

"Is this money; a hundred dollars?" he inquired of the Mexican
proprietor of the saloon.

"One hundred dollars, yes," said the latter, with an assuring smile.
"Made payable to you, Alvarez. Good? Good at any bank, good here at my
saloon, good as gold. Better than gold, Alvarez, because easier to
carry. Do you wish the money for it?"

The Mexican ex-bandit jingled some dollars in his trousers' pockets.

"I have enough to eat and drink," said he. "If the paper is good, if
you will give me gold for it, then I will wait until I return. As you
say, it's not so heavy to carry."

"Bring it to me when you return. Mr. Menocal is very wealthy, very
rich. He has much land and many sheep. Besides, he owns a bank full of
gold and silver. The paper is good."

Alvarez was impressed. He stood in thought.

"Those sheep and that bank full of money! In Mexico we would form a
company of revolutionists and help ourselves," he said.

"That isn't the custom here," was the reply.

Alvarez again stared at the check, then folded it, bit the edge with
his teeth, placed it in a small leather bag suspended under his shirt
by a cord about his neck, and returned to the table where Charlie
Menocal waited.

"I will go up yonder in a few days, senor," he stated. "There are
girls there, are there not?"

       *       *       *       *       *

One day a week later, after Bryant and Dave had returned to Kennard,
and after numerous conferences with Mr. McDonnell, his attorney and an
engineer called in for consultation, Lee exclaimed to his companion,
"We win. McDonnell will take hold of it. Bully for him!" And he went
about clearing up the odds and ends of business at a great rate.

Moreover, McDonnell believed he could dispose of the bonds within a
fortnight, by the middle of September. That would enable Bryant to
make good headway with the dam on the Pinas River while the water was
low and before cold weather set in. The attorney would look after the
incorporation of the company and the stock and bond issues. Lee could
at once engage a staff of assistant engineers and arrange to let the
building contract. In the matter of the canal line, he had received
ample assurance from members of the Land and Water Board at Santa Fe
that the changes he asked would be granted. Everything was propitious,
everything exactly as he would wish.

"Out of those town duds, Dave," he exclaimed. "You can't be a sport
any longer. Back to Perro Creek for us and your new spotted pony. And
it's high time, too, for I saw you making eyes at that girl with
yellow hair and angel blue eyes, whose mamma----"

"You never did!" Dave yelled, crimson with ire.




CHAPTER XII


October. And the last golden leaves twirling down from cottonwood and
aspen and mountain maple; the lofty brown peaks fresh powdered with
snow; the air dazzling, keen, heady like wine; frost a-sparkle of
mornings on stone, fence-post, roof, with a rainbow coruscation of
diamonds; clear, high moons; marvellous, moonlit nights.

It was the middle of the month. Three weeks previous, with the bonds
sold and the injunction suits dismissed, the contractor employed had
unloaded his outfit at Kennard, moved up the Pinas River, raised in a
day his camp at the mouth of the canon above Bartolo, and begun his
task. This man, Pat Carrigan, had been in Bryant's mind from the
first: a Pueblo contractor of Irish extraction, born in a railroad
camp, trained on a dump, and now grizzled and aging but unequalled in
handling men, in keeping them satisfied, in moving dirt. In his time
he had turned off jobs from Maine to California, from Wisconsin to
Texas. Already along the hillside a yellow gash was deepening from the
dam site through the fenced fields where ran the right of way; while
in the Pinas, low at this season, the traverse section of the river
bed had been cleaned out and the base of the dam was building of
stones and brush.

Late on a certain afternoon Ruth Gardner and Imogene Martin stood
waiting by a gray runabout at the edge of the camp. A storm was
sweeping up the Ventisquero Range from the south, one of the autumn
storms that marked the change of seasons, enveloping, as it advanced,
the gray peaks one after another in its fog and trailing over the mesa
gauzy brown streamers of rain. In the west the sun still shone
unobscured, but with its light failing to a chill saffron glare as the
cloud expanded over the sky.

Bryant and another man, a newcomer in the last few days, an engineer
from the East representing the bondholders, were walking toward the
girl from the dam. As the men walked, they engaged in rather spirited
argument.

"You'd better hurry, you two," Ruth called. "Don't you see that rain
coming? Imo and I want to reach home, Mr. Gretzinger, without being
soaked."

Bryant's companion waved an assuring hand without ceasing his rapid
and forceful statement addressed to his fellow. Half a head shorter
than Lee, he was of stockier build, a man somewhere near thirty-five
or six years of age, with hair tinged with gray above his ears. Both
in manner and speech he exhibited by turns superficial gayety, latent
cynicism, and an egregious assumption. When Lee had introduced him to
the young ladies at Sarita Creek, he had made himself at home in three
minutes. He had the latest witticisms of restaurants and theatres, the
newest stories, the most recent slang; his clothes were of the
autumn's extreme mode; he was intelligent if frankly materialistic;
and he interested, amused, and diverted the two girls. From his gay
and airy talk they gathered that he had been married and divorced,
that the West might have the scenery but New York had the bright
lights; that money could buy anything from food to fame; and that
"movies" were a bore. To the girls he was like a breath from the
metropolis itself, that hard, throbbing, restless, glaring, convivial,
avid, fascinating city in which is centred everything of wealth and
misery, everything intense and abnormal, and everything to satisfy the
desires. But the effect upon the girls was different. Imogene, though
entertained, continued calm, unimpressed, unenvious; Ruth, however, as
she listened and asked questions, the better they became acquainted,
was bright-eyed and excited. "Don't you think him a remarkable man?"
she had exclaimed to Imogene. "So experienced, so polished, so--well,
everything." This was after his second visit, which he made without
Bryant, stopping on his way from the dam camp to Kennard where he made
the chief hotel his headquarters. Imogene had replied, "Oh, he's
amusing company, and he can't be accused of being diffident, at least.
But I wonder if he would wear well. His divorced wife's opinion would
be valuable on that point, I fancy." That had caused Ruth to sniff.
She said, "You heard his explanation; they didn't agree and so they
just separated. That was sensible. When two people find they're not
compatible, they shouldn't live together a minute. And I shouldn't be
surprised if she was a cat."

Gretzinger's speech as he and Bryant advanced toward the girls and the
gray runabout was quick, determined, and uncompromising. His fleshy,
aggressive face, that lacked the tan of his companion's, was fixed in
dogmatic lines. From time to time he switched his gauntlets against
the skirt of his fashionably cut ulster with lively impatience.

"I certainly demand that these changes be made and shall recommend to
the bondholders," he was saying, "that they also insist on them."

"Can't help it if you do," was Lee Bryant's reply. "I know what I'm
talking about: concrete is necessary. No irrigation engineer to-day
who knows his business would think of anything else. Mr. McDonnell's
man approved its use, the state engineer likewise. The latter wouldn't
allow the change even should I ask it."

"Pah! He'd not concern himself either way. I know how these state
officers run things. Leave it to me; I'll arrange the matter."

"Not with my consent. And he'll never grant the change over my
opposition."

Gretzinger gave his knee an angry slap.

"I tell you it must be different, Bryant. In addition to the bonds my
men have their share of stock. They consider this stock bonus as part
of their investment. It is. And they intend to see that that stock
earns every dollar--every dollar, do you understand?--that's to be
made out of the project. I'm here to protect their interests, and
shall do it."

"Well?"

"Now, Bryant, be reasonable. It means more profit in your own pocket,
too. You're no philanthropist pure and simple, I take it, and want to
make money out of this thing. So agree to this change. You'll make a
saving both in time and cash. Carrigan's contract doesn't include the
building of these drops; you plan to do that yourself; and if you
substitute wood for concrete in these drops and in the gate-frames,
it would lessen the labour cost, the material cost, the freighting
cost, the----"

"And in five years the wood will have rotted and then concrete will
have to be put in after all," Lee interrupted. "More than that, the
water will undercut wooden drops, then rip the devil out of the canal
along the ridge, making the cost of rebuilding ten times what it is
now and very likely causing a water shortage in the middle of an
irrigating season so that the farmers' crops will be a dead loss.
Fine! I suppose you didn't allow yourself to think that far."

"Why should I?" Gretzinger retorted. "It's not our business to figure
on all the calamities that may occur in the next fifty years, or the
next ten, or the next five. We build the canal, then it's up to the
farmers to keep it in shape after we turn it over to them. If anything
happens, that's their lookout and the lookout of the engineer in
charge."

The two had come to a halt just out of earshot of the runabout. Bryant
could discover on the speaker's face no other expression than a fixed
intent to maintain his view.

"Leaving out the injustice of such a course----"

"Injustice, nothing!" the New Yorker derided. "This is cold business.
The project must be built as cheaply as possible in order to give the
investors the largest return. My father is one of them, and when he
puts money into a thing he wants all out of it that's coming to him.
So do his associates."

"Let me finish what I started to say," Lee remarked. "Aside from what
purchasers of land under this canal scheme have the right to expect,
and what they would suffer from a disaster, it hits our own pockets in
the end. Poor construction always turns out to be expensive
construction. Aside from the initial cash payments from buyers, all we
have from them will be notes--mortgage notes that can be paid only by
crops from the land. The water insures these crops. Let the canal
system go smash, and where are these notes? Nowhere. I don't propose
to lose fifty or sixty thousand dollars for a short-sighted gain of
ten."

Gretzinger laughed, then tapped the other's shoulder with a
forefinger.

"Do you imagine for a minute we'll keep the paper?" he inquired.
"Well, I should say not! We'll discount it ten, and if necessary
twenty, per cent. to make a quick clean-up and be out. A mortgage
company in the East will attend to that part of the business. These
mortgages run for ten years; you certainly don't think we'll sit
around that long waiting for our money and profits. The discount will
make the paper attractive to small investors, among whom it will be
peddled and who want long-time securities. And you'll profit from that
along with the rest of us; we couldn't leave you out if we wished."

"No, you can't leave me out of your calculations," said Bryant,
grimly.

"You see now, I hope, why it's to your interest as well as ours to
make the change I suggest," Gretzinger continued. "It will equal the
amount of the discount. In a year or so we'll all be out from under
with bonds and stock liquidated dollar for dollar. In other words,
with our profits in cash in the bank instead of in notes."

"And somebody else holding the sack, eh?" Bryant's aquiline nose came
down a little as he asked the question. "No, Gretzinger, you haven't
persuaded me, and you never will by that argument. A pretty rotten
scheme, that of yours. I shall go right ahead and use concrete."

"Then you don't intend to consider bondholders as having a voice in
matters?"

"No."

"Well, they're stockholders as well."

"Minority stockholders, that's all," Lee stated, coolly. "You've said
this is a matter of cold business. Very well; I'm the majority
stockholder and have the control. I consider it cold business to build
the drops of concrete as planned. I consider it cold business and good
business to provide the farmers with a safe system. And I shall do
that."

Again came Ruth's call, urging Gretzinger to hurry. He answered and
spoke a last word to Bryant, with a suddenly altered mien.

"You're an obstinate devil, Lee," he exclaimed, cheerfully. "I'll have
to think up some new arguments to get you over, I find. Now I must run
along, or the ladies will be up in arms--and not my arms, either."

Bryant helped him to button the curtains on the hood of the car, found
an instant when he could press Ruth's hand unobserved and murmur a
word in her ear, and stated that if the rain did not last he would run
down (he had picked up a second-hand Ford in Kennard) to Sarita Creek
after supper.

"I don't see half enough of you," Ruth said, giving him a pat on the
cheek with the gloved finger that now wore a diamond solitaire. To Mr.
Gretzinger she continued, "If you get us home without a wetting, you
may stay and eat with us; but if you don't, why, you can go straight
on to town."

Off the car sped down the trail toward Bartolo where it would gain the
well-travelled mesa road, a hand thrust through the curtains waving
back at Bryant.

The engineer did not go to Sarita Creek that night, for the rain
settled into a steady drizzle that lasted until well toward morning.
After supper he went, however, to the adobe dwelling of the Mexican
who once had warned him from his field. The man's seven-year-old boy
had fallen from a horse the day previous and fractured a leg; half
fearfully, half recklessly, the parent had come running to camp for
medical aid; and Lee had despatched the camp doctor, a young fellow
recently graduated, to treat the injury. Bryant was admitted into the
house. The youngster, he learned, was resting comfortably and had been
visited by the doctor that afternoon. Lee was even conducted to the
bedside, where the boy's leg thick with splints and wrappings was
exhibited for his benefit.

"The doctor, he said I was to speak to you about his pay," the Mexican
stated after a time, when he and Bryant had talked awhile in Spanish.

Bryant waved the words aside.

"There's no charge, nothing," said he. "I was delighted to send the
doctor. I hope your son improves rapidly. The physician will continue
to pay you calls until the boy no longer requires them. Those are very
pretty geraniums you have in the window, senora. Are they fragrant?"
Lee crossed the room and bent his face above them.

The man's wife rubbed her hands together under her apron with much
pleasure. Thus politely for him to notice and praise her flowers! In
her heart, as in the heart of her husband, there formerly had been
resentment at this white canal-builder for cutting their field with a
big ditch, an occurrence which the county judge somehow had stupidly
permitted. But now she did not know what to feel. Yesterday he had
sent them a doctor for nothing, and this evening was smelling her
flowers admiringly. He could not be exactly a monster. Removing one
hand from beneath her apron, she inserted a finger-nail in her black
hair and scratched her scalp, considering the subject. Winter was
coming, too. Food would be needed--and besides, she long had desired
one of those loud phonographs at Menocal's store, and also needed a
new stove. She perceived that her husband was staring at Bryant's back
with a thoughtful air. Undoubtedly he was thinking the same thing as
she.

"You yet want men and teams for your work, senor?" she inquired.

"All I can get."

"If a man falls sick while at work, would he have the services of the
doctor?"

"Yes, without charge. There will be work on the dam most of the
winter, where the building is only a matter of stone and brush. I can
use all who want employment. Then in the spring there will be the
digging of the ditch on the mesa."

"Five dollars for a man and his team, is it not so?" the Mexican
inquired.

"Yes."

"What if a man's wife or children fall sick?" the woman asked.

Bryant hid a smile at this shrewd bargaining. Yet he was perceiving an
opportunity. There were no Mexicans at work on the project; one and
all they had held off. Likewise they refused to sell him grain and
hay, which necessitated the hauling of feed from a distance. But now
this accident to the boy might prove a heaven-sent chance to break
Menocal's monopoly of influence.

"In case of sickness in the man's family, the doctor shall attend
free," he stated.

The woman took thought afresh.

"And if the man's horses are taken sick?"

"Nay, he's not a horse doctor," said Lee, smiling. And even the woman
smiled.

"But there's another matter. I fear it prevents," the man remarked.
"It is a note for fifty dollars that the bank holds against me. If I
work, Menocal will make trouble about that. I think we had best talk
no more of employment."

"Suppose I advance the amount in case he does, letting you work out
the debt. I could keep, say, two dollars out of each day's five until
you owed nothing."

"That would be agreeable to me, senor. But what if he then refuses to
sell me goods from his store?"

"You can buy at the commissary," Lee said. "Why should you lose five
dollars a day because of Menocal's bad feeling for me? You remain
idle--but does he pay you, or feed you? And the wages I offer you, and
the doctor's services, and the other accommodations, I also offer to
other Mexicans who will work. You may tell them so. Remember, there
will be teaming on the ditch until it freezes up, then work on the dam
throughout the winter, then scraper work on the mesa in the spring.
Five dollars a day coming in the door! You can buy meat and flour and
clothes and tobacco and candy for the children and a new wagon and
pictures of the Madonna, yes, all. But now I must go."

"But Menocal would be very angry," said the man, with a shake of his
head.

Bryant bade them good-night and departed. He went up the muddy road
through the wet darkness to the camp. Domination of the native mind by
Menocal appeared too strong for him to break.

But to his surprise next morning the Mexican came driving his team
into the camp. Lee sent him to Pat Carrigan, who gave him a scraper
and set him to work on the ditch. Toward noon the engineer encountered
him moving dirt from the deepening excavation; the sight had an
amusing feature. The man, Pedro Saurez, laboured in his own field
building the canal at about the spot where he had warned Bryant away
when surveying.

When Saurez beheld Lee, he grinned and removed the cigarette from his
lips.

"It will be a fine ditch, this," was his remark.




CHAPTER XIII


Work on the canal section near the river advanced without incident
until, one morning early in November, the plows unexpectedly uncovered
a forty-foot-wide body of granite just beneath the surface. This
particular difficulty was not serious, and was the contractor's; but
Pat Carrigan was no more pleased than any other contractor would have
been at finding rock, even a small amount, when he had figured his
excavation costs on a dirt basis.

"That wipes out a piece of my profits," he remarked to Bryant, after a
first profane explosion. "I'll send out for some dynamite and shoot
it. If it wasn't for damned troubles like this, I'd been a retired man
and fat and rich long ago. Don't grin, you heartless blackguard!
You'll have miseries of your own before we're done."

Pat Carrigan was a true prophet. A blow of fatal nature, indeed, was
preparing at the moment and fell within a week. From the state
engineer Lee received a letter advising him that an application for
use of the water appropriated to Perro Creek ranch had been made by a
man of the name of Rodriguez, of Rosita, under an old statute long
forgotten. This law was mandatory upon the Land and Water Board. It
required the latter to cancel rights and to reappropriate water
elsewhere to the amount in excess of what a canal actually carried, or
what a canal had failed to carry for five successive years if it were
not shown within ninety days after a filing for reappropriation that
the said canal had been enlarged to a capacity to carry the original
appropriation, and proof given of the owner's intention to employ said
appropriation.

Menocal once more! He had been very quiet all this while; he
apparently had made no effort to dissuade the Mexicans who, following
Saurez's lead, had come in increasing number to work on the canal or
the dam; the man had almost passed from the engineer's mind. But he
had not been idle. He had had shrewd legal talent seeking a deadly
weapon for him among the musty statutes, with which he could deal the
irrigation project a _coup de grace_. And as the import of the letter
penetrated Bryant's brain, his heart seemed to turn to ice. Ninety
days--finish dam and canal in ninety days! As well fix a limit of
ninety hours!

Finally he rushed off to Pat Carrigan superintending scraper work and
dragged him aside.

"For God's sake, read that, Pat!" he cried. "Read what the Land and
Water Board are going to do. They're going to cut the heart right out
of us! Kill the project! All for a law nobody ever heard of! Read it!"

Pat knit his brows and slowly extracted the meaning from the state
engineer's formal, involved announcement. That something serious had
occurred he guessed before Bryant had opened his lips. He had never
seen the engineer so wrought up, so white, so agitated.

"Let me get this right," the old contractor said, at length. "They're
going to cancel your water right."

"Yes."

"But not at once. You've ninety days to----"

"Ninety days! We can't do a year's work in ninety days, and in winter
time at that!" Lee cried.

"Of course not," was the answer. "But it gives you time to argue with
'em and fight this thing. My advice is to go see this Board at once.
Maybe if you explain the situation, they'll call off this fellow
Rodriguez."

Bryant, however, remained depressed. Clearly the officials had no
liberty of action in the matter.

"I don't know that it will do any good," he said, "but it's all that's
left to do. Pack your grip, Pat; I want you to go with me. Leave
Morgan in charge. Can you start in half an hour?"

The ride to Kennard was made at high speed, and on the way the men did
little talking. Both wanted to weigh the disaster confronting the
project. In town they sought out McDonnell, who promised to have his
attorney go into the matter at once and who appeared very grave at the
news. Then they returned to the hotel to await their train.

Here Lee was surprised to encounter Ruth in company of Gretzinger,
Charlie Menocal, and a Kennard girl with whom he was not acquainted.
Ruth and Imogene, he learned, had come down the day before with the
New Yorker and were staying at the McDonnell home.

"We're just roaming around and amusing ourselves," Ruth said, slipping
her arm within Lee's. "Come on and join us."

Lee smilingly shook his head.

"Can't possibly do it," said he. "I'm leaving for the capital soon."

Ruth drew him aside.

"But give me ten minutes of your time before you go, will you, dear?"
she asked. "Come, we can go into one of the parlours where we'll be
alone." And when they were seated there, she continued, "I know why
you're going to Santa Fe. Charlie said he understood you were involved
in some new legal trouble and that you might lose your whole project.
Mr. Gretzinger laughed at him and so did I, for we knew it couldn't be
true. But it's bothering you, I see; your face is anxious. I hope
you'll clear up the horrid matter, whatever it is, while you're gone."
Then after a pause, she remarked, "Perhaps Mr. Gretzinger could be of
assistance to you."

"Not in this matter," said Lee.

"He has a great deal of influence, especially in the East."

"But this is the West--and I don't care much for Gretzinger, besides,"
he stated.

"So he says. More than once he has wished you would be more friendly.
Isn't it a little inconsiderate of you, Lee, to hold him off at arm's
length, especially when he's here as representative of the
bondholders? He has a vital interest in the canal and its success.
Really, I think he might be of great help if you'd permit. And it
would be of great advantage to us in the future, his friendship and
that of the men behind him, for they are wealthy and influential.
That's one reason why you ought to cultivate him, Lee."

"Go on," said he, as she paused.

"Well, I thought we should discuss the matter. I'm of the opinion that
you misunderstand him. You'll not deny that he's a man of ability."

"No--though I know little of him."

"He is, though, Lee. And an engineer of high standing, too, and of
experience. Wouldn't it be wise to consult him a little more than you
do? He has talked to me at times about the project and has, I believe,
ideas you could use. For instance, he says that if you made certain
changes in the canal there would be a considerable saving of money, by
which the stockholders would benefit, you among them. He says that if
in certain places wood were used instead of concrete it would mean
thousands of dollars in your pocket."

"It would, but it would also endanger the canal."

"Mr. Gretzinger said you asserted that as your reason," she proceeded,
"but he claims there's no more prospect of danger from that source
than from a fly. And anyway, isn't it a matter that concerns only the
buyers afterward? He says so. I don't know much about such matters, of
course, but you really must look after your own best interest
first--and mine. I say mine because mine will be yours after we're
married. Mr. Gretzinger says your share of the saving would be at
least five thousand dollars and possibly more. Lee, do this for me."

"What he proposes is dishonest, Ruth."

"But why? He says the state board would grant the change if proper
representations were made. If the officials allowed it, I can't see
where it would be dishonest."

"The officials would have to be deceived to gain their consent to such
a change," Lee said, patiently. "But the real point at issue is the
permanency of the water system, Ruth. The poor devils who buy the land
and who toil for years to pay for it are to be considered. If the
canal is too cheaply constructed, they'll probably lose their crops;
and losing their crops means ruin. As far as possible an engineer must
insure against this danger when he builds the canal; then if any
accident happens later, his conscience, at any rate, is clear."

"But he says you over-estimate the risk, that wood is perfectly safe.
And he's an expert engineer, too. More experienced than you, Lee."

"You seem to have discussed this thing with him at great length,"
Bryant remarked, dryly.

"I have, indeed I have, because I have your success so greatly at
heart, dear. I want to see you receive every penny that you earn and
all the credit you deserve; I want you to go ahead in your profession
and become both wealthy and famous; but sometimes I think that you're
so absorbed in the engineering part of the work that you're careless
of the future. One has to be practical, too. One has to look out for
one's own interests. And I don't see why your responsibility for the
project doesn't end when you've built the canal, sold the land, and
turned the system over to the farmers. You can't go on looking out for
them after that; you're not answerable to the 'hay-seeds' who settle
here for what may or may not happen. And we shall need the money that
would be saved by using wood instead of concrete, Lee. When you're
through here, we shall want to live in New York at least part of the
time. With Mr. Gretzinger's friendship you could perhaps form a
connection so that you could be there all the while, and make a big
fortune. You will do this for me, won't you, Lee? It means just that
much more happiness for us."

She slipped her arms about his neck and kissed him impulsively,
eagerly. Lee felt himself tremble at that clasp, at that kiss. Words
seemed futile. His anxiety over the fate of his project gave way to a
profound sickness of soul. That Ruth should thus reveal such a
cloudiness of spiritual vision, such an inability to distinguish
between moral values, such a ready acceptance of Gretzinger's vicious
philosophy, was the final drop in his bitter cup this day.

"It's not a question of either wood or concrete just at present," he
said, rising. "It's whether I'm to have a project at all. I'll not go
with you, Ruth, to your friends; I must think over what I'm to do and
say at Santa Fe to-morrow."

As he rode thither with Carrigan that night it seemed as if he now was
at grapple with forces, invisible, powerful, malevolent, that strove
to dispossess him of everything that was dear. His project! What
means, what help, what law was there of which he could make use to
ward off this deadly assault on it? And Ruth! How should he save
her--save her from herself, clear the mist from her eyes, arouse her
drowsing soul? All that he had aimed at and all that he had striven
for hung on finding answers to those questions.




CHAPTER XIV


By noon Bryant and Carrigan had concluded their interviews with
members of the Land and Water Board. All of them had listened, asked
questions, expressed their regret at the situation in which Perro
Creek project found itself, but stated that the Board had no course
other than that of executing the law evoked in the case. They
suggested that Bryant bring an action in the courts to test the law;
they admitted that his company might be forced into the hands of a
receiver; they inquired concerning the possibility of gaining the
consent of the adverse party to a withdrawal of his application. Their
hands, however, said one and all, were tied in the matter.

The engineer and the contractor went down the steps of the state house
and found a seat on a bench at a shady spot of the grounds.

"Just as I expected it would be," Bryant said, grimly.

He sat humped over, his elbows on his knees and his cheeks between his
fists. His eyes were dull, heavy; he had not closed them during the
previous night. He wore the mud-caked lace boots and stained khaki, as
did Carrigan, in which he had departed from camp.

"Well, we haven't quit breathing yet," Pat remarked, licking the
wrapper on the cigar he was about to light.

Lee sat silent for several minutes.

"Anyway, I'll see you don't lose, Pat," he said. "You can figure out
what profit you would have made on your contract if the ditch had been
built and I'll pay you that. Then you can call off your crew."

"Oh, I'll let you down easy, Lee. That wasn't worrying me any," was
the rejoinder. "I was just thinking----" But his words broke off
there, and he again gave his attention to the cigar wrapper that
persisted in coming loose.

Bryant continued his gloomy cogitation. The muscles of his cheeks
moved in hard lumps beneath his fists as if he were champing some
resistant substance. Over his eyes his lids from time to time drooped
sleepily. But all at once he leaped up.

"If I but had something I could take hold of, Pat!" he exclaimed.
"Something I could lay hands on and move, like that bed of rock you
uncovered! So I could go ahead! A law is so damned immaterial that one
has nothing to work against. It leaves a man nowhere, helpless. It
lifts him off the ground and holds him kicking futilely in the air.
Just that. By God, I'm desperate enough to try anything--to try
building the ditch--try whipping Menocal even under this moth-eaten
law he's dug up!"

Pat shut one eye against the smoke curling into it.

"I was speculating a little along the same line," said he, slowly.

"But twelve miles of ditch in ninety days! The whole mesa line! We'd
be crazy to think of it. Let's talk of something else."

Lee's mouth, nevertheless, was twitching, while gleams like light came
and went on his face.

"I always had a weakness for the bad bets," said Pat.

"But twelve miles of ditch!"

"And the nights freezing harder every week," the old contractor added.

"And the days short."

"Yes, and nerve shorter yet," said Pat.

The remark was airily given, but the inference was plain. Lee took a
step aside and stood staring across the capitol grounds, with brows
knit, with lips compressed, the prey of struggling hopes and doubts.

"Pat," he said, turning.

"Well?"

"Do you think we could do it?"

"God knows; I don't. But we could give the job an awful whirl," the
contractor stated.

"The thing looks impossible, preposterous, but if you see the
slightest chance of success I want you to say so. Dirt moving is your
game, not mine. Ninety days; that's thirteen weeks. Almost a mile a
week. Can it be done? Can you do it?"

Pat at last threw away the cigar that refused to draw.

"With men and teams enough I could build a ditch to tide-water in that
time," said he, with sudden energy. "Men and scrapers, scrapers and
men--that's all. You can rip the insides out of any dirt job on earth
if you have the crews. Of course, it takes money, big wages, to get
and hold them."

"Money! What do I care for that if we build the canal? How much more
will it take? How much will you need?"

"Say twenty thousand more."

"Get out your pencil and begin figuring it."

"I don't need a pencil," Carrigan answered. "I haven't been moving
dirt for fifty years without figures sticking to my hair. I've
digested your blue-prints and know what's to come out of the ground.
Now I'll tell you what it would be if there was no frost in the
ground, as in summer--and we'll afterward allow for the frost; and
what's necessary in men, horses, fresnos, shacks, horsefeed, food,
clothes, and general supplies."

And thereupon Carrigan began to pour forth a stream of data so exact,
so comprehensive, so full, that Bryant listened in astonishment. All
carried in his head, ready for use!

"I hope I know my business at your age as you know yours," Lee
exclaimed.

"You will, or ought to. I've paid for what I know in mistakes and
miscalculated jobs, as does every man some time or other--paid in hard
cash. What he learns is all he gets out of losses. Now, the figures I
gave were for summer work; winter dirt moving is another kind of
animal. Work is slower, men are harder to keep, weather is generally
bad."

"This autumn has been later than usual, and it may last," said Lee.

"And it may not," Carrigan stated, emphatically. "It's that that
worries me about this thing. As it is, the ground freezes on top every
night. Let the thermometer make a low drop, and we won't be able to
stick a plow-point into it anywhere."

"There's no moisture to speak of in the soil of the mesa."

"Enough to freeze the dirt, just the same," said Pat.

"We can leave the dam out of consideration."

"Yes; no trouble about finishing that. And your concrete work, Lee,
won't lose you any sleep. A carload of cement from here, gravel from
the river, and a dozen Kennard carpenters to knock together gate and
drop frames--no trick to crack that nut. Frost, lad, frost! It's the
thing to set us groaning."

Bryant sat down and put his hand on the speaker's knee.

"Pat, if we go into this thing and put it through, there will be a
good fat bonus for you."

"Maybe there will be and maybe there won't. Maybe you'll have some
money left when we're done and maybe you'll not have a red cent. In
any case, the old man is with you, Lee, to the end of the scrap--if
you go ahead. What about your bondholders? Will they stand for risking
what's not yet spent? They will save considerable by your stopping
now; they'll lose all if we fail."

"What do you----"

Pat's raised hand halted him.

"Ask me nothing," said he. "That's for you alone to settle. If you
spend their money and win, they'll say 'Thank you'--maybe; and if you
go under, they'll damn you up one side and down the other and probably
try to send you to the pen. You're the chief; you have to decide; you
can't share the responsibility--anyway, not with me. And if you're
inquiring, I'll remark that its considerable responsibility. Go off
yonder by yourself and think it over a bit."

Bryant left the old contractor lighting a fresh cigar. He walked to
another bench a short distance away, where he sat down. In his first
exultation at perceiving a fighting chance to save the project he had
seen only the opportunity, but Carrigan's unexpected turn of the
subject had brought him back to earth. He was guardian, as well as
dispenser, of company funds. He had obligations to the bondholders.
Therefore, would he be justified in risking the money on such a
desperate venture? His soul sank.

But his mind would not cease to revolve about the undertaking, for he
could not at once relinquish his long-cherished dream. The thought of
tame surrender was as wormwood in his mouth. To stand by acquiescent
while the project collapsed! That prospect he could not endure. Never
again, if he capitulated now, would he be able to strike out with the
same courage as in this project; never with the same courage, or
spirit, or faith. The project was his creation! The thing of his brain
and will! Part of himself! And how confidently he had made his plans
and acquired the property and started work! No doubts of his ability
to carry it through! No question of his right to go ahead! No fear of
the task!

The engineer came suddenly to his feet.

Builders throughout the world took equal risks and overcame as great
obstacles every day; it was the measure of their genius and will.
Engineers elsewhere crushed a way through earth and rock to their
goals, and under adverse circumstances, with no thought of failure.
Were there not men who would unhesitatingly take hold of this project
now and complete it in the time allotted? Yes, any number. For the
very same reason that he had launched the scheme. Because they had the
ability, because they had the will, because, most of all, they had
faith--faith in their own powers.

Lee went back to Pat Carrigan.

"We shall build it," said he. "And in ninety days."

The contractor rose.

"You talk like a real 'chief' now, Bryant," he replied. "I was waiting
for that. Come along; we'll start burning the wires."




CHAPTER XV


Louise Graham, entering the dining car for breakfast, received a
surprise at beholding Lee Bryant half way along the aisle at one of
the smaller tables. He laid down the spoon with which he was delving
into a half of a cantaloupe and got quickly to his feet to greet her.

"So you're home again," he said, after shaking hands. "Your father
told me when I met him that you were in the East. Will you share my
table?"

"I use 'shopping' as a pretext for a jaunt now and then," she laughed,
when they were seated. "Once in a while the lure of city dissipations
seizes me; I had a week in Washington and three in New York with
friends, which will satisfy me for a few months. You were just
starting work on your project when I went away. Are you making good
progress?"

"Very. But I'll make still better from now on. It's a case with me of
do or be 'done', of dig out or be buried. I may as well be open about
it, for everyone will know presently, anyway. The project must be
completed in ninety days."

"Ninety days? Great heavens!"

"That's what I said, too," Lee stated, with a smile. "Several times,
in fact. There is an old law, it seems, that enables interested
parties to hold a stop-watch on me."

"And what's the penalty if you fail to finish the work in those three
months?"

"Cancellation of my water right."

"Cancellation? Surely not."

"I tried to convince the Land and Water Board of that in Santa Fe, but
made no headway."

"How outrageous!" she exclaimed.

The waiter at her elbow recalled her to the requirements of the
moment. Still with a trace of colour in her cheeks, the result of her
indignation, she scanned the menu and wrote out her order.

"The thing is so utterably unreasonable," she resumed, more calmly.
"Why did they let you start if they proposed afterward to hang a sword
above your head?"

"The Board was ignorant of this law, as was everybody else, until it
was brought to light by the applicant for cancellation," said Lee, "a
certain Rodriguez, of Rosita."

"Who is he?"

Bryant shook his head.

"Don't ask me. No friend, at any rate."

She regarded him steadily for a moment.

"Probably a man put forward by Mr. Menocal."

"I suppose so," said he.

"But the idea of expecting you to build all those miles of ditch in
ninety days and in the winter time! I wonder that you can be so calm."

"Why shouldn't I be calm? My mind's made up. I'm going to complete the
project on time."

The words were uttered in a matter-of-fact tone that impressed Louise
Graham far more than would any vehement assertion. As he had stated,
his mind was made up, quite made up on the point. Others might think
what they pleased: it carried no weight with him. The thing was
certain.

She examined the engineer with a new interest. There was a difference
in him, what would be hard to say. One couldn't exactly put finger on
it. Something in his gray eyes, perhaps; something in the sharper
stamp of his aquiline nose, of his lips, of his bronzed jaw; something
in his whole bearing. It went deeper than features, too; she sensed a
change in the spirit of the man from what it had been that day of his
going down to Kennard, when he strolled with her in her garden. He was
less bouyant, less manifest, less elated, but more poised and sure. A
change, yes.

Then her thoughts reverted to his tremendous undertaking.

"How long have you known this?" she inquired.

"Since the day before yesterday. Pat Carrigan, my contractor, and I
came to the capital at once to discuss the affair with the Board. The
news was--well, a good deal of a facer."

She nodded.

"It would be," were her words. "You'll need more workmen and horses,
of course."

"All I can get. Pat went to Denver last night, and the labour agencies
there and at Pueblo, Colorado Springs, Santa Fe, El Paso, and places
farther east doubtless by now are rounding up men. We picked up an
idle grading outfit yesterday in Santa Fe; it will be loaded and
started by to-night."

Her face became a little rueful.

"That all sounds so big that I hesitate to make the offer I had in
mind when I asked," she said.

"What was it, Miss Graham?"

"Father has twelve or fifteen teams and some scrapers used on the
ranch. The horses aren't working at this season. He would be glad to
let you have them, I know, if he thought they would be of any aid. But
with what you'll have, perhaps you----"

"I want them; I'll be more than grateful for them. I need every man
and horse available. I can't get too many. Each labourer and each
horse counts just that much more. It's a great kindness on your part
to suggest their use to me, and I'll stop on the way to camp to see
your father."

"He'll consent to your employing them," said she, confidently. "Dad
likes a man who puts up a good fight, and you're doing that. A fight
against great odds."

Bryant's face lightened with a smile almost sunny.

"By heavens, it's comforting to have a friend like you," he exclaimed,
"when one's in a tight place!"

The waiter began to place her meal, and he turned his head to look out
of the window while his mind recalled his talk with Ruth in the hotel
parlour at Kennard. Little comfort he had had from her then. Her
interest in the project, in fact, as he reviewed the summer, had been
slight, always casual, concerned only with its financial factor, never
particularly sympathetic, never warm, never eager. The thought struck
him unpleasantly. It had never occurred to him before. He wondered if
this indifference would continue when they were married, if in ten
years--when he was about forty, say--she would be even less inclined
to know his work, like the wives of some men he could name who had
their own separate interests, who gave their husbands no sympathy at
their tasks, nor courage, nor heart, and whose single cognizance of it
had to do with the size of the income.

But he drove this depressing and disloyal speculation from his mind.
Ruth was young and perhaps restless, but she was sweet and full of
promise. Time would round out her character; and when she had matured,
she would be one in a million--a mate who cheered and inspired. Every
bit of that! She would presently see the real values of things;
Charlie Menocal's monkey tricks would no longer amuse her, and she
would perceive what a shallow harlequin he was, while she would
comprehend Gretzinger's vicious, unprincipled sophistry and turn in
disgust from the man. She was inexperienced, that was all.

"It will be good to be back once more where one has plenty of room,"
Louise Graham remarked. "In that liking, you see, I'm a genuine
Westerner. That's what I missed most when at school in the East, at
Bryn Mawr--space. I wanted my big mountains and wide mesa and long,
restful views. And how I galloped on my pony through the sagebrush
when I came back during summer vacations!"

The recollection set her eyes glistening.

"You still do it when you return from a trip, I'll venture to say,"
Lee stated, marking the glow of her face.

"Yes, I do. Almost the very first thing. It clears my brain of city
noise and sights and grime. It soothes my nerves. Nothing does that
like our keen air with its scent of sagebrush."

"Then I should see you riding up my way soon."

"Oh, I'll certainly want to follow the progress of your work, Mr.
Bryant. With father's teams working for you, I'll feel as if we had a
part in the race." After a pause she proceeded, "The contractor's
outfit went up and you were just starting the dam and excavation about
the time I went East. Father mentioned in a letter to me that he had
dropped in at your camp once or twice when at Bartolo."

"Yes, I showed him what we were doing. We've had other visitors
occasionally. Miss Gardner and Miss Martin--at Sarita Creek, you
remember--come at times. Miss Martin is a niece of Mr. McDonnell, of
Kennard."

"So Mrs. McDonnell told me. Just before I left I called at their
cabins again. But I had no more luck that time than the first; they
were away somewhere. Well," she concluded, with a smile, "perhaps the
third time will win; that's the rule. I'll go another time soon."

"You'll like them, I'm sure. They're both charming, I think. Unusual
girls."

"I'll go soon," she repeated.

"My desire possibly will be understood by you," said he, after a
slight hesitation, "when I say that Miss Gardner and I are engaged to
be married. So it would please me immensely if you two became good
friends."

Louise Graham showed some surprise. But this immediately changed to
smiling interest.

"Accept my congratulations, Mr. Bryant," she said. "You may count on
our being friends. Hereafter she and Miss Martin must come to our
ranch whenever they will. I suppose they ride up where you are nearly
every day; Miss Gardner, in particular, must be tremendously devoted
to your project and now tremendously excited, too, over your race
against time. Who wouldn't be, in her place!"

"Naturally," said Lee, with all the heartiness he could muster in his
voice. But to himself, at least, his tone rang hollow.

When an hour or so after they had finished their meal they alighted
from their Pullmans at Kennard, the echo of his forced reply still
sounded in his mind with persistent irony. He was glad he had an
interview with McDonnell before him that would silence it, the
negotiating of a large private loan.




CHAPTER XVI


For Bryant there now began a period of activity compared to which his
earlier efforts were mere play. Headquarters were moved down to Perro
Creek, ten miles nearer Kennard. In an endless procession streamed
northward automobiles crammed with labourers, wagons heaped with
lumber, cement, implements, food, tents, forage, and long lines of
fresnos. From distant Mexican settlements came natives in ramshackle
wagons and driving half-wild ponies. Out of the hills came
sheep-herders and prospectors. The word of big wages ran everywhere.
The drive was on.

By the dam and on the tongue of ground extending from the mountain
side where the canal would swing out upon the mesa, excavation for the
intake gate and weir and the drops was in progress, with a crew of
carpenters swiftly erecting wooden forms to receive the concrete when
the diggers finished and retired. On the mesa half a dozen young
engineers, using Bryant's notes and fixed points, ran anew the ditch
line and set grade stakes. North of Perro Creek white tents gleamed in
the sunshine; and beyond these a swarm of men and horses gashed a
yellow streak in the mesa, ever extending as the days passed--cutting
sagebrush, ripping through sod, flinging up earth with plow and
scraper.

Yes, the fight was on. The fight to secure and keep horses, to get
and hold workmen, to feed and use them both mercilessly, to press them
ahead like a shaft of steel, to drive them forward under lash, mile by
mile, rod by rod, foot by foot, forcing a channel through the
resistant earth and across the mesa--a fight to outwit frost, to
outstrip time, to outreach and overcome the impossible.

Bryant himself was everywhere, now at the dam, now with the
carpenters, now at Perro Creek. Morgan, in charge of the north camp,
succumbed to Bryant's own restless energy and matched it. The gang,
now beginning to pour concrete behind the carpenters, caught the
infection of his ardor. Foreman and crew on the hillside section, at
his word that they had the most difficult part of the dirt work,
toiled the harder. The other engineers promised to give him their best
and gave him more. And in the main camp at Perro Creek Pat Carrigan
extracted the last ounce of effort from man and beast.

In Kennard Bryant had said to McDonnell, "Give me a good man for this
end, one who can work twenty hours a day." And the banker had given
him such an one: a short, bow-legged clerk with a pugnacious jaw, who
took the typewritten list of Bryant's immediate requirements, read it,
jerked on his hat, and bolted out of the door. He it was who kept the
road north from Kennard a-jiggle with freight wagons.

The fierce struggle against time became generally known. Ranchers
visited the mesa for a sight of the toiling camps. Wagonloads of
Mexican families, curious, observant, came and went. Automobile
parties from Kennard and elsewhere made inspection trips to the spot.
Even a journalist representing a Denver paper appeared, made
photographs, and obtained an interview from Bryant consisting of
"Finish it on time? Certainly. Can't talk any longer." Which, together
with the pictures and the special writer's account, filled a page of a
Sunday issue.

The anxiety ever in Bryant's and Carrigan's minds was of that grim and
implacable enemy, cold. Autumn had lasted amazingly; November yielded
to December, with the days still fine; but who could tell when the
white spectre, Winter, would lay his icy hand upon the earth? The
peaks and upper slopes of the mountains were already mantled with
snow. Each morning the engineer and the contractor marked with care
the fall of the thermometer during the night, examined the frost upon
the grass and tested its depth in the soil. They watched the barometer
like hawks. They observed every cloud along the Ventisquero Range.
They studied the wind, the sun, the sky. But the weather held fair. So
calm was the air that at times sounds of the dynamite blasts at the
granite outshoot, where a pair of miners were clearing a path for the
canal, came travelling down to Perro Creek.

"The Lord surely has his arms around us," said Pat, one morning.

Bryant nodded, but Dave spoke up, "A cattleman who went by here
yesterday, an old-timer, said: 'When December's clear, then January's
drear.'"

"And an old-timer once told me that same thing when I was building a
railroad grade in Kansas," Pat remarked, "and I had to ship in
palm-leaf fans and ice to keep my 'paddies' from fainting with the
January heat." A slight exaggeration, to be sure, but showing the old
contractor's contempt for wise saws pertaining to weather. Yet no one
understood more than he the law of probabilities, or the balance of
seasons. Some time cold must follow warmth, foul follow fair, to work
the inevitable mean. And it was too much to hope that this natural law
would be suspended for them until the middle of February.

In fact, the nights while remaining clear were hardening. The mercury
in the tube sank by possibly a degree every two nights, at last
touching zero; and it correspondingly failed to arise by as much at
noon. The days were cruelly short. Darkness lasted until eight in the
morning; it dropped down again at five. The frost crept deeper into
the earth.

But construction advanced. The dam of brush and uncemented smooth
brown stones, stretching across the Pinas, was gradually rising. The
hillside section of ditch through the fields was finished and only the
miners continued at the granite reef, the ring of their hammers on
drills going steadily and the roar of the shots now and again booming
out at nightfall. Excavation went forward in the spaces between the
drops on the ridge leading forth upon the mesa. The carpenters had
finished and returned to Kennard. The concrete gang had moved their
mixer from the dam to the drops, for the intake gate and its
accompanying flood weir were made, and Bryant had had their wooden
frames knocked off so that the structures stood white and imposing
beside the dam, like pillars of accomplishment. From Perro Creek the
main camp had moved toward the northwest on the arc it must pursue,
until its tents touched the horizon and the clean yellow trench,
fifteen feet wide at the bottom, thirty feet wide at the top, and five
feet deep, with its flanking embankments, alone was left behind, a
forced and undeviating course through the sagebrush, the water way
driven by a determined man.




CHAPTER XVII


Meanwhile Lee, under relentless pressure of work, saw less and less of
Ruth. She had come a number of times at the beginning of the drive,
sometimes with Gretzinger, sometimes with Imogene, to watch the
feverish spectacle on the mesa; as had Louise Graham, her father, and
at rare intervals Mr. McDonnell. Bryant, on his part, had gone
evenings to Sarita Creek when he could spare an hour, and, for that
matter, when he could not. But the meetings with her were infrequent,
and always left him with a sense of inadequacy, of dissatisfaction,
because partly Ruth and he seemed to have no common interests and
partly that she now let her affection go for granted. Her talk was not
of the subjects usually discussed by an engaged couple--of their
coming marriage (though no date had been fixed) and a home and
prospective joys together; it dealt wholly with amusements, dances,
friends at Kennard. And though her own eyes glistened at the recital,
Lee's lost their light and his speech was quenched. For his was the
role of an outsider.

Certain friendships that she maintained, moreover, were exceedingly
distasteful to him.

"Ruth, I've nothing against your going around so much with
Gretzinger," he said one evening, "except that I don't like the fellow
and believe he's crooked, and it may, under the circumstances, create
gossip."

"Nonsense, Lee, don't be jealous. Gretzie never takes me anywhere
except in a crowd. And don't say he's crooked, or I shall be angry."

"Well, let him pass," he went on. "It's Charlie Menocal I've more in
mind. He talks openly against my project; he calls me a thief and a
ruffian; he's an avowed enemy. Yet you run around with him as if that
were of no importance, as if it made no difference. The scoundrel no
doubt counts it a brilliant bit of smartness to carry about in his car
the fiancee of the man he hates, and brags of it. It reflects on us
both, Ruth. I ask you to consider my feelings at least that far."

She regarded him speculatively for a time. Then the touch of obstinacy
hardened her chin and pushed up her under lip the barest trifle. But
there was no resentment in her voice when she answered and, indeed,
her tone was too casual.

"Oh, nobody pays any particular attention to what Charlie says," she
remarked. "You surely don't really believe what you've just stated
about his bragging? I don't. Of course, he hasn't brains like Mr.
Gretzinger, but he's gentlemanly. And he's very kind. And so is Mr.
Menocal, his father. I've eaten dinner with a party of young folks at
their house twice. Your ideas of them are altogether wrong, for
they've been at pains to tell me that a business difference like that
with you shouldn't affect personal relations. I think the same. But
that isn't all. You never take me anywhere, you won't go to the
parties and shows and things. Am I to sit here every day and every
night at Sarita Creek until your canal is built?" By now her words
were not only casual but carried a trace of disdainfulness.

"No, Ruth," said he. "I want you to have a good time and derive every
pleasure that you rightly can. My greatest regret is that I can't take
you and share the fun. But it goes without saying that I can't. Only,
Charlie Menocal----"

"Lee, what's got into you to-night? If it were not for Mr.
Gretzinger's and Charlie's thoughtfulness, I'd have died of
lonesomeness long before this. You know how I hate this life, this
homestead business. You know I'm only waiting until you've finished
and we can be married and go away where there is something worth
while. Now be reasonable. You work too hard, so that every little
speck looks like a mountain. And it's making you narrow, too, or will
if you don't watch out. I have to kill time somehow till we can be
married and so you ought not to find fault with my doing it. Run along
over and talk to Imo in her cabin now, Lee; that's a good boy. I
didn't get back home from town last night until after midnight, and
I'm sleepy."

He did not go to Imo's cabin, but to camp instead. For the bitterness
of his disappointment at his failure to move her made him desire the
darkness and solitude of the ride home. With her, it seemed, he was in
a worse predicament than he had been when faced with the problem of
his ditch; for that he had found an answer, found something to take
hold of. But she was not like the mesa, to be mastered by sheer will
and incessant labour. Character is intangible, and he found himself
balked. One cannot lay hands on the desires in a heart and pluck them
out, or on the spirit and twist it straight.

His bitterness became acute when some time later Charlie Menocal came
driving with Ruth along the rutted trail by the canal to where he
stood inspecting a new drop.

"You wait, Charlie; I'll not be long," she said, as she alighted.
"Come with me out of earshot, will you, Lee?"

They moved to a spot that satisfied her.

"I heard you were doing this and I asked Charlie to bring me here,"
she began. "I wanted to see for myself. And it's true. You're going
ahead and make these things out of concrete. I'm indignant, I'm hurt.
After you led me to rely----"

Bryant stopped her sharply.

"No, Ruth, not that. I'm sorry that you gained the impression I should
use wood instead of concrete; and it never was in my mind to do so, to
use wood. My decision was fully made when you raised the matter in the
hotel parlour at Kennard, and I explained my reasons for the decision.
I didn't tell you bluntly, perhaps. I waited, trusting that you would
come round to my way of thinking and realize that I could only follow
my own best judgment."

"I haven't changed my mind not one particle," she exclaimed,
vehemently.

"But, Ruth----"

"I think you're throwing away good money, deliberately. That is, if
you really ever make any money on your project. You may lose
everything."

"I may not, also. But if I should, the father of the fellow sitting in
the car yonder waiting for you would be responsible. As for these
drops, Ruth, Gretzinger was wrong and I was right, and so they're
being built of concrete. Now please forget all about it."

"And that you refused my request, I suppose."

"Yes."

"Well, I can't do that; it's too much to ask." An angry gleam shot
from her eyes. "You might have thought more of me and less of
yourself. You put your old canal first and me second." With which she
swung about and marched off to the car, and it went away, rocking and
lurching down the uneven trail.

Lee stood looking after it. Her last words brought up the memory of
the occasion when she had playfully uttered the like, one night in
August, with the added inquiry, "What if you had to choose between
us?" Were things drifting to such an issue? Would she at last force
upon him that hard choice? He flung up a hand in a gesture of despair.
Some metamorphosis had occurred in her; she was not the simple and
loving Ruth to whom he had offered himself that day they picked
berries in the canon. Or was it that only now her real self was
revealed? Was it that she was capable of loving only selfishly? Did
she love him at all?

The questions bit like acid into his heart. And a new one, that
startled and dismayed his soul: Did he love her? Yes--the Ruth she yet
was. But he could never love the woman she seemed on the way to
become, breathing an exciting and unhealthy atmosphere, seeking purely
personal gain, indifferent to worthy objects, selfish, hard,
mercenary, worldly. No, that kind of Ruth would kill love.

He still stood there when Morgan, who had been on an errand to
headquarters, came galloping back on his way to the dam.

"Accident down below," he said. "Man hurt in the mixer. Arm crushed."

Bryant jerked his head about to look at the drop two hundred yards
farther down the ridge. He saw the workmen grouped together. The huge
cylindrical machine was motionless.

"I'll see," he exclaimed, hurrying to his runabout.

He drove recklessly to where the injured man lay, helped lift him into
the car, and bidding the foreman stand on the running board and
support the unconscious labourer, set off for headquarters at such
speed as was possible. Into the low shack used for hospital purposes
the two carried their charge, and as the doctor was absent Bryant
began a search to find him. He ran down the camp street shouting the
doctor's name and along the ditch where the teams moved, until he
encountered Carrigan.

"Doc ain't here. Who's hurt?" Pat asked. For a call for the doctor
could mean but one thing.

Bryant described the nature of the accident and both men hastened back
to the hospital. The door was now closed. Before it, stood the foreman
of the concrete gang, who was narrating for the benefit of a group of
cooks and freighters details of the mishap.

Bryant turned the knob, but the door was locked.

"He stationed me here to keep men out," the foreman said.

"Then he's in there."

"Yes, came a-running. Was loafing out there in the brush and having a
smoke. Said he was going to operate at once, then locked the door."

"Not alone!" Lee exclaimed.

"No, he has help. One of the engineers from the office, who had come
trotting over to see what was wrong, and a girl."

"A girl! What girl?"

The foreman shook his head.

"Don't know who she is. She came riding in from the south. When she
saw us hustling round, she asked what had happened and jumped off her
horse and inquired of the Doc whether she could be of any help. He
looked at her, then said yes. She's in there now. One of the men is
caring for her horse."

"A bay horse?"

"Yes. And a pretty girl, too. I'd almost lose an arm to have a
good-looker like her hovering over me."

"All right, Jenks. You can go back now. Get another man for your crew
from Morgan. I'll obtain this fellow's name and his address, if he has
any, from the time-keeper, in case he passes in his checks."

The foreman started away. The group before the door disintegrated and
presently disappeared. Pat glanced at the sun, lighted a cigar, and
asked:

"Do we start a night shift?"

"Yes; whenever you can bring in the men."

"Then I'll wire for some right away. The thermometer was five below
this morning, and only twenty-two above this noon. She's cold at
last."

"Go to it, Pat. I'll stay here till Doc is through."

When Carrigan had left him, Bryant sat down on a discarded oil tin
lying on the ground--one of the square ten-gallon cans common about
camps. He gazed at the door of the hospital shack. He could hear faint
sounds from within, a footfall on the board floor, an indistinct word
or murmur. Behind him and farther down the street, in the big cook
tents where the crews ate, was the rattle of pans and an occasional
oath or burst of laughter. There the cooks were peeling potatoes and
mixing great pans of biscuit dough and exchanging jests, while here in
the shack a fight was going on for a life.

Bryant saw again that unshaven, heavy-faced workman, with the terribly
mangled arm, whom he had brought hither. Poor devil! Some oversight,
some carelessness, some mistake on the part of himself or another; and
if not a dead man, then one-armed for the rest of his days. He,
Bryant, could not consider these accidents with Pat Carrigan's
philosophic calm--a calm acquired from decades of camp tragedies and
disasters. They harrowed his spirit. Though they appeared inevitable
where men delved or builded or flung forth great spans, they made the
cost of constructive works seem too great. They took the glamor from
projects and left them hard, grim, uninspiring tasks.

Lee felt a weariness like that of age. The strain under which he
laboured, the sustained effort of driving this furrow through earth
that was like iron, his unavailing endeavours to reclaim Ruth,
afflictions such as this of the past hour, the uncertainty of
everything--all sapped his energy and shook his faith. Yet before him
there were weeks of the same, or worse. He had put his hand to the
plow; he could not turn back.

All at once the door of the shack opened. Louise Graham came out,
without hat, garbed in a great white surgical apron. Her knees seemed
about to give way. Her eyes were half shut. Her face was without
colour, drawn, dazed. With her from the interior came a reek of
chloroform.

She had been the girl in there! Bryant had guessed it, feared it. He
ran forward and put an arm about her shoulders and led her to the tin
oil canister on which he urged her to be seated.

"No, I won't faint," she said, weakly. He knelt beside her and
supported her form. "I just feel dizzy and a little sick," she went
on. "Better in a moment." Lee observed her shudder. Presently she
murmured, "Stuck it out, anyway. Dad says--dad says, 'Never be a
quitter.' And I wasn't one."




CHAPTER XVIII


Rymer, a sandy-haired, blue-eyed young fellow, one of Bryant's staff,
walked out of the shack, pulling on his coat. He had a cigarette in
the corner of his mouth, at which he was sucking rapidly. In spite of
its dark lacquer of tan his face had a grayish tinge.

"Sick?" he asked of Bryant, jerking a nod toward Louise Graham.

"A bit. Have Doc give you a little brandy in a glass. And bring out
her things, too."

Rymer went back into the shack, presently returning with the liquor
and accompanied by the young doctor, who still had his sleeves rolled
up. Louise swallowed the fiery dram.

"That--that would raise the dead!" she gasped, wiping sudden tears
from her eyes. She sat up, pushed back the hair from her brow, and
began to glance about.

"How's your man?" Bryant asked the doctor.

"Right as a trivet--if no complications set in. Have him stowed on a
cot in the inner room. Bring on your next."

"You ought to be the next," said Lee, darkly.

"Because I grabbed her? Well, I'll use her another time if she's
about. Steady as a pin. No wasted motion, either. Passed me
instruments and things like a veteran nurse. I just gave a nod or
glance and she had the right tray. I wanted to pat her on the
shoulder. Can't give people that thing; it's a born knack. Knowing
exactly what's wanted at the instant. She has it, has it to the tips
of her fingers."

Lee said no more. The young doctor was still labouring under the
excitement of the past hour and swimming in exultation at performing
an operation that would have taxed the skill of an experienced
surgeon. It had been one of those wicked cases--arm crushed to the
shoulder, everything gone into a hodge-podge of flesh and arteries and
splintered bone, a case for fast work and at the same time for
delicate closure of the stump. This had been thrust at Higginson like
a flash, he out of a medical school but a year and a half, still
coaxing a moustache, so to speak. Lee perceived it all. The matter for
Higginson had been like the ditch with Bryant: something tremendous,
something to be met with the means at hand, something to be
accomplished at all costs. And now his brain was ringing with triumph.
He was superior to anything Bryant might think or say or do. For the
moment he was quite ecstatic. One in his exalted state could conceive
nothing unmeet in having haled a strange, sensitive girl into the
ghastly business for an assistant.

"I'll conduct Miss Graham to my office, where she can remain until
she's wholly herself," Bryant said. "This air is too sharp. You have
everything, Rymer--cap, coat, gauntlets? Bring them along."

"But I'm feeling better now," Louise protested.

"You're not yet fit to start home. Over there it's warm and quiet." He
rose to help her remove the great apron.

In the shack at the head of the street where he led her, he made her
comfortable in an old arm-chair from his ranch house with a Navajo rug
over her lap. As he stirred up the fire, she gazed about at the room.
In one corner was a desk knocked together of boards, littered with
papers; near it on the floor were boxes stuffed with rolls of
blue-prints; the wall spaces between windows were filled with
statements and reports; bulging card-board files rested on a shelf;
from nails hung an old coat and a camera; in another corner leaned a
tripod, rod, and a six-foot brass-edged measure specked with clay; and
piled in a heap beyond the stove were a saddle, a pair of boots,
chunks of pinon pine, and a discarded flannel shirt on which lay a
gray cat nursing a kitten. Through the inner door, standing open, she
had a glimpse of two cots with tumbled blankets. The place was the
office and temporary home of a busy man, a rough board-and-tar-paper
habitation that went forward on skids as the camp went forward, the
workshop and living-quarters of a director who was stripped down to
the hard essentials of toil and whose brain was the nerve centre of a
desperate effort by a host of horses and men.

"You have companions, I see," Louise remarked, indicating the mother
cat and kitten.

"Dave's," was his reply, as he finished at the stove. "He found them
somewhere. There were four kittens to begin with, but only one is
left. It's a hard game for cats to survive in a camp like this."

"Poor little things!"

"Dave says he'll save this kitten, or know why."

"What about Dave himself with all these rough men?"

"It leaves him untouched," Lee said. "Doesn't hurt a boy when he's
made of the right stuff. He'll be better for it, in fact. Many a grown
man would be more competent with the knowledge Dave's picking up here,
young as he is. He's learning what work means and what men are and
what's what generally. When this job is done, I'm going to send him
off to school; and he'll eat up his studies. Just watch and see."
Bryant laughed. "He's aching to become an engineer. He has his mark
already fixed, which not one boy in a thousand at his age has. And all
this is priming him to go to his mark like a shot."

"I hadn't thought of that," she stated.

"Actually he's soaking up more arithmetic, geology, physics,
veterinary knowledge, and so on, by pumping Pat Carrigan, the
engineers, and the men, than I supposed his head could hold," Lee
continued. "When he gets at his books, they won't be meaningless
things to him. Not much! He'll understand what prompted them and what
they open up. Well, now, are you feeling better?"

"Yes, I think so." Then she said, "But I'm keeping you away from your
work. You go, and when I'm--"

"Wouldn't think of it. Nothing pressing." And Bryant began to move
about thoughtfully, now going to gaze out a window and now returning
to stand and fix his eyes upon her intently.

"That was a distressing experience for you," he went on, presently. "I
feel all upset at your being in there. Higginson was desperate, I
suppose, and grasped at you because you happened to be there and he
could not wait."

She put out a hand toward Lee.

"Don't scold him please," she said.

"Little good it would do now," he replied. "He'll be so cocky that
he'll dare me to fire him if I say a word, and grin in my face, for he
knows now that he's a good man and that I know it and will never let
him go."

"Higginson, is that his name?" Louise asked. "Well, he is a good man.
When he started the engineer using the chloroform and me arranging
things, he was swallowing hard. I saw he was terribly nervous and
keyed up. But he went right at the operation without faltering and
with a sort of doggedness. As if nothing should stop him. I myself was
doing rather mistily what he wanted. The chloroform, the smell of
antiseptics, the shiny instruments, the cutting, the nipping of
blood-vessels with forceps and tying them, the clipping with scissors,
the sewing--all went to my head. And I constantly had to tell myself,
'Don't be silly! You're not going to faint. He might fail if you did.
That tray, those forceps, those sponges, that thread, that's what he
wants now. Keep your head. Don't be a quitter.' And so on through
eternity--it seemed an eternity, anyway. I think the young engineer
with me thought so, too. He turned quite green once or twice. But then
I must have looked that way throughout. All at once it was over,
suddenly. Quite unexpectedly, too. I had come to believe that it would
go on and on forever. But, as I say, all at once it was done and the
men were wheeling the bandaged fellow into the other room. Then the
doctor called over his shoulder at me, 'Open the door, girl; let in
some air.' So I opened it as he wanted, and came out."

Bryant was greatly affected by that simple recital. He began to walk
back and forth beside Louise, restlessly thrusting his hands in his
coat pockets but immediately pulling them out as if there were no
satisfaction in the action, and casting troubled glances at her from
under close-drawn brows. His disquietude moved her to speak.

"You're worrying about me, Mr. Bryant; you mustn't do that. In a few
minutes more I'll be entirely recovered. I should be foolish to
pretend that the happening wasn't a shock to me, but I'm not a
weakling--I've health and strength. I'll not permit the thought of the
operation to depress my spirits. Indeed, I know I'll be very proud of
what I did this afternoon, for it was a chance to do a real,
disinterested service. And I can guess what father will say when he
learns of it--'Louise, you did just right. Exactly what you should do
under the circumstances.'"

Already the colour had reappeared in her cheeks. A resilience of
nature was indeed hers, he perceived, that enabled her to undergo
ordeals that would prostrate many women. It came, undoubtedly, from
the same springs out of which rose her splendid courage, her fine
sympathy. Ah, that golden quality of sympathy! Because of it her duty
that day had seemed plain and clear.

"Louise--may I not use that name, for we're friends?--Louise, you're
the bravest, kindest girl I have ever known. I mean it, really. I've
never forgotten your generous act that day when someone so brutally
killed my dog Mike, how you tried to save him. I didn't know you then,
but that made no difference to you. And now when you find an
opportunity to help save a man's life, you never flinch."

"Why, it's the natural thing to do."

"Is it? I was beginning to think selfishness was the natural thing,"
he said, with a hard, twisted smile.

She rested her hand on his sleeve for an instant. A smile and a shake
of her head accompanied the action.

"I know better than that, Lee Bryant," she rejoined. "You're not
selfish yourself and will never arrive at a time when you'll believe
what you said."

"But there are selfish people, many of them."

"Yes. Of course."

"And one can't change them, and they cause infinite anxiety in
others----"

"Yes; that, too. Has Mr. Menocal been troubling you in some new way?"

Lee rose hastily. "I wasn't thinking of him," said he; and he went to
a window and stared out at the engineers' shack across the street. Her
touch on his arm, her tone, her solicitude, agitated him more than he
dared let her see. Why in the name of heaven couldn't he have a Ruth
who was like her? A Ruth who was a Louise, with all of her lovable
qualities and splendid courage and fine nobility of heart?

He swung about to gaze at her. She yet sat half turned in her seat so
that her clear profile was before his eyes. Her soft chestnut hair
glinted with gleams of the fire that escaped through a crack in the
door. Her features were in repose. Something in her attitude, in her
face, gave her a girlish appearance, as she might have looked when
sixteen--an infinite candor, an innocence and simplicity, that alone
comes from a serene spirit.

Presently he discovered that she had moved her head about, that she
was looking straight at him. Bryant experienced a singular emotion.

"Some serious trouble is disturbing you," she said.

Her eyes continued fixed upon his, increasing his uneasiness. He felt
himself flushing. He made a gesture as if whatever it was might be
disregarded, then said, "Yes."

"You're not still anxious concerning me? I'm rested--see!"

She sprang up, casting off the rug and spreading her arms wide for his
scrutiny. The heat of the fire had put the glow into her cheeks again;
a smile rested on her lips; she seemed poised for an upward flight.

"I'll take you home," he said, abruptly.

"Oh, no. I can ride----"

"One of the boys will bring your horse to you in the morning," he
continued, as if she had not spoken. "It would be dark before you
reached home; dusk is already at the windows. And you would be chilled
through. You've no business to be riding after what you've been
through. I'll bring my car to the door while you're putting on your
things."

A vague fear sent him out of the door quickly. Ruth in his mind was
like a figure projected far off in the landscape, occupied, distant,
facing away; but Louise Graham was by, and despite his wish or will,
or her knowledge, drawing his heart. What he had sought in Ruth was in
her possession, the possibility of happiness. Life had deluded him and
seemed about to crush him in a savage clutch. As he moved along the
street, this apprehension lay cold in his breast; he could not dismiss
it; it persisted like a dull throb of pain. A sudden fury swept him.
The place was becoming intolerable, the mesa a hell. He burned to
chuck the whole wretched business.

When he returned with the car he was at least outwardly calm. He
helped Louise into the seat.

"I'll have you home in no time," said he.

"And you must stay for supper."

"Yes; why not. Might as well."

"And we'll pick up the girls; all of us can crowd in here somewhere."

The slightest pause followed before his answer.

"Certainly," he said. "We can all ride."

Imogene's cabin, however, was the only one showing a light when they
stopped before the pair of little houses, and only Imogene was at
home. She was delighted to go with Lee and Louise. Ruth had driven
with Charlie Menocal to Kennard earlier in the afternoon, she briefly
stated. Then she remarked:

"Aren't you dissipating frightfully to-night, Lee?"

"Like a regular devil," was the response.




CHAPTER XIX


Imogene had been startled by a note in Lee's answer to her bantering
question that she never before had heard him use. Though his words
were uttered lightly, there nevertheless was a hard ring to them, a
grate, as if his teeth were on edge. Something had happened. Ruth had
driven during the afternoon to see him and returned exceedingly put
out. If anything had occurred, Imogene hoped it was--well, one certain
thing.

When Bryant brought her home that evening, he went with her into her
cabin. In silence he built up the fire, fussed for a time with the
lamp-wick, lighted a cigarette, took a turn across the cabin,
inspected thoughtfully the back of one hand, and then lifted his gaze
to Imogene. She had been waiting, with a vague alarm. And this his
stern visage and burning eyes increased.

"Will Ruth marry me at once, do you think?" he questioned.
"To-morrow--or the next day?" His tone was calm. He might have been
speaking of the cabin, asking if it kept out the wind.

Imogene was dumbfounded by that voice and that inquiry. She had
expected anything but either.

"Not then; not so soon, I suspect," she said, at length.

"When? At the end of a week, the end of a fortnight?"

"I can't say," she replied with a sensation now of being harried.
This would not do; she must get herself in hand. "The fact is, Lee,
I'm not in Ruth's confidence. Haven't been for some considerable time.
We've drifted a little apart."

"Only a little?"

"Only a little--I hope."

The cigarette Bryant held had gone out. Presently he glanced at it,
then crushed it in his palm and dropped it into a coat pocket.

"Don't fence with me, Imogene," he said. "Give me the truth."

The truth--well, why not? He was entitled to it. Besides, since he had
eyes and a brain with which to reason he was not ignorant of the
girls' waning friendship. Pretense was foolish. Imogene leaned forward
in her seat and rested her crossed arms upon her knees, directing her
look at the floor. Her fluffy golden hair had been slightly
disarranged when she removed her hat and so remained. Her face was
thinner than in the summer, with a pinched aspect about her lips.

"The situation is this," she began, slowly. "Ruth and I are not really
on good terms and we've been perilously near a break several times.
But I've restrained my temper and my tongue to avoid one, because I
feel I must remain as long as she does. No, I can't leave her here
alone--that would be brutal. And ruinous for her, too. I've thought it
all out pretty carefully. You see, we both agreed to stay when we
came, until we agreed to go or had proved up on our claims. Probably I
don't make myself very clear to you. I think now that I made a mistake
and that neither of us ought ever to have attempted homesteading. So
much has happened that is different from what I anticipated. Not the
existence itself; I don't mean that. Other things. Ruth's change,
chiefly. See, Lee, I speak frankly, for we've usually been frank
toward each other. You two are engaged, but"--she straightened up in
order to meet his eyes--"she's treating you abominably and
shamelessly. Ordinarily, I would hold my peace, I've held it hitherto,
but I can no longer. Why, I choke sometimes! Going constantly with
Gretzinger, who's so despicable that he tries to use her as a tool to
reach and corrupt you, or Charlie Menocal, who's your out-and-out
enemy, it's too much for me, Lee. And uncle and aunt are furious with
me for staying. She listen to me? Ruth listens neither to me nor any
one." She rose and came close to Bryant. "You're right to marry her
immediately. If you two love each other, that is." Her look was
penetrating, questioning. "For she needs a restraining influence.
People in Kennard are talking----"

"My God!" Bryant cried, hoarsely. "No, no; not Ruth! She couldn't do
anything wrong!"

"No, there's nothing bad. But she has given grounds for gossip, she
and some other girls. She sees too much of this Gretzinger and Charlie
Menocal and men like them; and the time may come when I'll tremble.
I've begged her to be discreet and considerate of your good opinion
and love, but she always declares that she's acting eminently proper.
Lee."

"Yes."

"There's something more. Gretzinger's not only finding amusement in
her company, he's in love with her. After the women he's been
accustomed to in New York, the rouged and jaded type he naturally
would know, her freshness and spirits appeal to him. But you know what
sort of man he is--cynical, unscrupulous, without principles."

A long time passed before Bryant made a response. He stood knitting
his brows, as if preoccupied. Imogene wondered if he had been
following her at the last.

"I'll speak to him about his principles in connection with Ruth," he
said. The utterance was amazingly dispassionate. Then quite
unexpectedly he remarked, "I've never yet had to kill a man, never as
yet."

Imogene shuddered, and she was terrified. It was as if a curtain had
been jerked aside disclosing figures grouped for tragedy.

"It must never come to that," she breathed.

Bryant stirred, then began to look about the room. He grew observant.

"This is bad for you, Imogene," he said, presently. "Impossible! Your
uncle is right. This wretched cabin doesn't keep out cold or wind; you
have to chop wood and carry water, tasks beyond your strength; you're
lonely, you're ill at times--"

"And Ruth?"

"Well?"

"You know her situation. Financial, I mean."

"I less than any one know it. Extraordinary, too, now that I think of
it," he said, reflectively. "What is her situation?" Immediately he
added, "Of course, I guess that she has no great means and she has
said that she lacks training to earn a livelihood. But her family?"

"She lived with an aunt until she came here, Lee."

"So she mentioned."

"They didn't get on well together after Ruth went to stay with her on
her parents' death," Imogene explained. "The woman was narrow-minded
and exacting, especially in matters of amusements and religion. You
know the type." Bryant nodded. "And Ruth was young, exuberant, and, as
I now see, wilful. Their clashes were the cause of her desire to come
West. We had been good friends, but not intimates; and I marvel at
myself now at having gone so rashly into a thing like this, without
inquiring whether our habits, tastes, desires, natures, everything,
fitted us for prolonged companionship. Yes, I marvel." She sat
motionless, staring at the lamp fixedly. "However, I'm in it now up to
my neck. Ruth declares that she will never return to her aunt."

"And she can't earn a living."

"Nor would if she could, I fear," Imogene added, a little sadly. "At
least, now. It would be too dull."

"Then I must marry her at once."

Imogene gave him a strange look.

"She is waiting," said she.

"For marriage?"

"No, to see how you succeed. Oh, to have to say these things is
dreadful, Lee!" she exclaimed. But Bryant brushed this aside with a
gesture almost august in its indifference. "If you finish your project
on time, she will be ready for the ceremony," the girl went on. "If
you fail, she'll postpone it until you're able to provide more than
just a roof, a chair, and a broom. Her very words! Love must not
prevent people from being practical, from her viewpoint. So, as I
say, she's waiting to discover the outcome." A corner of her mouth
twisted up while she paused. Then she concluded in a low voice, "And
probably something else."

Bryant had again fallen into study. Imogene doubted if he had heard
her added remark, and she could not divine from his countenance how
fierce or in what direction his covered passion was beating.

"It will be too late," said he, suddenly and, as it seemed to her,
irrelevantly.

Then she thought that she understood.

"He's going home in a few days, for the Christmas holidays," she
stated. "Possibly then Ruth will--I'm planning for us all to be at
uncle's, you with us."

"Gretzinger wasn't in my mind."

"You said 'too late'," she pursued. "Naturally I supposed your
reference to be of them."

The gravity of his face deepened.

"I was thinking of myself," said he, turning his eyes upon her. "If
we're not married soon, very soon, it will be too late. I mean that it
would be a mockery. For me, at any rate. One may wish to go one way,
and be swept another, especially when the mooring line is slack." His
breast rose and fell at a quick, agitated breath. "But promise me that
you'll not speak of this to Ruth."

"The very thing to bring her round, perhaps."

"More likely to fill her with despair."

This was something Imogene could not grasp. It was so inexplicable, so
extravagant, so perverse, that her cheeks grew hot.

"I can't follow you at all," she cried, indignantly. "Ruth alarmed,
jealous, in doubt--yes, I can credit her with any one of those
feelings. But despair! She lays her plans too far ahead to be led into
despair."

"Even if she knew I had ceased to love her? When she understood our
marriage would be a hollow ceremony?"

"Would it be that if you succeed with your project?"

Bryant's eyes blazed suddenly.

"Great God, you talk as if she were to marry the canal!" he exclaimed.
He glowered for a time. "I see now what you mean. You believe she
would marry me if I win out with the ditch. Being practical, she would
accept money as a substitute for love. That reminds me: she herself
once declared that if circumstances necessitated she could take a rich
man for his riches." Bryant uttered a harsh laugh. "My Lord, I was
frightened lest in a fit of anguish at losing my love she should go to
the devil!" Again he yielded to an outburst of laughter that made
Imogene shudder. "I fancied that at finding herself out of money,
unable to work, disinclined to work, unloved, miserable, she would
recklessly hurl herself into perdition. And I was going to save her
from that, marry her at once, sacrifice myself! Like an egotistical
fool! When all the while there was never the slightest danger or need,
when all the while she held the string, not I. And love isn't a
consideration whatever. And she will marry me when I've completed the
project. And complete it I must, of course. Not a way out, not a
single loop-hole. Oh, my Lord, my Lord, Imogene, did you ever know of
anything so devilishly laughable!" And his bitter, sardonic merriment
broke forth anew.

The girl was appalled. All she could do was to gasp, "Oh, Lee, Lee!
Don't laugh like that, don't think of it like that. You make it out
worse than it is."

He stopped short. By his look he might have detested her.

"I state it as it is," he said. "Wherein is the actual situation
better?"

"You could break your engagement; certainly she has given you
sufficient cause."

"Yes, break with her, as might you. Why don't you?"

Imogene put out a hand in protest.

"You know why, Lee; I've told you," she said, earnestly.

"No more can I, for the same reason," was his reply. He turned and
lifted his hat and gloves from the table. "I will have no act of mine
cut her adrift and push her under. Much better to stand the gaff. I
suppose one hardens to anything in time." His look wandered about the
room. "And the diabolic part of it all is that this squeamish feeling
of responsibility for another may achieve as much harm in the long run
as its lack. Who knows?"

He glanced at her as if expecting an answer. Imogene remained silent;
indeed, nothing need be said to so evident an enigma. For that matter,
nothing more said at all. Bryant drew on his gloves and bade her
good-night. At the door he remarked, quite in his accustomed manner:

"I'll send Dave over in the morning with more blankets and have him
chop some wood. There's a drop in the temperature coming."




CHAPTER XX


The predicted cold weather came, bringing winter in earnest. The frost
went deeper into the ground and construction grew slower, but the days
continued fine and without gales, those fierce and implacable winds
that sometimes rage over the frozen mesa hours at a time under a dull,
saffron sun, sharp as knives, shrieking like demons, and driving man
and beast to cover. They had not yet been unleashed.

Night work was begun, amid a flare of gasolene torches that gave a
weird aspect to the plain. The yellow lights; the moving, shadowy
forms of the workmen and horses; the cries and shouts--all made a
scene gnome-like in character. Frost gleamed upon the earth in a
silvery sheen under the torches' smoky flames. The headquarters
building and the mess tents now glowed from dusk until dawn. Fires
where workmen could warm their cheeks and hands were burning
continually, fed from the great piles of wood brought from the
mountains. And so by day and by night, without halt and despite cold,
the restless life was maintained and the toil kept going and the hard
furrow driven ahead.

With the approach of Christmas the advance of the project was marked.
The dam was nearing completion, with its long, gently inclined,
upstream face constructed of smooth cobbles--a slope up which any vast
and sudden rush of cloudburst water would slide unchecked to the crest
and harmlessly pass over. All of the drops, as well as the head-gate
and flood weirs, were finished, standing as if hewn out of solid white
stone. The miners had blasted out a channel through the reef of rock,
and gone. From the dam the canal section all along the hillside and
following the ridge, from drop to drop, and out to a point on the mesa
a mile beyond, was excavated, a great clean ditch; while from Perro
Creek the canal ran northward for six miles to the main camp, curving
in the great arc that constituted its line. Three and a half miles,
and complements, constructed at one end; six miles at the other.
Between, five miles of unbroken mesa. Seven weeks remained for the
small camp working down from the north and the great camp pushing from
the south to dig through those miles and meet--seven weeks; but in the
most bitter season of the year.

It seemed that it was with infinitely greater effort that the two
sections of the canals were forced ahead each day. The surface of the
ground was like stone, only by repeated attempts pierced by plows and
torn apart; while the subsoil immediately froze if left unworked. The
weaker labourers began to break: the scrawny Mexicans, the debilitated
white men, the drifters and the dissatisfied; and they left the camps.
These the labour agencies found it harder and harder to replace as the
cold weather persisted, so that the force showed a considerable
diminishment.

A few days before Christmas Gretzinger paid Bryant a visit. He had not
been to camp for a week and therefore on this occasion examined the
progress of work with care, studying the rate of excavation and
calculating the result.

"You'll just about make it through, Bryant, if nothing happens to put
a crimp in your advance," he stated when he was about to take his
departure from the office, where he and Lee conferred.

"Yes," said Bryant.

"And if anything should happen, then good-bye canal."

"That doesn't necessarily follow," said Lee, calmly.

Gretzinger ignored this reply. He thrust an arm into his fur-lined
overcoat and began to draw it on. That evening he was leaving Kennard
for New York, and now was desirous of returning to town by noon, where
he had a luncheon engagement with Ruth Gardner. He had casually
mentioned to Bryant that the girls had gone the day before to the
McDonnells for the holidays.

"My people were certainly handed a phony deal here," he remarked
shortly, as he buttoned the coat collar about his throat.
"Questionable title to the water! Extravagance and poor management!
Rotten project all through! If I had lined this thing up, I should
have learned what I actually had before a cent was expended. But of
course if the thing goes smash, we in the East have to stand the loss;
you're losing no cash, you have nothing in it but a shoestring. Well,
I'm expecting you to put your back into the job and do no loafing and
pull us out of the hole you've got us into."

Bryant's face remained impassive.

"I'll attend to my end," said he, "if the bondholders take care of
theirs. They'll have to dig up more cash."

"What's that!"

"More money, I said."

"They'll see you in hell before they do."

"Then that's where they'll look for payment of their bonds. You're not
fool enough, are you, to imagine a system can be built in winter and
under high pressure for what it could be constructed in summer and not
in haste? Strange the idea never occurred to you before--you,
Gretzinger, irrigation expert, though you never saw an irrigation
ditch till you came West. The sixty thousand dollars from bonds and
twenty thousand more I've put with it will be gone sometime next
month. Possibly I can stretch it out to the first of February. After
that, the bondholders will have to come forward to save their
investment."

Gretzinger unbuttoned his overcoat and sought his cigarette case. His
scowl as he struck a match was lighted by vicious gleams from his
eyes.

"Why didn't you stop work when you received notification from the
state engineer of the Land and Water Board's action?" he demanded.
"When you yet had the bulk of the money?"

"I preferred to continue."

"And now you're sinking it all."

"It costs money to move frozen dirt," said Bryant.

"Well, I tell you the bondholders won't put up another penny
unless----" The Easterner paused, growing thoughtful. Some minutes
passed before he resumed: "There's one condition on which they'll do
it, and I'll guarantee their support."

"And the condition?"

"That you surrender your stock to them."

"For the twenty or twenty-five thousand dollars more that will be
needed? My shares representing a hundred thousand? And I presume I
should have to withdraw altogether."

"Naturally," Gretzinger responded. "I should then take charge."

Bryant's expression exhibited a certain amount of curiosity.

"Do you really think you could finish the ditch on time?" he inquired.

A slight sneer was the answer. Gretzinger was one not given to wasting
time with men of Bryant's type.

"How about it? Am I to take back to New York with me your agreement to
this?" he asked, curtly.

The other spread his feet apart and hooked his thumbs in his coat
pockets and directed his full regard at the speaker.

"You think you have me in a hole, Gretzinger," he said. "You propose
to take me by the throat and shake everything out of my pockets and
then throw me aside. Well, I'm in a hole, no use denying that. But you
haven't me by the throat and you're not going to loot me. If I go
broke, it won't be through handing over what I have to you and your
gang of pirates, just make up your mind to that."

"Then you intend to wreck this project. A court action will stop that,
I fancy."

"The only court action you can demand is a receivership for the
company, and not until my money-bag is empty at that," Lee rejoined,
coolly. "And the time will expire and the company be a shell before
it's granted, at the rate courts move."

The New Yorker considered. Finally he began to re-button his
overcoat.

"I'll leave the offer open," said he. "I was uncertain before about
returning, but I'll probably do so now. You'll find as the pinch comes
that my proposition will look better--and we might pay you two or
three thousand so you'll not go out strapped. Besides, if we took over
and completed the project, it would save your face; you wouldn't be
wholly discredited; you would be able to get a job somewhere
afterward. Might as well make the most you can for yourself out of a
bad mess. Think it over, Bryant." He set his cap on his head with a
conclusive air.

Lee pointed at a chair by the table.

"Sit down for a moment; there's another matter." He crossed to his
desk, put his hand in a drawer for something, and came back. "Look at
that," he said, tossing a revolver cartridge on the table before
Gretzinger.

The man picked it up and turned it over between thumb and finger,
examining it with mingled surprise and curiosity.

"What about it?" he questioned.

"I understand you're interested in a certain young lady," Bryant
stated, smoothly.

Gretzinger straightened on his seat, flashing his look up to the
other's. A sudden tightening of his lips accompanied the action and he
ceased to revolve the cartridge he held.

"I'll not discuss my personal affairs with you or----"

"When they touch mine, you will," was the answer.

"Are you jealous?" Gretzinger asked after a pause, with a trace of
insolence. "Believe you are. I thought, along with your other
shortcomings, you weren't capable of even that. Now that we're
talking, I'll say that I've taken Ruth round and found her
entertaining. What about it? And I've given her my opinion of the way
you've run this work, because she asked for it. I told her that you
had botched the business from the beginning. I told her you were
unpractical, incompetent, small-gauged, and lightweight, and would
make a failure of everything you touched. There you have it all.
Well?"

Bryant's brows twitched for an instant.

"I guessed as much." He stood staring in silence at the table, but
presently brought himself to attention. "Honour is something you don't
understand. So I thought that bullet might focus your mind on possible
consequences."

"What's all this rot!"

Lee leaned forward with his fists resting on the table and his eyes
probing Gretzinger's.

"If any harm comes to Ruth through you, that bullet will pay it out,"
he said, harshly. "You've felt its weight. It's forty-four calibre,
plenty heavy enough to do the business. I can smash a potato at thirty
paces. One shot is all I shall ask. I won't do any hemming and hawing
over the matter, or----"

Gretzinger sprang up.

"See here, Bryant!" he cried.

"Or advertising in the newspapers," the other went on, in a level
tone. "I'll attend to your case, quickly and quietly. Here, or in New
York, or wherever you are. That's all."

Gretzinger had gone a little pale. He was nervously drawing on his
cap.

"Listen to me for a moment----"

"I said that's all. Get out." And Bryant's mien brooked no
temporizing.

It was of Lee's nature not to brood on such matters. He had given the
warning and must await the issue. Meanwhile, the burden of work and
the needs of the project would afford sufficient occupation for his
mind.

Christmas came. Bryant had ordered that labour cease for twenty-four
hours, as the gruelling fight of weeks had worn down the spirit of the
men. A holiday would rest them, while a big turkey dinner and
unlimited cigars and pails of candy would put them in a good humour.
At dark on the afternoon before the day shift at both camps ceased
work, the horses were stabled, the torches left unlighted, the fires
along the ditch allowed to die down, and the project was idle. A light
skift of snow had fallen during the morning, whitening the earth, but
the clouds had passed away, so that the still air and clear sky gave
promise of a fine morrow.

Christmas Eve, however, did not lapse without a disturbing incident.
About supper time Dave came running to Bryant and Pat Carrigan in
Lee's shack. He had seen workmen going furtively into a tent in
numbers that aroused his curiosity, and had crept unseen under the lee
of the canvas shelter, where, lifting the flap, he beheld in the
interior a keg on the ground and a Mexican, by light of a candle,
serving labourers whisky in tin cups.

"Whisky in camp!" Lee roared. "Come with me, Pat." The two men, guided
by Dave, strode down the street. Before the tent indicated they halted
to listen. The shelter glowed dimly; formless shadows stirred on its
canvas walls; and from within came low, guarded voices and once a
muffled laugh.

Jerking the flaps apart Bryant entered, followed by the contractor. He
forced an opening through the group of workmen by a savage sweep of
his arms and came to the keg, where the Mexican at the moment was
bending down and holding a cup under the spigot. When the man
perceived the engineer, he leaped up. The fellow's short, squat figure
and stony expression had for Bryant a vague familiarity--that face
especially, brown, stolid, brutal, with a fixed, snake-like gaze.

But Lee had no time to speculate on the Mexican's identity. The liquor
was the important thing. The man stood motionless, holding in his left
hand the half-filled cup that gave off a pungent, sickening smell of
whisky; his eyes were intent on the engineer. Behind Lee, Carrigan was
already herding the others from the tent.

"Where did you get that stuff?" Bryant demanded. But as the Mexican
only shook his head, he changed to Spanish. "Trying to start a big
drunk here?"

"To-morrow is a fete day, senor," was the reply. "A friend made me a
present; I share it with the others. Besides, in cold weather it keeps
one warm."

"How long have you worked here?"

"Three days."

"There's a camp order: 'No liquor allowed in camp.' You can't say that
you don't know it, for it's posted everywhere on placards in English
and in Spanish."

He received no response. A faint shrug of the shoulders, perhaps. The
Mexican's glistening, sinister eyes, on the other hand, continued as
rigid as orbs of polished agate, and his face as expressionless.

"Well, we'll lock you up and see if we can learn who your 'friend' is
that sent this barrel in," Lee stated.

There was a slight movement of the man's elbow.

"Watch him--his right hand!" Pat cried, sharply.

The hand had darted swiftly to the fellow's hip, but Bryant's fist was
as quick. It shot up, catching the man's jaw and hoisting him off his
feet. Next instant the engineer had disarmed the prostrate ruffian.

"The Kennard jail for you," said he, in English. "A bad _hombre_, eh!
Up with you, quick."

But what followed neither the engineer nor the contractor anticipated.
With a lightning-like roll of his body the man vanished under the side
of the tent. When the others rushed out in search of him he had made
good his escape; and a search through the dark camp would be useless.
They therefore emptied the keg upon the ground, extinguished the lamp,
and returned to Lee's office. Though the Mexican had got away, they
nevertheless had put a foot on the malicious scheme.

All at once Dave, who was walking at Bryant's and Pat's heels up the
street, exclaimed:

"I've got that greaser's number now! We saw him once at the depot in
Kennard, Lee. He was watching you, remember?"

"I guess you're right; I recall him."

"Bet that old devil in Bartolo put him up to this." Dave asserted.

"Tut, tut, kid! Language like that on Christmas Eve! Charlie
might--but not his father, I imagine."

Dave, however, was not altogether to be suppressed.

"Well, I don't put anything past either of them," he sniffed.




CHAPTER XXI


On Christmas morning the thought occurred to Lee that he had heard
nothing more from Imogene of the plan for him to spend the day at the
McDonnells', which she had mentioned the night of their talk. Rather
strangely, too, he had not received from either of the girls even a
note of holiday greeting; to Imogene he had had sent from Denver an
edition of Ibsen's plays, and to Ruth a splendid set of furs, both in
care of Mrs. McDonnell, who had promised they should be delivered when
Santa Claus came down the chimney. Odd, the girls' silence.

He was at work on his accounts at the moment, but now he remained
biting the end of his pen-holder and staring through the window. From
somewhere in the sagebrush came the sound of shots: Dave potting tin
cans with the .22 rifle that had been Lee's gift to him. In the room
was only the snapping of the fire. Presently the telephone rang.

"Imo now," he exclaimed. "I'll be hanged if I go down and carry out
the farce before the McDonnells."

But the person proved to be Louise Graham.

"I wondered--well, several things," she said, when he had answered.
"First, if you had gone away anywhere; next, in case you hadn't,
whether you were working; and last, should the camp be resting to-day,
if you wouldn't come to Christmas dinner with father and me."

"No work's going on."

"Then we'll be delighted to have you come--and Dave also, of course.
There's an especially fattened turkey ready to slide into the oven
now. Father has just said, too, to tell you that there's going to be
something else--Tom and Jerry. How does that sound?"

"Like a man and a boy coming down the road toward Diamond Creek," Lee
answered, with a laugh. "Thank you for your thoughtfulness in
remembering us."

"I'll judge how sincere you are by the amount of turkey you eat," she
said. "Dinner will be about one o'clock."

"We shall be prompt."

Lee hung up the receiver, then glanced at his watch. It was ten. He
reseated himself at his desk and endeavoured to fasten his thoughts
upon the entries in the book before him, but at last he exclaimed,
throwing down his pen: "Damned if I can or will!" and jumped up, and
went to tramping about the office, and when Dave's cat and kitten
presented themselves to be stroked, unfeelingly thrust them aside with
his boot as he tramped. And when Dave came in, about half-past eleven,
the boy found him part way into a clean white shirt, with the cat and
the kitten eying him resentfully, and received the order: "Get a move
on you; we're going to the Grahams' for dinner. See that you scrub
your face, too--and ears!" Which left Dave quite as indignant as the
cat, for he always washed his ears.

They arrived at the Graham ranch house shortly after noon, where
wreaths of holly, strings of evergreen, and red paper bells created a
Christmas atmosphere. Coming from their cold ride into these cheerful
rooms and to a warm welcome, the hearts of both man and boy glowed
with unaccustomed feeling. And throughout the dinner that followed
betimes--during which Mr. Graham's pleasantries and Louise's gay
spirits and mirth evoked in Lee a blitheness to which he long had been
a stranger and in Dave a state of joyous bliss--they luxuriated in
halcyon well-being. After the meal Louise, at her father's suggestion,
went to the piano and sang while the men were smoking their cigars.
And then followed an hour at cards, High Five, at which Mr. Graham and
Dave won the most games; and then a maid, a Mexican girl, Rosita,
brought in a bowl of nuts and raisins for the rancher and the boy who
settled themselves for a match at checkers, and Lee and Louise
strolled to a window seat at the other end of the long living room.

A delicate pink was in the girl's cheeks. Her eyes were tender under
their long lashes; a smile still lingered on her lips. It was as if
her countenance, her mind, her spirit, were suffused with the
happiness and peace of the hour, of the day.

"My poor one-armed man, how is he?" she asked. "I intended to go see
him, but the cold has been so steady that I gave it up. You said over
the telephone several days ago that he was doing as well as could be
expected."

"Quite out of danger now," Lee replied. "The doctor told him a lady
assisted at the operation and now he's full of curiosity regarding
you."

"I'll surprise him some day by just walking up to his cot and saying:
'Good morning, how's my patient?' The day I'm going to pick is the
next one you move camp: I want to see how all those tents and shacks
and everything rise up on their feet and travel."

"You shall," he stated, with a laugh. "I'll notify you of the date.
About New Year's Day the next migration will occur. You've had your
turn at hospital work and now perhaps you wish to try your hand at
transportation. I wager you'd make a good camp manager if you took
hold of the job."

"Would you revive me a second time if I threatened to faint?" she
queried, gayly. "You and Imogene Martin gave me just the right
treatment that evening, for you kept my thoughts off the ordeal I'd
been through. Next day I was myself, as I told you when you called
up."

"I haven't seen you since that day," Lee remarked. "I was really
worried that afternoon, you know." And an echo of the anxiety he had
suffered sounded in his voice.

Her face showed that she noted it, and it softened.

"And you have so many anxieties, too," said she.

He stirred, then withdrew his gaze from her and directed it out a
window. The emotion he had experienced that afternoon when she sat
before his fire, when she sat there so frank and so simple-hearted,
was rising in his breast again. The breath trembled a little upon his
lips. But after a time he felt himself grow calmer.

"I have anxieties, yes," he said, "but so, I suppose, has every man
and woman, of his or her own kind and degree. And they aren't the
important thing, after all. What has happened in the past, not what
may occur in the future, is what really matters. One can't change the
past, what's done; especially by one's own act. And if the act was a
serious mistake. That's fatal! I see now that failure to accomplish
what one sets out to do, as for instance in the building of my canal,
may not be ruinous to a man. A man may fail and be quite as able a man
as ever, as those who succeed; for human beings can do only so much
and no more. Nothing that he has done or not done would alter the
result. And he need not take the failure greatly to heart. But
voluntary and heedless acts of folly, precipitate and unconsidered
leaps in the dark, these indeed are ruinous. Oh, yes, they do the
business. They become balls and chains. Leave him no choice or action.
If it were only so simple as the game of checkers your father and Dave
are playing! When one game is over, they can start another. But
there's only one game to life."

"But it is a long one, and changes," Louise said.

She glanced at him. He intended that his words should be taken, she
perceived, in a general sense. But the mind always seeks the specific:
hers instinctively seized on the particular thorn that had prompted
his utterance. Of Ruth Gardner's extraordinary and inexplicable
behaviour she had become informed, like everyone else; it at first
amazed, then shocked, and finally outraged her sense of decency. It
repelled her--but, then, her early attempts at friendship with the
other had never advanced. The girl had always been absorbed in her own
doings, immersed in pleasure or in plans for pleasure, concerned
entirely with the friends she had, and, unlike Imogene, received
Louise's calls and approaches at cordiality with an indifference that
withered all feeling. With the passing of time Louise had considered
Lee's course in relation to the girl as a cause for wonder. The
engineer was singularly patient, or incredibly obtuse, or marvellously
in love. Whichever it was, her heart stirred with pity. He deserved
better, he deserved the best. As for Ruth Gardner, she could now only
think of her with a hot resentment that set her lips quivering; and
she was moved at moments by a profound desire to express her sympathy
to him and to give that warm encouragement his spirit on occasion must
need. But she must refrain.

At his speech her conclusions, but not her feelings, underwent a sharp
revision. The revelation startled her. He had not been obtuse. He no
longer was marvellously in love with Ruth Gardner, nor in love with
her at all. Relief followed surprise in her mind, the relief that
comes at a fear unrealized, a disaster avoided. Disaster had been
precisely what she had sensed if not thought, since a union of two
persons whose natures were as utterly different, as essentially
opposed, as Lee's and Ruth's would inevitably lead to disillusionment,
antagonism, sorrow, havoc. That his eyes at last were open was a
blessing.

"What are you thinking of?" he asked, all at once.

She found his eyes full upon her.

"Of what you had said," she responded. "And at this minute I'm
speculating on whether anything--one's decisions, or acts, or
sentiments--are ever quite conclusive or final. Or fatal, too, as you
said. We might possibly except murder and suicide." She smiled as she
mentioned this reservation.

Lee shifted his position with a trace of impatience.

"I'm not a pessimist," he exclaimed.

"No, you're too active to be. Pessimism is at bottom a kind of mental
indolence, I'd say--an unpleasant kind."

"Some matters are not solved by action," said he. "That is, when they
are out of one's hands and in another's."

Her attention was caught by those words, and she hung on them for a
little. They distressed her; they caused her to understand the forced
immobility of his face as he spoke, and wish that he would give way to
his feeling. The phrase "out of one's hands and in another's" referred
undoubtedly to Ruth Gardner. She did not trust herself to speak.

"What became of all those flowers that were in your garden last
summer?" he asked, suddenly. "Do you dig up the roots, or cover them,
or let them freeze? You have no idea how many times these cold days
the recollection of that hour with you last summer when we walked
among them recurs to me. It seems ages ago, however. That was one of
the happy days, Louise."

A delicate tint of pink stole into her face. For to her also the day
had been one of happiness, as clear-cut in her memory as a cameo. The
thought that it and she had been dwelling in his mind produced in her
breast an unaccountable agitation. The coral pink in her cheeks
deepened to a flush; she lowered her eye-lashes and averted her look.

"The flowers are banked with straw, the perennials," she said, to
prevent a silence.

"I shall come and see them when they're blooming again," he stated.
"The more I recall them, the more beautiful it seems they were--yes,
and the orchard, too, and the grassy canals, and the sunshine that
day. And you in the picture--the centre of the picture, Louise. The
impressions one retains that stand out vividly in the mind are few:
that is one of the number for me. But perhaps not for you."

"Oh, for me also," she exclaimed.

Bryant stared at her round forearms and hands lying on her lap, but
without observing them. He had marked the quick sincerity of her
response. It affected him as would her soft hand-clasp. He began to
glance restlessly about the room.

The dusk of the early winter night was at hand. It had thickened in
the corners and over where Mr. Graham and Dave were meditating their
game in silence. The flames crackling in the fireplace intensified the
forming shadows. Lee recognized that it was time to be going.
Nevertheless, he continued to linger for a while, with his eyes
sometimes resting on his companion in enjoyment of her face, engaged
in thought, experiencing a contentment in merely being in her
presence.

"This will be another of those days," he at length remarked, in a
musing tone.

His words aroused her from her own reflections.

"One for winter as well as for summer," she said, raising her look.
"Did I seem to be dreaming when you spoke? I was doing scarcely that;
my mind was lulled; the quiet--the twilight--Christmas Day--they bring
a soothing mood."

"Something that in a world of money, money can't buy," Lee said. He
appeared about to make a further remark, but failed to do so. His
thoughts, however, had gone off somewhere, Louise observed. Then he
inquired in a matter-of-fact way: "When will you ride up to camp
again?"

"Not until it grows warmer. Twelve miles or more is rather too far for
a canter on a sharp day."

He cast his eyes about at the strings of evergreen and the suspended
red bells and holly wreaths.

"I'll run down again, if I may, before the holidays are over," said
he. "If only for another look at those things. They give a fellow a
pull--out of the ditch, so to speak." And he rose.

"Come, by all means," Louise replied, with a nod.




CHAPTER XXII


A week of twenty-below-zero weather opened the month of January and
halted work on the mesa. At that time four miles of canal remained to
be dug. Bryant and Pat Carrigan sat by the stove in Lee's shack and
waited, as the whole camp waited, for the thermometer to rise. On one
of these mornings, when Dave had gone across the street to the
engineers' building, Lee informed the contractor that company funds
were not far from exhausted and related his talk with Gretzinger
before the latter's departure for New York.

"So he would squeeze you out," Pat remarked. "What you might expect
from him, nothing more! I've had the notion for some time that your
cash was getting low, from the way the money has gone."

"I've spent five thousand on engineering, medical, and general
accounts," Lee stated, "twenty thousand on concrete work, and paid you
forty thousand. I've fifteen thousand left from the sale of bonds and
a personal loan I obtained from McDonnell. That will pay for about two
weeks' work. And I think we've made every dollar go as far as it would
under the circumstances."

"My word for that."

"It's this little trick of Menocal's that's burning up good coin.
Sixty thousand would have built the project ordinarily; my estimates
were correct enough. But having to do the job in this infernal weather
is what's raising the cost forty thousand more. I feel like entering
in the ledger 'To account of frost--$40,000.00.' Like that." Lee
scribbled the line on a sheet of paper and handed it to Pat. "But
there's one thing sure, I'll sink the last cent I have in the ground
before I quit and let those Eastern pirates get their claws into me.
I'll have you cut down your force if necessary and string the last
dollar and last day's work out till my three months' grace is up."

"Might try McDonnell for another loan," Carrigan suggested.

"I hate doing that worse than anything I know. He, not the bank, let
me have that twenty thousand on my unsecured note. I had nothing to
offer but my stock in this company, and until the project's finished
that's no better than so much blank paper. Loaned it to me because of
my nerve, he said. And at the time I told him it would be enough money
to carry me through, which I believed. Now to go back to him
again----" Lee stopped, with an expression of deep chagrin upon his
face.

Pat tapped the dottle from his pipe and refilled the bowl. He glanced
once or twice at the engineer during the act.

"You can make a better showing now than before," said he. "Four miles
more and you'll be to the good. One of the excitements of construction
enterprises, and of irrigation projects in particular, I've observed,
is the financing. The more often a man can go and pull his backers'
legs for cash, the better financier he is. It seems to be largely a
matter of keeping at them, talking them to death, wearing them out,
until they weaken and hand over the money. More than one railroad was
built that way. Try it on McDonnell."

"You come with me."

"No, thank you," said Pat, with vigour.

"I thought you wouldn't," said Lee.

He took Carrigan's suggestion, however, and went down through the
bitter cold to see the banker. But the visit was fruitless. The bank
could not make the loan, and money being tight because of first of the
year settlements, McDonnell was not in shape to make it personally,
nor would be in time to render any assistance. He was perfectly
willing, he said, to gamble another twenty thousand on Bryant's
ability to win through, but he did not have the cash. Then he went on
to say that Imogene had been suffering from a slight cold, and that
Ruth Gardner was visiting at present with other friends in Kennard.

Lee had had a telephone call from each of them the morning after
Christmas, thanking him for his gift, and later a letter from Imogene
again expressing her appreciation, with a line that a change in Mrs.
McDonnell's plans had prevented having him with them on Christmas.

Nothing from either since. He now asked the banker to convey to
Imogene his wishes for a quick recovery, then set out for camp.
Ruth--he did not even know where in town to look for Ruth, had he been
so inclined. Engaged! The thing would have been amusing if it was not
so horrible.

"No luck," he said to Pat, briefly, when in his shack warming his
chilled body at the fire. "Your system may work in summer, but all
the money is froze up at this time of year, like everything else."

At the end of the week the winter's frigid grip on the earth relaxed
and a period of mild, almost balmy days followed. Under the noon-day
sun the top ground even softened a little. The camps awoke, the rested
men and horses fell upon their task with new spirit, and excavation
went ahead steadily. If there had been a full force, as Carrigan
pointed out, he could have moved at the rate of a mile in six days
instead of in eight. Still the canal was being built, yard by yard,
rod by rod, until by the middle of January another mile of the total
was finished. The two camps were now easily within sight of each
other, the larger in the south, the smaller in the north, and but
three miles apart across the sagebrush. Moreover, the last stones of
the dam had been laid; it stood completed; and the men who had been
engaged there moved down to add their strength to the north camp.

One day toward noon Lee entered his office and to his amazement found
Ruth seated there, glancing over an old magazine and toasting her feet
at the stove. The furs he had given her reposed on his desk, where she
had laid them aside. At his entrance she sprang up, uttered a
delighted exclamation, and rushing forward clasped her arms about his
neck and kissed him.

"Lee, how good it seems to see you!" she said. "After so long! And I
can't thank you enough for those darling furs! I've thought of you so
much, working up here in the cold and alone with just men. My, your
face is like ice! Come to the fire. Poor thing, you look so thin and
tired! I hope that soon you'll be able to rest; I'll make it a point
to see that you do take a long vacation and rest, for you need it."
She concluded with a hug and another kiss.

"Go easy with my ears, Ruth," he said, disengaging her arms. "They
were nipped the other night and are still tender. How did you get
here? I thought you were in Kennard."

He led her back to her seat and began to remove his cap and long
sheep-lined overcoat, saying in an undertone that the weather was
really too warm for the things. Afterward he posted himself by the
stove near her, where he stuffed his pipe with tobacco and began to
smoke, while his eyes considered her face.

"Imo and I returned to Sarita Creek yesterday," she remarked, with an
air of satisfaction. "It was good to be back, too. There has been so
much going on at Kennard that I felt quite worn out; one becomes weary
of too much buzzing around. I don't want any more of it for some time.
And I missed you dreadfully, Lee!" She flashed up a smile at him,
caught his hand for an instant, and gave it a squeeze. A thin stream
of smoke issued from one corner of Bryant's mouth at the action. "The
people were proving somewhat tiresome also. So as the weather had
moderated Imogene and I decided to return to our cabins."

"Has she recovered from her cold?" Lee inquired, raising his look to
the ceiling.

"Oh, yes; entirely. And we're quite comfortable. We had even thought
of having our ponies brought from the stable at Bartolo, so that we
could ride if it grew still milder."

"Risky."

"Well, you're probably right." She paused and scrutinized her toes to
see that they were not scorching. "Charlie brought Imo and me here on
his way home; you can take us back to our cabins when we're ready to
go."

"Imo here?" Bryant's eyebrows lifted.

"Over in the shack Dave called 'the hospital.' Dave was here when we
came and Imo asked him to take her to the place; she had heard
something of an injured man from Louise Graham. Did Louise really help
during an operation?" Lee nodded. "Well, she's odd in many ways. Must
be--what shall I say?--a little thick-skinned not to mind blood and
all the rest of it. And she doesn't go about much; not at all with the
real crowd at Kennard, only with a slow one when she does go. With her
father well off, I'd think she would want to be doing something worth
while. Charlie's still mad for her, but Gretzie thought after he met
her at our cabins that she was too self-conceited. When he asked her
if the men of New York, compared with Western men, didn't impress her
with superiority and smartness of dress, she said, 'Not those of my
acquaintance; they don't try to impress one; it isn't done in their
circle, you know. That's one of the differences in manners, I suppose,
that distinguishes Fifth Avenue from Broadway.' Gretzie was furious.
He had been speaking of Broadway shows and restaurants and things at
the time. He declared later that a little attention had turned her
head, and that what she had said was all rot. I don't care for her,
either. But let us talk of ourselves, Lee."

"Yes, that's more interesting," he remarked, with an accent of irony
that escaped her.

He was curious to learn what this talk was leading to. His curiosity
outweighed the irritation he felt at her calm ignoring of the past
weeks, at her complacent assumption of his love, at the kiss and the
caress she had bestowed, indeed, at her very presence in the room.

"Tell me everything about your work and about yourself," she said,
folding her hands and gazing up at him. "I'm so impatient to hear."

"Nothing worth relating has occurred," he replied.

"You've been well?"

"Oh, quite. This is a regular health resort."

"And you're not working too hard?"

"For a whole week I scarcely stirred from the stove," said he.

"I'm so glad. You had earned a rest. You don't seem worried about
anything, either."

"Worried?" His intonation was that of surprise. Then he added, as if
by after-thought, "Oh, no."

"How relieved I am! I feared you might be worrying your head off about
difficulties--cold weather, the time limit set, perhaps money matters.
I gained the impression somewhere that you might run short before you
finished; I can't just say where I got it. From Imo, perhaps. Nothing
definite, you know. But it's so nice to know that you're no longer
anxious. That means you're sure you'll build the ditch. How much more
is there to do?"

"You can see the north camp out of that window."

Ruth rose and went to the window indicated, where she stood surveying
the men and teams at work beyond the camp and the stretch of
sagebrush extending to the white specks of tents in the distance.

"That's all that's left to do, Lee?"

"That's all. Three miles."

"Charlie Menocal hasn't said anything about it lately."

"Knowing Charlie, I'm amazed," he commented.

Ruth resumed her seat and proceeded to toast her toes anew. Her
glances from time to time were directed at Lee's countenance somewhat
speculatively. Several times she smoothed her dress with slow
attention. Lee continued his deliberate smoking.

"Well, it's a great comfort to know that you're well and that
everything is proceeding so brightly," she stated, at length. "You
must take time to run down and see me, now that I'm back. I'm not
going to be satisfied with anything less than almost every evening
with you. Bring along one of those nice engineer boys for Imogene
while we talk."

Lee gave a shake of his head.

"Don't count on me," he said. "We're doing night work as well as day.
We're near the end. Have to push the job. Little time to spare." He
jerked the phrases forth shortly, one after another.

"Do try to come once in a while, though," she responded, gazing about
the room in a way that gave her speech a perfunctory character. That,
at any rate, was the impression made upon Lee; and he continued to
puzzle his brain as to what underlay it all--what motive, what object.
At the same time he was sickened by the suave interest she pretended,
by her shallow insincerity. "I've wondered if I could be of any help
here to you," she went on. But a sharp movement on his part caused
her to say, "Still, I know a man doesn't like a girl messing up his
work. That's one reason I've been careful not to propose it before, or
even to make the demands on your time that some girls would have made.
I'll be glad when the project is out of the way; then we can begin to
plan for ourselves." She cast her eyes upward at space. "There are
lots of things to decide--where to live, and so on. You come soon and
we'll set some of them down on paper for consideration."

Lee could not escape that feeling of perfunctoriness in her twitter of
talk. It went no further than that, however; he had no chagrin or
repugnance or anger at the thin duplicity, not even at her complacent
confidence in his stupidity and infatuation. For to count on his being
blind to the past and deluded by her words, she could only believe him
both stupid and infatuated. He was quite calm. His actual state of
mind was, more than anything else, one of detachment. He imagined that
he had come to a point where she was incapable of arousing in him any
kind of sentiment or passion.

Presently she took up her furs and walked humming about the office as
she adjusted them.

"I'd like to stay all day, but must be going," she said. "Imo and I
were wondering, by the way, if you could send us a man with some
tar-paper to line our cabins."

"Of course. I'll send him after dinner. And he can chop you some wood
and bring your water."

She stood for a little examining a blue-print tacked on the wall.

"That's like the one Mr. Gretzinger sometimes carries," she remarked.
"I suppose he'll be returning one of these days. Not that it matters;
he was tiresome at times, like Charlie Menocal." She studied the lines
of the map attentively. "He appeared anxious to get to New York. Said
something about a sweetheart there. You'll be glad if he doesn't come
back to bother you again, won't you, Lee dear?" She swung about,
laughing.

"Oh, he'll show up."

"I wasn't sure; he said he thought not."

Lee emptied and put away his pipe.

"He'll come," was his assured reply.

"Then he must have been 'kidding' me."

Her thoughtful air returned. She picked a raveling from her sleeve,
and stroked her fur, and inspected the tips of her gloves, and untied
and retied the strings of her cap--all with an inscrutable face. Then
suddenly her mind appeared to be made up.

"Well, dear, run and bring your car and we'll pick up Imogene," she
said, giving him a quick pat on the cheek.

Lee experienced an inward and involuntary shrinking at that touch. He
no more could have returned the caress than he could have risen off
the ground into the air, like those floating figures depicted in
sacred paintings. After all, she was quite capable of stirring a
sentiment in his heart--a sentiment of aversion.

"Go join Imo," he replied. "One of the boys will bring the car to the
hospital and take you home. Impossible for me to drive you there
to-day."

That was it--impossible, literally impossible, for his whole being was
in revolt. The threshold of the door might have been a dead-line; he
was unable to cross it, at any rate. With a stony aspect he watched
her depart and wave a hand back at him from a distance and at last
disappear. Then he closed the door and leaned his head against it,
with his features drawn in an expression of pain and desperation. His
position was diabolical. She meant to hold him to his word; she
believed he loved her; and, anyway, she had him fast in a coil. Yes,
she had him fast. And he did not love her, not at all. On the
contrary, he detested her--detested her with all his heart, almost to
hatred, utterly.




CHAPTER XXIII


"Will you be so kind as to come here?" Mr. Menocal inquired of Bryant.

It was an afternoon in late January, and the banker, bundled in a
great overcoat and numerous rugs, had reined his team to a halt at the
spot where he found the engineer. The air was cutting. Steam in sharp
jets came from the nostrils of his pair of bays, as from those of the
horses straining at the plows and scrapers in the stretch of partially
excavated canal near by.

Lee went forward to the buggy, slapping his gloved hands together to
quicken their circulation.

"What do you want of me, Mr. Menocal?" he asked. "You're picking a
frosty day to look at the scenery."

"Well, there's a matter that's been troubling my mind for some time
and I decided to let it go no longer. We have our differences, Mr.
Bryant, but I wouldn't wish you to believe me responsible for a number
of annoyances to which you've been put. I am a gentleman; I fight
fair. For instance, I was quite within my rights in suggesting those
men take homesteads down yonder along the base of the mountains,
though I was wrong in my guess. Also, in taking advantage of the law
under which you were limited by the Land and Water Board, I wasn't
stepping out of bounds. But I've learned that some time ago a man
introduced whisky into camp against your rules, and I wish to tell
you that I knew nothing of it at the time and would countenance no
sort of disgraceful act like that."

"I judged that you wouldn't," said Lee.

"Then again last summer someone killed your dog, I understand. That
was a bad deed. I am fond of dogs, and had I been able to learn who
did it I should have informed you so that you could have had Winship
arrest him. Since that time, too, there have been other things, many
of them--men cutting your telephone wire, removing your survey stakes,
and the like. All making you angry. Well, I was angry when I heard
that those things were being done. Resorting to questionable and
criminal tactics against any man is the worst possible course a person
can follow. I do not do it in your case; I will prevent any one else
from doing it if I can. You have the right to work undisturbed."

"I never connected you with these underhanded acts," the engineer
stated.

"Thank you, Mr. Bryant. It pleases me to hear you say that. I should
like to see you lose your water right, of course; it would mean much
money in my pocket; but I'll not do contemptible things or crooked
things to get possession of it."

Lee glanced at the speaker's face. It was sincere, earnest, and now
relieved. He felt an increase of respect for the man, opponent though
he was. Menocal appeared, to be sure, unable to comprehend the ethics
involved in seeking to thwart Bryant, but he was scrupulous and
honourable within his understanding. Far more so than Gretzinger, for
instance. Or Charlie Menocal. The thought of the banker's son pulled
Bryant up. Should he mention his conviction that Charlie was the
instigator of the mischief discussed? As he was still in doubt when
his visitor turned the subject, he let it rest.

"The way you're going ahead with your canal, I'm afraid that my chance
of retaining the water is poor, very poor," Menocal said, with a
lugubrious sigh. He drew his fat chin deeper into his coat collar,
tugged at the ice on his big white moustache, and ran his eyes up and
down the long line of moving teams. "And it will cost me a lot of
money." Again the sigh. "I didn't think you could do it; I didn't
think any man in the world could do it. In cold weather, in ninety
days! I said it was impossible. Charlie said it was impossible.
Everyone said it was impossible."

"Everyone except my contractor and me," Lee interjected, smiling a
tight smile.

The other nodded. "Except you, yes. And you're showing us that after
all it's not impossible. I shall never say again that anything is
impossible. If I ever have a big ditch to build, I shall insist, Mr.
Bryant, that you take charge. Then I would say, 'I should like to have
it built so and so, and by such a time,' and sit down at my desk and
think no more of it, knowing it would be built."

Bryant laughed softly. He could not help doing so. That naive avowal
from the one whom he considered his chief enemy tickled his fancy. And
presently Menocal, catching the humour of it, himself began to smile.

"I shouldn't be surprised if we have had a misconception of each
other," Lee stated.

"Ah, _cielos!_ That is nothing less than the truth. What a pity, too,
my young friend, that we could not have found it out earlier. Our
affair, perhaps--we might have reached a satisfactory agreement. This
winter work, it is costing you something."

"A good many extra thousand."

"And, alas, costing me even more! But it is too late now." He made a
tragic gesture. "It has gone too far. Within two or three weeks it
will be settled one way or the other. For you if the weather remains
good; for me if the weather becomes stormy." He again studied the
moving horses along the canal. "For me then--perhaps. You might not
allow even a great storm to stop you, in some way. This winter is
remarkable; there seem to be no storms to happen. You're very lucky."

"Yes, I am in that respect."

"Well, I've done all that I shall do in the matter. I've become quite
calm, fatalistic. There's nothing else to be." He gathered up his
reins.

"That's a good team you have," Lee remarked.

"Of the very best. I disliked to use them in this cold, but Charlie
had gone with the car to Kennard. Va! He is never at home any more. It
would be well if I made him drive a team on your ditch."

"Send him along; I'll give him a job," Lee said.

The banker shook his head.

"He would say I was crazy and he wouldn't come. He doesn't even attend
to matters that require attention. This winter he has been running too
much with idle men in town and spending money as if it took no effort
to get it, as if it could be picked off of weeds. It's very
perplexing. I am too easy with Charlie, I let him have his way too
much. I should put him in a pair of overalls for a while and say, 'You
are going out with a band of sheep; you have to work.' Several times
I've made up my mind to do that, but when the moment came I couldn't
say it. He isn't robust, he has always had the best of everything, and
he's been educated in a college."

"Cut off his allowance and take away his automobile. He would stay at
home and attend to business then," Lee offered.

"But it would shame him. He isn't a little boy any longer; he's thirty
years old. The trouble is that he isn't like me, particular and
careful; he's wild and impatient and reckless. His mother wasn't that
way, I am not that way--I don't know where he got that nature."

Menocal senior drove off and Bryant turned back to his work. The pity
of the thing was, as the banker had stated, that they had been hasty
in the beginning, that they had not sought to come to an
understanding, some arrangement. It was another mistake. To Lee his
whole past here was beginning to appear a record of oversights,
incredible misjudgements, blinded blunders, and ghastly mistakes.




CHAPTER XXIV


Ghastly mistakes! Some cynic has said the only mistake in life a man
can make is "to go broke." Bryant did not realize until afterward the
irony lurking in the penumbra of the talk with Menocal. He was broke,
unable to proceed, even while he listened to the banker's
commendation. The workmen were busy, it was true, and the horses were
pulling loaded fresnos, and plows were cutting the trench deeper; but
that was an expiring motion, a last falling gesture. Only a few
wretched dollars lay at the bottom of the money chest. A day more, and
Menocal would have won.

That evening Lee climbed in his car and drove away from camp. Carrigan
had said nothing, but he as well as Bryant knew the company's bank
account was drained; he would expect a settlement and when it was
made, discharge the crews, pull up stakes, and move his property to
Kennard. At Sarita Creek Bryant alighted.

"I wish to see Ruth," he told Imogene. "Is she away? Her cabin is dark
and I obtained no answer to my knock."

"She's gone to town."

"Well, I wanted to tell her I've failed. Work stops to-morrow. Out of
money. And less than two miles to build!"

Imogene's face became a picture of dismay.

"Oh, no, Lee! There must be some way to go on, some place to obtain
money," she cried.

"None. I've tried, but have reached the end of my rope. Only twenty
thousand more needed, or maybe twenty-five. Just enough to hammer
through during the next two weeks. But it might as well be a million.
I decided to inform Ruth at once; she might consider it important."

"She would," said she, positively.

"I haven't been to Sarita Creek before since you returned. You can
guess why."

"Yes."

"Does Ruth suspect that I've ceased to love her?" he asked, frowning.

"I think not. There was considerable talk on her part about being
bored with Kennard and how happy she would be when she was married,
but it was on the surface. She's really waiting for something I'm not
able to divine. I'm reminded when I observe her of a card-player
studying a hand before the cards begin to fall."

"Where is she to-night? With Charlie Menocal?"

"With Gretzinger."

"Gretzinger back?"

"Arrived in Kennard this morning. Two days ago Ruth received a letter
with a New York post-mark and became very animated. I'm sure she has
had none before. Then late this afternoon the man himself appeared
here, ate supper with us, and took Ruth off to a concert in town. He
said he had business in camp with you to-morrow."

"Ruth's spirits have revived and her retirement has ended," Lee
remarked, with sarcasm. "Well, don't say anything about this now to
either of them."

"Oh, I'll be long asleep when they return, and I'll not speak of it to
Ruth in the morning. She'll not rise before noon, I suspect, as it
will be one or two o'clock before they're home. Or she may stay with
one of the girls she's chummy with and come up with him to-morrow.
Probably that."

Lee made ready to go. He gave Imogene a sardonic smile.

"May the music she hears to-night strengthen her soul for the morrow's
smash," he said; and went out.

Where the trail from the cabins debouched upon the main mesa road he
slowed the car to a stop and sat for a time in thought, with the
engine humming softly and the freezing night air biting at his cheeks.
It seemed to make little difference where he went, or if he went at
all. Nothing worth while was at the end of any road. His inclination,
however, was working and at last he set out for the Graham ranch.

Since his Christmas visit he had made a number of calls there, a
rather large number, indeed, considering everything. He had schooled
his face and words on those occasions to a passivity he was far from
feeling, and had left Louise's presence each time with a greater
torment of mind. Now this was the end--of her as of everything so far
as he was concerned. To-morrow the project came down in wreckage. Then
he should go from Perro Creek, poorer in purse, poorer in spirit,
poorer in faith, sore, and bitterly disillusionized.

Louise Graham observed a shadow upon his countenance as she invited
him to a seat before the fireplace. Her father was absent and she had
been reading a book when Bryant's knock came. She had been wondering,
too, if the engineer might not choose this night to call again. How
much these calls of his now meant to her she did not dare consider.

"What's wrong, Lee?" she asked at once, anxiously. "I see something
has happened."

He moved round on the divan that he might fully face her.

"Everything so far as my affairs go," he replied. "Work stops on the
canal to-morrow. That will result, of course, in the water right
lapsing and in the ditch never being finished or used, except under
the circumstance of my handing over my interest gratis to Gretzinger
and the bondholders. If I did that even, I don't believe Gretzinger
could finish it on time, for neither Carrigan nor the men would exert
themselves for him as they have for me, and they would be sure of
their pay in any case. The trouble is, I've used up all the money and
can borrow no more. I'm through. And I can't bring myself to the point
of surrendering my interest in the company to the bondholders merely
to pull them out. They're trying to strangle me in order that they may
profit; they could put up the cash needed easily enough if they would;
but they count on my yielding. I shall not do so. And so the project
fails. Those New Yorkers will wait too long if ever they do put up the
funds; and I can do nothing myself. The uncompleted ditch will remain
simply a scar on the mesa."

"I never dreamed you were in this strait!"

"No, probably not. One always hopes to the last that somehow--by a
credulous belief in one's own letter of credit with Providence, I
presume--one will pull through. So I delayed telling you of what was
impending."

"If--perhaps father----"

"Your father? No. Above all persons, no. That's a suggestion I can't
consider for an instant."

"But what will you do?" she exclaimed, nervously.

Lee glanced at her, then compressed his lips.

"I'm going away; I couldn't stay here on the scene of this disaster.
It would be intolerable. Before long people will be describing the
unfinished project by the name of 'Bryant's Folly', or the like.
Haven't you seen old, windowless structures that were never completed,
or grass-grown railroad enbankments never ironed, or rusting mine
machinery never assembled? Men's failures, men's 'follies'."

"Lee, Lee! It never will be so!" she cried. "Nor will your project be
a failure to me who have known how you've striven and sacrificed."

Bryant looked past her and about the room, but his eyes in the end
came back to hers.

"You have always been generous in your thoughts of me," he said, in an
unsteady voice.

"No more than you deserved."

"Listen, Louise," he went on, after a pause. "This is the last time I
shall see you for a long time, possibly for all time, and it's of your
kindness I wish to speak--and of another matter. Of course, I
shouldn't be quite human if I hadn't complained a bit about this blow,
but my complaints are done now. I'll possibly do some grimacing to
myself hereafter, though. What I came to say is that wherever I go in
the future I'll always carry with me as a treasure the memory of your
goodness and of your face."

Louise's lips had parted, while the colour slowly receded from her
cheeks.

"But we shall see each other," she gasped. "We'll meet, we can keep in
touch." After a silence there came in a whisper, "Friends should."

Bryant began to tremble. He turned away from her in order to gaze into
the fire. Her low utterance had wrung the chords of his heart; he
dared not allow his eyes to continue to dwell upon her face.

"What good in that?" he asked. Then he gave a passionate shake of his
head. "The risk for me is too great. I shall seek an engineering
billet altogether out of the country, in South America, in Asia,
wherever one is open. A job without responsibility, preferably. No,
no; I can't remain and play with fire--any longer."

An intense stillness rested in the room after these words. He doubted
if Louise even breathed.

"Would it be that?" she asked, at last.

"Of course. Haven't you seen?"

"I--I----" Her voice failed her.

"I could no more help loving you, Louise, after I came to know you,
than can the earth its blooming under a summer sun. The thing was
inevitable." He was speaking now in a slow, fixed attempt at
restraint. "And this love coming when it did, after I was betrothed to
Ruth Gardner, is the capping madness of the whole nightmarish
situation in which I find myself. 'Nightmarish' isn't an exaggeration,
honestly. By all the empty, senseless conventions I ought to seal my
lips on my love and to go dumbly away, because I'm engaged to Ruth
Gardner." He turned abruptly to her. "Do you think I should?"

Her hands were locked together in a clasp that expelled the blood and
left them white. Her regard had the intentness of a stare.

"If you love me, if you're going away--" She suddenly became agitated.
"Oh, I am unhappy!" And with a quick movement she bent her head aside.

"Louise, forgive me for causing this distress," he exclaimed.

Without looking about she put out a hand, touched and pressed his. The
unexpected act filled Bryant with amazement. He sat gazing stupidly at
the hand until she withdrew it. Then he found an explanation.

"You feel compassion for me," he said. "You would." A sound, low,
inarticulate, reached him. "It's your kind nature to make some return
for my love even if it's not love you can give. Or ought to give! I'm
expecting nothing, can expect nothing. That is out of the question. If
I were entirely calm and rational, I should doubtless be asking myself
why I should speak of my passion instead of trying to tear it out of
my heart. But, of course, being in love I'm neither the one nor the
other. The only explanation for the impulse to pour out a confession
like this is overcharged nerves. Or, after all, is it just unconscious
egotism?" His composure had slipped off and his tone had grown savage.

"Don't, don't, Lee! Don't cut at yourself!"

"What was it I had started to say? Oh, yes. I had said I felt no
compunction in brushing aside the usual conventions of duty as
proscribed for an engaged man. Cobwebs in my case! Why pretend lies?
No honour is involved that I can discover. I don't love Ruth, and I
think she's incapable of loving me or any one else. She never felt
half the affection I did for her, and mine withered quickly, God
knows! A dash of passion on my part, and lonesomeness and the belief I
should have wealth on her side--there's the salad."

Louise leaned forward a little breathlessly.

"And if she believes you're ruined?" she asked.

"She'll hold me if she thinks she can't do better," Lee responded,
bitterly. "I at least beat homesteading."

"Lee!"

Louise had risen. The pallor of her face startled him. Her hands were
fast clenched.

"What is it?" he asked, fearfully.

"I can bear this. To have you love me--love me and go away! It will
break my heart. To stay here alone!"

The words struck his brain as if they were cast in a fierce glare of
light. The suddenness of the knowledge they gave, the revelation they
made, left him speechless. Louise loved him in return. The first
effect upon his mind was to produce a blank incredulity; he stared at
her as if to ascertain whether or not this was in truth she; for
though he well knew he possessed her friendship, he had never
conceived so fantastic a possibility as that of winning her love. Then
a swift exaltation succeeded. He swam in a kind of spiritual ether.

"Louise, Louise, my dear beloved!" he murmured.

He caught her hand, pressed it. She glanced at him without replying,
looked away, back again. Her bosom rose and fell with a slow and
tremulous movement, as though stirring with deep, soundless sighs. A
little smile hovered on her lips, tender, rapturous.

But at length she withdrew her hand, while the soft gladness passed
from her face.

"It cannot be; you must go, Lee," she said.

Bryant remembered--and felt the ice forming about his heart. He
shivered slightly. The full cruelty of the situation was reached. Ruth
Gardner not only held him, but he held her as well by a thread to
which she could cling for safety against the blandishments of
scoundrels, and her own desires, and the dark uncertainty of the
future. And much as he loved Louise Graham, he could not snap that
thread; much as he detested Ruth, he lacked the flintiness of heart to
let her slip into the abyss. Nor would Louise have it otherwise.

She was seeking his eyes, questioning them.

"Well, this hour is worth it all to me," he said, calmly. "All of the
unhappiness of the past, and all the loneliness of the future! I am
poor now; in that fact lies what hope I have."

A gentle inclination of her head answered him.

"I am happy to-night, anyway," said she.

"The only thing for me to do is to remain away from you," he answered.
"Heaven knows I shall be miserable enough then, but I should grow
desperate if I were near."

"I know. We mustn't see each other, Lee dear."

He walked to where his storm coat and cap lay on a chair by the door.
In silence he drew on and buttoned the former. She had accompanied
him to the spot and watched with moisture on her lashes his
preparation for departure. His eyes were lowered while his fingers
were engaged with the buttons.

"You should understand about this," he said, grimly. "That man
Gretzinger is after her. She has no money, no training to earn money,
is crazy for pleasure and attention and clothes. I ought in all
decency to break our engagement. She has given me grounds enough. But
it's keeping her straight. If I broke it"--his hand dropped to his
side and he stood for a moment quite still--"he drags her under." His
gaze rose to hers.

"I guessed it long ago," she said, in a choked voice. "And loved you
for it." Next instant she leaned forward, took his temples between her
hands, and lightly touched his brow with her lips. "Go, go!" she
exclaimed, with an accent of despair.

She herself turned and went quickly out of the room.




CHAPTER XXV


Bryant had asked Carrigan to come to the office at two o'clock,
stating that the company was insolvent and but enough money remained
to square accounts with the contractor. Pat had cast a shrewd glance
at Lee and nodded. This was during the morning. Afterward the engineer
had gone for a visit to the dam, the drops, and the canal line, a last
view of the project as a whole; and the ride was pursued in that
peculiar melancholy of spirit which appertains to mortuary events. To
him, indeed, the ride marked a burial, a burial of high hopes and
ambition, and of his youth, with the partially excavated canal
providing their pit and the concrete work standing as a headstone.

He came back to camp somewhat late for his appointment and found Pat
waiting in the office, but not alone. Gretzinger stood, back to the
stove, smoking a Turkish cigarette.

"Well, Bryant, I've returned to discuss our little business
transaction," he greeted. "Judged this to be about the right time.
How's the exchequer?"

"Little in it," said Lee, hanging his coat and cap on a hook. "But I
made sure it was locked before leaving here; you might come any
moment."

"Oh, I don't waste time on an empty box," was the light answer. "Mind
if Carrigan hears what we say? Don't, eh? Neither do I. He knows, or
ought to know, you're through. And besides, I'll want to discuss
construction matters with him when you and I are done."

"Perhaps Bryant can yet secure a loan somewhere," the contractor
remarked, mildly.

"From Menocal, possibly," Gretzinger suggested, cocking his eyebrows
at Carrigan with mock enthusiasm. "If Bryant could have secured a
loan, he would have had it in his pocket before this. I made inquiry
of McDonnell when I reached Kennard concerning the company's cash
account and discovered that it looked awful sick. No, he can't get
money for the company except through me."

"I see," said Pat.

Gretzinger turned to Bryant.

"Now, Lee, let's get down to brass tacks. You're played out as manager
and engineer-in-chief, so it's time for you to step out and give the
men who are able a chance to complete the work. I made you one offer;
I'm prepared to-day to make even a better one. The bondholders went
thoroughly into the subject with me of what they could afford to pay
you for your stock and a decision was finally reached to give you ten
thousand dollars for your interest in the company. Considering
everything, that's exceedingly liberal. I'm authorized to draw a check
for that amount to your order when you've assigned the shares."

"Not enough," Lee replied. He sat down at his desk, lifted his feet to
a window ledge, and held a match to his pipe.

"That's the limit."

"It's not enough; I need more."

"What you need and what you'll take are two different things," the
other stated, sarcastically.

"Go higher," Lee said, with his gaze upon the window.

"Not a cent!"

"I owe McDonnell twenty thousand that has gone into the canal. I've
put in my ranch, and land I traded for it, and months of work and
organization--value twenty thousand; and I figure my present control
of things worth twenty thousand more. But let us say fifty thousand.
I'll sell for fifty thousand; that gives you my stock at fifty cents
on the dollar. Exceedingly liberal, I call it."

The look the other directed at him was heavy with contempt.

"Ten thousand is all--and make up your mind to that," said he. Then he
faced round toward Carrigan, whom he addressed. "I want you to
increase the force to double its strength at once, so that the work--"

"What are you paying a yard for moving dirt?"

"The same as before."

"Not to me," Pat responded, complacently.

"What do you mean?" Gretzinger demanded, angrily.

"It's not enough."

"Not enough! You seem to imagine your contract doesn't bind you."

Pat slowly uncrossed his knees and stared at the speaker with a
countenance of bewilderment.

"Now what in the world is the man talking about! Contract? The only
contract I had with Bryant was an oral agreement to build the dam and
move dirt at a certain day rate per man and per team, terminable at
his option. Oh, you mean the first contract to construct the ditch in
a year! We tore that up after he got notice from the Land and Water
Board."

"Well, we'll continue the oral arrangement."

"Not any more," said Pat.

Gretzinger inspected the coal of his cigarette, replaced the latter
between his lips, and glanced at Bryant. But the engineer was
maintaining his consideration of objects on the outside of the window.

"So you're trying to hold me up," was Gretzinger's remark.

"You're slicing the fat off Bryant, and therefore I'll trim a bit off
you," Carrigan replied. "You're not the only one who can work a knife.
Once I used to sit back and let others keep all the easy money, but I
don't any more, not any more." With considerable relish he rolled the
words upon his tongue and nodded at Gretzinger.

The latter scowled.

"How much do you want?" he demanded.

Pat spat, then remained pursing his lips while he engaged in
calculation. Once he shook his head and muttered, "Not enough," and
again after a time repeated the words. The man by the stove glared at
the seated contractor during the prolonged period of study as if he
hoped his look would consume him.

"How much?" he questioned a second time, impatiently.

Pat looked up at Gretzinger from under his bushy eyebrows with a
steely glint showing. The lines of his weather-beaten face had
hardened.

"I don't like you," he stated. "I don't like you at all. When I work
for people I don't like, it costs them money. I like you less and less
all the time. If I go ahead and finish the ditch, I'll be liking you
so little that I'll be hating myself. And when I don't like any one
that much, I don't do it cheap. The job will cost you one hundred
thousand dollars."

"You--you----" Gretzinger choked.

"Cash down before I move a wheel," Pat added, calmly.

The other was white with rage. He cast his cigarette upon the floor
and ground it under his heel. His lips worked and twisted in a vicious
snarl. Carrigan observed him unmoved; and Bryant had turned his head
about to see.

"You grafters, you infernal thieves, you pair of rotten crooks!" he
shouted, shooting murderous glances from one to the other. "You've
'framed' me! Arranged it between you. Been waiting for me to come back
so you could spring your game! If there's any law in this state, I'll
have you both where you belong for deliberately wrecking this
company--in a cell!"

His raving outburst continued for a while in this strain. His voice
had the high and squealing pitch of a wild pig caught fast by a foot;
on his pink, fleshy face, now distended with anger, was a look, too,
of porcine hate and fury. The cynical and patronizing manner he
usually affected had dropped off, leaving revealed his actual coarse,
spiteful, greedy, craven spirit--a creature of infinite meanness. At
length, however, Gretzinger's torrent of abuse diminished until it
ended in a last muddy dripping of threats and curses. With an effort
he strove to pull himself together and assume a composure his eyes
belied, while he lighted another of his offensive Turkish cigarettes.

After a time he said shortly:

"You can't bluff me. When you fellows get down to my figures, then
we'll do business."

"Look out! Your coat is scorching--or is it only that tobacco?" Bryant
rejoined.

Gretzinger stepped hastily aside and felt behind him, where his hand
moved about on the hot cloth fabric with searching movements. The
solicitude for his garment thus quickened seemed to effect the final
dispersion of his inward heat.

"Well, are we going to get together on an arrangement?" he questioned,
when assured his coat was uninjured.

"I stated my terms--fifty thousand," Lee said. "That or nothing."

"You won't get it."

"Then there's the alternative of the bondholders putting up money
enough to finish the work."

"That, neither."

"All right, Gretzinger," Bryant stated, rising. "You have an idea that
I'll give in----"

"Yes, I have. You'll grab this ten thousand I offer, grab it quick by
to-morrow night, which is the limit I set for it to remain open. I've
seen men before in a tight hole who swore they wouldn't take the terms
handed them, but they always did in the end, and so will you. Only a
fool wouldn't. And I fancy Carrigan won't sacrifice a good piece of
work in a dull season and pull off his men and teams."

Pat hoisted himself off his seat stiffly.

"Why don't your outfit sell instead of trying to buy?" he asked,
crossing to Lee's desk and obtaining a can of tobacco sitting there.
"I suppose they'll sell." He began to stuff his pipe, pressing the
tobacco into the bowl with a brown forefinger.

"Certainly; they would unload what they have in this rotten project so
fast that the bonds would smoke. But who in the devil would touch
them?"

"I might."

"You?" Gretzinger began to laugh. "What have you besides your outfit?
They're not taking worn-out fresnos in exchange to-day, thank you."

"And what are the three bondholders you represent worth?" Pat
inquired, in a nettled tone.

"Half a million each, or more."

Carrigan's brows rose contemptuously.

"Is that all?" he exclaimed. "Why, from the way you talked, I thought
they were real financiers! And they're only piffling tin-horns, after
all. What d'you know about that, Lee?" Pat turned to the engineer with
an amazed air.

Gretzinger's anger surged up anew.

"You never saw half a million in your life," he sneered.

"I could buy out all three of them with what I have in one trust
company in Chicago alone," was the unperturbed reply. "It's cheap
sports like you that make a real man sick. How much for the bonds? You
want to unload. Speak up; how much?"

Despite his anger, the other's brain perceived that the contractor was
in earnest.

"The amount of the face of both bonds and stock, with interest on the
former to date," he answered quickly.

"I buy only bargains," was Carrigan's dry statement.

"One hundred thousand then."

"You're still sailing way up in the clouds. The stock was a bonus,
Gretzinger; it cost your parties nothing. So it's only the bonds that
count. And the project is rotten, it may not be finished on time, be a
dead loss; your men want to get out from under; they'll jump at the
chance to sell, you say. All right. They can unload on me. Wire them
to deposit the bonds and stock in any New York bank and draw on
McDonnell for forty thousand dollars. That's what I'll give."

Gretzinger walked to the wall, where he reached down his overcoat and
put it on.

"The ditch will go to weeds first," he said.

"The offer's open until to-morrow night," said Pat.

"You bloodsuckers can't put anything over on me," was the Easterner's
departing declaration, as he opened the door. "I'm on to you,
Carrigan. You're backing Bryant and will finish the ditch. We'll just
sit tight on our bonds and stock."

Pat watched him go.

"I hate to make money for men like them," he remarked to the engineer,
"but I guess I can't help it, because I'll not let you down, Lee, for
a matter of cash payment. I'll advance what's necessary and take a
company note. Maybe you're wondering why I let you sweat all this
time? Because you needed the experience. You laid down too easy. All
the time that you were thinking the game was up, I was waiting for
you to grab my leg and begin to pull. But you never did."

"You had done too much for me already, Pat; and though I supposed you
were well-fixed I had no idea you were wealthy. The thought you might
risk twenty thousand dollars----"

"Why not? I know this project better than any banker; it's sound, it's
about completed," the old man interrupted. "All that's necessary is to
take a long breath and push hard for three weeks more. Sometimes I
think you have the making of a fair engineer, Lee, but you discourage
me dreadfully when I try to picture you as a financier. I'm afraid
you'll wind up like one of these bondholders of Gretzingers, just
piffling."

Lee went to stand at the window, so that Carrigan could not see his
face. Emotion had unmanned him. He would not have even Pat know how
strongly he was moved by this act of magnanimity.

"Well, I better be getting back to the ditch," said the contractor,
presently.




CHAPTER XXVI


A week later the long-belated big storm appeared at hand. McDonnell
telephoned Bryant one morning, a morning in February now, that the
weather forecast predicted blizzard conditions sweeping down the Rocky
Mountain region from the Northwest. A mile of excavation yet remained
to do. Lee at once sent Saurez and other Mexicans abroad in the native
settlements with offers of double wages and this drew the most
indolent back to camp again. They were flung into the night shift,
which toiled with increased vigour at news of the impending storm. For
two days and nights the desperate effort was pushed while the sky
continued clear, with the crews of both camps attacking the iron earth
and steadily forging closer.

Bryant scarcely slept during that time, or ate. Toward morning, when
the night shift went off, he would cast himself down fully dressed and
drawing the blankets to his chin sleep restlessly for two or three
hours, then again rise to drive the work. The third day came sunny and
quiet, but with heavy warmth in the air wholly strange to the season.
During the night both Lee and Pat had continually and anxiously
watched the peaks of the Ventisquero Range for portent of the change
imminent in the weather; and now on this morning they beheld about the
crests long, low-lying layers of gray cloud.

Again McDonnell telephoned, but now with particulars of the storm. It
was general in character, covering the states from the Canadian line
southward, with very low temperatures and raging furiously, destroying
wire communications and blocking railroads, and at the moment was
bearing down across Utah, Colorado, and Kansas. The entire region from
the Pacific coast to the Mississippi was in its grasp.

"Ten days is all that's left of our time," Lee said to the contractor,
with a heavy heart. "And no one can tell how long this weather spree
will last."

"It's not a mile we've got to go any more, any way. With what we'll do
to-day it will be half a mile of dirt moved in three days. That leaves
but half a mile. This storm may be played out when it reaches us." But
the worry on his face showed that he put little faith in this
possibility.

What he stated in regard to the ditch was true. The work of night and
day had eaten well into the remaining mile between the two camps. To
be sure, it had been rushed work: the sides of the ditch were gouged
and ragged, the bottom uneven and rutted, and the removed dirt was
piled anywhere along its banks. But nevertheless there was a canal,
dug on grade and to measurement, and capable of carrying water.

During the afternoon a pair of men drove two lines of waist-high
stakes to mark the survey of the short section of ground yet
untouched, doing this under Carrigan's supervision. In case snow came,
he told Lee, he wanted something he could see. "Nine hundred yards of
unbuilt ditch will be lying buried," he added, "and I don't propose
to paw up the whole mesa finding this section."

About four o'clock Bryant rejoined him.

"Still lovely," said Pat with a grin. "I've just set some plows
tearing up the scalp on another two hundred yards. If this storm will
just hang off for three or four days longer, it can come and welcome.
I'll have my fresnos stacked and waiting to go down to Kennard."

"Take a look at the northwest," said Bryant, significantly.

A smoky haze lay along the horizon.

"Aye, I see. That's her hair blowing out ahead. There will be plenty
of wind after awhile, I'm thinking. Get word to the men in camp, will
you, to make all the tents tight."

At sundown the haze in the west had thickened somewhat. The air,
however, remained warm, almost oppressive, and the sharp cold that
usually fell at night was wanting. The Ventisquero Peaks were hidden
by a mass of cloud. At seven o'clock the night crew began work, as
ordinarily; no wind was stirring and the steam that came from the
horses' nostrils was light.

"I'm taking a little time to skip down to Sarita Creek and see if
those girls are still there. If they took a notion to stick, they'd
try to do it, whether McDonnell sent after them or not. But I'll pry
them out. If the storm breaks in a hurry, get the men and teams into
camp at once. Don't take any chances, Pat." Thus spoke Bryant.

"Aye, I've seen blizzards before," was the reply.

Lee sped rapidly toward Sarita Creek, with the headlights of his car
casting their glow before him upon the dark road. The silence of the
night was broken only by the steady humming of his engine. The mesa
seemed very hushed, unstirring, unnatural.

When he reached the girls' cabins, he saw that the windows of each
were lighted. The girls were there. What incredible folly! Then his
lamps brought into view an automobile. He breathed relief. Someone had
come for them. Alighting he walked forward and knocked on Ruth's door.
When it was opened by Ruth, he discovered Gretzinger seated within.

"Oh, it's you, is it? Well, come in," Ruth said.

She wore a pink party gown, with her throat and smooth, round arms
showing through some filmy stuff that was part of the creation. Bryant
had never seen her so dressed; she looked very youthful and charming,
almost beautiful.

"There's a party at Kennard to-night," said she, before Lee could open
his mouth to make an explanation of his presence, "and Mr.
Gretzinger's taking me. He just came. Sorry you chose to-night to
call, Lee. And we're starting immediately." She reached forth and gave
Lee a pat on the cheek, at the same time smiling.

Bryant continued stony under the touch, under the smile, under the
false affection. He gazed at her and detected beneath her apparent
good spirits and loveliness a suppressed excitement. His glance went
to Gretzinger; the man was observing them with a restless, frowning
face. On the instant the truth flashed into Bryant's brain. She was
cunningly playing him off against the New Yorker, using him as a lay
figure in her despicable game, bestowing endearments to anger
Gretzinger and arouse his jealousy.

"I came to tell you a big storm is brewing," he said quickly. "You and
Imogene must plan to stay in Kennard for some time. If a heavy fall of
snow occurs, the mesa will be closed for ten days or two weeks with
the temperature very low."

"Then I'll pack my things in my suit-case so that I can remain that
long," Ruth exclaimed. "I'll stay with Mabel Seybolt. Imogene's uncle
sent up his car this morning, but I didn't imagine there was any
really bad storm coming and sent it back. I doubt if the snow amounts
to much, anyway. The weather's too warm." Nevertheless, she began to
fill a suit-case.

"I'll tell Imogene also," Lee said.

Ruth's eyes turned toward Gretzinger with an inquiring look.

"There won't be room for three of us, will there?"

"No," he answered.

Her regard still continued directed at him.

"I'm sure there won't be," she said, with conviction. "It probably
won't storm before to-morrow, in any case. I'll tell Mr. McDonnell in
the morning and he can send up his big car for her."

"Or you can take her to town yourself," Gretzinger added in an
indifferent tone.

"I can't spare the time," Lee said.

"But dearie, I'll be done packing in two minutes, while it will take
Imogene half an hour," Ruth replied. "She's too slow to wait for. And
she has one of her eternal headaches, too."

Ruth was hurriedly removing articles from her trunk to the suit-case.

"Listen, please," Lee said, addressing her. "If Imo remains she may
become snowbound, and if snowbound, freeze. I can't go, I can't
possibly go. With this storm coming, I must stay at camp. As things
are, a blizzard may put me out of business."

Ruth straightened up to confront him.

"You mean the work would stop, that you couldn't finish it on time?"

"That's just what I mean."

"Why?" Gretzinger spoke. "You have ten days left."

"Yes, and what are ten days with two feet of snow on the ground and
the mercury forty below zero?" Bryant retorted.

Gretzinger stood up, glanced at his watch, and buttoned his overcoat.
He then bent down and set to work buckling the straps of the suit-case
Ruth had closed.

"You do seem to get into every possible kind of trouble, Lee," the
girl said.

"Perhaps I do. But the point now is about Imogene. Will you take her
with you, or not?"

"Mr. McDonnell can send for her to-morrow; that will be soon enough."

"My God, you leave her! With a blizzard coming!"

"I don't think there'll be a blizzard. Or if there is, she can get
along comfortably till her uncle comes."

"Are you ready, Ruth?" Gretzinger asked, impatiently.

"Yes, as soon as I fasten my gloves. Anyway, Lee, you can take her to
Kennard if you want to. It's because you're just obstinate. Besides,
she didn't have to come up here; I told her so; I could have got along
without her--much better, probably, for she's always finding fault;
she came on her own responsibility and so can look out for herself;
and if you're so anxious for fear she'll freeze, why, take her. It
won't make any difference about your ditch that I can see, for you say
you'll very likely lose it, anyway. Now you'll have to excuse us;
we're going. Blow out the light, please, and lock the door, our hands
are full. Give the key to Imo to keep."

Two minutes later Gretzinger's car was gone with a swirl of the
headlights as it circled and with a sudden roar of its exhaust. Lee
extinguished the light and closed the cabin. To him that little house
seemed poignant with tragedy; and he knew, whatever came, his foot
would never be set in it again.

He found Imogene sitting beside her sheet-iron stove, wrapped in a
quilt and coughing.

"I heard your car come after his; I knew it was you," she greeted him.

Lee regarded her closely.

"You're sick," he said. "You ought to be in bed. Ruth stated that you
had a headache and now I discover you in a coughing fit bad enough to
take off your head. Is your throat sore?"

"A little."

"Why in the name of all that's sensible haven't you gone to your
uncle's? I begin to think you're unbalanced."

"I explained my reasons once, Lee." She coughed again, then continued,
"Ruth and I quarrelled Christmas because of actions of hers and aunt
said she must leave the house. That's why you were not asked then. But
she made it up afterward and so I came when she did, for she was
determined to live here where she could be free. I just had to come."

"And now she's leaving you in the face of the worst storm this winter,
the ingrate!" Bryant exclaimed. "To-night's work finishes her with me.
She may go to eternal damnation so far as I'm concerned. I'm done! She
refused, she would have left you here to freeze, she set your life
against her convenience! And after you had sacrificed your comfort and
undergone hardships to save her good name! There's no limit to her
selfishness and miserable hypocrisy. Our efforts and consideration
haven't restrained her a particle, and she will tread the road she
chooses irrespective of our desires or feelings. What fools we've
been! You and I, Imogene Martin, aren't going to chase a
will-o'-the-wisp any longer. We've wasted enough time on this delusion
of saving Ruth Gardner; if she's to be saved, she must save
herself--and if she will not do that, then the whole world together is
of no avail. You're never going to come here again, or have anything
to do with her, or let her have a part in your life. Nor am I. She
walks out of our book, and we draw a pen across the bottom of the
page."

Imogene had covered her face with her hands during his terrible
denunciation and was weeping softly. She knew it was true. She knew
that Ruth had gone out of her life, for such baseness as her one-time
friend had shown was not to be forgiven.

"You're right--I can't go on here longer," she sobbed. "I'm sick, I'm
really sick. I've been barely crawling about for the last two days.
And she knew it and left me! Oh, Ruth, Ruth!"

"And would have left you, storm or no storm, and whether I came or
not! In order to be alone with Gretzinger!" Her heart-breaking sobs
went on. "Don't weep, Imogene. Put her out of your mind." He gently
placed an arm about her shoulders. "Come, I will take you to Louise."

That she had been "crawling about the last two days" was apparent when
she attempted to rise. Her strength suddenly vanished, her knees gave
way. Bryant secured her coat and cap, wrapped her in blankets from the
bed, and carried her out to the car. Then he put out her lamp and
locked the door.

And that turning of the lock, Lee felt, terminated a painful chapter
of his life.




CHAPTER XXVII


As by the girls' cabins, so before the Graham house, Lee perceived a
motor car. He brought his own machine to a stop near it and cut off
his engine. At the same instant the door opened in the house, where by
the light shining through the portal he saw Louise's and Charlie
Menocal's figures. Menocal stepped forth.

"You will please go now," Louise was saying. "When you telephoned I
told you then that I shouldn't go with you, or go to the dance at
all."

Bryant had alighted and was arranging the blankets about Imogene.
Charlie's voice spoke, rather truculently:

"I told you I was coming for you, didn't I? Now see what a position
that leaves me in! People think you're coming. I promised to bring
you."

"Then you were too presumptuous," Louise said. "Now go. You're only
making a bad matter worse."

"See here, Louise----"

"You had my refusal and I've repeated it a dozen times," she
interrupted, indignantly. "Must I shut the door in your face to
silence you? And here's another car. Have some regard for my personal
feelings, sir."

Lee by now had lifted Imogene into his arms and started toward the
speakers.

"Be a good sport, Louise," Menocal pursued, in a tone intended to be
wheedling. "Run upstairs and put on a party dress while I wait for
you. You don't understand how much I want you to come along to this
dance." His words were a little thick and stumbling.

"Hush! Don't you see someone has come? You've been drinking; and
you're sickening to me."

"I don't care if someone is there! Let 'em hear, Louise. Let all the
world hear, let your father hear, let anybody hear! Because I love
you, and so you must come to the dance." Suddenly his tone changed to
an angry hiss. "You've been treating me like a cur, refusing to see me
or go with me, and not letting me come here. I came to-night! I've
stood for enough from you; you can't play me for a fool any longer.
And you're going to marry me, too."

Bryant perceived by the lamplight of the doorway that the fellow had
snatched her hand, that the two were struggling. Burdened with Imogene
as he was, Lee was helpless to enterfere. But he went hastily up the
steps toward them. Louise tugged herself free.

"Oh, you contemptible creature!" she cried, in a voice of quivering
passion. "It's only because you know father is out caring for stock
that you dare stay here to insult me." Then looking past Menocal, she
exclaimed, "Who is that?"

"I, Bryant," said Lee. "With Imogene. She's ill, she needs to be put
to bed. There was no time to ask your permission to bring her, but I
knew----"

"Of course! If this beast will stop making a scene and go!"

Charlie Menocal was pulling on his fur cap.

"So here's our swell-headed crook of an engineer butting in again,"
he sneered. "You better be hunting up your own chicken, or Gretzinger
will have her. Who y' say you got there?"

"Stand aside!"

Bryant's voice struck the other like the lash of a whip, and the
half-drunken youth instinctively fell back a pace, so that Lee could
pass with his charge into the house. But as Louise was about to follow
Menocal seized her arm.

"Girlie, you're not going to throw me down? You'll be good to me and
come----"

Louise shook off his hand, darted through the doorway, and quickly
closing the door turned the key in the lock. Then still grasping the
door-knob she leaned with her head against the panels, face white,
lips trembling, and her breast rising and falling stormily.

"Oh, Lee! For you to be forced to see and hear that!" she said, in a
tone of anguish.

"I think nothing of it; you could not avoid him."

After a moment she recovered herself and said, "Wait until I call
Rosita."

When she returned with the Mexican girl, she conducted Bryant to an
upper chamber where he placed Imogene upon a bed, pressed the latter's
hand assuringly, and then left her in charge of the other two while he
went below to telephone to her uncle. McDonnell had already set out
for Sarita Creek, his wife informed Lee. He had started about half an
hour before. Bryant went out of the house and entering his car drove
down the lane to the main road, where he stopped.

Soon far away in the south there was a flash of light, repeated at
intervals, until at length it grew into a steady, powerful glare that
threw his own machine into strong relief, that dazzled and blinded
him. Finally the other car stopped near by.

"What's the trouble, Jack?" McDonnell's voice came, addressed to his
chauffeur.

Bryant went forward to the banker, who was leaning out of the
limousine. He gave the information that neither of the girls was at
Sarita Creek and explained that Imogene was at the Graham house,
comfortable though ill.

"She's too sick to be removed and will probably need a nurse for a
time," he concluded. "I brought her here as soon as I learned her
condition. Miss Graham put her to bed."

"All right; I'll run in and see her. Much obliged to you, Bryant," was
the answer. Then in a vexed strain he went on, "What I expected to
happen has happened. Advice, pleadings, commands haven't prevented her
from following out this crazy affair. You may not believe it, but
she's as stubborn as a mule when she wants to be. My wife has been
almost distracted all winter. Well, I'll send up a doctor and a nurse
both as soon as I return to Kennard, if there's time before this
storm. Still at work?"

"Still digging. Will keep at it till the last minute."

"Supposed you would. That's the lane there, isn't it?"

Next minute the big car had passed Lee's and was moving up the roadway
between the rows of cottonwoods toward the house. But Bryant did not
at once start for camp. His mind was busy with pictures--pictures of
the two girls as he first had seen them at Perro Creek, and at their
cabins afterward, and finally to-night: Imogene, weak and racked by a
cough and huddling in a quilt beside her sheet-iron stove, and Ruth in
her own cabin, standing in the lamplight in her pink party dress with
round arms and throat showing through its filmy gauze, unconcerned and
intent upon her own ends.

At last he glanced up at the impenetrable sky. Something soft and wet
had floated against his cheek. Then he saw here and there in the
funnel of light projected by his car lamps what looked like solitary
bits of white down sinking through the radiance. Snow!




CHAPTER XXVIII


The first flakes were but the precursors of a heavy fall of snow that
almost immediately began, soundless, without wind, filling the air and
whitening the earth, and that was still continuing unabated two hours
later. It mantled the shoulders of the workmen and the withers of the
horses; it clogged the wheels of the fresnos so that dirt was moved
with ever-increasing difficulty; it veiled the flaring gasolene
torches and choked the night. Where a plow ran or a scraper scooped
earth, snow speedily obliterated the mark, and with the passing of
time both men and animals found it necessary to struggle more and more
desperately in the dirt cut against mud and snow and gloom.

Carrigan contracted his working line, placing the torches at shorter
intervals and keeping the scrapers in close succession. The foremen
informed him frequently that the men were growing exhausted and
rebellious, but he ordered them to hold the crews at the task. He and
Bryant moved to and fro constantly, giving encouragement or lending a
hand to help start a stalled fresno. By sheer power of their wills
they were combatting the snow, forcing the work ahead, deepening the
stretch of excavation that had been opened that afternoon; by iron
determination they were wrenching out the last spadeful of earth
possible and exacting the final ounce of man power before the snow had
its way.

The strange warmth continued. The temperature was not even down to
freezing and the men, muddied and wet to the knees, dripped with
perspiration, while the horses' flanks were soaked with both sweat and
melted snow. It was difficult to breathe, what with the heavy,
oppressive air and what with the fall of suffocating snow, constantly
growing thicker. Horses slipped and went down, but were raised again;
fresnos were mired, but freed once more; men gave out and were sent to
their camp. And the fight kept on.

But about eleven o'clock Bryant felt a cool puff of air on his cheeks,
light and of brief duration. It was followed by a second, this time
quicker and stronger, blowing from the northwest and sending the snow
a-scurry in a slanting fog of flakes past the flames of the torches.
He studied this change for a moment, then sought out Carrigan.

"Time to make a break for cover," he announced. "Wind is coming and
the devil will be to pay when once it picks up all this loose snow."

"Well, we're about at a standstill, anyway," was the reply. "I'll have
the crews draw the scrapers and plows off at one side where we can get
at them. I had a spare horse tent put at the disposal of the Mexicans,
and have had men in both camps piling baled hay all evening around the
big tents for windbreaks. We'll issue extra blankets and crowd the
crews into the shacks and mess quarters where there are stoves."

"What about water if our pipe freezes?"

"Then the horses will eat snow like the range ponies, I guess--and the
rest of us, too."

At that he went off to order the work stopped, as did Bryant. For some
time the wind blew only in those fitful puffs Lee had noted or died
down entirely for short periods; and of this fact the night shift took
advantage to assemble the fresnos and plows beside the canal and to
drive their horses to shelter. The crews of the north camp, being
fewer, got away first; and thither Bryant plowed through the snow with
them to see all made safe. When he returned, Carrigan was just herding
the last man and team toward the main camp. Together the contractor
and the engineer extinguished the torches, then made their way,
carrying a flare with them, toward the glow showing at the edge of the
camp, where an oil-soaked bale of hay burned as a guide. At their
backs the wind and snow blew with gradually increasing strength.

They made the rounds of the horse tents packed with animals, the mess
tents packed with workmen--with those men only come and those newly
aroused from sleep and gathered here--of the shacks, the hospital, the
engineers' headquarters and the big commissary tent, all crowded with
white men and Mexicans, steaming with moisture, smoking cigarettes and
pipes, giving off a rank smell of clay and human bodies and wet
clothes and horses, who talked and laughed and waited restlessly. The
pair waded around examining guy-ropes, stakes, the protective walls
raised of hay bales. They took advantage of a sudden dropping of the
wind to go among the small tents, thrusting their flares within each
and having a look, to make certain no sleeper of the day shift had
been overlooked. Then at last they stumbled up the street to Bryant's
shack.

The wind now had utterly died away. The snow had resumed its thick,
silent fall straight to earth. Carrigan was kicking his boots clean
against the door-sill when Lee exclaimed, "Listen to that, Pat!"

Carrigan wiped the moisture from his ears and harkened.

"That's the Limited coming, and making no stops," he remarked. "Get
in!"

They entered the little building. The office contained the engineering
staff and several others. Tobacco smoke lay thick in the room.

Outside, the faint whining sound was growing steadily in volume until
at last it deepened into a roar very like that of an approaching
express train, as Pat had suggested. Followed a smart blow on the
shack. Then it reeled and the night was filled with a howling tumult
that deafened the men inside; the blizzard had burst upon the mesa.
Through the windows one could see nothing, for the air had become a
black maelstrom of whirling snow and darkness where a choked roar
persisted as steadily as the bass thunder of Niagara. The warmth had
vanished; a cutting cold, as if striking direct from arctic ice,
minute by minute drove the mercury in the thermometer on Bryant's wall
downward with unbelievable swiftness. If anything, the fury of the
storm seemed to increase as time passed, swelling to such terrible
violence that one imagined nothing could withstand its force, its mad
blasts, its deadliness.

"Those mess tents and horse tents," Lee said to Carrigan, anxiously.

"They're safer under their lee of hay than is this little paper box
we're sitting in," the contractor replied. "I've been through
blizzards before, and know how to meet them."

From by the stove one of the engineers spoke.

"But we'll never see some of those little tents any more. There are
several travelling toward Mexico by now."

"And my new flannel shirt!" cried another, suddenly. "Washed it this
noon and hung it out on a line and forgot all about it. Oh, Lord,
where is it now?"

"Good-bye, little shirt, we'll never see you more!" said the first,
sentimentally. "You'll be hanging on the Equator by morning."

"While we're left here in the drifts," said a third. "Oh, the lovely,
big, white drifts there'll be to-morrow!"

Toward one o'clock the first furious rush of the storm had passed and
it had settled into a fifty-mile-an-hour wind, bitterly cold, with
snow that drove against the building in fine particles. Freezing air
never ceased to enter the thin walls of boards and tar paper. It was
necessary to keep the cast-iron stove red-hot to secure anything like
comfort.

And to this dreadful cold and snow, thought Lee, Imogene would have
been left deliberately by Ruth Gardner and Gretzinger!

Carrigan bade the others roll up in their blankets and get what sleep
they could while he and Bryant tended the fire. Lee saw that Dave was
warm and well-wrapped. The men, worn out by prolonged exertions, made
themselves beds on the floor or stretched themselves out on their
seats, drew their coverings closer, closed their eyes, slept.

The contractor and the engineer, together before the fire, continued
to talk in low tones.

"Haven't told you yet," said Pat, presently, "but we picked up that
Mexican this evening who was trying to start a drunk Christmas Eve. It
was while you were at Sarita Creek. Saurez told me he had sneaked into
camp and meant mischief. Some of us caught him behind the commissary
tent with a can of oil, just ready to fire the camp."

"A fine night for us all to have been left without shelter," Lee
remarked. "Where is he?"

"In the hospital tied up, with a trusty man to watch him. Here's what
I found on him. Look inside." And Pat handed over a dirty leather bag
with a long string. "Found this around his neck."

Lee extracted four pieces of paper from the sack--all checks drawn to
the order of F. Alvarez. Besides these there were two twenty-dollar
gold pieces, three rings, and several unset turquoises.

"Well, we can make use of these checks," he said, after thought. "I'll
talk to the fellow to-morrow." He restored the miscellaneous
collection of property to the sack.

On the panes of the small windows the snow beat and the wind hammered.
Carrigan stuffed the stove with pine knots. Afterward he refilled his
pipe, cast a sharp glance about at the sleeping occupants of the room,
and said:

"You've got what you need now to mix medicine with the banker." He
confirmed his words with several satisfied nods.

"Yes," said Bryant.

Carrigan proceeded to meditate.

"Awhile back I sent for some more dynamite," he stated, breaking the
silence. "Didn't say anything to you about it at the time. It was
there in the commissary tent under a stack of cases of peaches and
bags of coffee. If this Alvarez had got his oil on that canvas and a
fire going, there sure would have been some fire-works. You would have
had a reservoir blown right in the middle of your project, I'm
thinking."

"What in the name of heaven do you want with dynamite!"

"Well, my boy, there's a lot of ground that can't be dug, but I never
saw any that nitro wouldn't move. What I got is dirt-blowing dynamite,
the kind powder companies sell for making drainage ditches and blowing
stumps and so on. I didn't know whether I should have to use it, but I
always like to have a trick up my sleeve. Powder is ordinarily too
expensive to employ when fresnos can work, yet it's just the thing in
a pinch. We're in an emergency now. If it should set in and snow right
along, with one storm on top of another, as may happen after so long a
mild season, powder even may not help us out. These last eight hundred
yards are going to make us weep before we're through, I'm guessing.
But just the same, I'm counting on this dynamite. It can't blow like
this forever, and the minute it quits we'll grab hold."

Lee twisted about to look at a window. The particles of snow were
biting at the glass relentlessly, while the howl of the gale told only
too plainly how the drifts were being heaped on the dark mesa.

"We'll finish this ditch on time even if hell freezes over," he said,
slowly. "I'm not going to be beaten at this late day."

He continued to sit gazing at the frosted panes and harkening to the
roaring blasts. On the floor and in the chairs the blanketed men slept
heavily. Pat fed the fire anew. But through the cracks of the walls
the cold sifted more and more intense, while along the edges of the
boards there formed thick fringes of glistening frost.




CHAPTER XXIX


For four days the bitter cold and fierce wind held the camps in
thrall, then the latter blew itself out. The cold, however, still
endured though the sun shone. When one looked forth from camp, all
that could be seen was a snowbound earth; mesa and mountains were as
white and silent as some polar region; nothing moved; nothing seemed
to live out yonder. It was like a dazzling, frigid, extinct world.

The main mesa road was blocked and telephone wires were down. What
went on outside the limits of the camp's snow-drifted horizon its
dwellers knew not--nor for the moment cared. Work was the only
thought. With hastily constructed snow-plows roads had been broken
among the tents and shacks as soon as the weather allowed, and
afterward broad paths made to the working ground. The section of undug
canal was now scraped bare. There, sheltered by tents and warmed by
sagebrush fires, men bored in the iron-like earth powder-holes in rows
that exactly aligned the canal. On the morning of the fifth day a
first stretch of fifty yards was blown out, whereupon teams and
scrapers were rushed into the ragged cavity to deepen and clear the
ditch before the soil froze anew. This was at the north end. In the
afternoon one hundred yards at the south end went up in a blast and
crews from the main camp fell upon this area.

That night the sky clouded over again. All the next day snow came down
steadily. The workmen played cards in the mess tents and waited.
Carrigan busied himself at accounts and waited. Bryant waited, with
impatience and anxiety gnawing at his heart. There were six hundred
yards and more unexcavated, and but three days of his time remained.

The snow ceased at nightfall and work was instantly resumed by aid of
the torches; again the desperate scraping of snow, bundled men at
fires and sheltered by windbreaks, the drilling of holes in the frozen
ground, the reliefs every two hours, the thawing of nipped fingers and
toes and noses. All night hot food and boiling coffee were served at
intervals to the cold and hungry labourers. At nine o'clock next
morning two hundred yards of dirt went spraying into the air, with the
subsequent struggle in the long hole: fresnos bearing forth what earth
was loose and what the plows broke out; the horses, blinded by the
glare of snow, staggering forward under curse and lash; the men
toiling in a sort of grim fury. A maximum of effort finished one
hundred and fifty yards more by eleven o'clock. Carrigan ordered all
work to stop until nine next morning.

"The men are 'all in'," he told Lee. "We'll crack this last nut
to-morrow."

"But what if it sets in to snow? More than two hundred and fifty yards
left to do, and only to-morrow and the day after to work."

"We'll have to risk it."

"Will your powder hold out?"

"Yes." He regarded Bryant keenly. "Say, what you need isn't
information but sleep. You worked all day yesterday, and all last
night, and to-day again, and here it is going on midnight. I'm going
to tell you the schedule for to-morrow to calm your mind, then you
roll into your blankets. At nine o'clock in the morning all hands
except the cooks go at the drills and stay by them till the stretch is
holed. Whenever that's done, which should be about evening, we shoot
the chunk. And after that we hit the bottom with every scraper and
fresno and horse and man, with the cooks fighting the coffee-boilers,
and never come out of the ditch till the last lump of dirt is moved.
That's the programme. I figure it will be about midnight when the last
card's turned, maybe an hour or so after. I promised the men double
wages and a box of cigars apiece out of the store and a few other
things perhaps--I don't remember. So you get your sleep, for there's a
big day ahead to-morrow. That dirt all goes out before you'll have
another chance to hit the hay."

Bryant arose next morning at seven. The sky was overcast and the
thermometer was sixteen below zero when he examined it. Across the
snow he could see the north camp stirring to life, awakening in the
frosty, pallid light of dawn. Stretching thither ran uneven snowy
ridges, save at one place where they lay bare and brown--the banks of
the canal. When the small interval still undug was moved, the ditch
would be finished from river to ranch, from the Pinas down to Perro.
And this was to be the last day of toil! To-day the camps were to hurl
themselves at that short remaining strip of earth and tear it out; the
furrow so long pressed ahead through the iron ground was to be brought
to an end; the enemy, frost, was to be conquered at last. When he
thought of the inexorable labour done under heart-breaking conditions,
in spite of cold and wind and snow, and with sufferings and
deprivations little considered. Bryant felt for the workmen, rough
though they were, a strong affection. They had done the bitter work.

"Out goes the chunk to-day," was Pat's greeting that morning.

A spirit of eagerness, almost of enthusiasm, pervaded the crews that
first went forth in the cold to work at the drills. It was the final
attack, and they went from their steaming breakfast with jests and
laughter that rang back over the snow. Sixteen below zero, and they
laughed! Bryant had a sudden conviction that nothing could stop such
men--neither weather, nor elements, nor fate itself. They were heroes
not to be daunted. They swung the hammer of Thor against the earth and
were worthy of an epic.

Toward the middle of the afternoon of that day Carrigan said to the
engineer:

"We're making better time than I calculated. The holes will all be
drilled by five o'clock; we're loading them as they're done and we'll
shoot at five-thirty."

"What about supper?"

"Supper at five. Then the men will be back and ready to jump in the
ditch when the shot's fired."

"And be done twenty-four hours before the hour set by the Land and
Water Board," said Lee.

"That's cutting it fine enough as it is. Who's that waving yonder
toward camp?" And Carrigan pointed a mittened hand at a figure
swinging an arm and shouting Bryant's name.

The engineer stared for a time.

"Charlie Menocal," he said, finally. "Morgan--Morgan, come here!" he
called. And as Morgan came to join him, Lee addressed Pat, "I'll just
run over to Bartolo with this young scoundrel. The road's open and
I'll be back by dark. Want Morgan to come along to look after him and
Alvarez, the man you caught."

"Better start back in plenty of time. The sky's thickening again. More
snow in sight, Lee."

"I shall."

"You might invite old man Menocal to return with you," Pat remarked,
with a grin, "and see us put the kibosh on his dream of owning the
Pinas River. What are you going to do with this boy of his? Send him
over the road?"

"I haven't decided yet."

"That's where he ought to go, after trying to burn us out the night of
the blizzard." He turned away to the work.

"You're not to let this fellow over there waiting for us get away,
Morgan," Lee stated.

"I'll freeze on to him."

They went along the snowy path toward camp, coming up with Menocal,
who waited until they arrived and then accompanied them toward
Bryant's office.

"Have a letter for you from Ruth," he said. "Had a terrible time
getting up from Kennard. Road isn't half opened, but I found a man to
drive me home. Promised Ruth to deliver this to you."

He drew the letter from an inner pocket and handed it to the
engineer, who glanced at the writing on the envelope, his own name,
and shoved the epistle into his glove. When they gained camp, Lee
said:

"Morgan and I are going to Bartolo with you, and also a friend of
yours called Alvarez. We nabbed him as he was trying to burn our camp
about two hours before the blizzard. Take this man to headquarters,
Morgan, and keep him till I come over."

Menocal's face became livid with anger and alarm.

"Let me go, damn you!" he shouted, shrilly.

Bryant waved a hand towards the engineers' shack and thither Charlie
was propelled, cursing and struggling, in Morgan's firm grasp.
Entering his office, Lee closed the door, walked to the stove, and
standing there produced the letter. It was the first and only missive
he had ever received from Ruth. He gazed at the envelope and the
scrawled writing on it with an impression of strangeness, but this
gave way to a curiosity as to the contents. He had a strong suspicion
of the letter's purport. Ruth would have reviewed her conduct that
night at Sarita Creek, and, with her instinctive cunning, perceived it
would alienate Lee. The message doubtless carried an adroit
explanation and excuse, ending up with numerous declarations of her
affection and hypocritical assertions of her anxiety on his account.
Disgust overwhelmed him. He was minded to cast the thing into the
stove unread. At last, however, muttering to himself, he thrust a
forefinger under the flap and ripped the envelope open. A newspaper
clipping that had been enclosed in the letter dropped to the floor. He
read:

    DEAR LEE:

    After thinking the matter over very carefully, I've decided to
    release you from our engagement. If this pains you, as I fear
    it will, I'm extremely sorry, but I've discovered that we're
    not temperamentally suited to each other. You've failed,
    besides, so I understand, which further convinces me of that.
    And in addition, I've learned of late that I love another, who
    loves me. Therefore it's much better that I take this step,
    much better and much wiser--don't you think so? However, Lee,
    I shall always be your friend.

    It may interest you to know that this evening Mr. Gretzinger
    and I are to be married. Privately, with only a few close
    friends. We depart immediately after the ceremony for New
    York. Mr. Menocal is to pack my things at Sarita Creek, so you
    need not bother about them. I understand Imogene is visiting
    at the Graham ranch; I'm dropping her a note there telling her
    the news.

          With best wishes,
          RUTH.


Bryant lifted from the floor and read the clipping. It was a short
announcement, evidently from a Kennard paper, of the prospective
wedding that night of Miss Ruth Gardner, of Sarita Creek, and Mr. J.
Senton Gretzinger, of New York.

When he had read this, Lee gently tilted and shook the envelope. But
no diamond solitaire dropped out.




CHAPTER XXX


They were waiting in the sheriff's office in the court house in
Bartolo. They were waiting for Mr. Menocal. Winship had sent a
messenger for him. At one place in the room, handcuffed and tied, sat
the evil-eyed Alvarez; at another sat Charlie Menocal, silent and
apprehensive and with a sickly pallor showing under his dusky skin;
and between them lounged Morgan. The sheriff and Bryant stood across
the room conversing of the storm.

"I thought your goose was cooked when that blizzard hit us," Winship
was saying.

"Froze, you mean," was Lee's smiling reply. "I thought so myself for a
while. We've hammered along, however. To-night the last dirt goes
out."

"That was an idea now--powder."

"It was Carrigan's, not mine. It saved us. The old man has forgotten
more than I ever knew. Here's the banker now."

The door swung open, admitting Menocal, blinking from the snow's
sheen. He bade the sheriff and the engineer good day, glanced sharply
at them and then at the others. When his look encountered his son, his
eyebrows went up.

"So you're home finally," he addressed him. "After two weeks' time!"
His regard moved about from one to another of the trio. "What does
this mean, Charlie? Who is that fellow wearing handcuffs?" He paused,
staring steadily at his son. "What have you been doing to bring you
into Winship's office?" As Charlie continued to sit silent, he turned
to the sheriff.

"I'll explain, Mr. Menocal, but what I have to say won't be pleasant
hearing for you," Lee stated, at a nod from Winship. "Take this chair,
if you please."

The banker sat down, heavily. He sighed, while his fat cheeks shook
with a slight tremble.

"What has he done?" he asked, with his eyes fixed on an ink-well on
the sheriff's desk.

Briefly and without temper Bryant related the circumstance of seeing
Alvarez in Kennard one day during the previous summer, when the man
appeared to be watching him. Charlie was also in town on that day.
Alvarez was the man who had attempted to make the workmen drunk in
camp on Christmas Eve, but he had escaped on that occasion. He had
stolen into camp again on the afternoon preceding the blizzard and two
hours after sundown had been captured seeking to fire the commissary
tent. When made a prisoner, he had been searched. On his person were
found several checks for sums ranging from fifty to one hundred
dollars. Bryant drew the leather sack from his pocket, extracted the
checks, and handed them to the banker.

"You see they are given by your son," said he. "I've questioned this
Alvarez and he has finally admitted that he was employed by Charlie
and instructed by him what to do. Your son, therefore, is the
instigator of the attempted crime, and Alvarez, an ignorant and brutal
outlaw from Mexico, was merely his tool. I pass over the matter of the
whisky and the petty inconveniences earlier caused me and my men. But
here is an act of a different character, Mr. Menocal. The man's
endeavour to fire our camp, had it been successful, would perhaps have
resulted in the death of scores of men, as the storm broke shortly
after and they would have been without shelter."

Charlie Menocal sprang to his feet.

"Before God, I didn't know he would choose that night!" he cried,
passionately. "I meant only to stop their work!"

His father shook his head sadly.

"That makes no difference, my son; you planned a wicked deed," he
said, in a barely audible voice.

Morgan pushed the young man back upon his chair and Bryant went on. As
he proceeded, he had found it harder and harder to address the parent;
and his task was no easier now. The eyes of the father had gone to the
slender, sagging figure of his son and seemed to be the eyes of an
expiring man; his plump cheeks were working under an excess of
emotion; then his head went down suddenly as under the blow of a club.

"Because of the character of the act," Lee said, "it wasn't only a
stroke at me but at every animal and man in the entire south camp. I
want to make this clear in order to show how black and dastardly the
thing was. Whether Charlie understood or intended the destruction of
all the lives and property there is no excuse; it was a deed that
would have carried terrible results in its train. I don't even let my
mind conceive them. All this has followed, Mr. Menocal, from the
single fact that your son disliked me in the beginning. To that may
be added an idea that I was depriving you of something to which I had
no right, namely, the title to the Perro Creek canal appropriation.
And there, I think, responsibility for his course touches you."

He paused to gaze at the Mexican, whose face had become drained of
colour.

"Mr. Menocal, the water is mine," he continued, "and to-night some
time it will be mine beyond all dispute, for then the ditch will be
finished. So much for that. Some days ago we had a talk that, I
believe, led us each to a better opinion of the other. I think that as
a leader here in Bartolo and around about you're a force for good; you
believe in law, order, and education; and I know, from what I've
learned, that you carry many of the people on store accounts for long
periods when crops are bad or when they are distressed by sickness.
I'm confident you're endeavouring to elevate them so far as possible;
and I admit frankly that I've modified very greatly my first
estimation of you. That weighs in the scale against Charlie's actions.

"Then there's one kindness Charlie himself has done me, though he may
not be aware of the fact. I'll not say what it is; let it suffice that
it is the case. A very great kindness it was, indeed! I count that
likewise in the opposite scale. And then there are other things to
consider, one among them that after all no harm has come to me. The
enmity he's held for me has simply recoiled upon his own head. All he
has to show for it after months of hating and contriving is his
position here in this room to-day--and a dead dog. Surely it must make
plain to him that his course has been not only futile but foolish."

The engineer glanced at the young fellow. He sat in an attitude of
despair that almost equalled his father's.

"Well, that brings me to the point," Bryant said. "You've been too
indulgent with Charlie, Mr. Menocal, as you once acknowledged to me.
You've given him too much money, too much admiration, too much head,
and it has led him up against the bars of the state prison. The
question is whether or not I shall open the gate and push him in, as
at first I determined to do on securing the proof in this leather
sack. If I thought he would keep on along his present line, I should
say yes, merely as a matter of public policy, but I've had several
days to think the thing over and have come to the conclusion he'll
soon realize his folly, if he doesn't now. And another restraint
should be the good name and the happiness of his father. I'm not
vindictive, Mr. Menocal, and less on this day than I've ever been. I
don't believe in causing people misery merely for the pleasure of
inflicting it or because I happen to have the power. We all have
enough to contend with, as it is. I don't propose to ruin your
position here, and end your influence, and blast your life, by sending
your son to the penitentiary. That would make me no happier, and would
make a number of people infinitely wretched, while perhaps starting
Charlie on the road to hell. Very likely so. I much prefer to see
everyone cheerful and at work. Suppose we ship this fellow yonder back
to Mexico--Winship can arrange that--and destroy the checks, and tear
up this sheet of Charlie's record, so to speak. Only one or two
persons besides ourselves know of the matter and I'll ask them to
forget it."

Lee struck a match and ignited the checks, holding them while they
burned until at last he dropped them on the floor, where they blazed,
curled up in strips of black ash, and were no more. He glanced about
at the others. Winship was picking his teeth with a quill toothpick,
with his mind apparently far away on other matters. Morgan stolidly
chewed tobacco and kept a wary eye on the bandit, Alvarez. Charlie sat
pale, limp, gazing at nothing. The elder Menocal had lifted his eyes
to Bryant, at whom he looked mistily; he appeared to have aged
astonishingly, his cheeks having gone flabby, slack, and gray, while a
slight tremour shook his head.

"That's all, I guess," Bryant said, briskly. "We'll just consider our
relations established on the same footing they were before this
occurrence."

He put out a hand, smiling. The banker struggled to his feet and
clasped it in both of his.

"They shall not be on the same footing, but on a better one, Mr.
Bryant, if it's in my power to make them so," he exclaimed, in a
choked voice.

"That suits me right down to the ground, Mr. Menocal."

The Mexican was silent. His lips parted, quivered, and shut again. His
hold on the engineer's hand tightened.

"I--I can't talk now, can't say what I wish to say," he said, mastered
by feeling. "When I'm more myself, when I can talk--another time----"
He ceased, but presently finished, "Another time I'll tell the
gratitude in my heart. Now my shame for my son and for myself----Come,
Charlie, take me home."

They went out. Winship came to life and crossing the room dragged the
outlaw Mexican to his feet, then pushed him over the floor and into
the hall on his way to the cells in the basement. Morgan pulled on his
hat. Bryant glanced at the paper ashes on the floor, then did
likewise. It was time to get back to camp.




CHAPTER XXXI


The first snowflakes of another storm were beginning to flutter down
by the time the two men reached camp, and dusk had set in. On the
drifted road from Bartolo, over which but few wagons had passed,
travel was slow and they had consumed an hour and a half on their
return. The torches were burning along the canal, appearing at a
distance like winter fireflies, but the crews of workmen had gone to
supper. Bryant and Morgan, when they drove down the street in camp,
could hear them at their meal in the glowing mess tents--a subdued
hubbub of plates and knives and voices.

Half an hour later they were pouring forth toward the horse tents,
while the engineers were making their way along the torch-lit path to
the stretch of undug canal.

"We'll allow fifteen minutes for them to get the teams out, then
shoot," Carrigan said to Lee, as they moved along. "All the shots are
in and double-fused. Doesn't appear to be any wind behind this snow."

The air, though cold, was still. The flakes were not yet falling
heavily and they lay on the hard crust of snow as light as silk fluff.
What might be coming down in another hour from the darkness overhead,
however, could not be foretold, while if both a gale and a great fall
of snow occurred the labour of the night would be increased a
hundred-fold.

Bryant's anxiety was no longer on account of the time limit fixed by
the Land and Water Board. He knew that since the revelations made in
the sheriff's office the claimant Rodriguez would never press his
case, even were the canal never completed. But he had the keen desire
of a tired man to clean up the job and be done, and a pride in keeping
faith with himself in accomplishing what he had sworn he should do,
build the project in ninety days. He would never have it said by any
one that he had failed in that. By Gretzinger, for example. Ruth in
particular! She believed that he had already failed when she wrote her
letter.

By the end of the quarter of an hour prescribed by Carrigan teams and
workmen were coming along the snowy road in a long line. From the
north camp also a string of animals in pairs was advancing by light of
the torches. A warning shout sounded from the ditch section. Men
retreated. Then a roaring boom burst upon the night, with other
thunderous reports following in rapid succession, until it seemed that
the mined earth cascading upward in the darkness was the bombardment
of scores of cannon. The flames of the torches and the falling snow
tossed and whirled at the percussion of air. Showers of clay rained
upon the earth. Vibrations jarred the ground.

Then the companies of horses and men, fastening upon scrapers,
hastened into the trench. The remaining strip that joined the two
sections of canal had been blown out and now this was the final,
culminating assault. When this two hundred and fifty yards of ditch
line had been widened and deepened to correspond to the rest, water
would flow of summers in a small river from the dam down to the broad
acres of Perro Creek ranch.

Hour after hour the steady labour proceeded--plows ran; flat scrapers
and wheeled fresnos followed, scooped up the earth, bore it to the
banks above; horses tugged and strained; men toiled, pausing only to
thaw their feet and hands at fires burning by the ditch or to drain
great tin-cups of the scalding coffee that the cooks dipped from cans.
And steadily the excavation widened and deepened hour by hour, the
slope of the sides becoming apparent, the banks rising higher and the
ditch assuming its desired shape and size. At eleven o'clock the cooks
wheeled immense canisters of sliced beef and bread among the workmen,
who seized the food and ate it as they worked. At midnight the plows
were cutting near the bottom, and the work was going faster, as the
frost did not strike this deep into the soil. At one o'clock in the
morning, amid thickening snow, the last scraperfuls of dirt were going
out, while the engineers, with their long rules, were checking depths
and slopes.

"By golly, she's about done!" exclaimed Dave, who had been permitted
to remain up on this eventful night and who had been moving about,
here, there, and everywhere, in a great state of excitement. "By
golly, she is, Lee!"

"Yes, by golly; the ditch you helped me survey, too."

"By golly, yes!" He had forgotten that.

The last dirt moved with a rush. Then, even as the teams were dragging
the loads from the excavation, Carrigan passed to a foreman the word
that announced the end of work. It ran along the canal from mouth to
mouth, at first in a call but finally in a shout that swelled to a
roar of exultation. That roar rang over the snow and through the
night like the cry of an army which has gained a walled city.

"Done!" said Bryant, to himself.

Back to the camps trooped the teams and men by the flare of the
torches they carried in jubilation. Not a soul in all that company but
felt the triumph beating in Lee's heart. Finished, built! Despite
frost and snow they had driven the iron furrow through to the end, and
on time. Toil-weary though they were, their spirits were light. They
knew themselves fellow-workers in a redoubtable achievement.

Carrigan and Bryant were among the last to go. To the latter there was
in the fact of completion a sense of unreality. As he took a final
view of the ditch before setting out for camp, events raced through
his mind--his coming, his first labours, the confused interplay of his
life with those of the Menocals, McDonnell, Gretzinger, Carrigan,
Imogene, Ruth, and Louise; the months of incessant toil; of
brain-racking and body-wearing endeavour to force the canal forward;
of unresting strife with frost and snow and earth, of being under a
pitiless hammer. He could not easily realize that he was now free of
all this.

"I have an empty feeling," he remarked to Carrigan.

"One always has a 'let-down' after a hard job," was Pat's sage
rejoinder. "You'll feel restless for maybe a week now."

They went from the spot up the snowy road and turned in at Pat's shack
for a smoke. Late as it was, neither felt the need of sleep as yet.

"Well, it's a comfort to know that we don't have to plug again at that
ground in the morning," Lee remarked, with a sigh of satisfaction. He
had his feet on the table, his body relaxed, and his pipe going.

"Yeah. The only disappointment I have," Pat said, "is not having
lifted the bonds and stocks out of Gretzinger. If we hadn't been so
pressed for time, we might have played him a little till he took the
hook. I don't like his kind at all."

Bryant laughed.

"Why, he's the best friend I have," he exclaimed. "What do you think
he did for me?"

"Well, what? Besides trying to shake you down?"

"Pat, he carried off and married my girl."

The contractor lowered his feet, placed his hands upon his knees, and
gazed at Bryant, with brows down-drawn and under lip up-thrust.

"That good-for-nothing Ruth what's-her-name?" he demanded. In all the
months of their association it was the first time he had ever spoken
of her to Bryant.

"Ruth Gardner, yes."

Carrigan rose, gave Lee a long and solemn look, then went to a trunk
in the corner of the room. This he unlocked and opened. From its
interior he produced a black bottle.

"I don't take a drink very often," he announced, coming forward and
setting the bottle on the table, "but this is one of the times. We'll
take one to celebrate your luck."




CHAPTER XXXII


About the middle of the next afternoon Lee Bryant was riding southward
from camp on the main mesa trail. The road was difficult and his horse
Dick made slow time along the snowy path broken by wagons through the
drifts, but the rider let the animal choose his own gait, as he had
done that hot July day when coming up from the south to buy the Perro
Creek ranch. On reaching the ford Lee pulled rein. How different now
the creek from on that burning afternoon of his encounter with Ruth
Gardner and Imogene Martin! Snow covered its bed; the sands where he
had knelt, the little pool, the foot-prints, lay hidden from sight.
How much had happened since! And how different was his life! He had
suffered much and learned much since that hour of meeting; and he
should never henceforth view this spot without a little feeling of
melancholy. The youth and two girls who drank there at the rill were
no more: they had become other persons.

Presently he dismissed thoughts of this and set Dick wading across the
ford. Yonder he now could see the three bare cottonwoods, with the low
adobe house near by where he and Dave had lived and laboured at the
surveys for the project. The bones of his dog Mike, too, rested there
under the ground. This brought to mind the meeting with Louise upon
the road--and it was Louise to whom at this moment he was going. He
began to urge Dick to greater efforts. Once on a stretch of road, bare
and wind-swept, he pushed him into a gallop. It seemed interminable,
this snow-bound trail. But at last he crossed Sarita Creek (with but a
single glance at the canon's mouth where the two cabins stood
untenanted and abandoned among the naked trees) and then covered the
long miles to Diamond Creek, and rode up the lane between the rows of
cottonwoods to the house, where Louise, who had perceived his approach
from a window, appeared at the door to greet him.

"We were terribly alarmed for your safety the night of the blizzard,"
she said, "but the mail-man finally made his trip to Bartolo and back,
and said you were still there and not blown away. And he also stated
that you were working night and day."

"Not any more," said Lee, swinging from the saddle.

"You have finished! I can read it on your face!" she cried, joyfully.

"Yes; we threw out the last clod at one o'clock this morning."

"I needn't tell you that I'm proud and happy; you know that, Lee. Even
happier than when I learned you were able to continue, at the time you
supposed you were unable. Put up your horse and come in. You're half
frozen."

Bryant endeavoured to discover from her face what he wished to know,
but did not succeed. So he asked:

"Have you had your mail lately?"

"Not for three days. The mail-man made one trip and then the next snow
closed the road again to Kennard."

Lee went off to stable Dick. On his return he found Louise at the door
still waiting, and she helped him to remove his overcoat and scarf
when they passed in to the fire. Then they pushed a divan forward and
she bade him spread out his hands before the blaze.

"It wasn't so long ago that we agreed we mustn't see each other again,
and here we are together," he stated, with a pretense of solemnity. He
extended his hands to the heat and moved his fingers about to expel
their numbness. "I don't know what your father would say if he knew
all the circumstances."

"I--I don't know, either," Louise stammered, in dismay at the thought.

"How's Imogene?" he inquired.

"Improving slowly. All she needed was to get away from that horrid
cabin and horrid--well, surroundings."

"And your father's here?"

"At one of the feed corrals, I think. He had all the cattle rounded up
before the blizzard and held here and fed. A big task, with several
thousand head."

"Then we're safe," said Lee.

Louise looked at him doubtfully. She knew not what to make of this
talk and his portentous air, and felt a new apprehension rising in her
mind.

"What is it? What has happened now, Lee?" she whispered.

But all at once he began to laugh. He caught her hand and holding it
gazed, smiling, into her eyes. Then he drew from his pocket an
envelope, which (still keeping prisoner the hand he had captured) he
waved to and fro before her eyes.

"If I didn't know you well, I'd think you had lost your wits," she
cried.

"I have--wits and heart both. With joy! Wait, I'll take the letter out
so that you can read it. The only blessed thing I ever knew her to do!
I bless her for it, at any rate." He pulled the letter and the
clipping from their cover and laid them in Louise's hand. "Read, read
the tidings!"

The girl's fingers began to tremble as her eyes flitted along the
lines. But she read no more than the first part of the letter. She
turned to him with her eyes misty, her face radiant.

"I could weep for happiness--but I'm not going to." She made a little
dab with her handkerchief at her lashes. "Oh, Lee, to think you're
free! And that now we may love each other!"

"I thought we did."

"Of course we did--but you know what I mean."

"You didn't read it all," said he. "You don't know yet the poor
opinion she has of me."

Louise crumpled the letter in her hand and cast it into the flames.

"Nor do I want to know it," she exclaimed. "All I care about is my own
opinion of you, and our love. That's enough. Perhaps we shall be all
the happier for the little misery she caused us."

Her eyes dwelt proudly upon him, upon his face that showed new lines
of strength, that was clear and calm, that revealed a spirit come to
full manhood, that was luminous with the love she inspired. He had
taken her hands and was regarding her tenderly.

"Ruth rendered me one service," said he. "She taught me that there's
an appearance which may be mistaken for the substance. That shall be
to her credit." He sat silent, smiling thoughtfully for a moment. Then
he raised his eyes and drew Louise toward him. "But you, Louise, awoke
real love."

His arms enclosed her fast and their lips met in a first kiss.

"We shall walk among the flowers and in the orchard again, Lee dear,"
she murmured, "as we did once before. And I shall bring you buttermilk
as I did that morning--but there will be no Charlie Menocal."

"No. Charlie won't annoy us in the future."

"And when the snow is gone we'll ride along your canal----"

"Our canal now, sweetheart."

"Along our canal and see where you worked so hard and struggled and
won, and I'll listen while you point here and there and tell of the
obstacles overcome, and of all you did. We shall be gay and happy."

"As I'm happy now," he said, softly. "Do you know what I see there in
the firelight? A building, a house--our home."

Louise's face lifted to his, all sweetness and trust.

"I see it, too," she murmured.

"On Perro Creek ranch," Lee continued, "with the sagebrush gone and in
its place fields of grain and alfalfa spreading out to the horizon,
with water rippling along in little canals and fat cows standing
about, and contented farmers at work, and perhaps a railroad somewhere
in the background, and ourselves in the foreground by our new home,
where flowers are growing, too, and--and----"

Louise's arms slipped up and about his neck, until her cheek rested
against his.

"You dream and then you build--you dream and make your dreams come
true," she said. "You're my dreamer-builder."

Lee was smiling. The caress in her words, the warm touch of her cheek,
her heart beating against his, all made his happiness complete.

"And your lover," he whispered.


THE END


       *       *       *       *       *




=Popular Copyright Novels=

_AT MODERATE PRICES_

Ask Your Dealer for a Complete List of A.L. Burt Company's Popular
Copyright Fiction

       *       *       *       *       *

=Adventures of Jimmie Dale, The.= By Frank L. Packard.
=Adventures of Sherlock Holmes.= By A. Conan Doyle.
=After House, The.= By Mary Roberts Rinehart.
=Ailsa Paige.= By Robert W. Chambers.
=Alton of Somasco.= By Harold Bindloss.
=Amateur Gentleman, The.= By Jeffery Farnol.
=Anna, the Adventuress.= By E. Phillips Oppenheim.
=Anne's House of Dreams.= By L.M. Montgomery.
=Around Old Chester.= By Margaret Deland.
=Athalie.= By Robert W. Chambers.
=At the Mercy of Tiberius.= By Augusta Evans Wilson.
=Auction Block, The.= By Rex Beach.
=Aunt Jane of Kentucky.= By Eliza C. Hall.
=Awakening of Helena Richie.= By Margaret Deland.

=Bab: a Sub-Deb.= By Mary Roberts Rinehart.
=Barrier, The.= By Rex Beach.
=Barbarians.= By Robert W. Chambers.
=Bargain True, The.= By Nalbro Bartley.
=Bar 20.= By Clarence E. Mulford.
=Bar 20 Days.= By Clarence E. Mulford.
=Bars of Iron, The.= By Ethel M. Dell.
=Beasts of Tarzan, The.= By Edgar Rice Burroughs.
=Beloved Traitor, The.= By Frank L. Packard.
=Beltane the Smith.= By Jeffery Farnol.
=Betrayal, The.= By E. Phillips Oppenheim.
=Beyond the Frontier.= By Randall Parrish.
=Big Timber.= By Bertrand W. Sinclair.
=Black Is White.= By George Barr McCutcheon.
=Blind Man's Eyes, The.= By Wm. MacHarg and Edwin Balmer.
=Bob, Son of Battle.= By Alfred Ollivant.
=Boston Blackie.= By Jack Boyle.
=Boy with Wings, The.= By Berta Ruck.
=Brandon of the Engineers.= By Harold Bindloss.
=Broad Highway, The.= By Jeffery Farnol.
=Brown Study, The.= By Grace S. Richmond.
=Bruce of the Circle A.= By Harold Titus.
=Buck Peters, Ranchman.= By Clarence E. Mulford.
=Business of Life, The.= By Robert W. Chambers.




Popular Copyright Novels

_AT MODERATE PRICES_

Ask Your Dealer for a Complete List of A.L. Burt Company's Popular
Copyright Fiction

       *       *       *       *       *

=Cabbages and Kings.= By O. Henry.
=Cabin Fever.= By B.M. Bower.
=Calling of Dan Matthews, The.= By Harold Bell Wright.
=Cape Cod Stories.= By Joseph C. Lincoln.
=Cap'n Abe, Storekeeper.= By James A. Cooper.
=Cap'n Dan's Daughter.= By Joseph C. Lincoln.
=Cap'n Eri.= By Joseph C. Lincoln.
=Cap'n Jonah's Fortune.= By James A. Cooper.
=Cap'n Warren's Wards.= By Joseph C. Lincoln.
=Chain of Evidence, A.= By Carolyn Wells.
=Chief Legatee, The.= By Anna Katharine Green.
=Cinderella Jane.= By Marjorie B. Cooke.
=Cinema Murder, The.= By E. Phillips Oppenheim.
=City of Masks, The.= By George Barr McCutcheon.
=Cleek of Scotland Yard.= By T.W. Hanshew.
=Cleek, The Man of Forty Faces.= By Thomas W. Hanshew.
=Cleek's Government Cases.= By Thomas W. Hanshew.
=Clipped Wings.= By Rupert Hughes.
=Clue, The.= By Carolyn Wells.
=Clutch of Circumstance, The.= By Marjorie Benton Cooke.
=Coast of Adventure, The.= By Harold Bindloss.
=Coming of Cassidy, The.= By Clarence E. Mulford.
=Coming of the Law, The.= By Chas. A. Seltzer.
=Conquest of Canaan, The.= By Booth Tarkington.
=Conspirators, The.= By Robert W. Chambers.
=Court of Inquiry, A.= By Grace S. Richmond.
=Cow Puncher, The.= By Robert J.C. Stead.
=Crimson Gardenia, The, and Other Tales of Adventure.= By Rex Beach.
=Cross Currents.= By Author of "Pollyanna."
=Cry in the Wilderness, A.= By Mary E. Waller.

=Danger, And Other Stories.= By A. Conan Doyle.
=Dark Hollow, The.= By Anna Katharine Green.
=Dark Star, The.= By Robert W. Chambers.
=Daughter Pays, The.= By Mrs. Baillie Reynolds.
=Day of Days, The.= By Louis Joseph Vance.
=Depot Master, The.= By Joseph C. Lincoln.
=Desired Woman, The.= By Will N. Harben.




=Popular Copyright Novels=

_AT MODERATE PRICES_

Ask Your Dealer for a Complete List of A.L. Burt Company's Popular
Copyright Fiction

       *       *       *       *       *

=Destroying Angel, The=. By Louis Jos. Vance.
=Devil's Own, The.= By Randall Parrish.
=Double Traitor, The.= By E. Phillips Oppenheim.

=Empty Pockets.= By Rupert Hughes.
=Eyes of the Blind, The.= By Arthur Somers Roche.
=Eye of Dread, The.= By Payne Erskine.
=Eyes of the World, The.= By Harold Bell Wright.
=Extricating Obadiah.= By Joseph C. Lincoln.

=Felix O'Day.= By F. Hopkinson Smith.
=54-40 or Fight.= By Emerson Hough.
=Fighting Chance, The.= By Robert W. Chambers.
=Fighting Shepherdess, The.= By Caroline Lockhart.
=Financier, The.= By Theodore Dreiser.
=Flame, The.= By Olive Wadsley.
=Flamsted Quarries=. By Mary E. Wallar.
=Forfeit, The.= By Ridgwell Cullum.
=Four Million, The.= By O. Henry.
=Fruitful Vine, The.= By Robert Hichens.
=Further Adventures of Jimmie Dale, The.= By Frank L. Packard.

=Girl of the Blue Ridge, A.= By Payne Erskine.
=Girl from Keller's, The.= By Harold Bindloss.
=Girl Philippa, The.= By Robert W. Chambers.
=Girls at His Billet, The.= By Berta Ruck.
=God's Country and the Woman.= By James Oliver Curwood.
=Going Some.= By Rex Beach.
=Golden Slipper, The.= By Anna Katharine Green.
=Golden Woman, The.= By Ridgwell Cullum.
=Greater Love Hath No Man.= By Frank L. Packard.
=Greyfriars Bobby.= By Eleanor Atkinson.
=Gun Brand, The.= By James B. Hendryx.

=Halcyone.= By Elinor Glyn.
=Hand of Fu-Manchu, The.= By Sax Rohmer.
=Havoc.= By E. Phillips Oppenheim.
=Heart of the Desert, The.= By Honore Willsie.
=Heart of the Hills, The.= By John Fox, Jr.




=Popular Copyright Novels=

_AT MODERATE PRICES_

Ask Your Dealer for a Complete List of A.L. Burt Company's Popular
Copyright Fiction

       *       *       *       *       *

=Heart of the Sunset.= By Rex Beach.
=Heart of Thunder Mountain, The.= By Edfrid A. Bingham.
=Her Weight in Gold.= By Geo. B. McCutcheon.
=Hidden Children, The.= By Robert W. Chambers.
=Hidden Spring, The.= By Clarence B. Kelland.
=Hillman, The.= By E. Phillips Oppenheim.
=Hills of Refuge, The.= By Will N. Harben.
=His Official Fiancee.= By Berta Ruck.
=Honor of the Big Snows.= By James Oliver Curwood.
=Hopalong Cassidy.= By Clarence E. Mulford.
=Hound from the North, The.= By Ridgwell Cullum.
=House of the Whispering Pines, The.= By Anna Katharine Green.
=Hugh Wynne, Free Quaker.= By S. Weir Mitchell, M.D.

=I Conquered.= By Harold Titus.
=Illustrious Prince, The.= By E. Phillips Oppenheim.
=In Another Girl's Shoes.= By Berta Ruck.
=Indifference of Juliet, The.= By Grace S. Richmond.
=Infelice.= By Augusta Evans Wilson.
=Initials Only.= By Anna Katharine Green.
=Inner Law, The.= By Will N. Harben.
=Innocent.= By Marie Corelli.
=Insidious Dr. Fu-Manchu, The.= By Sax Rohmer.
=In the Brooding Wild.= By Ridgwell Cullum.
=Intriguers, The.= By Harold Bindloss.
=Iron Trail, The.= By Rex Beach.
=Iron Woman, The.= By Margaret Deland.
=I Spy.= By Natalie Sumner Lincoln.

=Japonette.= By Robert W. Chambers.
=Jean of the Lazy A.= By B.M. Bower.
=Jeanne of the Marshes.= By E. Phillips Oppenheim.
=Jennie Gerhardt.= By Theodore Dreiser.
=Judgment House, The.= By Gilbert Parker.

=Keeper of the Door, The.= By Ethel M. Dell.
=Keith of the Border.= By Randall Parrish.
=Kent Knowles: Quahaug.= By Joseph C. Lincoln.
=Kingdom of the Blind, The.= By E. Phillips Oppenheim.




=Popular Copyright Novels=

_AT MODERATE PRICES_

Ask Your Dealer for a Complete List of A.L. Burt Company's Popular
Copyright Fiction

       *       *       *       *       *

=King Spruce.= By Holman Day.
=King's Widow, The.= By Mrs. Baillie Reynolds.
=Knave of Diamonds, The.= By Ethel M. Dell.

=Ladder of Swords.= By Gilbert Parker.
=Lady Betty Across the Water.= By C.N. & A.M. Williamson.
=Land-Girl's Love Story, A.= By Berta Ruck.
=Landloper, The.= By Holman Day.
=Land of Long Ago, The.= By Eliza Calvert Hall.
=Land of Strong Men, The.= By A.M. Chisholm.
=Last Trail, The.= By Zane Grey.
=Laugh and Live.= By Douglas Fairbanks.
=Laughing Bill Hyde.= By Rex Beach.
=Laughing Girl, The.= By Robert W. Chambers.
=Law Breakers, The.= By Ridgwell Cullum.
=Lifted Veil, The.= By Basil King.
=Lighted Way, The.= By E. Phillips Oppenheim.
=Lin McLean.= By Owen Wister.
=Lonesome Land.= By B.M. Bower.
=Lone Wolf, The.= By Louis Joseph Vance.
=Long Ever Ago.= By Rupert Hughes.
=Lonely Stronghold, The.= By Mrs. Baillie Reynolds.
=Long Live the King..= By Mary Roberts Rinehart.
=Long Roll, The.= By Mary Johnston.
=Lord Tony's Wife.= By Baroness Orczy.
=Lost Ambassador.= By E. Phillips Oppenheim.
=Lost Prince, The.= By Frances Hodgson Burnett.
=Lydia of the Pines.= By Honore Willsie.

=Maid of the Forest, The.= By Randall Parrish.
=Maid of the Whispering Hills, The.= By Vingie E. Roe.
=Maids of Paradise, The.= By Robert W. Chambers.
=Major, The.= By Ralph Connor.
=Maker of History; A.= By E. Phillips Oppenheim.
=Malefactor, The.= By E. Phillips Oppenheim.
=Man from Bar 20, The.= By Clarence E. Mulford.
=Man in Grey, The.= By Baroness Orczy.
=Man Trail, The.= By Henry Oyen.
=Man Who Couldn't Sleep, The.= By Arthur Stringer.




=Popular Copyright Novels=

_AT MODERATE PRICES_

Ask Your Dealer for a Complete List of A.L. Burt Company's Popular
Copyright Fiction

       *       *       *       *       *

=Man with the Club Foot, The.= By Valentine Williams.
=Mary-'Gusta.= By Joseph C. Lincoln.
=Mary Moreland.= By Marie Van Vorst.
=Mary Regan.= By Leroy Scott.
=Master Mummer, The.= By E. Phillips Oppenheim.
=Memoirs of Sherlock Holmes.= By A. Conan Doyle.
=Men Who Wrought, The.= By Ridgwell Cullum.
=Mischief Maker, The.= By E. Phillips Oppenheim.
=Missioner, The.= By E. Phillips Oppenheim.
=Miss Million's Maid.= By Berta Ruck.
=Molly McDonald.= By Randall Parrish.
=Money Master, The.= By Gilbert Parker.
=Money Moon, The.= By Jeffery Farnol.
=Mountain Girl, The.= By Payne Erskine.
=Moving Finger, The.= By Natalie Sumner Lincoln.
=Mr. Bingle.= By George Barr McCutcheon.
=Mr. Grex of Monte Carlo.= By E. Phillips Oppenheim.
=Mr. Pratt.= By Joseph C. Lincoln.
=Mr. Pratt's Patients.= By Joseph C. Lincoln.
=Mrs. Belfame.= By Gertrude Atherton.
=Mrs. Red Pepper.= By Grace S. Richmond.
=My Lady Caprice.= By Jeffrey Farnol.
=My Lady of the North.= By Randall Parrish.
=My Lady of the South.= By Randall Parrish.
=Mystery of the Hasty Arrow, The.= By Anna K. Green.

=Nameless Man, The.= By Natalie Sumner Lincoln.
=Ne'er-Do-Well, The.= By Rex Beach.
=Nest Builders, The.= By Beatrice Forbes-Robertson Hale.
=Net, The.= By Rex Beach.
=New Clarion.= By Will N. Harben.
=Night Operator, The.= By Frank L. Packard.
=Night Riders, The.= By Ridgwell Cullum.
=Nobody.= By Louis Joseph Vance.

=Okewood of the Secret Service.= By the Author of
   "The Man with the Club Foot."
=One Way Trail, The.= By Ridgwell Cullum.
=Open, Sesame.= By Mrs. Baillie Reynolds.
=Otherwise Phyllis.= By Meredith Nicholson.
=Outlaw, The.= By Jackson Gregory.


       *       *       *       *       *


    +------------------------------------------------------+
    |        Typographical errors corrected in text:       |
    |                                                      |
    |   page  19: mortage replaced by mortgage             |
    |   page  62: Monocal replaced by Menocal              |
    |   page  63: Monocal replaced by Menocal              |
    |   page  66: dissappointed replaced by disappointed   |
    |   page 130: Sante replaced by Santa                  |
    |                                                      |
    +------------------------------------------------------+

       *       *       *       *       *






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Iron Furrow, by George C. Shedd

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE IRON FURROW ***

***** This file should be named 17088.txt or 17088.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/7/0/8/17088/

Produced by David Garcia, Jeannie Howse and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
