The Project Gutenberg eBook, The German Element in Brazil, by Benjamin
Franklin Schappelle


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net





Title: The German Element in Brazil
       Colonies and Dialect


Author: Benjamin Franklin Schappelle



Release Date: December 20, 2005  [eBook #17361]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GERMAN ELEMENT IN BRAZIL***


E-text prepared by David Starner, Ralph Janke, and the Project Gutenberg
Online Distributed Proofreading Team (http://www.pgdp.net/)



Note:
   Text in the original formatted in italic is maked as _italic_.
   Text in the original formatted in bold is marked as =bold=.





THE GERMAN ELEMENT IN BRAZIL

Colonies and Dialect

by

BENJAMIN FRANKLIN SCHAPPELLE, Ph.D.







Americana Germanica
Number 26
Americana Germanica Press
Philadelphia
1917
Copyright[TN1] 1917
by
Benjamin Franklin Schappelle.



       *       *       *       *       *


Americana Germanica
Monographs Devoted to the Comparative Study of the Literary, Linguistic
and Other Cultural Relations of Germany and America

Editor
Marion Dexter Learned
University of Pennsylvania

XXVI. THE GERMAN ELEMENT IN BRAZIL
COLONIES AND DIALECT

_(See List at the End of the Book)_


       *       *       *       *       *



RESPECTFULLY DEDICATED
TO
JOSEPH G. ROSENGARTEN, LL.D.





TABLE OF CONTENTS

Lied der Deutschbrasilianer

Preface


CHAPTER I.

THE COLONIES. HISTORY AND LOCATION.

The First Settlers

COLONIZATION IN INDIVIDUAL STATES.

Introductory Remarks
  Bahia
  Minas Geraes
  Espirito Santo
  Rio de Janeiro
  Sao Paulo
  Parana
  Santa Catharina
  Rio Grande do Sul

The Total Number of Germans in Brazil


CHAPTER II.

THE BRAZILIAN GERMAN DIALECT.

Underlying Basis of the Dialect

Brazilian German Word Forms
  Surnames
  Baptismal Names
  Terms of Family Relationship in Titles

EXAMPLES FROM BRAZILIAN GERMAN DOCUMENTS.

The Written Language

The Spoken Language

Introduction to Glossary

Glossary


APPENDIX.

The Brazilian German Press
  Almanacs
  Newspapers

Bibliography




LIED DER DEUTSCHBRASILIANER.

      Rein wie hoch am Himmelsbogen
    Unsrer Heimat Sterne stehn.
    Maechtig, wie die Meereswogen
    Gegen unsre Kueste gehn,
    Soll der Heimat Sang uns dringen
    Aus der treuen Brust hervor,
    Soll Brasiliens Preis erklingen
    Aus dem deutschen Maennerchor.

      Fuelle liegt auf deinen Fluren,
    Gottgesegnet Vaterland;
    Leuchtend zeigst du noch die Spuren
    Von des Schoepfers Meisterhand:
    In des Mittags blauen Fernen
    Wo die goldne Sonnenpracht,
    Mit des Himmels schoensten Sternen
    Schmuekt sie funkelnd deine Nacht.

      Deine fruchtgetraenkte Erde
    Gibt uns Mut zu frischem Tun,
    Gibt uns Muesse, um am Herde
    Sonder Sorge auszuruhn.
    Aus des Bodens Scholle ziehen
    Wir des Lebens bestes Mark,
    Aus des Bodens Kraft erbluehen
    Die Geschlechter frei und stark.

      Lasst uns schaffen mit der Staerke
    Dessen, der die Heimat liebt,
    Lasst uns beten, dass zum Werke
    Gott uns das Gedeihen gibt!
    Ewig heilig, ewig teuer
    Bleibest du dem deutschen Lied,
    Heimatland, in dem das Feuer
    Unsres Herdes gastlich glueht.

O. Meyer in _Uhle's Kalender_ for 1916.




PREFACE.

The primary purpose of this work is to give an idea of the dialect which
has been developed by the German-speaking element in Brazil.

As comparatively little is known by the English-speaking public
concerning the history, location and relative importance of the German
element in Brazil (judging from extant English publications referring to
the subject), the main part of the work has been preceded by a chapter
dealing with these particular phases. This first chapter is also
intended to prepare the reader to form a reasonable estimate of the
comparative importance and extent of the dialect under discussion in the
main part of the work.

In connection with this study the author is particularly indebted to the
well-known authority on German American cultural relations and
conditions, Professor Marion Dexter Learned, of the University of
Pennsylvania. It was at his suggestion and under his constant help and
advice that the plan was carried out.

While on a trip of investigation in Brazil the writer was furnished
important information and material by Friedrich Sommer, _Direktor_ of
the "Banco Allemao Transatlantico" of Sao Paulo; Henrique Bamberg of Sao
Paulo; Otto Specht, _Chefe da Seccao de Publicidade e Bibliotheca_ of
the "Secretaria da Agricultura" of Sao Paulo; Johann Potucek,
Austro-Hungarian Consul in Curityba; J.B. Hafkemeyer, S.J., of the
"Collegio Anchieta," Porto Alegre; G.A. Buechler of the "Neue Schule,"
Blumenau; Cleto Espey, O.F.M., of the "Collegio St. Antonio," Blumenau;
E. Bloch, _Engenheiro Chefe da Estrada de Ferro Santa Catharina,_
Itajahy; Nikolaus Dechent, _Direktor_ of the "Deutsche Schule,"
Joinville; Petrus Sinzig, O.F.M., of the "Convento dos Franciscanos,"
Petropolis; Edmondo Hees, Editor of the "Nachrichten," Petropolis;
Pastor Fr. L. Hoepffner of the "Deutsch-Evangelische Gemeinde," Rio de
Janeiro; W. Muenzenthaler, _Kaiserlicher General-Konsul,_ Rio de Janeiro;
and Heinrich Lotz, _Kgl. Bezirksgeologe a.D._, Berlin.

Special thanks are also due to Professor D.B. Shumway, of the
University of Pennsylvania, for valuable suggestions and assistance in
the final arrangement of the manuscript.

The above-mentioned persons are in no wise responsible for any errors
which may appear in the text.




=CHAPTER I.=


THE COLONIES. HISTORY AND LOCATION.


THE FIRST SETTLERS.

The first reference to German settlers in Brazil we have from the pen of
Hans Stade of Homberg in Hessen. Stade made two trips to Brazil; one in
1547 and one in 1549. In the latter instance he was shipwrecked but
succeeded in landing safely near the present port of Santos in the state
of Sao Paulo. As he was a skilled artillerist the Portuguese made him
commander of the fort Bertioga, the ruins of which are an interesting
landmark to this day. Later Stade spent several most trying years as the
captive of a cannibalistic tribe.

After his return to Germany, Stade published an account of his
experiences. The first edition entitled "_Wahrhafftige Historia unnd
beschreibung einer landschafft der Wilden, Nacketen, Grimmigen,
Menschfresser Leuthen in der Newen Welt America gelegen, ..._" appeared
at Marburg in 1557.[1] In this work Stade refers to two of his
fellow-countrymen located in Brazil; the one Heliodorus Eoban of Hessen,
who had charge of a sugar-refinery on the island of Sao Vicente (near
Santos); the other Peter Roesel, who was located in Rio de Janeiro as the
representative for a business firm of Antdorff.[2]

Next we come to Manuel Beckmann, the son of a German who had located in
Lisbon. He is known in history as Manoel Bequimao and was the leader in
the Maranhao revolution of 1684. This uprising, altho it came to grief,
may be regarded as the first of a long series of protests against the
home government resulting in the declaration of the independence of
Brazil on the field at Ypiranga, September 2d, 1822. Beckmann died a
martyr's death at Rio on November 2, 1685. His younger brother, Thomas
Beckmann, who had also taken part in the revolution, was acquitted.[3]

In the 18th-century there was another important German figure in
Brazilian history; that of Lieutenant-General Johann Heinrich von Boehm.
It was von Boehm who, at the head of Portuguese troops, recaptured the
city of Rio Grande in Rio Grande do Sul from the Spaniards in 1777.[4]
Von Boehm was assisted by two other German officers, i.e., the Count of
Lippe and Marschal Funk. These three characters were in a sense the
forerunners of the German battalions brought into Brazil by the First
Empire in the early part of the following century.

The first colonization of importance by Germans in Brazil did not take
place until the early part of the 19th century. Beginning with that
century there was a steady stream of non-Portuguese settlers into the
country, and of these the Germans formed an important part.


COLONIZATION IN INDIVIDUAL STATES.


_Introductory Remarks._

The following is a resume of the German colonies[5] in Brazil and a
brief introduction to their history.

For the sake of convenience, the colonies have been divided:

First; according to the states in which they are located.

Second; according to the date of founding.

Third; according to the kind of colony administratively at the time of
founding. As to this they fall under three categories:

a) Private colonies, i.e., founded by a private individual or
corporation.

b) Provincial colonies, i.e., founded by a particular state or former
province.

c) State colonies, i.e., founded by the central government, whether
during the time of the Empire[6] or since the formation of the Republic.

The word _German_ as applied to colonists refers only to natives of
Germany who became naturalized citizens of Brazil and to Brazilians of
German extraction.

Colonies located within the confines of other German colonies (_e.g.,_
Hansa, Sao Bento _etc._) are not listed.

_Direct immigration_ signifies immigration from Europe.

_Indirect immigration_ signifies immigration from a South American
country bordering on Brazil; immigration from another Brazilian state;
or from another colony within the same state.

Numerical statistics concerning individual colonies have been avoided
except in a few cases where they are of sufficient comparative
importance to be noted in a work of this scope.

All the colonies coming in consideration (excepting some of those
founded since 1890) have been "emancipated," _i.e.,_ they no longer
receive special aid from, the government and their special colonial
directorates have been abolished.

The states of Brazil which are important so far as German colonization
is concerned are Bahia, Minas Geraes, Espirito Santo, Rio de Janeiro
(Federal District), Sao Paulo, Parana, Santa Catharina and Rio Grande do
Sul.[7] This is the geographical order from north to south and the one
according to which they will be taken up.


BAHIA.

In this state is located the first German colony founded in Brazil. It
is =Leopoldina=, started as a private undertaking by Busch, Reycke and
Freireiss in 1818.[8]

=Frankenthal=, another private colony, was founded in 1822 by Peter
Weyll and Saueracker.[9]

Of all the states mentioned, Bahia is the least important so far as
German colonization is concerned. This is largely due to the fact that
its climate is too tropical to favor such colonization oft an extended
scale.


MINAS GERAES.

The private colony =Theophilo Ottoni=,[10] in the north-eastern part of
the state was founded by a German stock-company in 1851.

Recent state colonies where Germans form a considerable part of the
population are =Nova Baden, Francisco Salles, Itajuba, Joao Pinheiro,
Constanca, Vargem Grande,= and =Rodrigo Sylva=.[11]

Germans form a considerable part of the population of the capital of the
state (Bello Horizonte) and of the important city of Juiz da Fora.


ESPIRITO SANTO.

The state colony =Santa Izabel= was founded in 1847. The first settlers
were composed chiefly of Rhenish Prussians.

=Santa Leopoldina=, another state colony, was founded in 1857. A
suggestion as to the origin of the first settlers is offered by the
names of the different districts into which the colony was first
divided; _viz._; Schweiz, Sachsen, Pommern, Rheinland, Tirol and
Holland.

The two above-mentioned are the most northern of the important German
colonies in Brazil to-day.


RIO DE JANEIRO (Federal District).

=Nova Friburgo=, the oldest state colony in Brazil, was founded in 1819.
The first settlers were Swiss, but since Germans immediately followed
them and formed the larger part of the subsequent influx, Nova Friburgo
is properly classed as a German colony.

=Petropolis= was made a state colony in 1845. In reality it had its
origin as a German colony in 1838. The first settlers were German
emigrants originally bound not for Brazil but for Sydney, Australia. On
account of the bad treatment they received on the French sailing vessel
"Justine" they revolted and compelled the captain to land them at Rio de
Janeiro on December 2d, 1837. Here the Brazilian Imperial Government
assisted them and at the suggestion of Major Julius Friedrich
Koehler[12] gave them employment on the construction of the Serra road
between Estrella, located a short distance above Rio, and Parahyba do
Sul, located near the border between the Federal District and Minas
Geraes. They formed their settlement at what later became Petropolis. On
account of the satisfaction which the government found in these
immigrants it turned the settlement into a state colony in 1845, as
above mentioned.

As in the case of Santa Leopolidina, the origin of individual groups of
colonists to Petropolis is indicated by the names of some of the
sections into which the colony was divided, _viz.,_ Bingen, Ingelheim,
Moselthal, Nassau, Westphalen, Unteres-Rheinthal, Mittleres-Rheinthal,
Simmern, Castellaunerthal, Untere Pfalz, Obere Pfalz, Oberes Rheinthal,
Woestaedterthal, Schweizerthal, Wormserthal, Darmstaedterthal, etc.

Since 1850 there has been but little German immigration into the
Petropolis colony. On the other hand, this particular colony has been a
rich source for indirect German immigration into the more southern
states.

Among the recent state colonies of Rio de Janeiro that of =Visconde de
Maua= is largely populated by Germans.[13]


SAO PAULO.

The oldest German settlements in the state are the provincial colonies
founded in 1827. On November 13th of that year the first levy of
settlers, all South Germans, landed at Santos. These were apportioned
into two colonies; one located at _Santo Amaro_ and the other between
Penha and Nossa Senhora dos Garulhos.

The provincial colony of =Quilombo=, located between Itapecerica and
Contia, was founded in 1828.[14]

In 1847 the private colonies of =Ybicaba= and =Angelica= were founded by
the Senador Vergueiro. They were put on the basis of _meiacao_,[15] the
later abuse of which, by others than Vergueiro, paved the way for the
famous Heydt rescript[16] of November 3d, 1859.

In the following more recently established provincial colonies the
population is largely made up of German settlers: =Campos Salles=,
founded in 1897; =Jorge Tibirica=, founded in 1905; =Nova Europa=,
founded in 1907; and =Bandeirantes=, founded in 1908. In addition to
these, the provincial colonies of =Moncao= and =Pariquera Assu= also
contain important quotas of Germans.

In the state of Sao Paulo the Germans form to-day an urban rather than a
rural population. They are very strongly represented in Sao Paulo (the
capital), Campinas and Santos. The following towns and their vicinities
are also important centers of German population: Riberao Pires, Sao
Bernardo, Rocinha, Vallinhos, Helvetia, Nova Friburgo, Salto de Ytu,
Sorocaba, Botucatu, Riberao Preto, Sao Joao da Boa Vista, Villa
Americana, Pires, Araras, Leme, Rio Claro, Sao Carlos do Pinhal, Santa
Rita do Passo Quatro, Santa Cruz das Palmeiras, Brotas, Dous Corregos,
Jahu, Villa Raffard, Piracicaba, and Jacarehy.[17]

Excepting the older colonies first mentioned, the German element in Sao
Paulo is largely made up as the result of indirect immigration; in the
early years from the Petropolis district, and later from the more
southern states and from Argentine.


PARANA.

The state colony of =Rio Negro= was founded in 1829[18] while this
section of Brazil was still within the limits of Sao Paulo.[19] Shortly
after its founding the colony was increased by the location of members
of the mustered-out German legion of the Imperial army.[20] Subsequently
many settlers from the Sao Bento district in Santa Catharina moved over
to this colony.

The following provincial colonies are settled largely by Germans or
German-speaking Austrians: =Jesuino Marcondes, Ivahy, Iraty,= all
founded in 1907; =Itapara= and =Tayo=, both founded in 1908; and =Vera
Guarany=, founded in 1909.[21]

By far the most important center for Germans in the state is the
capital, Curityba. There are some 12,000 German-speaking residents in
this city. In addition, a large number are located in the important
cities of Lapa, Ponta Grossa, Porto da Uniao and Castro.[22]

A large part of the German element in Parana is due to indirect
immigration from Santa Catharina.


SANTA CATHARINA.

=Sao Pedro de Alcantara=, a state colony, was founded in 1828.[23] Its
first settlers came mainly from the Rhine district.

=Itajahy=[24] and =Santa Izabel=, two other state colonies were founded
in 1835 and 1846 respectively.

=Blumenau=, a private colony (originally), was founded in 1850 by Dr.
Hermann Blumenau.[25] The first settlers were mainly natives of
Pomerania and Mecklenburg. Blumenau is the most widely known (largely
because of its German name) and one of the most important German
colonies in Brazil to-day. According to Carvalho "Blumenau constitue
dans l'Amerique du Sud le type le plus parfait de la colonisation
europeenne."[26] The area of the "municipio"[27] covers 10,725 square
kilometers and is populated by about 60,000 inhabitants, the great
majority of whom are of German descent.[28] The "Stadtplatz"[29] is
composed mainly of one street 5-1/2 kilometers in length (including
Altona) and is most beautifully situated on the right bank of the river
Itajahy-Assu. It contains about 3,000 inhabitants, nearly all of whom
are Germans.

=Dona Francisca= was founded in 1851 as a private colony by the
"Hamburger Kolonisationsverein von 1849." It comprises the territory
given as a marriage dot by Dom Pedro II. to his sister, Dona Francisca,
at the time of her marriage to the Prince of Joinville of the French
House of Orleans. The "Stadtplatz" of the colony was named Joinville in
honor of the prince.

Dona Francisca was founded under favorable circumstances at a time when
many Germans, including members of the "upper classes" were leaving the
Fatherland on account of the general political discontent during the
latter part of the forties of the past century. This fact is reflected
in the German language as spoken in Joinville to-day. It is perhaps more
free from dialect than in any other German colony in Brazil. The
general cultural status of the inhabitants of Germanic origin is
relatively high.

The entire colony (municipio) of Dona Francisca contains more than
30,000 inhabitants; the "Stadtplatz" about 6,000. In both, the
inhabitants of Germanic origin form the great majority.

The colony of =Brusque=[30] was founded in 1860. Its early colonists
were composed largely of former inhabitants of the Rheinland,
Westphalia, Oldenburg and Baden. Next to Blumenau and Dona Francisca,
Brusque is to-day the most important German colony in Santa Catharina.

In the territory not included in the "municipios" mentioned above, the
larger part of the inhabitants of the following centers are of German
descent: Angelina and Santa Thereza, both founded in 1853; Therezopolis,
founded in 1860; Palhoca, Braco do Norte and Pedras Grandes.

Important numbers of Germans are located along the following rivers of
Santa Catharina: Rio Itajahy do Sul; Rio das Tijucas; Rio Braco do
Norte; and Rio Capivary.[31]

In point of numbers, Santa Catharina is next to the most important state
in Brazil so far as German colonization is concerned.


RIO GRANDE DO SUL.

=Sao Leopoldo=, a state colony, was founded in 1824. The first settlers
came from the Hunsrueck section. To-day its population is estimated at
more than 50,000, mostly of German descent.[32] We may designate Sao
Leopoldo as the center of the "Deutschbrasilianerthum" of Rio Grande do
Sul.

The state colonies of =Tres Forquilhas= and =Sao Pedro de Alcantara das
Torres= were founded in 1826. The former was settled by German
Protestants, the latter by German Catholics.

=Santa Cruz=, a state colony, was founded in 1849. Its first settlers
were mainly from Pomerania and the Rheinland.

Next in order there followed an important period of private
colonization. As a result of this we have =Rincao d'El Rei=, founded in
1850 by Dr. Israel R. Barcellos; =Mundo Novo=, founded in 1850 by
Tristao Jose Monteiro; =Conventos=, founded in 1853 by Baptista F.
Pereira e Cie.; =Estrella=, founded in 1856 by Santos Pinto; =Mariante=,
founded in 1856; and =Marata= founded in 1856 by Andreas Kochenborger
and Pedro Schreiner.

In the year 1857 two provincial colonies were founded, i.e., =Santo
Angelo= and =Nova Petropolis=.

The year 1858 marked the second period of private colonization. In that
year =Sao Lourenco= was founded by Jakob Rheingantz. The first settlers
of this colony were Pomeranians and natives of the Rheinland. In the
same year =Teutonia= was founded by a group of capitalists of Porto
Alegre.[33]

The last period of strictly provincial colonization is marked by the
founding of =Monte Alverne= in 1859 and of =Sao Feliciano= in 1867.

In the most recent period a number of colonies supported by both the
state and central governments have been founded. Of these the following
have been settled largely by Germans; =Guarany=, founded in 1891;
=Ijuhy=,[34] founded in 1891; and =Erechim=, founded in 1909.[35] In
addition, Dr. Hermann Meyer's private colonies of =Xingu= and =Neu
Wuerttemberg= were founded in this period; the former in 1897 and the
latter in 1899.

The German element is very strongly represented in the important cities
of Porto Alegre and Pelotas as well as in the "municipios" of Sao Joao
de Montenegro, Sao Sebastiao do Cahy (now includes Nova Petropolis),
Venancio Ayres, Lageado, Taquara, Cruz Alta and Palmeiro.

Rio Grande do Sul has a much larger population of German descent than
any other state in Brazil. The main reason why so many Germans settled
in this state we may attribute to the climatic conditions which are here
more favorable to Germanic peoples than in any other section of the
country.


AN ESTIMATE AS TO THE TOTAL NUMBER OF GERMANS IN BRAZIL.

It is impossible to make an exact statement as to the total number of
Germans in the country. The reasons for this are not far to seek. The
fact that an accurate census for Brazil does not exist is not surprising
when we consider the enormous expanse of territory.[36] The greater part
of this is but sparsely settled and largely covered with primeval
forests. Official statistics, where they do exist are apt to have been
carelessly compiled and often are entirely untrustworthy, "Paciencia,"
has been the watchword here as well as throughout all other walks of
life in Brazil.

If we restrict ourselves to estimate, among the total of Brazilian
citizens, those of any particular European origin, the difficulty
increases. Here the census reports offer practically no help because all
persons are listed simply as Brazilians, no reference being made as to
their origin.

The primary sources in making up the estimates are furnished by the
immigration reports as they are found in the "Ministerio da Agricultura"
in Rio and the "Secretaria da Agricultura" of several individual states.
Even here the statistics are inadequate for our purpose. As a rule only
such colonists as came in third class on ships from Europe are
listed.[37] In addition, it is impossible to determine how many
colonists came by land (indirect immigration) from adjoining South
American countries such, as Uruguay, Paraguay or Argentine.

The secondary sources, and the ones which in this instance are most
valuable, are embodied in the estimates of former colonial directors and
other officials, as well as private persons having first hand knowledge
concerning the different European elements in Brazil.

The official data offered by the Bureau of Statistics of the "Ministerio
da Agricultura" in Rio concerning immigration directly from Europe
begins with the year 1820. That concerning immigration from Germany in
particular begins with 1827. Official figures are available as to the
number of immigrants from Germany from that date to the present
excepting the years 1830-1836 inclusive, 1838, 1839, 1843, 1844, 1846,
1848 and 1849. The total is 128,233 up to the end of the year 1915.[38]

In order to determine the approximate numerical value of the German
element in the population of Brazil, many estimates worthy of
consideration have been compared. The estimates which in the opinion of
the writer have the strongest claim to accuracy, are listed below. As
will be seen, those determined upon by Friedrich Sommer, _Direktor_ of
the "Banco Allemao Transatlantico" of Sao Paulo are largely followed.
This authority has for years been making a careful study of the subject
and consequently his conclusions bear particular weight.

Taking up the states in the order as previously, we have:

    Bahia. No reliable estimates except as contained below
    in "Northern and Central States."

    Minas Geraes...............   5,000.  Sommer.
    Espirito Santo.............  25,000.  Ludwig[39]
    Rio (Fed. Dist.)...........  18,000.  Sommer.
    Sao Paulo..................  32,000.  Ibid.
    Parana ....................  35,000.  Ibid.
    Santa Catharina............ 100,000.  Mueller von Koenigswinter
    Rio Grande do Sul.......... 250,000.  Ibid.
    Northern and Central States
      (including Bahia)........  10,000.  Sommer.
                                ________
    Total...................... 475,000.

Making a fairly liberal allowance for underestimates, we may regard the
number 500,000 as representing the total number of citizens of German
descent in Brazil to-day.[40]

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 1: _V._ Tootal, p. XCV.]

[Footnote 2: _V._ Kluepfel, pp. 121 and 162.]

[Footnote 3: _Cf._ Sommer: "Manoel Beckmann." _German American Annals._
New Series. Vol. 14, Nos. 5 and 6, 1916, pp. 189-196. Also Pereira da
Silva: _Quadros_.... p. 111.]

[Footnote 4: _V._ Ludwig, p. 27.]

[Footnote 5: It is emphasized that only colonies (state, provincial, or
private) in which the German element forms an important part of the
population are noted.]

[Footnote 6: These are commonly designated as "Imperial Colonies."]

[Footnote 7: A comparatively very small number of Germans are located in
the northern and western states of Brazil. They primarily follow
business or professional careers and can hardly be classed as settlers.
Consequently they do not come in consideration in this work.]

[Footnote 8: _Cf._ Sellin, _Das Kaiserreich Brasilien_, Vol. II, p. 80.]

[Footnote 9: Ibid.]

[Footnote 10: Formerly called "Philadelphia."]

[Footnote 11: _Cf._ Report of Pedro Rache, _Inspector do Servico de
Povoamento_, in _Relatorio._]

[Footnote 12: Koehler was born in Mainz in 1810. At the age of 23 he
went to Brazil and soon became a naturalized citizen of the country. He
entered the government service and was promoted to the rank of major in
the engineering corps in 1842. Died in Petropolis in 1847.]

[Footnote 13: _Cf._ report of the inspector Antonio Ribeiro de Castro
Sobrinho in _Relatorio._]

[Footnote 14: _V._ Marcondes de Souza: _O Estado de Sao Paulo_, p. 195.
_Cf._ statement by Ernst Heinke in _Jahrbuch, Erstes_ ..., p. 250.]

[Footnote 15: I.e., lease of a section of land for the return of
one-half of the yearly products.]

[Footnote 16: A Prussian ministerial decree (also adopted by other
German states) forbidding the emigration of German citizens to Brazil.
In 1896 it was revoked for the three most southern states of Brazil,
i.e., Rio Grande do Sul, Santa Catharina and Parana.]

[Footnote 17: _Cf._ statements by C.F. Scheler in _Jahrbuch, Erstes_
..., p. 175 ff.]


[Footnote 18: In 1828 according to Grossi, p. 168.]

[Footnote 19: Parana was separated from Sao Paulo in 1853.]

[Footnote 20: _V._ Sellin, _Das Kaiserreich Brasilien_, Vol. II, p.
111.]

[Footnote 21: _Cf._ report of the inspector Manoel F. Ferreira Correia
in _Relatorio._]

[Footnote 22: Information furnished by Johann Potucek,
Austro-Hungarian Consul in Curityba.]

[Footnote 23: This is commonly referred to as the first colony in Santa
Catharina. However, Grossi (p. 168) refers to a _Colonia Alemao o
Conselheiro Pedreira_ (state colony) founded in 1827.]

[Footnote 24: Lacmann (p. 8) states that _Gross Itajahy_ was founded in
1829.]

[Footnote 25: Born 1819 at Hasselfelde in Braunschweig. Specialized in
pharmacy. In 1849 came to Brazil and laid out plans for a colony. From
1850 to 1880 he was primarily occupied in directing the colony which
bears his name. This colony was emancipated in 1880, but Dr. Blumenau
remained on the scene of his former activities until 1884, when he
returned to Germany. Died 1898.]

[Footnote 26: _V. Le Bresil Meridional,_ p. 309.]

[Footnote 27: The term "municipio" denotes a city or town together with
the surrounding districts coming under the same jurisdiction; frequently
(as used in this work) an emancipated colony.]

[Footnote 28: According to census of 1907 and calculations to date
(September, 1916) in the archives at Blumenau.]

[Footnote 29: The term "Stadtplatz" as used by the colonists designates
the seat or governmental center of a particular colony. Portuguese
"sede."]

[Footnote 30: So named in honor of the president of the state at the
time, Dr. Araujo Brusque.]

[Footnote 31: Information furnished by E. Bloch, _Engenheiro Chefe da
Estrada de Ferro Santa Catharina._]

[Footnote 32: Grossi, p. 162.]

[Footnote 33: _Cf._ Ludwig, p. 84.]

[Footnote 34: A particularly strong current of German settlers has in
recent years been moving into Ijuhy, mostly by indirect immigration.]

[Footnote 35: _Cf._ report of the inspector C. Lila da Silveira in
_Relatorio_.]

[Footnote 36: About equal to that of the United States without the
colonies and Alaska, but with the state of Texas doubled.]

[Footnote 37: The study of emigration reports in European archives does
not help us much because by no means did all persons listed as emigrants
for Brazil finally arrive in the latter country.]

[Footnote 38: In order to enable the reader to put a correct valuation
on the popular bugaboo, the "perigo allemao" (German peril), the
following facts are noted by way of comparison:

According to the statistics above referred to, the German immigrants
occupy fourth place in point of numbers for the period 1820-1915,
inclusive. They are superseded by:

     a) Italians. First mentioned in the records 1836.
        Total to 1862....................................       209
        Total to and including 1915...................... 1,348,777

     b) Portuguese. First noted in 1837.
        Total to and including 1915......................   977,524

     c) Spaniards. First noted 1841.
        Total to 1868....................................       274
        Total to and including 1915......................   470,107]

[Footnote 39: Dr. Ernst Wagemann, of the Kolonialinstitut, Hamburg,
recently estimated the German population of Espirito Santo at
20,000-30,000, according to statements by W. Muenzenthaler, German
Consular-General in Rio.]

[Footnote 40: The above estimates refer to conditions at the end of
1915. The estimate for the total population of the country for that year
was 23,000,000.]




=CHAPTER II.=


THE BRAZILIAN GERMAN DIALECT.


THE UNDERLYING BASIS AND REASONS FOR THE FORMATION OF THE DIALECT.

As may be inferred from chapter I, the German immigration into Brazil
antedating the nineteenth century was quite insignificant. Beginning
with the early years of that century, however, there was a steady
current of new settlers from the German-speaking sections of Europe into
the southern part of the country. The people who made up this current
settled, particularly during the early years, in small, widely separated
colonial nuclei where they found themselves more or less thoroughly cut
off from the outside world and its influences. It is not surprising,
therefore, to find that these people have developed a new dialect which
we may call "Brazilian German."

The Germanic settlers from Europe who had come to Brazil found
themselves located in surroundings radically different from the ones to
which they had been accustomed in the land of their nativity. Physically
they had to adapt themselves to a new climate. From the moment of their
arrival on the parcel of land allotted to them they were in contact with
many objects for which their mother tongue offered no designation. The
animals, plants, insects and even the agricultural implements in the new
home land had, to a large extent, names for which the German language
offered no equivalent. As a result, many non-germanic words had to be
immediately adopted.

In reference to the older colonies, the German-speaking immigrants from
any particular section of Germany, Switzerland or Austria would more or
less settle in a particular section of Brazil. Thus we have Petropolis
in Rio de Janeiro settled by former inhabitants of the Coblenz district
and Blumenau in Santa Catharina settled largely by Pomeranians. In a
general way it may be stated that the older colonies were in this
respect relatively homogenious, while those founded since the middle of
the past century drew their settlers to a larger extent from different
German-speaking sections of Europe.

The settlers, largely drawn from the agricultural class, naturally
brought with them from Europe a variety of German dialects. These were
more or less preserved depending on the relative isolation of the
colonies. In cases where a considerable and constant influx of settlers
either by direct or indirect immigration was kept up after the first
years of the history of any particular colony the original dialect
largely gave way to a modified form of High German, due primarily to the
normalizing influence of the German school and church. Such is the case
in the "Stadtplaetze"[41] of Dona Francisca, Blumenau, Santa Cruz and Sao
Lourenco.

The preceding statements are intended to present, as it were, the
background or basis on which the new dialect was developed. We now come
to the most potent influence in the formation of that dialect. It is the
Brazilian Portuguese, a language which has no connection with the
Germanic group. In this point, therefore, our case differs radically
from that of the student of the German dialects which have been
developed in North America.

The degree of linguistic influence exerted by the Brazilian Portuguese
on the High German or its various dialects as spoken by the immigrants
varies again according to the relative isolation of the settlements. We
have degrees ranging from that of the old settlements in the Santo Amaro
district of Sao Paulo,[42] where the German language has practically in
its entirety given way to the Brazilian Portuguese, to that of some of
the sections of the "municipios"[43] of Blumenau in Santa Catharina and
Sao Leopoldo in Rio Grande do Sul where a modified German has not only
held its own among the inhabitants of German extraction, but has also
become the language of parts of the Luso-Brazilian[44] and negro
elements as well.[45] About half way between these two extremes we might
range the case of Petropolis in Rio de Janeiro.


BRAZILIAN GERMAN WORD FORMS.

The following general principles are observed in connection with the
dialect which has been developed by the German element in Brazil.

Nouns form by far the greatest number of words taken over, followed next
in order by verbs, exclamatory words and phrases, adjectives and
adverbs. The last two appear relatively rarely.


OBSERVATIONS ON WORDS FROM THE BRAZILIAN PORTUGUESE.


I. Nouns.

A. Masculines.

1) In the case of masculines the vowel ending is as a rule dropped,
e.g.,

     _Brazilian_    _Brazilian_
     _Portuguese._  _German._     _English._

     abatimento...  abatiment...  discount.
     campo........  camp........  field, plain.
     facao-.......  fac.........  hunting-knife.
     intendente...  intendent...  administrator.
     pasto........  past........  pasture.

2) The same holds for words of the following type where there have been
further orthographical changes with preserve, however, the same phonetic
values.

     _Brazilian_    _Brazilian_
     _Portuguese._  _German._     _English._

     macaco.......  makak.......  monkey.
     trapiche.....  trapisch....  warehouse (on the wharf).

3) Internal phonetic changes have taken place in such words as:

     _Brazilian_    _Brazilian_
     _Portuguese._  _German._     _English._

     kaschero.....  kaschoer.....  shop-man, clerk (in a store).
     municipio....  munizip.....  district.


B. Feminines.

In feminines the final vowel '_-a_' is as a rule weakened to _'e'_,
e.g.,

     _Brazilian_    _Brazilian_
     _Portuguese._  _German._     _English._

     capoeira.....  capoeire....  copse.
     carreta......  carrete.....  cart.
     garaffa......  garaffe.....  bottle.
     lancha.......  lanche......  barge.
     larancha.....  laranche....  orange.
     mula.........  mule........  mule.
     persianna....  persianne...  Venetian-blind.
     picada.......  picade......  lane (through a forest).
     pimenta......  pimente.....  pepper.
     pipa.........  pipe........  barrel, tun.
     roca.........  rosse.......  clearing (of a forest).
     sanga........  sange.......  ditch.
     tolda........  tolde.......  cover, hood (of a wagon).
     traca........  trace.......  track, design.
     venda........  vende.......  inn, store.


C. Change of gender in nouns.

1) Masculine to feminine, e.g.,

     _Brazilian_    _Brazilian_
     _Portuguese._  _German._      _English._

     barranco _m._  barranke _f._  slope.
     cabresto _m._  cabreste _f._  halter.
     cachimbo _m._  kaschimbe _f._ tobacco-pipe.
     camarote _m._  camarote _f._  box (in a theater).
     cangalho _m._  cangalhe _f._  packsaddle.
     charuto _m._.  charute _f._.  cigar.
     farelo _m._..  farelle _f._.  bran.
     hiate _m._...  jatte _f._...  yacht.
     portreiro _m._ portreere _f._ pasture-ground.
     rio _m._.....  rio _f._.....
                    (rarely _m._)  stream, river.

2) Feminine to masculine, e.g.,

     _Brazilian_    _Brazilian_
     _Portuguese._  _German._     _English._

     cachaca _f._.  cachass _m._  gin, brandy (of sugar-cane).
     troca _f._...  troc _m._...  change (of money).

3) Masculine to neuter, e.g.,

     _Brazilian_    _Brazilian_
     _Portuguese._  _German._     _English._

     doce _m._....  doss _n._...  candy, confectionery.
     fosforo _m._.  fosforo _n._  match.
     tatu _m._....  tatu _n._...  armadillo.
     xarque _m._..  xarque _n._.  jerked beef.

4) Feminine to neuter, e.g.,

     _Brazilian_    _Brazilian_
     _Portuguese._  _German._     _English._

     canoa _f._...  kanoe _n._..  monoxylon, dugout.
     farinha _f._.  farin _n._..  flour.

From the above examples it will be observed that the gender of the
Brazilian German noun is, where there has been a change from that of
the original Brazilian Portuguese, as a rule, the same as that of the
High German word replaced, e.g.,

     _Brazilian German._    _High German._

     barranke _f._........  Boeschung_f._
     cachass _m._.........  Schnaps _m._
     camarote _f._........  Theaterloge _f._
     charute _f._.........  Zigarre _f._
     doss _n._............  Konfekt _n._
     farelle _f._.........  Kleie _f._
     farin _n._...........  Mehl _n._
     fosforon _n._........  Streichholz_n._
     kaschimbe _f._.......  Tabakspfeife _f._
     portreere _f._.......  Weide _m._
     troc _m._............  Wechsel _m._


D. Nouns of mixed origin are quite frequent, e.g.,

     _Brazilian German._    _English._

     aboboramus...........  stewed (and mashed) pumpkin.
     korbgarrafao.........  demijohn.
     miljekolben..........  cob (of corn).
     mesclahosen..........  trousers (striped).
     ochsencarrete........  ox-cart
     palhazigarrette......  cigarette (with cornhusk wrapper).
     polizeidelegado......  inspector of police.
     puschochse...........  draught-ox.
     rocewirtschaft.......  agriculture, farming.
     sellofiskal..........  revenue agent.
     vendaschuld..........  drinking-score, debt for drink.


II. Verbs.

Brazilian German verbs are commonly formed by adding a weak ending,
_'-en'_ or _'-ieren'_ to the Portuguese stem, e.g.,

     _Portuguese._    _Brazilian German._  _English._

     amolar.........  amolieren..........  to grind, sharpen.
     capinar........  capinen............  to weed.
     cobrar.........  cobrieren..........  to cash, take in (money),
     lacar .........  lassen.............  to throw the lasso.
     puxar..........  puschen, pussen....  to pull.
     repousar.......  posen..............  to rest.
     requerer.......  rekerieren.........  to request.
     rocar..........  rossieren..........  to clear of weeds.
     sellar.........  sellieren..........  to stamp.
     tocar..........  tocken.............  to beat, strike.
     trocar.........  trocken............  to change (money etc.).

In pronunciation the Brazilian German differs still more from the
Portuguese than the printed forms would indicate. The main additional
differences in this case are the following:

1) The noun ending '_-ao'_ has the value of _'-ong'_ instead of the
Portuguese sound represented by _'-ao.'_ Thus, by phonetic spelling we
would have, e.g.,

     _Brazilian German._       _Portuguese._

     algodong             for  algodao.
     capong                "   capao,
     garrafong             "   garrafao,
     patakong              "   patacao.
     questong              "   questao,
     sertong               "   sertao,
     violong               "   violao.

2) The _'j'_ instead of remaining sonant as in Portuguese,
becomes surd.[46] Thus

     _Brazilian German._       _Portuguese._

     feschong             for  feijao,
     schakare              "   jacare.
     Schwong               "   Joao.

3) In the case of infinitives the final _'-n'_ is not sounded,
particularly in sections influenced by the Hunsrueck dialect. These forms
are therefore pronounced, e.g.,

     _Brazilian German._       _Portuguese._

     amoliere             for  amolieren.
     kapine                "   kapinen.
     pusche                "   puschen.
     tocke                 "   tocken.


SURNAMES.

As a general rule German family names are retained in their original
form in all sections where the German language held its own among the
colonists. This is especially true where such names offer no difficulty
in their pronunciation to people having Portuguese as their mother
tongue. On the other hand, where such names could not be readily
pronounced by Luso-Brazilians,[47] they underwent changes to greater or
less extent even in communities where the German element is most
strongly represented. Where the German language disappeared the German
family name as a rule disappeared with it, or was retained in such a
form as to be hardly recognizable.

By way of example a number of modifications in surnames are noted below;
first, from a section where the German language has almost entirely
given way to Portuguese[48], and second, from one of the strongest
German-speaking sections of Brazil.[49]

1)

Emmich became _M'_. The Portuguese could not pronounce the "-ich" and
consequently it dropped off, resulting in the formation of what is
probably one of the shortest family names in existence.[50]

Felippoffsky became _Felippe, Franz,_ or _Franco_. In this instance one
branch of the family adopted the first part of the original family name
and other branches made surnames out of the Christian name of the first
immigrant, i.e., Franz Felippoffsky.

Glaser became _Frittenmaku_. The first immigrant was Fritz Glaser. One
of his characteristics was lameness. The new family name is equivalent
in meaning to "der lahme Fritz."

Gottfried became _Gottesfried, Gottesfrid_ or _Gottesfritz_.

Helfenstein became _Helfestein_.

Hessel became _Essel_.

Klein became _Cleene_. In this instance a German dialect variant of the
original became the new family name.

Reinberg became _Remberg_.

Rochenbach became _Rocumbak_ or _Rocumbaque_.

Roschel became _Rocha_.

Toll became _Doll_ or _Doro_.

Weisshaupt became _Sapateiro_. In this instance the first Weisshaupt was
a shoemaker. The trade name translated into Portuguese became the family
name.

Zuellich became _Sills_.

2)

Waechter became _Walter_.

Werner became _Vierne_.

From the above examples it will be noticed that the new family names
show, as a general rule, an adaptation of the original to Portuguese
pronunciation.


BAPTISMAL NAMES.

So far as baptismal names are concerned, the case is quite different
from that applying to surnames. While the latter have been modified to a
great extent only where the German language gave way to the Portuguese
almost entirely, as stated, the former have been replaced by their
Portuguese counterparts, as a rule, in all parts of Brazil.[51] Probably
the chief reason for this is sentiment, or, to use what is in this case
perhaps a more accurate term, patriotism. The Portuguese Christian name
in the country in question distinguishes the individual as a Brazilian,
not as a German. The people under discussion regard themselves first of
all as Brazilians.[52] While, according to their idea the retention and
cultivation of their "Deutschthum" makes them better and more valuable
Brazilian citizens, they carefully differentiate between "Deutschthum"
and (to use their own expression) "Deutschlaenderthum."

The following are examples of Portuguese baptismal names which are
commonly substituted for their German counterparts by Brazilian Germans.

     _Portuguese form._        _German form._

     Adolfo              for   Adolf.
     Alberto              "    Albert.
     Augusto              "    August.
     Bernardo             "    Bernard.
     Carlos               "    Karl.
     Edmundo              "    Edmund.
     Eduardo              "    Eduard.
     Emilio               "    Emil.
     Ernesto              "    Ernst.
     Estevao              "    Stephan.
     Ewaldo               "    Ewald.
     Francisco            "    Franz.
     Frederico            "    Friedrich.
     Germano              "    Hermann.
     Guilhermo            "    Wilhelm.
     Gustavo              "    Gustav.
     Henrique             "    Heinrich.
     Ignacio              "    Ignaz.
     Joao                 "    Johann.
     Jorge                "    Georg.
     Jose                 "    Joseph.
     Julio                "    Julius.
     Leopoldo             "    Leopold.
     Luiz                 "    Ludwig.
     Maximiliano          "    Maximilian
     Paulo                "    Paul.
     Pedro                "    Peter.
     Ricardo              "    Richard.
     Roberto              "    Robert.
     Rodolfo (Rudolfo)    "    Rudolf.
     Theodoro             "    Theodor.


TERMS OF FAMILY RELATIONSHIP IN TITLES.

For the terms of family relationship in titles (business, etc.) the
Portuguese forms are commonly used where the German forms would
naturally be expected (i.e., in exclusively Brazilian German
publications, etc.). Among the forms most frequently used in this manner
(in full or abbreviated form, singular or plural) are the following:[53]

     _Portuguese form._        _German form._

     Filho               for   Sohn.
     Irmao                "    Bruder.
     Sobrinho             "    Neffe.
     Viuva                "    Witwe.


EXAMPLES OF BRAZILIAN GERMAN FROM DOCUMENTS.

The Written Language.

The following is an excerpt made from a short story entitled "Unrecht
schlaegt seinen eigenen Herrn."[54]

Der reiche Estancieiro[55] Joao Rodrigues sass eines Tages unter der
grossen schattigen Figueira,[56] welche das Wahrzeichen der Estancia[57]
Sao Manoel bildete. Er berechnete eben, wie viel Schlachtvieh er dieses
Jahr verkaufen koennte, und fand, dass es mindestens 700 Stueck seien. Das
gab ein schoenes Haeufchen Geld; denn die Viehpreise waren dieses Jahr
hoch. Unter 60$000[58] sollte ihm kein Stueck aus der Invernada[59] fort;
das machte rund 42 Contos[60] aus.

... "Compadre,[61] ich habe einen Auftrag, fuer eine benachbarte
Charqueada[62] rund 1000 Stueck Schlachtvieh aufzukaufen...."

... Damit war der Handel abgeschlossen, und die beiden Compadres
verabschiedeten sich, jeder zufrieden: Der Estancieiro, weil er ein
gutes Geschaeft gemacht hatte, und der Tropeiro,[63] weil er morgen ein
noch besseres zu machen hoffte!

Des anderen Tages stellte sich unser Estancieiro bei guter Zeit im
Geschaeftshause ein und fand daselbst seinen Compadre Bento schon in
angeheiteter Stimmung in der Venda[64] sitzen.

... "Noch fuer einen Augenblick," stotterte da wieder der betrunkene
Tropeiro. "Unter uns beiden braucht's zwar keine Quittung, ich habe
dein Vieh und du hast mein Geld; damit ist unsere Sache erledigt. Aber
bei den Herren von der Charqueada muss ich etwas Schwarz auf Weiss
vorweisen; ..."

... So wollte er gleich heute die ein paar hundert Milreis betragene
Vendaschuld begleichen.

... "Einen Moment Gedult, Compadre Joao, gleich ists prompt."[65] Und
wirklich, es dauerte nur einige Minuten, so hatte der Estancieiro seine
Rechnung zu Haenden, sie betrug 765$000. Er zug 4 von den
funkelnagelneuen Zweihunderten heraus und reichte dieselben dem
Geschaeftsmanne hin. Der beschaute sich die Dinger genau, holte aus
seinem Geldschrank einen Schein derselben Estampa[66] heraus, befuehlte
das Papier, schuettelte nachdenklich den Kopf und sagte nur das eine
Woertchen "falsch"!


EXAMPLES FROM ADVERTISEMENTS.

Advertisements in almanacs, newspapers, etc., appearing in German and
intended only for the German reading-public offer a rich source to the
student of Brazilian German words and phrases. The following examples
are by no means unusual. They set forth the principle which obtains in
practically all German publications in Brazil.

1.) FROM ALMANACS. (For meanings of terms _V._ Glossary.)

Luchsinger E. Co.... Import von Fazendas und Molhados....[67]

Selbach e Cia.... Internationale Verlags- u. Sortiments-Buchhandlung,
Buchdruckerei, Buchbinderei und Kartonnagen-Fabrik....[68]

Fraeb e Co.... Export von ... Haar, Wolle, Xarque, Gorduras, etc.,
etc.[69]

Otto Niemeyer. Seccos e Molhados.... Eigenes Armazem und
Trapiche....[70]

... Jose A. Picoral ... Papier-und Palhazigaretten. ... Leichte und
starke Charuten....[71]

Fraeb e Co.... Import: Fazendas, Miudezas, Molhados, Ferragens, Salz
u.s.w....[72]

Vva. Jose Mueller e Cia. Geschaeftshaus in Fazendas, Louca, Miudezas,
Seccos und Molhados, Kolonie-Produkten.[73]

... Sattlerei von Jorge Pedro Grub ... Zuggeschirre fuer Aranhas, Zaeume,
Caronas, Peitschen u.s.w. ...[74]

Paulo Groetzner, Biscoutosfabrik "Lucinda." ... Leistungsfaehigste Fabrik
in Biscontos, Bolachas, Bonbons, Konfitueren und allen besseren
Backwaaren. Escriptorio und Verkauf en gros: Alto Cabral.[75]

2.) FROM NEWSPAPERS. (For meanings of terms _V._ Glossary.)

Comp. Nac. de Navegacao Costeira. Der neue Doppelschraubendampfer
_Itajuba_ am Trapiche der Costeira ... Befoerdert Passageire, Frachten,
Encommendas, etc.[76]

Antigo Hotel Koch.... Bevorzugtes Haus der Musterreiter. Eigenes
Portreiro. Sorgsame Verpflegung der Reittiere. Joao Spitteler,
Eigentuemer.[77]

Hotel do Sul von Felippe Werb Filho. Wird dem reisenden Publikum ...
empfohlen.... Gute Stallungen.[78]

Kolonisten pflanzt Aipim, Mandioca, Araruta!...[79]

Aranha in bestem Zustande mit vorzueglichem Pferd zu verkaufen.[80]

Lageado. Carlos Genehr, Zahnarzt, empfiehlt sich den Bewohnern dieser
Villa und der umliegenden Pikaden....[81]

... zwischen der Eisenbahnstation und der Villa gelegen, fuer
Kolonisation vermessen und in Lotes von 4 bis 25 Alqueires
einteilen lassen ... der darauf befindliche Matebestand ein ganz
hervorragender.... Der Eigentuemer Bernardo Olsen....[82]

2 Pferde zugelaufen (1 Baio und 1 Zaino) Gegen erstattung der Unkosten
abzuholen bein Inspektor Jakob Neuhaus, ...[83]


POETRY.

A great deal of excellent poetry has been written by representatives of
the German element in Brazil. These writers have, however, primarily
used High German as their medium of expression and consequently their
works do not come in consideration in this study of a dialect. On the
other hand, we frequently come across poems where Brazilian German forms
are more or less in evidence. The following, in which the Hunsrueck
dialect forms the Germanic basis is presented by way of example.[84]
(Apologies to Goethe!)


_Gutes Geschaeft oder eine Pechincha._[85]

    Wer reit' lo dorch Storm un Wettergeriesel?
    Das is der Schrauber auf seime Isel.
    Der Hut is gebunne fest unner dem Kinne,
    Der Musterranze bammelt ihm hinne.

    "Freund Michel, was machst fuer ein banges Gesicht?"
    "'Sein Sie's wahrhaftig? Ich glaabten es nich!
    "'Der Schrauber wirklich mit Mala[86] un Ranze?
    "'Das is lo die reine Pikadewanze!'"[87]

    "Mein lieber Freund mach' Platz mal hier!
    "Die schoensten Muster zeige ich dir:
    "Algodao,[88] Riscado[89] und Druckkattun--"
    "'Laassen Se zu! Was soll 'ch mit dem Krempel lo tun?'"

    Dau, Vadder! raunt Mutter, loss 's Hannele sein!
    Der Schrauber seift dich e sunst jaemmerlich ein.
    "'Halt dei Mund un scher' dich rein in dei Kich,'
    "'De Schrauber kenn' un seine Schlich!'"

    "Willst, lieber Freund, du das Neueste sehn?
    "Hier hochfeine Ponchos[90] und Kasemir schoen,
    "Korsetts und bunte Struempf zum Praesent--
    "Bei Bahrzahlung zehn Prozent Abatiment"[91]

    Dau, Vadder! raunt Mutter, loss ja dich nit schnappe,
    Du hast noch genug an de Meier ze berappe!
    "Still!" murmelte Herr Michel, "un schwaetze mer nit!
    "So'n Mann als wie eich, der hat je Kredit."

    Der Michel kauft und Herr Schrauber notiert,
    Drei Monate drauf hat der Michel falliert.
    Der Schrauber hoert es: "Sie fassen ihn an!
    Sie gehen ihm an seine Venda[92] heran!"

    Herrn Schrauber grausset's, er steigt auf die Mule,[93]
    Ihm ist's um zehn Contos[94] am Herzen so schwule,
    Er taet im Galoppe "zer Venda reite,"
    Er kam, sagt _bom dia!_[95]--Der Michel war pleite!"


THE SPOKEN LANGUAGE.

The dialect under discussion, as spoken in the "pikaden" is practically
incomprehensible to the German-speaking person traveling in Brazil for
the first time. To the uninitiated it is even harder to understand than
the German dialects of North America. The latter developed under the
influence of a related language, as has been stated, while the former
came into being because of linguistic influences entirely foreign.

In order to give an idea of the spoken Brazilian German the following
"Sprachprobe" by Breitenbach[96] is reproduced. While of somewhat
peculiar composition, the example below quoted is a good representation
of spoken Brazilian German.

     Ein Kolonist faehrt in seinem mit einer Tolde[97] versehenen Wagen
     aus, der mit einem Tupiano[98] und einem Zebruno[99] bespannt ist,
     welche er von einem Tropeiro[100] von der Serra[101] gekauft hat.
     Er will seinen Compadre[102] besuchen, findet die Porteira[103] zur
     Pikade[104] verschlossen, oeffnet sie und erfaehrt von der ihm
     entgegenkommenden Frau seines Compadre, der Mann sei in die
     Rosse[105] gegangen, um einige Miljekolben[106] fuer die Mule[107]
     und einige Bobres[108] fuer die Schweine zu holen, welche im
     Poteiro[109] seien. Wenn er den Compadre aufsuchen wolle, so wuerde
     er ihn leicht finden, jenseits der Sange,[110] die aber steile
     Barankas[111] habe, so dass man beim Ueberschreiten derselben
     vorsichtig sein muesse. Da unser Freund seinen Compadre in der Rosse
     nicht findet, so geht er in den nahen Wald, aus dem Hundgebell ihm
     entgegen schallt. Mit seinem Fakong[112] schlaegt er einige
     Taquaras[113] und Zipos[114] nieder, um sich den Weg zu bahnen.
     Bald trifft er denn auch seinen Compadre, der soeben ein Tatu[115]
     ausgegraben und mit seinem Fuchs[116] erschlagen hat. Nach den
     ueblichen Begruessungen begeben sich beide ins Haus und beschliessen,
     sich am Nachmittag die Carreira[117] anzusehen. Gleichzeitig will
     der Compadre einige Saecke Farin[118] mitnehmen, um sie dem
     Vendisten[119] zu verkaufen. Zu diesem Behuf muss eine Mule
     eingefangen werden was aber nicht ganz leicht ist. Die Mule ist
     naemlich sehr stoerrisch und muss gepusst[120] und getockt[121]
     wereden. Beim Hause angelangt, wird dem Tiere die Cangalje[122]
     aufgelegt und die Ladung befestigt. Dann geht's fort.


INTRODUCTION TO THE GLOSSARY OF BRAZILIAN GERMAN TERMS.

For reasons previously stated, the language or dialect of the German
settlers in Brazil underwent an almost immediate change, not in its
syntax, but in its vocabulary. Had the immigrants and their descendants
only adopted such words as had no equivalent in their mother-tongue, our
case would be much simpler. They went, however, much further, and, as a
result even many of the commonest words dealing with the household or
farm were replaced at an early date by Brazilian Portuguese terms, or by
new formations based on them.

In the following representation of Brazilian German words and phrases an
attempt has been made to select only such as have been adopted by
German-speaking citizens in all parts of the country in question. In the
few cases where words or phrases noted seem characteristic of any
particular section of Brazil that fact is indicated. The glossary,
moreover, makes no claim to completeness.

The sources[123] of the expressions listed are Brazilian German
newspapers, books, almanacs, pamphlets, advertisements, "Festschriften,"
etc.,[124] as well as conversation with colonists. In the latter
instance only such terms as were repeatedly used to the exclusion of the
corresponding German terms were noted.[125]

In the glossary is given first the Brazilian German term (in certain
cases with variations), followed, by way of comparison as well as
definition, by the corresponding High German form. If the Brazilian
Portuguese[126] equivalent differs in form or gender it is given in
parentheses. If no such parenthetical form appears it signifies that
both languages are in the particular instance identical.[127] The German
element in mixed compounds being self-evident, such words are treated as
the simple Brazilian German forms.

Gender is indicated except in the case of masculine nouns ending in
_'-o'_ and feminines ending in _'-a.'_

Terms dealing with weights, measures and coinage have not been noted
except in cases where the Brazilian German form shows a modification of
the original and in instances where the terms refer to units no longer
current.[128]

Special abbreviations:

     R. = Rio de Janeiro.
     R.G. = Rio Grande do Sul.




GLOSSARY.


=A.=

     _Brazilian German._             _High German._

     abacaxi _m._ .................  Ananas.
     abatiment _m._ (abatimento) ..  Preisermaessigung,
     abobora _or_ abobra ..........  Kuerbis.
     abobora-mus _n._ .............  Kuerbis-mus.
     agriao .......................  Brunnenkresse. R.
     aipim _m._ (aipim, aipii
       _m._) ......................  Maniok (suesser).
     aldeamento _m._ ..............  Indianersiedlung. R.G.
     aldeia (aldeia _or_ aldea) ...  Dorf, Weiler.
     alfandega ....................  Zollamt, Steueramt.
     algodao ......................  Baumwolle.
     amolieren (amolar) ...........  schleifen, schaerfen.
     aranha .......................  Gig (_vehicle_).
     araruta ......................  Pfeilwurz.
     armazem _m._ .................  Kaufladen.
     arroba, arrobe _f._(arroba) ..  14.689 Kg. (_Weight._)
     arroio .......................  Bach.
     ate a volta ..................  bis zur Rueckkehr!
     ateloge _n._ .................  Aufwiedersehen.
     (_From_ ate logo. _Not used as
       noun in Portuguese._)
     ate logo .....................  auf Wiedersehen!


=B.=

     _Brazilian German._             _High German._

     baio .........................  Pferd (castanienbraunes).
     bakeljau _m._ (bacalhao) .....  Stockfisch, Kabeljau.
     balse _f._ ...................  Faebre, Floss.
     banhado ......................  Sumpf.
     baradi _m.V._ cachaca ........
     baranca ......................  Boeschung, Uferboeschung.
     baranke _f.V._ baranca .......
     barracao .....................  Baracke, Einwandererhaus.
     barranke _f.V._ baranca ......
     barre _f._ (barra) ...........  Hafeneinfahrt.
     barricaria ...................  Boettcherei.
     batata, batate, _f._ (batata)   Kartoffel (brasilianische).
       _(The term "batate" is at
       times applied to the "Irish"
       potato, altho the latter is
       generally called "Kartoffel"
       or "europaeische Kartoffel.")_
     batate doce _f._ (batata doce)  Suesskartoffel.
     becco ........................  Gaesschen, kleine Gasse.
     benzedor _m._ ................  Wunderdoktor.
     benzedura ....................  Besprechung der Krankheiten,
                                       Beschwoerung.
     bicho ........................  Insekt, Tier.
     biscouto .....................  Zwieback.
     boa noite ....................  gute Nacht! guten Abend!
     boas tardes ..................  guten Tag! guten Abend!
     bohre _f. V._ abobora ........
     bolacha ......................  Schiffszwieback.
     bom ..........................  gut!
     bombilha .....................  Materoerchen (i.e., Roerchen zum Mate-
                                       trinken).
     bombacha (bombachas _f.plu._)   Pluderhose. R.G.
     bom dia ......................  guten Tag!
     bond _m._ (bonde _m._) .......  Tram, Strassenbahnwagen.
     botina .......................  Halbstiefel.
     brasse _f._ (braca) ..........  2.20 M. _(Measure of length.)_
     buger _m._ (bugre _m._) ......  Indianer (Botokude).


C.

     _Brazilian German._             _High German._

     cabo .........................  Unteroffizier.
     caboclo ......................  Indianermischling.
                                     _(Portuguese and Indian.)_
     cabreste _f.V._ kabreste .....
     cachaca _m._, cachass _m._
       (cachaca) ..................  Zuckerrohrschnapps.
     cacique _m._ .................  Indianerhaeuptling.
     cadea, cade _f._ (cadea,
       cadeia) ....................  Gefaengniss.
     camarao, camarong _m._
     (camarao) ....................  Krabbe.
     camarote _f._ (camarote _m._)   Theaterloge.
     campamento (acampamento) .....  Feldlager.
     campanha .....................  Ebne.
     campo, camp _m._ (campo) .....  Grassland, Flur.
     caneca .......................  Wasserbecher.
     cangalje _f._ (cangalho) .....  Kreuzbocksattel, Packsattel.
     canna _m.V._ cachaca .........
     canne _f._ (canna, cana) .....  Zuckerrohr.
     canoa, _n._, canu _n._
       (canoa _f._) ...............  Einbaum.
     capa .........................  Mantel.
     capao, capoes _m.plu._ .......  Wald (kleiner, ausgerotteter)
     capataz _m._ .................  Vorarbeiter.[TN2]
     capinen _V._. kapinen ........
     capitao ......................  Hauptmann.
     capivara .....................  Wasserschein.
     capoeire _f._ (capoeira) .....  Gebuesch. _(Land which had been
                                       cleared, but which is again
                                       covered with underbrush.)_
     caramba ......................  potztausend! Donnerwetter!
     carapato (carrapato) .........  Zecke, Holzbock.
     carcereiro ...................  Kerkermeister.
     careje _f._ ..................  Materoesterei.
     cargueiro ....................  Lasttraeger, Lasttier, Lasttierfuehrer.
     carona .......................  Sattelkissen.
     carreira .....................  Pferderennen, Wettrennen.
     carrete _f._ (carreta) .......  Karren.
     carreteiro ...................  Fuhrmann, Kaerrner.
     carroca ......................  Karosse, Kutsche.
     carroceiro ...................  Fuhrmann.
     carteira .....................  Brieftasche.
     catuno .......................  Dieb.
     caspite ......................  potztausend! Donnerwetter!
     cautela (cautela, cautella) ..  Einschreibezettel.
     cavalheiro ...................  Herr, Edelmann. (_Gentleman._)
     caxeiro ......................  Ladendiener.
     caxoeira (cachoeira) .........  Wasserfall, Stromschnelle.
     chacara (chacara, chacra) ....  Grundstueck, Landhaus.
     chapeo republicano ...........  Hut (der Gauchos). R.G.
     charque _n.V._ xarque ........
     charqueada _f.V._ xarqueada ..
     charute _f._, cherrute _f._
         (charuto, cherruto) ......  Zigarre.
     chilena ......................  Spore. (_As worn by gauchos._) R.G.
     chimarrao (chimarra) .........  Ervatee. (_Without sugar._) R.G.
     churasco (churrasco) .........  Spiessbraten. R.G.
     cigarro ......................  Zigarette. (_Usually wrapped in
                                       palha._")
     cinema _m._ ..................  Lichtbilderhalle.
     cipo _m._ ....................  Liane, Schlingpflanze.
     cobranca .....................  Einkassierung.
     cobrieren _V._ kobrieren .....
     cochilha .....................  Huegelkette, Huegelland.
     cochinilhos _m. plu._ ........  Kochenillewaren.
     compadre _m._ ................  Gevatter, Freund.
     companheiro ..................  Gefaehrte, Kamerad.
     coronel ......................  Oberst.
     corral _m._ ..................  Viehhof.
     couveflor _n._ (couveflor _f._) Blumenkohl. (R.)
     coxemalade _f._ (coxo = lame
       _and_ melado = _sap of sugar
       cane_) .....................  Lecksyrup.
     coxinilhos _V._ cochinilhos ..
     cuia, cuja, cuya (cuia, cuya)   Matebecher. (_Made of a hollowed
                                       gourd._)


=D.=

     _Brazilian German._             _High German._

     delegado .....................  Inspektor, Abgeordneter.
     despaschieren (despachar) ....  abfertigen[TN3], aus dem Zollamt
                                       holen.
     devolut (devoluto) ...........  vakant, brachliegend. (Devolutes
                                       Land == Regierungsland.)
     diligencia ...................  Postwagen, Diligence.
     dispaschieren _V._
       despachieren. ..............
     doca (doca) ..................  Hafendamm, Landeplatz.
     doce _n._, doss n. (doce _m._)  Suessigkeit, Konfekt.
     dona .........................  Frau, Fraeulein.


=E.=

     _Brazilian German._             _High German._

     egua (egua, egoa) ............  Stute.
     encommenda, ericommende _f._
         (encommenda) .............  Sendung (per Post, Bahn oder Schiff).
     enfin (enfin, emfim) .........  mit einem Worte, endlich.
     engenho _m._ .................  Zuckermuehle.
     erva .........................  Paraguaythee (ilex paraguayensis).
     erva mate _m._ ...............  _Ibid._
     escriptorio ..................  Buereau.
     eskadron _m._ (esquadao) .....  Schwadron.
     esta bom .....................  es ist gut!
     estampa ......................  Gepraege, Abdruck.
     estancia .....................  Landgut, Viehzuechterei.
     estancieiro ..................  Viehzuechter.
     e tanto ......................  und so und so viel.


=F.=

     _Brazilian German._             _High German._

     fac _m._ (facao) .............  Waldmesser.
     fakong _m. V._ fac ...........
     farello, farelle _f._ (farelo)  Kleie.
     farinha, farin _n._ (farinha)   Mehl, Mandiocamehl.
     farrapo, farrape _m._ (farrapo) Revolutionaer. (_Of 1835._) R.G.
     fazenda ......................  Landgut
     fazendas .....................  Schnittwaren, Stoffe, Waren.
                                     Landgueter.
     fazendenloge _f._ (fazendas
       _and_ loja) ................  Warenladen.
     feijao .......................  Schminkbohne, schwarze Bohne.
     feitor _m._ ..................  Verwalter, Aufseher.
     ferragens _f. plu._ ..........  Eisenwaren.
     figueira .....................  Feigenbaum.
     foice _f._ (foica, foice,
       fouce, fouxe) ..............  Buschsichel.
     forca ........................  Streitkraft, Revolutionaerbande.
     fosforo _n._ (fosforo) .......  Streichholz.
     freguez _m._ .................  Kunde.
     freguezia ....................  Kirchspiel.
     fuchs _m.V._ foice ...........
     fumo, fum _m._ (fumo) ........  Tabac.


=G.=

     _Brazilian German._             _High German._

     gaita ........................  Dudelsack, Zieharmonica.
     gallinha .....................  Huhn.
     galpao .......................  Schuppen, Huette.
     garaffe _f._ (garaffa) .......  Flasche.
     garca ........................  Reiher.
     garonne _f._ (garonna) .......  Reitdecke, Satteldecke (aus Leder).
     garrafao, garafao (garrafao) .  grosse Flasche.
     garupa .......................  Kruppe.
     gateado ......................  schwarzgefleckt (von Tieren).
     gazose _f._ (gazosa) .........  Brauselimonade.
     gordura ......................  Fettware (i.e., Schmalz, etc.).
     governador _m._ ..............  Statthalter.
     gramme _f._ (grama) ..........  Weidegras, Hundgras, Quecken.
     guisada (guisado) ............  Ragout, Wuerzspeise.


=I.=

     _Brazilian German._             _High German._

     intendent _m._
       (intendente _m._) ..........  Verwalter, Landrat, Intendant.
     invernada ....................  Winterquartier. (_For cattle._)


=J.=

     _Brazilian German._             _High German._

     jacare _m._ ..................  Krokodil, Kaiman.
     jaguatirica ..................  Tigerkatze.
     jatte _f._ (hiate _m._) ......  Segelschiff, Jacht, Zweimaster.


=K=.

     _Brazilian German._             _High German._

     kabokler _V._ caboclo ........
     kabreste f. (cabresto) .......  Halfter.
     kadee _f.V._ cadea ...........
     kamp _V._ campo ..............
     kangalje _f.V._ cangalje .....
     kanoe _n._, kanoh _n.V._ canoa
     kapinen (capinar) ............  gaeten, jaeten.
     karrete _V._ carrete .........
     kartonnage _f._ (cartonnagens
       _f. plu._) .................  Pappware, Pappschachtel.
     kaschass _m.V._ cachaca ......
     kaschero, kaschoer _m.V._
       caxeiro ....................
     kaschimbe, _f._ (cachimbo) ...  Tabakspfeife.
     kobrieren (cobrar) ...........  einkassieren, einnehmen.
     korbgarrafao (garaffao) ......  Korbflasche.


=L=.

     _Brazilian German._             _High German._

     laco .........................  Schlinge.
     ladeira ......................  Abhang (eines Berges), steiler Weg.
     lagarto ......................  Eidechse (grosse).
     lancha, lanche _f._ (lancha) .  Lastkahn, Boot.
     larancha, laranche _f._
       laranje _f._ (laranja) .....  Orange.
     lassen (lacar) ...............  Schlinge werfen, mit der Schlinge
                                       fangen.
     late _f._, latte _f._ (lata) .  Blechbuechse, Dose, Kasten.
     lelong _f._ (leilao) .........  Versteigerung, Auktion.
     loege _f._ (loja) .............  Kaufmannsladen.
     lote _f._ ....................  Grundstueck, Landparzelle, Lose.
     louca ........................  Tafelgeschirr.


=M=.

     _Brazilian German._             _High German._

     macaco .......................  Affe.
     macho ........................  Maulesel.
     mais ou menos ................  mehr oder weniger, ungefaer.
     makak _m.V._ macaco ..........
     mala .........................  Reisetasche, Mantelsack.
     mamong _m._ (mamao) ..........  Rizinus, Wunderbaumfrucht.
     mandioca .....................  Maniok.
     mandubi _f., m._ (mandubi _m._,
       amendoim _m._) .............  Erdnuss.
     manga ........................  Hofplatz (fuer Tiere).
     mangeira (manjeira) ..........  Futterstaette, Viehhof.
     marchador ....................  in langsamem Trapp.
     mascato (mascate _m._) .......  Hausierer, Troedler.
     mata-bicho _(Slang)_ .........  Schnapps.
     matungo ......................  Klepper.
     mellado ......................  Syrup.
     mercado ......................  Markt.
     mesclahosen _f. plu._ (mescla
       = Mischung) ................  gestreifte Hosen.
     mestizo (mestico) ............  Mestize, Mischling.
     mico .........................  Pfeifaffe.
     milho ........................  Mais.
     miljekolben _m._ (miljo) .....  Maiskolben.
     miudezas _f. plu._ ...........  Kleinigkeiten, kleine Gegenstaende.
     mula, mule _f._ (mula) .......  Maulesel, Maultier.
     multe _f._ (multa) ...........  Geldstrafe.
     multieren (multar) ...........  zu einer Geldstrafe verurteilen.
     munizip _n._ (municipio) .....  Kreis, Teil eines Staates.


=N.=

     _Brazilian German._             _High German._

     no e? (nao e?) ...............  nicht wahr?
     no senhor! (nao senhor!) .....  nein, mein Herr!


=O.=

     _Brazilian German._             _High German._

     o de fora ....................  heida, du draussen!
     orsament _m._ (orcamento) ....  Anschlag, Bauanschlag, Kostenanschlag.


=P.=

     _Brazilian German._             _High German._

     paciencia ....................  Geduld!
     paiol _m._ ...................  Proviantkammer, Vorratskammer.
     palha, palje _f._ (palha) ....  Maisstroh.
     palhazigarrette _f._ .........  Zigarette (mit Maisstroh gewickelt).
     palla ........................  leichter Reitermantel.
     palpite _m._ .................  Ahnung, Herzklopfen.
     pancare _m._ .................  hellbraunes Pferd.
     past _m._ (pasto) ............  Weide.
     pataca, patak _f._, patake
       _f._ (pataca) ..............  320 Reis. (_Old coin._)
     patacao ......................  Zweimilreistueck. (_Old Spanish
                                       silver dollar._)
     patrao .......................  Prinzipal, Vorgesetzter.
     patte _f._ (pata) ............  Ente.
     peao .........................  Fussgaenger, Reitknecht.
     pechincha ....................  gutes Geschaeft, unverhoffter Gewinn.
     periquito ....................  Sittig, kleiner Papagei.
     persienne _f._ (persianna) ...  Sommerladen, Jalousie.
     peru _m._ ....................  Truthahn.
     picaco .......................  dunkelgefarbtes aber weissfuessiges
                                       Pferd.
     picada, picade _f._, pikade
       _f._(picada) ...............  Waldpfad, Urwaldweg, Koloniestrasse.
     picapau _m._ .................  Vorderlader, mit Vorderlader
                                       bewaffneter Soldat.
     pikarette _f._ (picareta) ....  Picke, Spitzhacke.
     pimente _f._ (pimenta) .......  Pfeffer, Nelkenpfeffer.
     pinga ........................  Tropfen (Schnapps).
     pipa, pipe _f._ (pipa) .......  Tonne, Fass.
     polizeidelegado ..............  Polizei-inspektor.
     poncho .......................  Reitermantel.
     portao, portong _m._ (portao)   Hauseingang, Torweg.
     porteira .....................  Eingangator (zur "Pikade").
     portreere _f._ (portreiro) ...  Koppel, Weideplatz, Viehraum
                                       (eingefriedigter).
     posen (repousar) .............  rasten, ruhen lassen.
     potro ........................  Fuellen, junges Pferd.
     praca ........................  Platz, Marktplatz.
     prima ........................  Base, Kousine.
     primo ........................  Vetter.
     prompt (prompto, pronto) .....  fertig, bereit
     puschen (puxar) ..............  ziehen.
     puschochse _m._ ..............  Zugochse.
     pussen _V._ puschen ..........


=Q.=

     _Brazilian German._             _High German._

     quero-quero ..................  Kiebitz.
     questao _f._ (questao) .......  Frage.


=R.=

     _Brazilian German._             _High German._

     rancho .......................  Kolonistenhaus, Lehmhuette, Huette.
     rapadura .....................  Zuckerkuchen, brauner Zucker.
     rebankieren (arrebanhar) .....  in Herden versammeln, zusammenscharen.
     rekerieren (requerer) ........  auffordern, bitten, ersuchen.
     riberong _m._ (riberao) ......  Bach.
     rio _f. (sometimes m.),_ (rio)  Fluss.
     riscado ......................  Gingan, gestreiftes Baumwollenzeug.
     roca, roce _f._ (roca) .......  Pflanzung, Lichtung.
     rocemachen ...................  Land urbarmachen.
     rocewirtschaft _f._ ..........  Landwirtschaft.
     rodeiro ......................  Umweg, Ausflucht.
     rosse _f.V._ roca ............
     rossieren (rocar) ............  ausjaeten, urbarmachen.


=S.=

     _Brazilian German._             _High German._

     sabia _m._ ...................  Amsel (brasilianische).
     salto _m._ ...................  Wasserfall.
     sange _f._ (sanga) ...........  Graben (wasserhaltiger).
     scharute _f.V._ charute.......
     scheegen (chegar) ............  genuegen.
     schikott _m._ (chicote _m._) .  Peitsche.
     seccos und molhados ..........  Kolonialwaren (i.e. trockene und
                                       nasse Waren).
     sellieren (sellar) ...........  stempeln, besiegeln.
     sello ........................  Freimarke.
     serra ........................  Gebirge, Hochland.
     sertanejo ....................  Einwohner der Wildnis.
     sertao .......................  Wildnis, Einoede, Kuestenwaelder.
     si, senhor! (sim, senhor) ....  ja, mein Herr!
     sitio ........................  Grundstueck, kleines Landgut,
     sobrado ......................  Stockwerk, Geschoss.
     stanz _f.V._ estancia ........
     strupiat (estropiado) ........  lahm, verkrueppelt.
     suspensorios _m. plu._ .......  Hosentraeger.


=T.=

     _Brazilian German._             _High German._

     tamandua _m._ ................  Ameisenbaer, Ameisenfresser.
     taquara ......................  Bambus.
     tarraffe _f._ (tarrafa) ......  Wurfnetz.
     tatu _n._ (tatu _m._) ........  Guerteltier.
     'te logo! _V._ ate logo ......
     tenente _m._ .................  Leutnant.
     terral _m._ ..................  Landwind.
     thesouraria ..................  Schatzkammer, Zahlamt.
     tocken (tocar) ...............  schlagen, antreiben.
     tokaio (tocaio) ..............  Namensvetter.
     tolde _f._ (tolda) ...........  Verdeck (auf einem Wagen).
     tostao .......................  100 Reis.
     trace _f._ (traca) ...........  Spur, Entwurf.
     trapiche _m._, trapisch _m._
       (trapiche _m._) ............  Lagerhaus (am Hafen), Kai.
     troc _m._ (troca) ............  Wechsel, Tausch, Kleingeld.
     trocken (trocar) .............  wechseln, tauschen.
     tropa ........................  Trupp, Maultiertrupp.
     tropeiro .....................  Viehhaendler.
     tupiano ......................  Scheck. (_Dappled horse._)


=U.=

     _Brazilian German._             _High German._

     urubu _m._ ...................  Geier.


=V.=

     _Brazilian German._             _High German._

     vamos ........................  vorwaerts!
     vaqueano .....................  Fuehrer.
     vendaschuld _f._ (venda) .....  Zechschuld.
     venda, vende _f._ (venda) ....  Kaufladen, Kram und Schankladen,
                                       Schenke.
     vendeiro, vedist _m._
       (vendeiro) .................  Gastwirt, Kleinhaendler.
     ventin _m._ (vintem _m._) ....  20 Reis. (_Coin._)
     villa ........................  Staedtchen.
     vintem _m._, vinten _m. V._
       ventin .....................
     violao .......................  Bratache, Bassgeige.
     viva .........................  Vivat, Lebehoch.


=W.=

     _Brazilian German._             _High German._

     wentin _m. V._ ventin ........
     wolte _f._ (volta)............  Spaziergang, Windung (eines Weges
                                       oder Flusses).


=X.=

     _Brazilian German._             _High German._

     xarque _n._ (xarque _m._) ....  Doerrfleisch.
     xarqueada ....................  Schlaechterei.


=Z.=

     _Brazilian German._             _High German._

     zaino ........................  ungeflecktes Pferd (e.g. ganz
                                       schwarz).
     zebruno ......................  Falbe.
     zigarro _V._ cigarro .........
     zipo _V._ cipo ...............
     zise _f._ (sisa, siza) .......  Accise, Verbrauchssteuer.




APPENDIX.


THE BRAZILIAN GERMAN PRESS.

Among the many things the German agricultural colonist in Brazil had to
dispense with so far as a supply from abroad was concerned, was reading
matter. Even to this day books are a relative rarity in the home along
the "picada." Only in the more important centers is there a general
access to publications of this type.


ALMANACS.

As has been the case for centuries in German-speaking communities both
in Europe and North America, where there has been a general lack of
books, the want of reading-matter has largely been filled by that most
important medium, the almanac. The same condition applies to Brazil. We
might call the almanac the colonist's encyclopedia. It is his
agricultural guide, medical adviser, compendium of short stories and
poetry, moral guide, diary, and a thousand and one other things in
addition to being the source of the information which an almanac is
ordinarily supposed to furnish, i.e., list the change of seasons, days
and months of the year, feast-days, eclipses, etc. To persons acquainted
only with the folk-almanacs in Europe and North America, the entire lack
of weather-forecasts in the Brazilian German editions is striking.

Among the best known and most important German folk-almanacs in Brazil
are:

     _Rothermund's Kalender fuer die Deutschen in Brasilien_, published
     in Sao Leopoldo and Cruz Alta, R.G. do Sul;

     _Uhle's illustrierter deutsch-brasilianischer Familien-Kalender_,
     published in Rio and Curityba;

     _Der Familienfreund_, published in Porte Alegre;

     _Riograndenser Marienkalender_, published in Porto Alegre;

and

     _Musterreiters Neu-Historischer Kalender_, published in Porto
     Alegre.

Rothermund's and Uhle's almanacs are perhaps the most important as well
as the most voluminous. To them one might well apply the statement found
in the preface to one of the well-known reading-texts published for use
in the "Pikadenschulen": "Darin ist alles enthalten, was fuer gebildeten
Kolonisten zu wissen interessant und lehrreich ist."[129]

The almanacs mentioned above have for years been appearing regularly. In
addition there have been many others, appearing, as a rule, only for a
year or sporadically. Their influence has been of minor importance.

In addition to being an indispensible source of information to the
colonists, the Brazilian German almanacs are also most valuable to
persons living outside of Brazil who want to form an idea of the life of
those colonists.


NEWSPAPERS.

The history of the German newspapers in Brazil has its beginning in the
early fifties of the past century. In October, 1852, _Der Kolonist_
appeared for the first time in Porto Alegre. This journalistic effort
was short-lived. From December, 1853, to July 10th, 1861, _Der Deutsche
Einwanderer_, appeared in the same city. Beginning with April 16th,
1853, _Der Deutsche Beobachter_, edited by B. Goldschmidt and G.F. Busch
appeared in Rio de Janeiro. This, like the preceding, soon turned from
an ordinary newspaper into a propaganda-sheet for the solicitation of
colonists and accordingly went out of existence. In 1858 the _Brasilia_,
a weekly, appeared in Petropolis. It lasted about one year. Beginning
with January 17th, 1864, the _Germania_, a weekly edited by Peter
Mueller, appeared in the same city. This was a most important paper in
its time and enjoyed a wide circulation. It lasted, however, only a few
years.

From 1860 to date the number of German newspapers with an ephemeral
existence published in Brazil is legion. Excepting those above
mentioned, we shall only concern ourselves with the ones which had a
continual existence from the time of their founding and appearing to
this day. They are included in the following list. In this list is
indicated in each case the title of the paper, the place of publication,
the number of times it appears weekly and the year in which it was
founded.

     _Deutsche Zeitung_, Porto Alegre. Daily. 1861.
     _Kolonie Zeitung_, Joinville. Semi-weekly. 1862.
     _Deutsches Volksblatt_, Porto Alegre. Daily and weekly, 1870.
     _Germania_, Sao Paulo. Daily. 1877.
     _Deutsche Post_, Sao Leopoldo. Daily. 1880.
     _Blumenauer Zeitung_, Blumenau. Semi-weekly. 1881.
     _Neue Deutsche Zeitung_, Porto Alegre. Daily and weekly. 1881.
     _Der Beobachter_, Curityba. Thrice weekly. 1889.
     _Kolonie_, Santa Cruz. Thrice weekly. 1890.
     _Der Urwaldsbote_, Blumenau. Semi-weekly. 1892.
     _Nachrichten_, Petropolis. Semi-weekly. 1892.
     _Deutsche Zeitung fuer Sao Paulo._ Daily. 1897.
     _Vaterland_, Porto Alegre. Daily. 1901.
     _Der Kompass_, Curityba. Thrice weekly. 1901.
     _Volks-Zeitung_, Sao Bento. Weekly. 1908.
     _Die Serra Post_, Ijuhy. Semi-weekly. 1910.
     _Brusquer Zeitung_, Brusque. Weekly. 1911.
     _Deutsche Wacht_, Pelotas. Semi-weekly. 1914.
     _Deutsches Tageblatt_, Rio de Janeiro. Daily. 1914.

From what has been said above, in reference both to almanacs and
newspapers, it will be noted that Porto Alegre in Rio Grande do Sul has
from the beginning been the most important center for Brazilian German
journalistic efforts.




BIBLIOGRAPHY.


The works listed below are important sources for the study of the
history and cultural status of the German element in Brazil. Books,
important pamphlets and several manuscripts are noted. A great many
articles dealing with the general subject of the German element in
Brazil have in the past appeared in newspapers and periodicals such as
the _Alldeutsche Blaetter, Ausland, Der Deutsche Ansiedeler, Deutsche
Erde, Deutsche Koloniezeitung, Echo, Globus, Petermann's Mitteilungen,
etc._, and particularly in the Brazilian German almanacs and newspapers
listed in the appendix. Due to the fact that a complete list of these
articles would require a volume in itself, they are not further
indicated.

Ackerbaukolonien. _Dr. Hermann Meyer's Ackerbaukolonien Neu-Wuertemberg
und Xingu in Rio Grande do Sul._ Leipzig, 1904. (_Pamphlet._)

Agassiz, Prof. Louis and Mrs.: _A Journey to Brazil._ Boston, 1868.

Angerami, Domingos. _V._ Fonseca, Antonio.

Auswanderer. _Central Auskunftstelle fuer Auswanderer. Deutsche
Kolonialgesellschaft. Rio Grande do Sul._ Berlin, 1904. (_Pamphlet._)

Ave-Lallement, Dr. Robert: _Reise durch Suedbrasilien im Jahre 1858._
Leipzig, 1859. (_2 vols._)

Bastos, Travares: _Questoes de Immigracao. (Manuscript in National
Library. Rio.)_

Blumenau, Dr. Hermann: _Suedbrasilien in seinen Beziehungen zu deutscher
Auswanderung und Kolonisation._ Rudolstadt, 1850.

Breitenbach, Dr. W.: _Aus Sued-Brasilien. Erinnerungen und
Aufzeichnungen_, Brackwede i/W., 1913.

Breitenbach, Dr. W.: _Die Provinz Rio Grande do Sul Brasiliens und die
deutsche Auswanderung._ Heidelberg, 1885.

Burton, Richard F., _V._ Tootal, Albert.

Canstatt, Oscar: _Kritisches Repertorium der Deutsch-Brasilianischen
Literatur._ Berlin, 1902.

Carvalho, C.M. Delgado de: _Le Bresil Meridional._ Paris, 1910.

Cunha, Dr. Jose Bonifacio da: _Commemoracao do 50 deg. Anniversario da
Fundacao de Blumenau._ Blumenau, 1900.

Dechent, N.: _Festschrift zur Jubelfeier des Schulvereins zu Joinville
am 14. August 1916._ Joinville, 1916.

Dettmann, Eduard: _Brasiliens Aufschwung in deutscher Beleuchtung._
Berlin, 1908.

Dilthey, R.: _Die deutschen Ansiedelungen in Suedbrasilien, Uruguay und
Argentinien._ Berlin, 1882.

Doerffel, Dr. O.: _Die Colonie Dona Francisca in der Suedbrasilianischen
Provinz Santa Catharina._ Joinville, 1882.

Elliott, L.E.: _Brazil Today and Tomorrow._ New York, 1917.

_L'Etat de Sao Paulo. Renseignements utiles._ Antwerp, 1914. (_Sao Paulo
State publication. 3d ed._)

_Festschrift zur Erinnerung an den Ostmarkenabend._ Sao Paulo, 1916.
(Apr. 13th.)

_Festschrift zum 50 jaehrigem Jubilaeum der Pfarrei Sao Jose do
Hortencio._ Porto Alegre, 1899.

Fonseca, Antonio,--et Angerami, Domingos: _Guide de l'Etat de St. Paul._
Sao Paulo, 1912.

Funke, Alfred: _Aus Deutsch-Brasilien. Bilder aus dem Leben der
Deutschen im Staate Rio Grande do Sul._ Leipzig, 1902.

Funke, Alfred: _Deutsche Siedelung ueber See. Ein Abriss ihrer Geschichte
und ihr Gedeihen in Rio Grande do Sul._ Halle a/Saale, 1902.

Gernhard, Robert: _Dona Francisca, Hansa und Blumenau._ Breslau, 1901.

Gerstaecker, Friedrich: _Achtzehn Monate in Suedamerika._ Jena, 1862, and
Leipzig, 1863.

Giesebrecht, Franz: _Die deutsche Kolonie Hansa in Suedbrasilien._
Berlin, 1899.

Grimm, M., und Ruecker, A.A.: _Heimatkunde von Brasilien._ Porto Alegre,
1914.

Grimm, M., und Ruecker, A.: _Lehr- und Lesebuch fuer Schule und Haus._
Porto Alegre, 1914.

Grossi, Prof. Dott. Vincenzo: _Storia detta Colonizzazione al Brasil e
della Emigrazione Italiana nello Stato di S. Paulo._ Milano-Roma-Napoli,
1914.

_Handbuch des Deutschthums im Auslande._ Herausgegeben vom Allgemeinen
Deutschen Schulverein zur Erhaltung des Deutschthums im Auslande.
Berlin. (Dietrich Reimer.)

Historia da Immigracao. _Dados para a Historia da Immigracao e da
Colonizacao em Sao Paulo enviados pela Seccao de Informacoes do
Departamento Estadual do Trabalho a Directoria do Servico de
Povoamento._ Sao Paulo, 1916. (_Govt. publication._)

Imperio do Brazil. _O Imperio do Brazil na Exposicao Universal de 1876
em Philadelphia._ Rio de Janeiro, 1875. (_State publication._)

_Impressoes do Brazil no Secolo Vinte._ London, 1913. (Lloyds Greater
Britain Publishing Company.)

Jahn, Adalbert: _Die Kolonien von Sao Leopoldo in der kaiserlich
brasilianischen Provinz Rio Grande do Sul sowie allgemeine Betrachtungen
ueber freie Einwanderung in Brasilien._ Leipzig, 1871.

Jahrbuch. _Erstes Jahrbuch fuer die deutschsprechende Kolonie im Staate
Sao Paulo._ Sao Paulo, 1905.

Jannasch, R.: _Land und Leute von Rio Grande do Sul._ Berlin, 1905.

Kluepfel, Dr. Karl: _N. Federmanns und H. Stades Reisen in Suedamerica
1529 bis 1555._ Stuttgart, 1859. (Bibl. des litt. Vereins in Stuttgart.
No. 47.)

Koseritz, Carl von: _Bilder aus Brasilien._ Leipzig and Berlin, 1885.

Krauel, Dr. R.: _Deutsche Interessen in Brasilien._ Hamburg, 1900.

Kultur-Pionier. _Der Kultur-Pionier im Staate Sao Paulo._
(Sonder-Ausgabe der Deutschen Zeitung.) Sao Paulo, 1913.

Lacmann, Dr. Wilhelm: _Ritte und Rasttage in Sued-Brasilien. Reisebilder
und Studien aus dem Leben der deutschen Siedelungen._ Berlin, 1906.

Lange, Henry: _Suedbrasilien, mit Ruecksicht auf die deutsche
Kolonisation._ Leipzig, 1885. (_2d ed._)

Langendonck, Madame van: _Une Colonie au Bresil. Recits Historiques._
Antwerp, 1862.

Learned, M.D.: _Guide to the Manuscript Materials Relating to American
History in the German State Archives._ Washington, 1912.

Lehmann, Emil: _Die deutsche Auswanderung._ Berlin, 1861.

Leyfer, H.: _Deutsches Kolonistenleben im Staate Santa Catharina in
Suedbrasilien._ Leipzig, 1900.

Lima, Oliveira: _Dom Joao VI no Brasil, 1808-1821._ Rio de Janeiro,
1908.

Ludwig, A.: _A colonizacao nos paizes da America do Sul._ Porto Alegre,
1916.

Lufft, Dr. Hermann: _Das portugiesische Suedamerika._ Berlin and Leipzig,
1913. (Sammlung Goeschen. No. 672.)

Marcondes de Souza, T. Oscar: _O Estado de Sao Paulo._ Sao Paulo, 1915.

d'Oliveira, Luiz Rodriguez: _Algumas Ideias sobre a Colonisacao do
Brazil._ Paris, 1871. (_Pamphlet._)

Orlando, Arthur: _Brazil. A Terra e o Homem._ Recife, 1913.

Pereira da Silva, J.M.: _Quadros da Historia Colonial do Brazil._ Rio de
Janeiro, 1895.

Perrin, Paul: _Les Colonies Agricoles au Bresil d'apres les documents
officiels les plus recents._ Paris, 1912.

Piccarolo, Dott. Antonio: _L'Emigrazione Italiana nello Stato de S.
Paulo._ Sao Paulo, 1911.

Pompeu, Julio: _Vier Staaten Brasiliens. Four Brazilian States._ Rio de
Janeiro, 1910.

_Prospekt der Hanseatischen Kolonisation-Gesellschaft. Ansiedelungen im
Staate Santa Catharina, Suedbrasilien, Kolonie "Hansa." (Pamphlet.)_
Hamburg, 1898.

_Ratschlaege fuer Auswanderer nach Suedbrasilien._ (Jannasch, Koseritz,
Doerffel, Sellin.) Berlin, 1897, (_3d ed._)

_Relatorio. Ministerio da Agricultura. Servico de Povamento em 1910._
Rio de Janeiro, 1911.

Ruecker, A.A. _V._ Grimm, M.

Schanz, Moritz: _Das Heutige Brasilien. Land, Leute und wirtschaftliche
Verhaeltnisse._ Hamburg, 1893.

Schueler, Heinrich: _Brasilien. Ein Land der Zukunft._ Stuttgart and
Leipzig, 1912.

Sellin, A.W.: _Brasilien und die La Plata-Staaten._ Munich. (J.F.
Lehmann's Verlag.)

Sellin, A.W.: _Das Kaiserreich Brasilien._ Leipzig, 1885. (_2 vols._)

Sellin, A.W.: _Landeskunde der Vereinigten Staaten von Brasilien._
Hamburg, 1909.

Sieves Wilhelm: _Suedamerika und die deutschen Interessen._ Stuttgart,
1903.

Simon, Alex.: _Auswanderung und deutsch-nationale Kolonisation v.
Suedamerika._ Bayreuth, 1850.

Sommer, Friedrich: _Das Deutschthum in Sao Paulo unter besonderer
Beruecksichtigung seiner Entwickdung und seiner heutigen
wirthschaftlichen und kulturellen Bedeutung._ Sao Paulo. (_Still in
manuscript at the time the present work went to press._)

Stade, Hans: _Wahrhafftig Historia und Beschreibung einer Landschafft
der wilden, nacketen, grimmigen Menschfresser Leuthen, in der newen Welt
America gelegen._ Franckfurt am Main, 1556. (_V._ Kluepfel, Dr. Karl.)

Telles, Moreira: _O Brazil e a Emigracao._ Lisbon, 1913.

Tootal, Albert, and Burton, Richard F.: _The Captivity of Hans Stade of
Hesse, in A.D. 1547-1555, among the Wild Tribes of Eastern Brazil._
London, 1874.

Tschudi, Johann Jakob von: _Reisen durch Suedamerika._ Leipzig,
1866-1869. (_5 vols._)

Urwaldsbote. _Der Urwaldsbote. Kalender fuer die Deutschen in
Suedbrasilien. Herausgegeben zum 50 jaehrigen Bestehen der Kolonie
Blumenau._ Blumenau, 1900.

Vallentin, Dr. W.: _Das Deutschthum in Suedamerika._ Berlin, 1908.

Wagemann, E.: _Die deutschen Kolonisten im brasilianischen Staate
Espirito Santo._ Schriften des Vereins fuer Sozialpolitik (Beitrag zur
Enquete ueher die Ansiedelung von Europaeern in den Tropen). 1916
[?].[130]

Wappaeus, Dr. J.E.: _Deutsche Auswanderung und Kolonisation._ Leipzig,
1846 and 1848. (_2 parts._)

Wernicke, Hugo: _Deutsch-evangelisches Volkstum in Espirito Santo. Eine
Reise zu deutschen Kaffeebauern in einem tropischen Staate Brasiliens._
Potsdam, 1910. (_2d ed._)

Wright, Marie Robinson: _The New Brazil._ Philadelphia, 1907.

Zoeller, Hugo: _Die Deutschen im Brasilischen Urwald._ Berlin and
Stuttgart, 1883.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 41: _V._ note 29, p. 18.]

[Footnote 42: I.e., Pedreiras, Parelheiros, M'Boy, Colonia Velha and
Itapecerica.]

[Footnote 43: _V._ note 27, p. 18.]

[Footnote 44: I.e., Brazilian of Portuguese extraction.]

[Footnote 45: In den Schneizen [of Santa Cruz and Sao Lourenco] sprechen
sogar die dort aufgewachsenen Neger Hunsruecker Dialekt.... Ein
Musterreiter bereiste einst ... die Rio Grandenser Kolonieen. Als er an
einen Kreuzweg kam, sah er zwei Schwarze am Wege im Felde hocken. Er
fragte sie auf Portugiesisch um den richtigen Weg. "Wat seggt de Kirl?"
fragt ein Schwarzer den andern. "Ah, ihr sprecht deutsch?" ... "Ja," war
die Antwort, "mir sein deitsche Neger."

E. Niemeyer in "Deutsche Siedler und Siedlungen im Urwald." _Uhle's
Kalender_ for 1912, p. 76.]

[Footnote 46: This rule holds for the Portuguese, but not for the German
_'j'_ as e.g., where the latter replaces the _'h'_ in _jatte_ (from
_hiate_), the _'i'_ or _'y'_ in _cuja_ (from _cuia, cuya_) or the
_'lh'_ in _cangalje_ (from _cangalho_). In such cases the _'j'_ has the
phonetic value of the English _'y'_.]

[Footnote 47: See note 4, p. 19.]

[Footnote 48: The outlying districts of Santo Amaro in Sao Paulo. _V._
note 2, p. 19.]

[Footnote 49: Joinville in Dona Francisca, state of Santa Catharina.]

[Footnote 50: For a further example of a short proper name compare the
one commonly applied to the small town "O'" (contraction of "Nossa
Senhora do O'"), located a short distance to the northwest of Sao
Paulo.]

[Footnote 51: This commonly applies to naturalized as well as to
native-born German Brazilians.]

[Footnote 52: Political propaganda literature intended to lead the
unwary to draw different conclusions has been copiously spread before
the public during the last decade. Whatever the ideas on the subject may
be in foreign countries, the German Brazilians themselves are the only
ones who can speak on it with authority. Strange to say, they never seem
to be consulted or studied at first hand by those who speak most loudly
about the "German peril" in Brazil. Porto Alegre, Blumenau, Joinville
and Curityba can furnish more accurate information on this particular
subject than Berlin, Paris, London and New York.]

[Footnote 53: Several specific examples will be noted in the specimens
from advertisements in almanacs and newspapers, pp. 36-39.]

[Footnote 54: By P. Th. Amstadt, S.J. The story appears in the
_Familienfreund_ for 1917, P. 39 ff.]

[Footnote 55: _Viezuechter._]

[Footnote 56: _Feigenbaum._]

[Footnote 57: _Landgut._]

[Footnote 58: Read _60 Milreis_.]

[Footnote 59: _Winterquatier._]

[Footnote 60: _Conto_= 1000 Milreis.]

[Footnote 61: _Freund._]

[Footnote 62: _Schlaechterei._]

[Footnote 63: _Viehhaendler._]

[Footnote 64: _Schenke._]

[Footnote 65: _Fertig._]

[Footnote 66: _Gepraege._]

[Footnote 67: _Uhles Familienkalender_, 1916, p. 318.]

[Footnote 68: Ibid., p. 300.]

[Footnote 69: Ibid., p. 315.]

[Footnote 70: Ibid., p~ 297.]

[Footnote 71: _Familienfreund_, 1917, p. xxv.]

[Footnote 72: Ibid., p. xxvii.]

[Footnote 73: _Riograndenser Marienkalender_, 1917, p. 128.]

[Footnote 74: _Rotermund's Kalender fuer die Deutschen in Brasilien_,
1915, p. 410.]

[Footnote 75: _Uhle's Familienkalender_, 1917, p. 170.]

[Footnote 76: _Deutsche Zeitung_, Porto Alegre, July 20, 1916.]

[Footnote 77: _Vaterland_, Porto Alegre, September 18, 1916.]

[Footnote 78: Ibid.]

[Footnote 79: _Blumenauer Zeitung_, August 22, 1916.]

[Footnote 80: _Brusker Zeitung_, August 12, 1916.]

[Footnote 81: _Deutsches Volksblatt_, Porto Alegre, July 5, 1916.]

[Footnote 82: _Kolonie-Zeitung_, Joinville, August 17, 1916.]

[Footnote 83: _Die Serra-Post_, Ijuhy, Rio Grande do Sul, September 15,
1916.]

[Footnote 84: From Funke's _Aus Deutsch-Brasilien,_ p. 167.]

[Footnote 85: _Unverhofftes Gewinn._]

[Footnote 86: _Reisetasche._]

[Footnote 87: _Waldpfadswanze._]

[Footnote 88: _Baumwolle._]

[Footnote 89: _Gingan._]

[Footnote 90: _Reitermaentel._]

[Footnote 91: _Preisermaessigung._]

[Footnote 92: _Kaufladen._]

[Footnote 93: _Maulesel._]

[Footnote 94: _10,000 milreis._]

[Footnote 95: _Guten Tag!_]

[Footnote 96: _V._ Breitenbach: _Aus Sued-Brasilien_, p. 247.]

[Footnote 97: _Verdeck._]

[Footnote 98: _Scheck._]

[Footnote 99: _Falbe._]

[Footnote 100: _Tierhaendler._]

[Footnote 101: _Hochland._]

[Footnote 102: _Gevatter._]

[Footnote 103: _Tor._]

[Footnote 104: _Waldstrasse._]

[Footnote 105: _Lichtung._]

[Footnote 106: _Maiskolben._]

[Footnote 107: _Maultier._]

[Footnote 108: _Kuerbisse._]

[Footnote 109: ="portreiro" (_Weideplats, Koppel_).]

[Footnote 110: _Graben._]

[Footnote 111: _Boeschungen._]

[Footnote 112: _Waldmesser._]

[Footnote 113: _Bambus._]

[Footnote 114: _Lianen._]

[Footnote 115: _Guerteltier._]

[Footnote 116: _Buschsichel._]

[Footnote 117: _Wettrennen._]

[Footnote 118: _Mehl._]

[Footnote 119: _Kleinhaendler._]

[Footnote 120: _Gezogen._]

[Footnote 121: _Geschlagen._]

[Footnote 122: _Packsattel._]

[Footnote 123: Of the words appearing in the GLOSSARY the writer
acknowledges as his source for the following the _Verdeutschungsheft_ by
G.A. Buechler, Blumenau, 1915: _Backeljau, balse, kaschimbo, lelong,
multe, multieren, orsament, pikarette, rekerieren, rossieren, sellieren,
strupiat, wolte, zise._]

[Footnote 124: It is to be remembered, however, that High German is the
norm in ordinary news articles in almanacs, newspapers, etc., as well as
for literary purposes in general. In such instances Brazilian German
forms appear relatively rarely.]

[Footnote 125: All words or phrases thus noted have since been observed
in print in Brazilian German publications, with the exception of
_agriao_ and _bond_.]

[Footnote 126: The simple word "Portuguese" is particularly avoided here
(as well as throughout this work generally) because the language as
spoken by the general public in Brazil frequently differs from the
language of Portugal. While the same in form, the words often have a
different meaning. Also many Indian words, especially from the Guarany
and Tupi languages, are embodied in the Brazilian national idiom.]

[Footnote 127: This applies to the written, but not always to the spoken
language.]

[Footnote 128: I.e., like the use of the word "sou" in France,
"Groschen" in Germany, or "penny" in the United States.]

[Footnote 129: _V._ Grimm-Ruecker: _Lehr-und Lesebuch_, p. iii.]

[Footnote 130: Because of existing conditions it has been impossible to
determine whether this work has as yet appeared in print.]




AMERICANA GERMANICA


MONOGRAPH SERIES.

1. _Translations of German Poetry in American Magazines 1741-1810._ By
Edward Ziegler Davis, Ph.D. 234 pp. Price $1.65

2. _The Harmony Society._ A Chapter in German American Culture History.
By John Archibald Bole, Ph.D. 179 pp. 30 Illustrations. Price $1.50

3. _Friedrich Schiller in America._ A Contribution to the Literature of
the Poet's Centenary, 1905. By Ellwood Comly Parry, Ph.D. 117 pp. Price
$1.25

4. _The Influence of Salomon Gessner upon English Literature._ By Bertha
Reed. 119 pp. Price $1.25

5. _The German Settlement Society of Philadelphia and Its Colony,
Hermann, Missouri._ By William G. Bek. 193 pp. Price $1.50

6. _Philipp Waldeck's Diary of the American Revolution._ With
Introduction and Photographic Reproductions. By M.D. Learned. 168 pp.
Price $1.50

7. _Schwenkfelder Hymnology and the Sources of the First Schwenkfelder
Hymn-Book Printed in America._ With Photographic Reproductions. By Allen
Anders Seipt, Ph.D. 112 pp. Price. $2.00

8. _The Settlement of the German Coast of Louisiana and the Creoles of
German Descent._ By J. Hanno Deiler. With Illustrations. 136 pp. Price
$1.25

9. _Early German Music in Philadelphia._ By R.R. Drummond, Ph.D. 112 pp.
Price $1.25

10. _"Uncle Tom's Cabin" in Germany._ By Grace Edith MacLean, Ph.D. 102
pp. Price $1.50

11. _The Germans in Texas._ A Study in Immigration. By Gilbert Giddings
Benjamin, Ph.D. 161 pp. 3 Illustrations. Price $1.50

12. _The American Ethnographical Survey._ Conestoga Expedition. M.D.
Learned, Director $2.00

13. _Swedish Settlements on the Delaware 1638-1664._ With 6 Maps and 150
Illustrations and Photographic Reproductions. By Amandus Johnson, Ph.D.
Two volumes. 908 pp. Price $10.00

14. _National Unity in the German Novel Before 1870._ By Roy H. Perring,
Ph.D. 75 pp. Price $1.25

15. _Journal of Du Roi the Elder_, Lieutenant and Adjutant in the
Service of the Duke of Brunswick, 1776-1778. Translated by Charlotte
S.J. Epping. 189 pp. Price $1.50

16. _The Life and Works of Friedrich Armand Strubberg._ By Preston A.
Barba, Ph.D. 151 pp. 4 Illustrations. Price $2.00

17. _Baldwin Moellhausen, the German Cooper._ By Preston A. Barba, Ph.D.
188 pp. 4 Illustrations. Price $2.00

18. _Beliefs and Superstitions of the Pennsylvania Germans._ By Edwin M.
Fogel, Ph.D. 386 pp. Price $3.50

19. _Dickens' Einfluss auf Ungern-Sternberg, Hesslein, Stolle, Raabe und
Ebner-Eschenbach._ By J. Theodor Geissendoerfer, Ph.D. 51 pp. Price
$1.00

20. _Whittier's Relation to German Life and Thought._ By Iola Kay
Eastburn, Ph.D. 161 pp. Price $2.00

21. _Benjamin Franklin and Germany._ By Beatrice Marguerite Victory.
Ph.D. 180 pp. Price $2.00

22. _Die Deutschamerikanische Patriotische Lyrik der Achtundvierziger
und Ihre Historische Grundlage._ By Gottlieb Betz, Ph.D. 131 pp. Price
$1.50

23. _Heine in America._ By H.B. Sachs, Ph.D. 193 pp. Price $2.00

24. _Socialism in German American Literature._ By William Frederic
Kamman, Ph.D. 1--pp. Price $1.50

25. _Robert Reitzel._ By Adolf E. Zucker, Ph.D. 74 pp. Price $1.25

26. _The German Element in Brazil. Colonies and Dialect._ By Benjamin
Franklin Schappelle, Ph.D. 68 pp. Price $1.50




AMERICANA GERMANICA

MONOGRAPHS DEVOTED TO THE COMPARATIVE STUDY OF THE

Literary, Linguistic and Other Cultural Relations of Germany and America

EDITOR MARION DEXTER LEARNED _University of Pennsylvania_

CONTRIBUTING EDITORS

     H.C.G. BRANDT
     W.H. CARRUTH
     HERMANN COLLITZ
     STARR W. CUTTING
     DANIEL K. DODGE
     A.B. FAUST
     KUNO FRANCKE
     ADOLPH GERBER
     JULIUS GOEBEL
     J.T. HATFIELD
     W.T. HEWETT
     A.R. HOHLFELD
     HUGO K. SCHILLING
     H. SCHMIDT-WARTENBERG
     HERMANN SCHOENFELD
     CALVIN THOMAS
     H.S. WHITE
     HENRY WOOD

PUBLICATIONS OF THE UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYLVANIA

NEW YORK D. APPLETON & COMPANY PUBLISHING AGENTS


       *       *       *       *       *


Transcriber's Notes:

   The following corrections regarding the original were made:

   [Footnote TN1: The original has here a wrong spelling: COPYWRIGHT
   instead of COPYRIGHT]

   [Footnote TN2: The original has here a wrong spelling: Vorabeiter
   instead of Vorarbeiter]

   [Footnote TN3: The original has here a wrong spelling: abfertitgen
   instead of abfertigen]



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GERMAN ELEMENT IN BRAZIL***


******* This file should be named 17361.txt or 17361.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/1/7/3/6/17361



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.net/fundraising/pglaf.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://www.gutenberg.net/about/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.net/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit:
http://www.gutenberg.net/fundraising/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

