The Project Gutenberg EBook of The School of Recreation (1696 edition), by
Robert Howlett

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The School of Recreation (1696 edition)
       Or a Guide to the Most Ingenious Exercises of Hunting,
       Riding, Racing, Fireworks, Military Discipline, The Science
       of Defence

Author: Robert Howlett

Release Date: February 9, 2006 [EBook #17727]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SCHOOL OF RECREATION ***




Produced by Jonathan Ingram, Sjaani and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net






THE

SCHOOL

OF

Recreation:

OR A

GUIDE

To the

Most Ingenious Exercises

OF

Hunting.          Hawking.
Riding.           Tennis.
Racing.           Bowling.
Fireworks.        Ringing.
Military          Singing.
  Discipline.     Cock-Fighting.
The Science of    Fowling.
  Defence.        Angling.

By _R. H._

_London_, Printed for _H. Rhodes_, at the _Star_, the Corner of _Bride
Lane, Fleet-street_. 1696.




_The School of Recreation._

[Illustration]

_Printed for Henry Rodes near Bride lane in Fleet streete._




The PREFACE TO THE READER.


_Reader, in this small Book you will find such Variety of Recreations,
that nothing of the nature ever appeared so like Accomplish'd in any one
Volume, of what Largeness soever: For besides my own Experience in these
acceptable and delightful Particulars, reduced under proper Heads, easy
to be understood, and put in practice; I have taken the Opinions of
those whose Ingenuity had led them to these Exercises in Particular or
General, and are approved for the Performance of them in the exactest
manner, whose judicious Approbations the more embolden'd me to a
Publication of them: In which you will not only find Pleasure, and keep
up a Healthful Constitution in moderately pursuing them, but in most or
all of them find considerable Profit and Advantage, when you can spare
leisure Hours from your Devotions, or to unbend your Cares after the
tiresome Drudgery of weighty_ Temporal Matters; _Not that I think it is
proper so eagerly to pursue them, as if you made them rather a_
Business _than a_ Recreation; _for though in themselves they are
harmless, yet a continual or insatiate Prosecution of any Thing, not
only lessens the Pleasure, but may render it hurtful, if not to your
self, yet in giving Offence to others, who will be apt to reflect upon
such as seem to doat upon them, and wholly neglect their other Affairs._

_We find the Taste of Honey is delicious and desirable, yet Nature
over-burthened with too great a Quantity, Surfeits, and begets a
loathing of it. Wherefore to Conclude, I commend them as they are,_ viz.
_Suitable_ Recreations _for the_ Gentry _of_ England, _and others,
wherein to please and delight themselves. And so not doubting this_ Work
_will be accepted, as it was well meant to serve my_ Country-Men, _I
take leave to subscribe myself, Kind Reader_,

Your most humble
and obliging Servant,

_R. H._




OF HUNTING.


Hunting, being a Recreation that challenges the sublime Epithets of
Royal, Artificial, Manly, and Warlike, for its Stateliness, Cunning, and
Indurance, claims above all other Sports the Precedency; and therefore I
was induced to place it at the Head to usher in the rest.

But to come to the Purpose: The young Hunter, as yet raw in the true
Knowledge of this Royal Sport, with what is meerly necessary and useful,
without amusing him with superfluous Observations for his Instruction: I
shall therefore observe throughout this Treatise this Method: 1. The
several _Chases_ or Games which fall under the First Denomination,
Hunting. 2. The genuine of Infallible Rules whereby we are to direct our
selves, for the obtaining the true Pleasure in prosecuting the same, and
the desired Effects of it.

Know than; the Beasts of Venery or Forest, are, _viz._ The _Hart_,
_Hinde_, _Hare_.

As likewise the Wild Beasts, or Beasts of Chace are, _viz._ the _Buck_,
_Doe_, _Fox_, _Marten_, _Roe_.

The Beasts of Warren, are, _viz._ _Hares_, _Coneys_, _Roes_.

_Note_, The _Hart_ and _Hind_ before spoken of, though they are of one
kind, yet, because their Seasons are several, are esteemed distinct
Beasts; and in the _Hart_ is included the _Stag_, and all red _Deer_ of
Antlier.

And because I reckon it the most necessary part of the Hunter to
understand the Names, Degrees, Ages, and Seasons of the aforesaid
different Beasts of Forest or Venery, Chase, and Warren, I therefore,
present him with these following


_Beasts of Forest_, &c.

The _Hart_, the first year is called a _Hind-Calf_, 2 A _Knobber_, 3 A
_Brock_ 4 A _Staggard_, 5 A _Stag_, 6 A _Hart_.

The _Hind_ the first Year a _Calf_, 2 A _Hearse_, 3 A _Hind_.

The _Hare_, the first Year a _Leveret_, 2 A _Hare_, 3 A great _Hare_.


_Beasts of Chase._

The _Buck_, The first Year is called a _Fawn_, 2 A _Pricket_, 3 A
_Sorrel_, 4 A _Sore_, 5 A _Buck_ of the first Head, 6 A Great _Buck_.

The _Doe_, the first Year a _Fawn_, 2 A _Teg_, 3 A _Doe_.

The _Fox_, the first Year a _Cub_, 2 a _Fox_.

The _Marten_, the first Year A _Cub_, 2 A _Marten_.

The _Roe_ the first Year A _Kid_, 2 A _Gyrl_, 3 A _Hemuse_, 4 A
_Roe-Buck_ of the first Head, 5 A Fair _Roe-Buck_.

As for the Beasts of Warren, the _Hare_ being spoken of before, little
or nothing is to be said. The _Coney_ is first A _Rabbet_, and then an
Old _Coney_.

Thus much for their Names, Degrees, and Ages: Now let us next observe
their proper Seasons for Hunting.

The _Hart_ or _Buck_, beginneth fifteen days after _Mid-Summer-Day_, and
lasteth till _Holy-Rood-Day_.

The _Fox_, from _Christmass_, and lasteth till the Annunciation of the
Blessed _Virgin Mary_.

The _Hind_ or _Doe_, from _Holy-Rood-Day_, till _Candlemas_.

The _Roe-Buck_, from _Easter_, till _Michaelmas_.

The _Roe_, from _Michaelmas_, till _Candlemas_.

The _Hare_, from _Michaelmas_, to the end of _February_.

Thus much I thought fit to speak briefly of the proper Names, Degrees,
Ages, and Seasons of the several Chases which we Hunt: But having almost
forgot some, I shall insert here, as intending to speak somewhat of
them, and they are the _Badger_, _Otter_, and Wild _Goat_.

As for the Terms of Art appropriated to Hunting. And now I bring you to
the second thing I proposed, _viz._ the Rules and Measures we are to
learn and observe in the aforementioned Sports or Chases; and in this we
must begin with the Pursuers or Conquerors of these Chases, namely.


_Of Hounds._

There are several kinds of Hounds, endued with Qualities suitable to the
Country where they are bred; and therefore consult his Country, and you
will soon understand his Nature and Use: As for instance, the Western
Countries of _England_, and Wood-land, Mountainous Countries, as also
_Cheshire_, and _Lancashire_, breed the _slow-Hound_; a large great Dog,
tall and heavy. _Worcestershire_, _Bedfordshire_, and many other well
mixt Soyls, where the Champaign and Covert are equally large, produce
the _Middle sized_ Dog, of a more nimble Composure than the
fore-mentioned, and fitter for Chase. _Yorkshire_, _Cumberland_,
_Northumberland_, and the North parts, breed the Light, Nimble, swift
slender Dog. And our open Champaigns train up excellent Grey-Hounds,
hugely admired for his Swiftness, Strength, and Sagacity. And lastly,
the little _Beagle_ bred in all Countries, is of exceeding Cunning, and
curious Scent in Hunting.

For the Choice of Hounds we are to rely much on their Colours, and
accordingly make our Election. The Best and most Beautiful of all for a
general Kennel, is, the White Hound, with Black Ears, and a black spot
at the setting on of the Tail, and is ever found to be both of good
Scent, and good Condition, and will Hunt any Chase, but especially the
_Hare_, _Stag_, _Buck Roe_, or _Otter_, not sticking at Woods or Waters.
The next is the Black, the blacktann'd, or all Liver hew'd, or the milk
White Hound, which is the true _Talbot_, is best for the string, or
line, as delighting in Blood; the Largest is the comliest and best. The
_Grizled_, usually shag-hair'd, are the best Verminers; and so fittest
for the _Fox_, _Badger_, or other hot Scents; a couple of which let not
your Kennel be without, as being exceeding good cunning Finders.

For the Shape of your Hound, you must consult the Climate of his Breed,
and the natural Composition of his Body; but by these following
Characters you may know a good Hound. If you like a large, heavy, true
_Talbot_ like Hound, see

His Head be round and thick. Nose short and uprising. Nostrils wide and
large. Ears larger and down-hanging. Upper lip-Flews lower than his
Nether Chaps. Back strong and rising. Fillets thick and great. Thighs
and Huckle-bones round. Hams streight. Tail long and rush grown. The
Hair of his Belly hard and stiff. Legs big and lean. Foot like a
_Fox's_, well clawed and round. Sole dry and hard. All these shew an
able Hound.

If you would choose a swift light Hound, the _Yorkshire_ one in the
generality will please you; for that (as these have) he ought to have a
slenderer Head, longer Nose, shallower Ears and Flews, broad Back, gaunt
Belly, small Tail, long Joynts, round Foot; and in fine of a
Gray-Hound-like Make.

Thus much to direct the choice of Hounds; now something ought to be
spoken of the Composition of Kennels, wherein I must appeal to the
Affection of the Gentleman, the Lover of this Sport, and let him tell me
the Reasons that induced him take pleasure in Hounds, whether it be he
fancies Cunning in Hunting? Or Sweetness, Loudness, or Deepness of Cry?
Or for the Training his Horses? Or for the Exercise of his Body only?

If for Cunning Hunting; breed your Dogs from the slowest and largest of
the forementioned Northern Hounds, and the swiftest and slenderest of
the West Country, of both Kinds, approved to be not given to lie off, or
look for Advantages, but staunch, fair, even running, and of perfect
fine Scent. These will make a Horse gallop fast, and not run; being
middle-siz'd, not too swift as to out-run, or too slow as to lose the
Scent; are the best for the true Art and Use of Hunting.

If for Sweetness of Cry; compound your Kennel of some large Dogs, of
deep solemn Mouths, and swift in spending, as the _Base_ in the Consort;
then twice so many roaring, loud ringing Mouths, as the _Counter-Tenor_:
And lastly, some hollow plain sweet Mouths, as the _Mean_: So shall your
Cry be perfect. Observe that this Composition be of the swiftest and
largest deep Mouth'd Dog, the slowest and middle-siz'd, and the shortest
Legged slender Dog. For these run even together.

If for Loudness of Mouth, choose the Loud clanging (redoubling as it
were) Mouth, and to this put the roaring, spending, and Whining Mouth,
which will be loud, smart, and pleasant: Such are for the most part your
_Shropshire_, and _Worcestershire_ Dogs.

If (lastly) for deepness of cry, the largest dogs having the greatest
Mouths, and deepest flews, are the best; such are your West-Country,
_Cheshire_, and _Lancashire_ Dogs.

But if you have your Kennel for Training Horses only; then compound your
Kennel of the lightest, nimblest, and swiftest Dogs, such as your
Northern Hounds are. For the strong and violent Exercises of their
Horses, through the Natural Velocity of their Hounds, in the North
parts, have render'd them famous for Truth and Swiftness above all other
parts of _England_.

Lastly, If for the Maintenance of your Health, by preventing Infirmities
and Grossness of Humours, you compose your Kennel; consult first your
own Ability for this Exercise; and if you think you are able to foot it
away, then the Biggest and slowest Dogs you can get are best. But if
you would pad it away through an Unability of footing it, than choose
the slowest or middle-siz'd Hounds, of good Mouths and Noses, for loud
Cry, and ready Scent.

Thus far for the Composing a Kennel: I come now to the _Kennel it self_,
of which I need say little, as indeed unnecessary, leaving that to the
Discretion of the _Huntsman_; only I would have him observe, that it be
built some pretty way distant from the Dwelling-House, in a warm dry
Place, free from Vermine, and near some Pond or River of fresh Water;
and so placed, that the Morning Sun may shine upon it. Be sure to keep
it clean, and let them not want fresh Straw every day. Feed them early
in the Morning at Sun-rising, and at Sun-set in the Evening. As for the
Meat, I leave to the ingenious Huntsman to get when they come from
Hunting; after you have fed them well, let them to their Kennel, and
wash their Feet with Beer and Butter, or some such thing, and pick and
search their Cleys, for Thorns, Stubs, or the like: If it is in
_Winter_, let a Fire be made, and let them beak and stretch themselves
for an hour or so at the fire, and suffer them to lick, pick, and trim
themselves; hereby to prevent the _Diseases_ incident to them, upon
sudden Cooling, as the _Mange_, _Itch_, _Fevers_, &c.

But before I treat of the keeping your Hounds in Health by curing their
Diseases, I must speak a Word or two of the way to _Breed good Whelps_,
viz. Having a Hound and a Bratch of that general Goodness in Size,
Voice, Speed, Scent, and Proportion you like, put them together to
ingender in _January_, _February_, or _March_, as the properest Months
for Hounds, Bitches, and Bratches to be Limed in; because of not _losing
time_ to enter them. When you put them together, observe, as near as
you can, if the _Moon_ be in _Aquarius_ or _Gemini_; because the Whelps
will then never run Mad, and the Litter will be double as many Dogs, as
Bitch-Whelps. When your Bitch is near her _Whelping_, separate her from
the other Hounds, and make her a Kennel particularly by her self; and
see her Kennell'd every Night, that she might be acquainted and
delighted with it, and so not seek out unwholsom Places; for if you
remove the Whelps after they are Whelp'd, the Bitch will carry them up
and down till she come to their first Place of Littering; and that's
very dangerous. Suffer not your Whelps to Suck above two Months, and
then _Wean_ them.

When your Whelps are brought up, _enter_ them not into Hunting till they
are at least a Year and half old: That is, if whelpt in _March_, enter
them _September_ come Twelve Month; if in _April_, in _October_ come
Twelve Months after, _&c_.

When you would _enter_ them, bring them abroad, with the most Staunch
and best Hunting hounds; (all babling and flying Curs being left at
home:) and a _Hare being the best entering Chase_, get a _Hare_ ready
before, and putting her from her Form, view which way she takes, and
then lay on your Hounds, giving them all the Advantages may be; if she
is caught, do not suffer them to break her, but immediately taking her,
strip off her Skin, and cutting her to pieces, give every part to your
young Whelps; and that beget in them a Delight in Hunting.


_Diseases incident to Dogs, and their Cures._

_For Sick Dogs._ Take Sheeps-heads, Wooll and all, hack, and bruise them
into pieces, make Pottage of it with Oatmeal, and _Penny-Royal_, and
give it warm.

_Lice and Fleas._ Boyl four or five handfuls of _Rue_, or _Herb of
Grace_, in a Gallon of running Water, till a Pottle be consumed, strain
it, and put two Ounces of _Staves-acre_ poudered, and bathe them with it
warm.

_Itch._ Take Oyl of _Flower-de-Lys_, Powder of _Brimstone_, and dry'd
_Elicampane-Roots_, of each a like quantity, and _Bay-Salt_ powdered;
mix these Powders with the Oyl, and warm it, anoint, scratch, and make
it bleed, it will do well.

_Tetter._ Take _Black Ink_, Juice of _Mint_ and _Vinegar_, of each
alike, mix them altogether with Powder of _Brimstone_ to a Salve, and
anoint it.

_Worms._ Give your Hound _Brimstone_ and new _Milk_, it will kill them.

_Gauling._ May _Butter_, yellow _Wax_ and unflackt _Lime_, made to a
Salve, and Anoint therewith, is a present Remedy.

_Mange._ Take two Handfuls of _Wild-Cresses_, of _Elicampane_, of the
Leaves and Roots of _Roerb_ and _Sorrel_, the like quantity, and two
Pound of the Roots of _Frodels_, Boyl them all well in Lye and Vinegar,
strain it, and put therein two Pound of _Grey Soap_, and after 'tis
melted, rub your Hound with it four or five days together.

_For any Ear Disease._ Mix _Verjuice_ and _Chervile_ Water together, and
drop into his Ears a spoonful or two, Morning and Evening.

_Sore Eyes._ Chew a Leaf or two of _Ground Ivy_, and spit the Juice into
his Eyes.

_Surbaiting._ Wash his feet with _Beer_ and _Butter_, and bind young red
_Nettles_ beaten to a Salve to his Soles.

_Biting by Snake, Adder_, &c. Beat the Herb _Calaminth_ with
_Turpentine_, and yellow _Wax_ to a Salve, and apply it. To expel the
inward Poyson, give the said Herb in Milk.

_Biting by a Mad Dog._ Wash the place with _Sea-Water_; or strong
_Brine_, will Cure him. The quantity of a Hazel-Nut of _Mithridate_,
dissolved in Sweet Wine, will prevent inward Infection.

_Madness._ Lastly, If your Hound be Mad, which you will soon find by his
separating himself from the rest, throwing his Head into the Wind,
foaming and slavering at Mouth, snatching at every thing he meets, red
fiery Eyes, stinking filthy Breath; then to Knock him in the Head, is a
present Remedy, and you'l prevent infinite Dangers.

And now I proceed to give some brief Instructions for Hunting the
several Chases, _viz._ the _Time when?_ and the _Manner how?_

Having your Kennel of Hounds in good order and plight, lead them forth,
and to your Game; only take this Caution; do not forget to have in your
Pack a couple of _Hounds_, called _Hunters in the High-wayes_, that will
Scent upon hard Ground, where we cannot perceive Pricks or Impressions;
and let a couple of _Old stench Hounds_ accompany you, by whose sure
Scent, the too great Swiftness of the young and unexperienced Ones may
be restrained and regulated.


_Of Hart_ or _Stag Hunting._

To understand the _Age_ of this our Game, it is known by several Marks,
amongst which this is the most authentick: That if you take his view in
the ground, and perceive he has a large Foot, a thick Heel, a deep
Print, open Cleft and long space, then be assured he is Old; as the
Contrary concludes him Young.

To find him? Examine the following Annual, or Monethly.

_November_, in Heaths among Furs, Shrubs, and Whines.

_December_, in Forests among thick and strong Woods.

_January_, in Corners of the Forests, Corn-fields, _Wheat_, _Rye_, &c.

_February_ and _March_, amongst Young and thick Bushes.

_April_ and _May_, in Coppices and Springs.

_June_ and _July_, in Out-Woods and Purlieus nearest the Corn-fields.

_September_ and _October_, after the first showers of Rain, they leave
their Thickets, and go to Rut, during which time there is no certain
place to find them in.

When you have found him in any of these places, be careful to go up the
Wind; and the best time to find him is before _Sun-rising_, when he goes
to feed; then watch him to his Leir, and having lodged him, go and
prepare; if he is not forced, he will not budge till Evening.
Approaching his Lodging, cast off your _Finders_, who having Hunted him
a Ring or two, cast in the rest; and being in full Cry and maine Chase,
Comfort and Cheer them with Horn and Voice. Be sure to take notice of
him by some _Mark_, and if your Dogs make _Default_, rate them off and
bring them to the _Default_ back, and make them cast about till they
have undertaken the first _Deer_; then cheer them to the utmost, and so
continue till they have either set up or slain him. It is the Nature of
a _Stag_, to seek for one of his kind, when he is Imbost or weary, and
beating him up, ly down in his place; therefore have a watchful eye unto
_Change_. As likewise by taking _Soil_ (i.e. Water) he will swim a River
just in the middle down the Stream, covering himself all over, but his
Nose, keeping the middle, least by touching any Boughs he leave a Scent
for the _Hounds_; And by his Crossings and Doublings he will endeavour
to baffle his Persuers: In these Cases have regard to your _Old Hounds_,
as I said before. When he is Imbost or weary, may be known thus: By his
Creeping into holes, and often lying down, or by his running stiff, high
and lumpering, slavering and foaming at Mouth, shining and blackness of
his Hair, and much Sweat; and thus much for _Stag_ or _Hart Hunting_. As
for the _Buck_ I shall not speak any thing, for he that can Hunt a
_Stag_ well, cannot fail Hunting a _Buck_ well. As likewise for the _Roe
Hunting_, I refer you to what is spoken of the _Hart_ or _Stag_.


_Of Hare Hunting._

As for the _Time_, the most proper to begin this Game, note; That about
the middle of _September_ is best, and to end towards the latter end of
_February_, when surcease, and destroy not the young early Brood of
_Leverets_; and this Season is most agreeable likewise to the nature of
_Hounds_; moist and cool. Now for the _Place_ where to find her, you
must examine and observe the Seasons of the Year; for in Summer or
Spring time, you shall find them in Corn-fields and open places, not
sitting in Bushes, for fear of Snakes, Adders, _&c_. In _Winter_ they
love Tuffs of Thorns and Brambles, near Houses: In these places you must
regard the _Oldness_ or _Newness_ of her _Form_ or _Seat_, to prevent
Labour in Vain: If it be plain and smooth within, and the Pad before it
flat and worn, and the Prickles so new and perceptible, that the Earth
seems black, and fresh broken, then assure your self the Form is new,
and from thence you may Hunt and recover the _Hare_; if the contrary, it
is old, and if your _Hounds_ call upon it, rate them off. When the
_Hare_ is started and on Foot, step in where you saw her pass, and
hollow in your _Hounds_ till they have undertaken it, then go on with
full Cry. Above all, be sure to observe her first Doubling, which must
be your direction for all that day; for all her other after Doublings,
will be like that. When she is thus reduced to the _slights_ and
_shifts_ she makes by Doublings and Windings, give your Dogs _Time_ and
_Place_ enough to cast about your Rings, for unwinding the same; and
observe her _leaps_ and _skips_ before she squat, and beat curiously all
likely places of Harbour: She is soon your Prey now.


_Of Coney Catching._

Their _Seasons_ are always, and the way of taking them thus: Set
Pursenets on their Holes, and put in a _Ferret_ close muzzled, and she
will boult them out into the Nets: Or blow on a sudden the Drone of a
Bag-Pipe into the Burrows, and they will boult out: Or for want of
either of these two, take Powder of _Orpiment_ and _Brimstone_, and
boult them out with the Smother: But pray use this last seldom, unless
you would destroy your Warren. But for this sport _Hays_ are to be
preferred above all.


_Of Fox-Hunting._

_January_, _February_, and _March_, are the best Seasons for Hunting the
_Fox_ above Ground, the Scent being then strong, and the coldest Weather
for the _Hounds_, and best finding his Earthing. Cast off your sure
Finders first, and as the _Drag_ mends, more; but not too many at once,
because of the Variety of Chaces in Woods and Coverts. The Night before
the Day of Hunting, when the _Fox_ goes to prey at Midnight, find his
Earths, and stop them with Black Thorns and Earth. To find him draw your
_Hounds_ about Groves, Thickets, and Bushes near Villages; Pigs and
Poultry inviting him to such Places to Lurk in. They make their Earths
in hard Clay, stony Grounds, and amongst Roots of Trees; and have but
one Hole straight and long. He is usually taken with _Hounds_,
_Grey-Hounds_, _Terriers_, _Nets_ and _Gins_.


_Of Badger Hunting._

This Creature has several Names, as _Gray Brock_, _Boreson_, or
_Bauson_; and is hunted thus. First go seek the Earths and Burrows where
he lieth, and in a clear Moon-shine Night, stop all the Holes but one or
two, and in these fasten Sacks with drawing Strings; and being thus set,
cast off your _Hounds_, and beat all the Groves, Hedges, and Tuffs
within a mile or two about, and being alarm'd by the Dogs they will
repair to their Burrows and Kennels, and running into the Bags, are
taken.


_Of the Martern or wild Cat._

These two Chases are usually hunted in _England_, and are as great
Infesters of Warrens, as the two last mentioned Vermine, but are not
purposely to be sought after; unless the Huntsman see their place of
Prey, and can go to it; and if the _Hound_ chance to cross them, sport
may be had. But no Rule can be prescribed how to find or hunt them.


_Of the Otter._

This Creature useth to lye near Rivers in his Lodging, which he
cunningly and artificially builds with Boughs, Twigs and Sticks. A great
Devourer of Fish. It is a very sagacious and exquisitely Smelling
Creature, and much Cunning and Craft is required to hunt him. But to
take him, observe this in short. Being provided with _Otter-Spears_ to
watch his Vents, and good _Otter-Hounds_, beat both sides of the River's
Banks, and you'll soon find if there is any. If you find him, and
perceive where he swims under Water, get to stand before him when he
_Vents_, (_i.e._ takes breath) and endeavour to strike him with the
Spear: If you miss him, follow him with your _Hound_, and if they are
good for _Otter_, they will certainly beat every Tree root, _Bul-rush
Bed_, or _Osier-Bed_, so that he cannot escape you.


_Of the wild Goat._

The _Wild-Goat_ is as big and as fleshy as a _Hart_, but not so
long-legg'd. The best time for hunting them is, at _All-hallontide_; and
having observed the Advantages of the Coasts, Rocks, and Places where
the _Goats_ lie, set Nets and Toils towards the Rivers and Bottoms; for
'tis not to be imagined, the Dogs can follow them down every place of
the Mountains. Stand some on the tops of the Rocks, and as occasion
offers throw down Stones; and place your Relays at the small Brooks or
Waters, where the _Goat_ comes down; but let them not tarry, till the
_Hounds_ come in, that were cast off.

_Thus much for Hunting._




_Of RIDING._


Here we must first examine the Ends and Design of our proposing this Art
to our selves, and accordingly lay down as briefly as may be the
necessary Rules and Lessons are to be observed and learnt; and I take
these to be the usual Perfections we aim at. _To ride well the great_
Horse, _for the Wars or Service, and the_ Horse _for Pleasure_; of both
which as concisely as I can, in their order.

We must begin with _Taming a young Colt_. After you have kept him at
home some time, and made him so Familiar with you, as to suffer
_Combing_, _Currying_, _Handling_, and _Stroaking_ any part, 'tis high
time then to offer him the Saddle, which you must lay in the _Manger_
first, that by its smell, he may not be afraid of it, or the _Styrrups_
Noise. Then gently saddling him (after his dressing) take a sweet
_Watering Trench_, anointed with Honey and Salt, and place it in his
Mouth so, that it may hang directly over his _Tush_; then lead him
abroad in your hand, and Water him; and after he has stood an hour
rein'd take off his Bridle and Saddle, and let him feed till Evening;
then do as in the Morning; dress and Cloath him, having _Cherisht_, by
the Voice delivered smoothly and gently; or by the Hand by gently
stroaking and clapping him on the neck, or Buttock; or lastly by the
_Rod_, by rubbing it on his Withers or Main.

On the next day as before; and after that, put him on a strong
_Musrole_, or sharp _Cavezan_, and _Martingale_; which is the best guide
to a Horse for setting his head in due place, forming the Rein, and
appearing Graceful and Comely; it Corrects the yerking out his Head, or
Nose, and prevents his running away with his Rider. Observe therefore to
place it right, that it be not buckled straight, but loose, and so low,
that it rest on the tender Grizsle of his Nose, to make him the more
sensible of his fault, and Correction; and so as you see you win his
Head, bring him straighter by degrees; let him but gently feel it, till
his Head be brought to its true perfection.

Having observed this well, lead him forth into some soft or new Plowed
Land, trot him about in your hand a good while: Then offer to Mount; if
he refuse to suffer you, trot him again; then putting your foot into the
_Styrrop_, mount half way; if he takes it impatient, correct him, and
about again; if not, cherish him, and place your self a moment in the
Saddle, dismount, cherish, and feed him with _Grass_, or _Bread_: All
things being well, remount, even in the Saddle, keeping your Rod from
his Eye; then let one lead him by the _Chaff-Halter_, and ever and a-non
make him stand, and cherish him, till he will of his own accord go
forward; then come home, alight gently, _dress and feed him well_. This
Course in few dayes will bring him to Trot, by following some other
Horse-man, stop him now and then gently, and forward; not forgetting
seasonable _Cherishings_ and _Corrections_, by Voice, _Bridle_, _Rod_,
_Spurs_.

Being thus brought to some certainty of _Rein_, and _Trotting_
forth-right, then to the treading _forth of the large Rings_. And here
first examine your Horses Nature, before you choose your Ground, for, if
his Nature be dull and sloathful, yet strong, then _New-Plow'd-Field_ is
best; if _Active_, _Quick_ and _Fiery_, then _Sandy-ground_ is to be
preferred; in the most proper of which mark out a large Ring, of a
Hundred paces circumference. Walk about it on the right seven or eight
times, then by a little straightning your right Rein, and laying your
left leg calf to his side, make a half Circle within the Ring upon your
right down to its Center; then by straightning a little your left Rein,
and laying your right Leg Calf to his side, make a half Circle to your
left hand, from the Center to the outmost Verge, and these you see
contrary turned make a Roman _S_. Now to your first large Compass, walk
him about on your left hand, as oft as before on the right, and change
to your right within your Ring; then Trot him first on the right-hand,
then on the left, as long as you judge fit, and as often Mornings and
Evenings, as the Nature of your Horse shall require. In the same manner
you may make him to _Gallop_ the same Rings, though you must not enter
it all at once, but by degrees, first a Quarter, then a Half-quarter;
and the Lightness and Cheerfulness of your Body, not the Spur, must
induce him to it.

The next Lesson is to _Stop Fair_, _Comely_, and without Danger. First
see that the Ground be hard and firm, then having cherisht your Horse,
bring him to a swift Trot, about Fifty Paces, and then straightly &
suddenly draw in your Bridle hand; then ease a little your hand to make
him give backward, and in so doing, give him liberty and cherish him;
then drawing in your Bridle hand, make him retire, and go back; if he
strike, ease your hand: if he refuse, let some by-stander put him back,
that he may learn your intention and thus he may learn these two Lessons
at once.

_To Advance before_, when he stoppeth, is thus taught: When you stop
your Horse, without easing your hand, lay close and hard to his sides
both Calves of your Legs, and shaking your Rod cry, _Up_, _Up_; which he
will understand by frequent Repetition, and Practice: This is a
Gracefull, and Comely Motion, makes a Horse Agile, and Nimble, and ready
to turn; and therefore be careful in it: That he take up his Legs Even
together, and bending to his Body; not too high, for fear of his coming
over; not sprawling, or pawing; or for his own pleasure; in these faults
correct him with Spur and Rod.

To _Yerk out behind_ is the next Lesson, thus learnt, Presently upon
your making him stop give him a good brisk jerk near his Flank, which
will make him soon understand you. When he does it, cherish him; and see
he does it comely, for to yerk out his hinder Legs, till his Forelegs be
above Ground, is not graceful; or one Leg yerk't farther out than the
other; or one Leg out while the other is on the Ground; in this case a
single Spur on the faulty side, is best. But to help him in Yerking,
staying his Mouth on the Bridle, striking your Rod under his Belly, or
Touching him on the Rump with it.

To _Turn readily on both hands_, thus: Bring his large Rings narrower,
and therein gently walk him, till acquainted. Then carry your
Bridle-hand steady and straight, the outmost rather straighter than the
inmost Rein, to look from, rather than to the Ring; trot him thus about,
on one side and the other successively, as aforesaid. After some time
stop, and make him advance twice or more, and retire in an even Line;
then stop and cherish him. To it again, after the same manner, making
him lap his outmost Leg above a foot over his Inner. And thus the _Terra
a Terra_, _Incavalere & Chambletta_, are all taught together. Perfect
your Horse in the large Ring, and the straight Ring is easily learnt.

Your Horse being brought thus far to perfection, with the _Musrole_ and
_Trench_, now let a gentle _Cavezan_ take their place; with a smooth
Cannon-Bit in his Mouth, and a plain watering Chain, Cheek large, and
the Kirble thick, round and big, loosely hanging on his nether Lip; and
thus mount him, and perfect your Horse with the _Bit_ in all the
aforesaid Lessons, as you did with the _Snaffle_; which indeed is the
easier to be done of the two.

To teach your Horse _To go a side_, as a necessary Motion for shunning a
blow from an Enemy, is thus: Draw up your Bridle hand somewhat straight,
and if you would have him go on the Right, lay your left Rein close to
his Neck, and your left Calf likewise close to his side (as in the
_Incavalere_ before) making him lap his left Leg over his Right; then
turning your Rod backward jerking him on the left hinder Thigh gently,
make him to bring to the right side his Hinder parts, and stand as at
first in an even direct Line: Then make him remove his Fore parts more,
that he may stand as it were Cross over the even Line, and then bring
his hinder parts after, and stand in an even Line, again. And thus you
must do, if you would have him go on the Left hand, using your
Corrections and Cherishings on the right. Use it, and you may be sure of
Perfection.

For the _Carreere_, only take this: Let it not extend in length above
six score yards, give your Horse warning before you start him by the
Bridle hand, and running full speed, stop him suddenly, firm and close
on his Buttock.

For the _Horse of Pleasure_, these following Lessons are to be learnt.
As first to _Bound aloft_, to do which: Trot him some sixteen yards,
then stop, and make him twice advance; then straighten your Bridle-hand;
then clap briskly both your Spurs even together to him, and he will
rise, tho' it may at first amaze him; if he does it, cherish him, and
repeat it often every day, till perfect.

Next to _Corvet_ and _Capriole_ are Motions of the same nature, and in
short are thus taught. Hollow the ground between two joyning Walls a
Horses length, by the side of which put a strong smooth Post of the same
length from the Wall, and fasten at the Wall an Iron Ring over against
the Post: Thus done, ride into the hollow place, and fasten one of the
_Cavezan_ Reins to the Post, and the other to the Ring; then cherish
him, and by the help of the Calves of your Legs, make him advance two or
three times; then pause, and Cherish him; make him advance again a dozen
times more, and then rest; double your Advancings, and repeat them till
it becomes habitual to him, to keep his Ground certain, advance of an
_equal hight_ before and behind, and observe a _due Time_ with the
motions of your Legs. The Inequality of his advancing his hinder Legs,
is helpt by a Jerk on the Fillets by some body behind him with a Rod.




_Of RACING._


A Racer must have the _Finest Cleanest Shape_ possible, and above all,
_Nimble_, _Quick_, and _Fiery_, _apt to Fly with the least Motion_; nor
is a long Bodied contemptible, it assuring _Speed_, tho' it signifies
_Weakness_ too. The _Arabian_, _Barbary_, or his Bastard, are esteemed
the best for this Use, these excelling _Fennets_, tho' they are good
too.

Having furnished your self with a Horse thus qualified, you are to
observe his right and due _Ordering_, before your designed _Racing_.
_Bartholomew-tide_ is the most proper time to _take him from Grass_; the
day before being Dry, Fair, and Pleasant: That Night let him stand
conveniently, to empty his Body; the next day _Stable_ him, and feed him
with _Wheat-straw_ that day, and no longer; lest you exceeding that
time, it straighten his _Guts_, heat his _Liver_, and hurt his _Blood_;
for want of _Straw_, Riding him Morning and Evening to Water, Airing, or
other moderate Exercises will serve. Then feed him with good old sweet
_Hay_, and according to the Season, and Temperature of his Body clothe
him; for a _Smooth Coat_ shews _Cloth_ enough, and a _Rough Coat_ want
of it. Observe likewise where you _Water_, your _Race-Horse_, that it be
a Running _Water_, or clear _Spring_, far distant (a Mile or more) from
the _Stable_, adjoyning to some _Level_; where after he has once well
drank Gallop him, and so Water and Scope him till that he refuse to
drink more, for that time; then Walk him gently Home (being an Hour on
your way, or more) clothe, and stop him round with soft _Whisps_, and
let him stand an Hour upon his _Bridle_, and after feed him with sweet
sound _Oats_, throughly dryed either with _Age_, _Kilne_, or _Sun_; if
he be low of flesh, or bad Stomacht, add a third part of clean Old
_Beans_, or two parts of _Oats_, or Wash his _Oats_ in strong _Beer_ or
_Ale_.

For _Dressing_ take these Rules. _Dress_ your Horse twice a day, before
you Water him, both Morning, and Evening, thus: _Curry_ him after he is
uncloath'd, from his _Ear-tips_ to his _Tayle_, and his whole Body
intirely (save his Legs under the Knees, and Cambrels) with an
_Iron-Comb_; then Dust him, and Rub him with a Brush of _Bristles_ over
again; Dust him again, and wetting your hand in clean Water, rub off all
the loose Hairs, and so rub him dry as at first; then with a fine _Hair
Cloth_ rub him all over; and lastly, with a fine Linnen Cloth; and then
pick his Eyes, Nostrils, Sheath, Cods, Tuel, and Feet clean.

The best Food for your _Racer_, is good, sweet, well dryed, sunned, and
beaten _Oats_: Or else Bread made of one part Beans, and two parts
_Wheat_ (_i.e._) two Bushels _Wheat_, to one of _Beans_, ground
together: Boult through a fine Range half a Bushel of fine _Meal_, and
bake that into two or three Loaves by it self, and with water and good
store of _Barm_, knead up, and bake the rest in great Loaves, having
sifted it through a _Meal-sieve_: (But to your finer, you would do well
to put the whites of Twenty or thirty _Eggs_, and with the _Barm_ a
little _Ale_, 'tis no matter how little water:) With the Courser feed
him on his Resting days, on his Labouring days with the finer.

The best time for feeding your _Runner_ on his Resting days is, after
his Watering in the Morning, at One a Clock at Noon, after his watering
in the Evening, and at nine or ten a Clock at nights: On his Days of
Labour, two Hours after he is throughly Cold outwardly and inwardly, as
before.

As for the Proportion of Meat, I shall not confine your Love to a
Quantity, only give him a little at once, as long as his Appetite is
Good: When he begins to fumble and play with his Meat, hold your hand,
shut up your Sack.

As for his _Exercise_ it ought to be thrice a Week, as his bodily
Condition requires; if he be foul, moderate Exercise will break his
Grease; if clean, then as you judge best, taking heed of breaking his
Mettle, or discouraging him, or laming his Limbs. Before you air him, to
add to his Wind, it is requisite to give him a raw Egg broken in his
Mouth: if your Horse be very fat, air him before Sun rising and after
Sun-set; if lean, deprive him not of the least strength and Comfort of
the Sun you can devise. To make him Sweat sometimes by coursing him in
his Cloaths is necessary, if moderate; but without his Cloaths, let it
be sharp and swift. See that he be empty before you course him; and it
is wholesome to wash his Tongue and Nostrils with _Vinegar_; or _piss_
in his Mouth, before you back him. And after his Exercise, cool him
before you come home, house, litter and rub him well and dry; then
cloath him, and give him after every Course a Scouring thus prepared.


_For scouring a Race-Horse._

Take 20 _Raisins_ of the _Sun_ stoned, 10 _Figs_ slit in the midst, boyl
them till they be thick in a Pottle of fair Water, mix it with Powder of
_Annis-seeds_, _Lycoras_, and _Sugar-candy_, till it come to a stiff
Paste, make them into round Balls, roul them in Butter, and give him
three or four of them the next morning after his Course, and ride him an
hour after, and then set him up Warm. Or this may be preferred, being
both a Purge and a Restorative, a Cleanser and a Comforter, thus
prepared.

Take three Ounces of _Annis-seeds_, six Drams of _Cummin-seeds_,
one Dram and half of _Carthamus_, one Ounce and two Drams of
_Fennugreek-seed_, one Ounce and half of _Brimstone_; Beat all these to
a fine Powder, and searse them; then take a Pint and two Ounces of
_Sallet-Oyl_, a Pint and half of _Honey_, and a Pottle of _White-Wine_;
then with a sufficient Quantity of fine white Meal, knead and work all
well into a stiff Paste; keep it in a clean Cloath, for use. When
occasion requires, dissolve a Ball of it in a Pail of Water, and after
Exercise give it him to drink in the Dark, that he may not see the
Colour, and refuse it: If he does refuse, let Fasting force him to be of
another mind.

To conclude, these Instructions, I will give you 'em in short before you
run, and then away as fast as you can.

_Course not your Horse hard four or five days before your Match, lest
you make his Limbs sore, and abate his Speed._

_Muzzle him not (except a foul Feeder) above two or three Nights before
the Race, and the Night before his bloody Courses._

_Give him sharp, as well at gentle, Courses on the Race he is to run._

_Shoe him a day before you run him._

_Let him be empty on the Match Day._

_Saddle him in the Stable, and fix to him the Girths and Pannel with
Shoe-makers Wax._

_Lead him with all Gentleness to his Course, and let him smell other
Horses Dung to provoke him to stale_, &c.

And Lastly, being come to the starting place, rub him well, uncloath
him; then take his Back, and the Word given, with all Gentleness and
Quietness possible, start and away; _And God speed you well_.




School _of_ Recreation. _How to make Artificial Fire-works of all sorts,
for Pleasure_, &c.


Of Artificial Fire-works for Recreation, there are three general sorts,
_viz._ Those that ascend or mount in the Air. Those that consume on the
Earth: And such as burn on the Water. And these are again divided into
three Particulars, _viz._ For the Air, the Sky-Rocket, the flying
Saucisson, and Balloon: For the Earth, the Ground-Rocket, the fiery
Lances, and the Saucissons descendent. For the Water-Globes or Balls,
double Rockets, and single Rockets; and of these in their particular
Orders, to make them, and such other Matters as may occur relating to
Fire-works.

But before I enter particularly on them, it will not be amiss to give
the Unlearned Instructions for making his Moulds for Rockets, _&c._

This Mould must be of a substantial piece of Wood, well season'd, and
not subject to split or warp; and first the Caliber or Bore of it, being
an Inch in Diameter; the Mould must be six Inches long, and Breech an
Inch and half; the Broach that enters into the Choaking part, three
Inches and a half long, and in Thickness a quarter of an Inch. The
Rowler on which you wrap the Paper or Paste board, being three quarters
of an Inch Diameter, and the Rammer somewhat less, that it may easily
pass and re-pass, made hollow to receive the Broach; for the Cartoush
Coffin must be filled with the Materials, the Broach being in.

If the Bore be two Inches Diameter, the Rocket must be twelve Inches in
Length: If an inch and a half in Bore, then nine Inches Long, and so
proportionably to any other Diameter. The Cartoush or Case must be
either strong Paper or fine Paste-board, choaked within an Inch and a
quarter of the Top, rowled on the Rowler with a thin Paste, to keep the
Doublings the higher together, that it may have the greater force and
higher flight. Having thus far considered your Mould and Cartoush or
Case, I proceed to the Composition and filling part, &c.


_A_ Sky-Rocket, _how to make it_, &c.

In the Composition of your filling Materials be very cautious that you
exceed not the just Proportion, for which I shall give Directions to be
a Standard in this case, _viz._ Having beat a Pound of Powder very fine,
and sifted it through a Lawn Sieve that no whole Corns remain in it; do
the like by two Ounces of Charcole; then sift them together, so that
they may mix well, which done, fill a small Rocket with this Mixture,
and if it break in Mounting before it come to the supposed height, or
burns out too fierce, then is there too much Powder, and more fine
sifted Charcole must be added; but if there be too much Charcole in the
Composition, then upon tryal it will not ascend, or very little.

Observe in charging your Rocket, at every quarter of an ounce of
Ingredients or thereabouts, you ram it down very hard, forcing your
Rammer with a wooden Mallet, or some weighty piece of Wood, but no Iron
or Stone, for fear any Sparkles of Fire fly out and take your
Combustible Matter; so fill it by degrees: If you design neither to
place Stars, Quills, or small Rockets on its Head, you may put in about
an Inch and a half of dry Powder for the Bounce, but if you are to place
the fore-mention'd things on the Head of a great Rocket, you must close
down the Paper or Paste-board very hard, and prick two or three holes
with a Bodkin, that it may give fire to them when it Expires, placing a
large Cartoush or Paste-board on the head of the Rocket, into which you
must put the Stars or small Rockets, Paper-Serpents, or Quill-Serpents;
of which I shall speak more hereafter.

Note further, That if you would have your Rocket sparkle much, you must
put some grosly bruised Salt peter into the Composition; but then it
must not lie long before it be let off, for fear it give and damp the
Powder. If you would have it leave a blue Stream, as it ascends, put
fine beaten and sifted Sulphur into it, but of neither of these more
than a third part of Charcole; and in this manner greater and lesser
Rockets are made, but the lesser must have more Powder and less Charcole
than the greater, by a fifth part in six.


_Golden Rain, and Golden Hair._

For Golden Rain, or streams of fire, that will, when at height, descend
in the Air like Rain: Take large Goose-Quills, take only the hollow
Quill as long as may be, fill it with beaten Powder and Charcole; as for
the Air Rocket only add a little Powder of Sulphur. Being hard filled to
a quarter of an Inch, stop that with wet Powder, called Wild-fire; place
as many as you think convenient on the Head of a great Rocket, pasted on
in a Rowl of Paper, so that it may not fall off till the Rocket bursts,
there being a little dry Powder in it to force the end when the stream
of fire ceases, at which time they taking, will appear like a shower of
Fire of a golden Colour, spreading themselves in the Air, and then
tending directly downwards. This is to be considered when you stand
directly, or something near under them; but if you are at some distance,
then they will appear to you like the Blazing Tail of a Comet or Golden
Hair.


_Silver Stars, How to make them._

To make Stars that will expand in Flame, and appear like natural Stars
in the Firmament for a time: Take half a Pound of Salt-peter, the like
quantity of Brimstone, finely beaten together, sifted and mingled with
a quarter of a Pound of Gunpowder so ordered: Then wrap up the
Composition in Linnen Rags or fine Paper, to the quantity of a Walnut,
bind them with small Thread, and prick holes in the Rag or Paper with a
Bodkin, and place six or ten of them on the Head of a great Rocket, as
you did the Quills, and when the Rocket expires, they take fire and
spread into a Flame, hovering in the Air like Stars, and descend
leisurely till the matter is spent that gives them light.


_Red fiery Colour'd Stars, How to make them._

Take in this Case half a Pound of Powder, and double the quantity of
Salt-peter; as much fine flower of Brimstone as Powder, wet them with
fair Water and Oyl of Petrolum till they will stick together like
Pellets; then make them up somewhat less than the former, and rowl them
in sifted dry Powder, then let them harden, by drying in the Sun or Air,
and place them on a great Rocket, as you did the other Stars, and you
will perceive them when the Rocket is at the height, fall, like Bodies
or Globes of Fire, in the manner as if real Stars were shooting or
falling from the Sky, for by reason of their wetness or density they
cannot expand into Flame, which occasions them by the pressure of their
weight to descend with greater Impetuosity till they waste and vanish
into Air, _&c._


_Another sort of Stars that give great Reports in the Air, as if Armies
were fighting._

Here you must observe to place six, seven, or eight small Rockets on the
Head of a great one, filled only with dry Powder, but indifferently
rammed, and on the ends of them holes being prick'd through, place any
of the sorts of Stars, or a mixture, as your fancy leads you; and when
the small Rockets go off like Thunder in the Air, the Stars will take
fire, so that the Noise will seem to the Spectators as if it proceeded
from them, because they will be seen on fire before the Sound of the
Reports can be heard.


_To make Paste-board Mortars for Balloons._

These stately Prospects of Fire are to be carried into the Air by the
force of Powder, by the help of Mortars; and therefore the making of the
Mortars are in the first place to be considered.

Take a Rowler of Wood, about 12 Inches Diameter, and three Foot and a
half in Length, wet strong Paste-board, and rowl upon it as close as may
be, glewing the Paste-board between each Rowling; then being about five
Inches thick, bind over it strong pitch'd Rope, though indifferent
small: Then choak the Breech of it, which must be beyond the length of
the Rowler, with a strong Cord; pitch or glue it over that the Powder
may not force its vent that way, and so when the Mortar is well dry'd,
draw out the Rowler, and make it as even as can be; bore a Touch-hole
two Inches from the Breech, that it may enter into the hollow of the
Mortar, and set it by for use.


_To make Balloons, the rarity of Fire-works._

Take strong Paper, or Paste-board, rowl it on a 12 Inch Rowler, near as
thick as 'tis long, then with a strong small Cord choke it at one end
only, leaving a Port-fire, which is a place to put in a Quill of
Wild-fire, that will last till being shot out of the Mortar it comes to
its height; then next to that put on an Ounce and a half of loose
Powder, and place in it as many small Rockets and Stars as it will hold;
so choak up the other end quite. You may also put into it little quills
of Wild-fire, then being closed up, only a Port-fire remaining, which
made of a Quill of Wild-fire, as is said, or Stopple, to make which in
the close of this Head I shall Instruct you, Charge the Mortar, being
set Sloaping upwards with half a Pound of corn Powder, and it will by
giving fire at the priming holes, send the Balloon up into the Air a
prodigeous height, and when it comes to the dry Powder, that will break
the Balloon; and then the Stars and Rockets in it taking fire, will
scatter abroad in various curious Figures delightful to the Spectators;
and as they are Cunningly placed, they will represent Crowns, Cyphers,
Characters, Dates of the Year, _&c._


_The Airy or flying Saucisson, How to make it._

This curious Fire-work must be made in the Composition matter for
filling mostly of corned Powder, putting before it when you fill the
Cartoush or Case as much fine sifted Powder and Charcole as composed for
the Rocket, will carry it to its height; leave a hole for the Port-fire
in the choaking as big as a Goose-Quill will enter filling it with
Dust-Powder and Charcole, and so close up the open end, by turning in
the Paper or Paste-board corner-wise, either glewing or waxing it down.


_Paste-board Guns to cast the Saucissons into the Air, How to make
them._

To make these kind of Guns, Take a Rowler, some what less than for the
Balloon, Rowel on it your Paste-board, and cord it over with strong
Packthread, making their Touch-holes at the bottom, because they must be
placed upright on a Plank or Board in a Row fixed into the Plank or
Board in holes cut proportionable to them, and lashed fast to Staples
above and beneath with strong Cords, and being charged with a quarter of
a Pound of Powder, fire by Match or otherways, given to the Touch-hole
underneath the Plank, when the Saucisson is lightly put in with the Neck
or Port-fire downward, so that it may touch the Powder; and this will
serve for Use a considerable time.


_Saucissons for the Earth or Water, To make them._

Make your Cartoushes or Cases about 9 Inches long, and an Inch in the
Diameter of the Calliber, by Rowling Paper or thin Paste-board on a
woodden Rowler; choak the ends only, leaving at one end a passage to
thrust in a Goose-Quill filled with Dust-Powder and Charcole well mixed,
at a Port-fire, Glue them over, or use small Cord glued or pitched to
strengthen the Case that it burst not unseasonably by the force of the
Composition, with which you must fill them when you have choaked; only
at the Port-fire end, the Composition being about 2 Inches, the same as
the former, the rest corned Powder, having primed and fixed them on a
Plank in a Row about a foot distance, lay a train of Stouple, and they
will fire gradually, flying about on the Earth or the Water, according
as you place them, giving reports like a Volley of Muskets.

This Stouple is useful for Trains; and Port-fire is no more than
Cotton-wool well dressed in water and Gun-powder dryed in the Sun, or in
a clean Swept warm Oven, that it may come somewhat near Tinder, but more
swift and fiercer in its fire when it has Taken.


_Fire-Boxes, To make them._

Take a great Cartoush or Case made, as for the Balloon, croud it full of
small Rockets or Serpents, with the choaked part downward, prime them
with Stouple or Wild-fire; fix it firm on a Pole, make a priming Hole in
the side towards the lower end, and run in a Quill of fine beaten
Powder, and they will fly out (the upper end being left open) one by one
as swift as may, or if you scatter loose Powder they will fly out
several together with a prodigeous Noise, and breaking, imitating a deal
of Thunder.


_Firey Lances, How to make them._

These are usually for running on the Water making there a very pleasant
Pass-time: Their cartoush or Cases are made like the small Rocket, with
thin Paste-board glued and rowled up on a wooden Rowler about 9 Inches
long: If you would have it carry a long fiery Tail on the Water, the
Composition must be 2 Ounces of Charcole, half a Pound of Brimstone,
half a Pound of Powder, and half a Pound of Salt-peter, or
proportionable for so many as you make, bruised finely and Sifted; but
if you would have it burn bright like a Torch, put only four Ounces of
Powder to the fore-named quantity of Brimstone and Salt-peter, without
any Charcole-dust, tying to each Line a Rod in the same nature as to
the Sky-Rocket; but not of that largeness; and they will float about a
long time, making a strange shew in a dark Night, their ends being so
placed on a frame when you give fire, that they may leap out of them
selves one, two, or three, at a time, or as you design them, by putting
more or less Stouple for Port-fires; scatter a very small quantity of
loose Powder underneath.


_To make the appearance of Trees and Fountains of Fire._

This is done by placing many little Rockets on the Head of a great one,
by passing their slender Rods through its large Cartoush; and if they
take fire whilst the Rocket is vigorously Ascending, they will spring up
like Branches or fiery Trees; but if they go off just as the Rocket is
spent, and Descending, they will appear like a Fountain of Fire.


_Girondels or Fire-wheels, How to make them._

Take a Wheel of light Wood, like the circle of a Spinning-wheel, on
which the Band is placed; tie small Rockets round it in the nature of a
Band, so fast that they cannot fly off, and so Head to Tail, that the
first fired when it bursts may give fire to the next, whose force will
carry the Wheel (which must be placed on a strong Pin in the Axeltree)
round so fast that although but one Rocket go off at a time, it will
seem all on fire, and so continue whilst all are gradually Spent; and
this especially at the Angles of great Fire-works are very Ornamental.

_Ground-Rockets, and the best way of Making Serpents._

The Mould of the Ground-Rocket may be made in all particulars like that
for the Sky-Rocket, but less in Length and Circumference, six, seven, or
eight Inches being a warrantable Length; rowl on the Cartoush or Case to
a moderate thickness; choak it at one end, fill it, the Broach being in
as the Sky-rocket; with this composition.

Put but an ounce of Charcole to a Pound of Powder, and about half an
Ounce of Salt-peter; beat, mingle and sift them finely; put in about a
quarter of an ounce between every Raming till it is full with in an Inch
with corned Powder, Lightly Raming it, leaving only so much room as may
choak it at that end, cutting then off what hangs over, and leaving it
with a picked end; being thus finished, prime it with a little wet
Powder, and lay it a drying till you dispose of it for your pass-time.

The Serpent is a kind of a small Rocket; To make them therefore well,
make a Case of strong white Paper, about six Inches and a half, the
Rowler being about the thickness of a small Arrow, it must have a Head
and a Broach proportionable, being Rowled up hard, past the Edg that
turns over; choak it with a strong Pack-thread, and fill it with a
Composition of six ounces of Powder to one of Charcole, both beaten
finely, sifted and well mingled; put in a little and little at time in,
and every time you put any in, Ram it down hard till within an Inch
full; then put in corned Powder, press it down gently, and with the end
of your Rammer force down the end that stands a little above; so that it
may cover the Powder, and then Seal it down with Wax; prime with
Dust-Powder, and a little Flower of Brimstone, and with your Match
having a good Coal on it, give fire as you see occasion.


_Fiery Globes or Comets, to make them._

Take half a Pound of Powder, two onces of Brimstone, an ounce of
Salt-peter, bruise these Grosly, and wet them; Aqua-Vitae and Oyl of
Petrolum, that they may be moulded like a Paste, that so they may be
made up into Balls, as big as ordinary Wash-Balls; then dry them very
hard, and wrap them up in Cerecloaths made of Brimstone, Rosin, and
Turpentine, in which make a little whole, and prime with Wild-fire: Put
the Ball then into a Sling, and the Wild-fire being Touched, throw it up
as high as you can into the Air, and when the body of the Ball fires, it
will appear to the Beholders like a fiery Globe, with a Stream or Blaze,
like as if a Comet or Blazing Star were Ascending or Descending,
according to its height or Declination,


_To try the goodness of Powder, that you may know its strength._

Observe whether it be well dryed and corned, which you have taken notice
of, and approved; lay a few Corns scattered on a sheet of white Paper,
and fire them; when if they leave a black and sooty mark behind them,
with a noisom smell, and sindg the Paper, then is that Powder gross and
earthy, and will fail your Expectation, if you use it in your
Fire-works: But if in the sprinkling and firing there appear few or no
marks, or those of a clear bluish Colour, then it is airy and light,
well made, full of fire, and fit for Service; half a Pound of it having
more strength than a Pound of the other.

And thus Reader, have I given you an Insight into the making Fire-works,
_&c._ Such as are very pleasing, and now used on occasions in all
Christian Countries, in making which, by a little you may soon be
perfect.


_St._ George _and the_ Dragon _fighting_ &c. _Also Mermaids, Whales_,
&c.

Form your Figures of Paste-board, Strengthen'd with Wicker, small Sticks
within pasted to the Board to keep it hollow, tight, and bearing out;
and place a hollow Trunk in the Body for a large Line to pass through,
and likewise for a smaller to draw them too, and from each other, that
they may the better seem in Combats, which must be fattened at the
_Dragons_ Breast, and let one end of the Cord be tied, which must pass
through the Body of St. _George_, turning about a Pully at the other
end, and fastning it to his Back, and tye another at his Breast, which
must pass through the Body of the _Dragon_, or a Trunk at his Back; and
so returning about a Pully at that end, it must be drawn streight, and
fastened to the _Dragons_ Tail; so that as you turn that Wheel, they
will run furiously at each other, and as you please you may make them
retreat and meet again, Soaping the Line to make them slip the easier;
at the _Dragons_ Tail, in his Mouth and Eyes you must fix Serpents, or
small Rockets, which being fired at their setting out, will cause a
dreadful sight in a dark Night.

Thus a Mermaid, or a Whale, may be made to float on the Water, but then
the Figure must be fixed on a convenient piece of Board, with two fire
Wheels fixed on an Axle, run through the poised part of the Body, by the
force of which it moves in a swift Line in the Water; the Wheels must
have little Rockets or Serpents tyed round them, as the Girondel before
mentioned.


_A Fire-Drake on a Line._

Having made the Figure of Paste-board to the proper Form of a Dragon
with Paste-board and Wicker, as has been taught before, make a hollow
Trunk through the Body of it for a great Line to pass through, and
fasten small Lines to draw it too and from you at the breast and Tail of
the Drake; put into the Eyes, Mouth and Tail of it Rockets so fixed,
that they cannot fly out, as you may put Wild-fire Rowled up hard and
long in Paper: Then fire that in the Eyes and Mouth first, and draw it
with Pullies from one end of the Line to the other; then that in the
Tail, and draw it back, and it will seem as retreating from danger, with
fire coming out of the Belly of it.


_A Burning Castle and Dragon on the Water._

Make the Dragon of Paste-board and Wicker, as before; The bottom of the
Castle of Light Wood, and the work of Paste-board with Paper, Turrets
and Battlements of a foot height, in the Portal of the Castle fasten a
Line that it may come level with the Water and therefore some part of
the Castle must be under Water; this Line must be fastened to the other
side of the Water, or in the Water, if it be broad, and admit not the
former on a Pole or Stake knocked down, and pass in a hollow Trunk
through the Belly of a Dragon, that being in the Castle, may upon firing
the Rockets, placed advantageously in the Tail, Eyes and Mouth, come out
of the Castle and move on the Line; to meet which, you may at the other
end of the Line, in the same manner, prepare a Neptune in a Chariot, or
riding on a Sea-horse, with a burning Trident, or a Whale with a Rocket
or Wild-fire in his Mouth; which if it ly low, by spouting out, will
make the Water fly about, as if it spouted Fire and Water out of its
Mouth; then by a Train fire, some little Paste-board Guns in the Castle,
which if the Composition of the Train be made of Wild-fire, or Stouple,
will go off by degrees, and coming to a Train of Brimstone, Rosin and
Powder, make the whole frame expire in a terrible blaze.


_A Wheel of Fire-works to run backwards and forwards on the Ground._

Procure a pair of Wheels, being of Light Wood, like that of a Spinning
Wheel, fasten them on an Axel-tree, and place Rockets round them, as
bands are fastened round a Wheel, and so primed at Tail and Head, that
when one Expires the other may take fire, half of them placed with their
Heads and Tails the contrary way to the first: So that when the first
are spent, and the Wheels have run on plain Ground a great way, the
other firing will turn them again, and bring them to the place where
they first set out.


_A Fire that will burn in the Water, or Water-ball._

Sow up a Case of Canvas, like that of a Foot-ball, but lesser, pitch or
glue it over: Then take one Pound of Powder, eight ounces of Roch-alom,
four ounces of live Sulphur, two ounces of Camphire, Linseed-oyl, and
that of Petrolum, each an Ounce and half, an ounce of Oyl of Spike, with
two ounces of Colophonium bruis'd and well mixed together, and stuff the
Ball hard with it, with a Stick pitch or glue it over again, binding it
with Marline on Pitch, on that leave two Vents or Port-fires, set it on
fire, trundle it on the Water, and it will burn under it.




_The exactest Military Discipline for the Exercise of_ Foot _and_ Horse,
_as in Use at this day, at Home and Abroad, in all the Words of
Command_, &c.


To be well disciplin'd and train'd up in Military Affairs, has been the
study and pride of all Warlike Nations, whereby they have acquired to
themselves Fame and Riches, by being able to defend themselves against
Invaders, and gain Conquests Abroad; but above all other, for many
hundred Years past the _English_ have excelled in this, being much
helped by their natural Courage. But since I only at this time intended
to write to the Learner, to train him up in his Exercise, by which means
his own Industry and Experience may lead him forth to greater matters. I
shall not enumerate the many brave Men, who from mean Conditions have
rais'd themselves by Arms, to the highest pitch of Honour and
Preferment; but shew our Youth what they are to do and observe in their
first Training, as to the Words of Command, to order their Arms in their
various Postures with Dexterity. And first of Foot Exercise, I shall
speak of the _Pike_, because it is the most Ancient, to Train which,
many, who are now great Commanders, have taken it as an Honour.


_The Exercise of the_ Pike_, by word of Command,_ &c.

1. =Pikes take: Advance your Pikes.=

To do this, as the first thing required, move in a direct Line with your
_Pike_ upward, with your Left-hand near your Side, your Right-hand
almost as high as you can reach, keeping your Left by a Depression, as
low as you can, your Fingers being strait out; and so raise the _Pike_
till the Butt-end come to your Hand, then place it between your Breast
and Shoulder, keeping the Butt-end close, that it may be the more steady
and upright.

2. =To the Front.=

To do this, put your Left-hand on your _Pike_, even with the Top of your
Shoulder, keeping your Fingers strait, and bring your _Pike_ right
before you with a swift Motion; drawing your Right-heel into your
Left-instep, and so keep the _Pike_ strait.

3. =Charge.=

Here you must fall back with your Right-leg, placing the Heel of your
Left foot against the middle of your Right, and bring down your _Pike_
with a quick Motion, support it with your Left-Elbow, and charge Breast
high; and upon yielding your Body forward, bend your Left-knee to fix
your self firmer, holding the Butt end of your _Pike_ in the Palm of
your Right-hand, your Left-Toe pointing in a Line with the Spear of the
_Pike_, your Feet set at a moderate distance: Then bring it down
somewhat beneath your Breast, be cautious of clattering, and when it is
charged, close it to your Breast.

4. =To the Right four times.=

Here turn your Left-toe to the Right, then make your Left-heel come up
to your Right-instep with a sudden Motion, Recovering your _Pike_ strait
before you, and having turn'd, fall back with your Right-leg, and Charge
as before.

5. =To the Right about.=

Now by turning your Left-toe, bring it to the Right about, bringing up
your Right-heel; your _Pike_ being recovered, Charge with much
swiftness.

6. =As you were.=

To do this, by turning to the _Left about_, bring up your Left toe; so
bringing your _Pike_ recovered, observe that your Left hand be never
higher than your Mouth, your Feet placed in order, and when turn'd, you
must fall back with your Right-leg and Charge, bringing your _Pike_
strait up without any clattering.

7. =To the Left four times.=

8. =To the Left about.=

9. =As you were.=

10. =Advance your Pike.=

These must be done, as has been shewed in the Right, only making your
Observation of Eight Left Motions, &c. And the better to do this, bring
your Right-heel to your Left-instep; your _Pike_ being before you, fall
out with your Right-foot, and so bring your _Pike_ to your Right-Thigh.

11. =Shoulder your Pike.=

Here extend your Fingers on the Left-hand, and lay it on the _Pike_
level with your Shoulder; make your Right-heel come up even with your
Left-instep, your _Pike_ right before you, fall back with your
Right-leg, and as far as may be put back your Right-arm, keeping your
_Pike_ about half a Foot from your Side, your Eye fixed on the Spear
directly to the Rear, your _Pike_ sloped: Then forsake it with your
Left-hand, and bring in your Right-leg, laying your _Pike_ on your
Right-Shoulder, closing your Elbow to your Body, the Butt of your _Pike_
being about half a Foot from the Ground, in the middle of the distance.

12. =Charge to the Front.=

In doing this, fall back with your Right-leg, keeping as much as may be
your Arm back, and the Spear exactly to the Rear, sloaping the _Pike_ to
the same height as Shouldering; then bring with your Left-hand the
Butt-end backwards, turning the Head with your Right; so quit it with
that Hand, then taking hold on the Butt-end, Charge Breast high, keeping
the Palm of your Hand open against the Butt-end, your Left-Elbow under
the _Pike_, and your Left-toe in Line with the Spear; and when you
Charge it must be directly forward, your Left-heel being just against
the middle of your Right.

13. =Shoulder as you were.=

Here raise your _Pike_ with both Hands, so quit it with the Right, and
with the Left turn the Head backwards, the Spear even with the Rear; so
with your Right-hand seize it again as high as you can reach with
little straining, and stand with it from your Body aslope; bring up your
Right-leg, and then forsake your _Pike_ with your Left-hand, and lay it
on your Shoulder, ever keeping the Spear in a direct Point to the Rear,
not crossing your Fellows.

14. =Charge to the Right.=

In this Case fall back with your Right-Arm and Leg, the Spear being kept
in the Rear sloping at the height of Shouldering; then turn your
Left-Toe to the Right, suffering the Right to fall behind the Left-foot;
so that the middle of your Right-foot may be over against your
Left-heel; then bring up your _Pike_ in this Action, and turn backwards
the Butt-end by your Right-side; then pressing it in your Right palm,
Charge.

15. =Shoulder as you were.=

Make your Left-toe come to the Left, and the middle of your Right-foot
come also against your Left-heel, with your _Pike_ up; and then turn the
Head to the Right, (that is) directly to the Rear, doing it at one
Motion: So take hold of your _Pike_ with your Right-hand, and keep it
sloped with both Hands a little distance from your Body; as in
Shouldering, at what time bring up your Right-leg, and lay your _Pike_
on your Shoulder.

16. =Charge to the Right about.=

In this Case give back with your Hand and Leg, then stand with your
_Pike_ a little distant from your Side, and turning your Left-toe to the
Right about, bring the Butt end of your _Pike_ to the Right-side,
falling back with your Right-leg and Charge, keeping the Spear all the
while to the Rear a Shouldering height; and when you are to Face to the
Right about, level your _Pike_ and Charge.

17. =As you were.=

In this, turn your Left-toe to the Left about, advancing your Right-foot
a moderate Step, that the middle of it may stand against your Left-heel;
then with your Left-hand bring the Butt-end by your Left-side, taking
notice the Spear be exactly with the Rear a Shouldering height; then lay
on your Right-hand as high as you can easily reach, and stand with it in
Form; after which, bring up your Right-leg, and Shoulder.

18. =Charge to the Left.=

Here fall back with your Left-arm and Leg, as in the former Chargings:
Turn the Left-toe and the Butt-end of your _Pike_ with your Left-hand to
the Right, after which, bring up your Left-leg, and Charge.

19. =As you were.=

Raise the Spear with both your Hands, turn the Left-toe to the Right,
and so fall back with your Left-leg and Arm, keeping your _Pike_ from
your Side, the Spear to the Rear; then bring up your Left-leg, and
Shoulder.

20. =Charge to the Left about.=

Here fall with your Arm and Leg back, bringing the _Pike_ over your Head
with both your Hands, the Spear directly to the Rear at a Shouldering
height: Turn your Left-toe to the Left about, then bring up your
Right-toe, that the middle may come with your Left-heel, and Charge.

21. =Port.=

Observe here, as in Charging in the Front; being wary that you sink not
the Spear of your _Pike_, rest it between the Thumb and Fore-finger,
keeping your Elbow close to your side.

22. =Comport.=

As far as may be bring your Left-hand backward, at the same time
stretching out the Right, make thereupon a step forward with the
Right-foot, grasping fast the _Pike_ as high as you can reach with the
Right-hand, not tossing the Spear too high; then forsake it with your
Left-hand, and bring back your Right-leg even with your Left; then close
it to your Side, keeping the Spear the height of your Head.

23. =Charge to the front.=

Here extend your Right-arm, advancing at the same time your Right-leg,
drawing back your Left-hand as far as may be; and bringing your _Pike_
forward, give a step back with your Right-leg, and take hold of the Butt
with your Right-hand; then Charge; and in all Chargings observe it be
done Breast high.

24. =Fire.=

Herein face to the Right about, suffering the Spear of your _Pike_ to
fall behind, you; after which, quit your Right-hand from the Butt-end,
without any motion of the Left, and be cautious not to strike upon the
Spear.

25. =Charge as you were.=

Here turn to the Left about, place the Butt-end in the Palm of your
Right-hand, and Charge, the Spear being kept an even height.

26. =Advance your Pike.=

In this Exercise bring your Right-heel to your Left-Instep, your _Pike_
directly before you to the Recovery; and so fall out with your
Right-foot that it may come even with your Left, and so bring the _Pike_
to your Right thigh.

27. =Order your Pikes.=

Raise your Left-hand, so that it may come even with the upper part of
your Shoulder, place it on your _Pike_, stretching out your Fingers;
then sinking your Left-hand, raise your Right; and then raise the
_Pike_, that when the Butt-end your Right-hand may be against your Eye;
keep the _Pike_ near your Head by clapping the Butt-end to the Latchet
of your Shoe; and here all the Butt-ends of as many as are exercised
must fall to the Ground at one and the same time.

28. =Pikes to you Inside Order.=

Place the Butt-end on the Inside your Right-foot to the middle, not
moving your foot, but only your _Pike_.

29. =Lay down your Pikes.=

As many as exercise in this case, must step altogether with their
Right-legs; stoop together with a very Quick Motion, and Lay their
_Pikes_ down very strait with their Right-hands.

30. =Quit your Pikes.=

Fall back with your Left-leg, bringing it even with your Right: Then
quit your _Pike_ absolutely, and rise up with a quick Motion.

31. =Handle your Pikes.=

Here you must step forward in a quick Motion with your Left-leg, and
then as many as exercise must stoop together, and extend their
Right-hands as far as they can reach, and then grasp the _Pike_.

32. =Order you Pikes.=

With your Right-hand raise the Pike, and step back with your Left Leg,
with a swift Motion, clapping the Butt-end of the _Pike_ to facilitate
the raising of it on the Inside of your Right-foot about the middle.

33. =Pikes to your outside Order.=

In this Exercise place the Butt-end of your _Pike_ on the out-side of
your foot, not moving your Foot, but the _Pike_.

34. =Advance your Pike.=

This must be done, as the fore-going; and thus much for the Exercise of
the _Pike_ in particular by it self, till I come to speak of its
Exercise conjunctly with the _Musquet_, in the general Exercising a
Company or Battalion.


_The words of Command in the Exercise of the_ Musquet, _and how they are
to be Observed and Performed_.

When you enter on this Exercise, be sure to keep your Footing firm, your
Feet at a moderate distance; that at all Times, and on all Occasions,
you may retain your full Strength. Observe moreover to keep the Right
heel firm, and set the Right foot steady, and then attend to the Words
of Command, which you are summoned to do by this Expression of the
Commander, viz. _Musketiers, have a Care of the Exercise, and carry your
Arms well._ After which, the proper Words of Command follow in their
Order.

1. =Lay your Right-hand on your Musket.=

Here the Lock being uppermost, turn the Barrel towards you, and
extending your Fingers, lay your Right-hand directly behind the Lock; so
close the Butt end to your Shoulder, suffering the _Musket_ to be in all
parts of an equal height.

2. =Poise your Musket.=

In doing this, you must hold it with a hard Grasp, facing to the Right,
and turning with a quick Motion on your Left-heel, your _Musket_ kept
directly before you the height of it, between your Shoulders; your Right
elbow on your Side, keeping your feet at a moderate distance, that when
you turn about, your Left-toe may stand to the Front, and your Right-toe
as you Face to the Left; let your Left-heel be against the middle of
your Right-foot; and by such means you will be in a resting posture.

3. =Rest your Musket.=

Here slide your _Musket_ down to your Left-hand bearing your Arm as low
as possible without stooping, and so receive your _Musket_ where the
Scowrer enters into the Stock, touching with your hand no part of the
Barrel, keeping it about half a Foot from your side sloping, your
Right-hand, with your Fingers, extended being behind the Lock.

4. =Cock your Musket.=

Place the Right-Thumb and your Finger behind the Trigger, so clap your
_Musket_ against your Thigh, and Cock; keeping it that it slip not your
Thumb, now removed steady on the Head of the Cock.

5. =Guard your Musket.=

Bring it with a very swift Motion strait before you, to recover your
Left-hand even with your mouth, about half a foot distance from it, not
suffering your _Musket_ to sink, nor stooping your Body, observing in
bringing up the _Musket_ before, which is a recovering, that the
Right-heel be brought to the Left-Instep, your _Musket_ being
perpendicular.

6. =Present.=

Here fall back with your Right-leg, that the middle of the Right foot
may be against the Left-heel; cause the Butt-end to rise to your
Shoulder, fixing it firm, and keep your Right elbow even with the height
of the Piece, being in a readiness with the fourth Finger of your
Right-hand to pull the Trigger, bowing the Left-knee keeping the Right
firm and steady, and so level your _Musket_ Breast high.

7. =Fire.=

Keep here an exact Motion in drawing the Trigger, every one drawing at
once, so that the whole Fire of a Company or Battalion may be as of one
report: Keep your Body steady, and your _Musket_ hard against your
Shoulder after you have fired, till the next Word of Command is given,
_viz_.

8. =Recover your Arms.=

Here let the Butt-end sink in both your Hands, and bringing it strait
before you, keep your right Hand under the Cock and the Left even with
your Mouth.

9. =Half bend your Musket.=

Fall back with your Right-leg, and let the _Musket_ at once rest,
placing the Right-thumb upon the Cock, and the Fingers of that hand
behind the Trigger; then closing it to your Thigh, half bend the Cock,
and keep it rested with your Fingers extended.

10. =Clean the Pan.=

Do this with the ball of your Thumb, pressed into the Pan, keeping your
Fingers of the Right-hand behind the Lock.

11. =Handle your Primer.=

Take the little end between your Finger and Thumb, turning the other end
to the back of your Hand, your Arm bearing backwards.

12. =Prime.=

Level your Piece, and strike your bruised Powder into the Pan half full,
or some what more, keeping your Left-toe to the Front.

13. =Shut your Pan.=

This do by using your two first Fingers, casting back your Primer and
bringing up your Right-heel to your Left-instep, your _Musket_ strait up
before you, as in the recovery, with the Barrel towards you; do it with
a quick Motion with the Thumb of your Right-hand on the top of the
Steel, Levelling your Left with your Mouth.

14. =Blow off the loose Corns.=

Bring your Mouth within four Inches of the Pan, give a strong Blast
without declining your Head, casting out your Arm, and suffering the
_Musket_ to sink from its former Posture.

15. =Cast about and Charge.=

Advance your right Leg, turn the Barrel of your _Musket_ downwards,
bring it to your Left-side a little backward, with your Left-hand, not
touching the Barrel with your Fingers; place the Toes of your Right foot
to the Front and the Right-heel against the middle of the Left-foot,
ballancing your _Musket_ in the Left hand, the Muzzle to the proper
Front, in an equal height, half a Foot from you, joining your Right-hand
to the Muzzle, your Thumb extended to the side of the Barrel.

16. =Handle your Charger.=

Gripe fast your Bandilier or Charger, hold it even with the Muzzle of
the _Musket_ underneath, about an Inch distant.

17. =Open your Charger with your Teeth.=

In this Case, bring it up to your Mouth without declining your Head,
then bring your Charger within an Inch of your Muzzle, about an Inch
from it, covering your Chargers Mouth with the ball of your Thumb.

18. =Charge with Powder.=

Pat the Powder into the Barrel with a quick Motion, and put the Charger
underneath as before.

19. =Draw forth your Scowrer.=

In this let fall your Charger, and upon turning your Hand, draw forth
your Scowrer at three Motions, holding it Level the height of your
Forehead, with an extended Arm, as if you designed to dart it.

20. =Shorten it to an Inch.=

Turn the great end of your Scowrer towards you, sinking it till within
an Inch of your Hand, rest it some what below your Right-breast, bearing
forward a little.

21. =Charge with Bullet.=

Take the Bullet out of your Mouth with your Right-hand, put it into the
Barrel with a swift Motion, holding the big end of your Scowrer near the
Muzzle of your Musket.

22. =Ram down Powder and Ball.=

Grasp full with your Thumb and Fore-finger from the Muzzle, your Thumb
on the Top of the Scowrer reserving a handful in your Hand.

23. =Withdraw your Scowrer.=

Your Hand, Thumb and Fore-finger turned towards the Muzzle, clear your
Scowrer at three Motions, and hold it up even with your Forehead,
extending your Arm as if you were about to dart it.

24. =Shorten it to an Handful.=

Turn the Butt-end of your Scowrer towards you; sink it till within an
Inch of the End, letting it rest against your Body a little below your
Right-breast, the Scowrer sloping.

25. =Return your Scowrer.=

Put it up in its proper place; grasp the Muzzle of your _Musket_ with
your Right-hand, extending your Thumb upon the Scowrer, keep it half a
foot distant from your Side.

26. =Poise your Musket.=

Here before you bring up your _Musket_ with your Left-hand, Grasp it
under the Cock with your Right, falling with your Right-leg to your
Left: Keep it Poised against your Nose, and when faced to the Front, let
your Right-elbow rest upon your Body.

27. =Shoulder your Musket.=

In this do as has been taught in the like case before.

28. =Order your Musket.=

Sink a little your Right-hand, and take hold on the Stock on the top of
the Scowrer with your Left-hand, then suffer that Hand to sink, and take
hold on the Muzzle with the Right-hand, letting the Butt-end easily sink
near the Ground; then let it after a little Pause come down: As many as
Exercise grounding them together, then close to the Right-foot, and
place the Butt-end about the middle of it, your Right-hand an Inch below
the Muzzle, the Lock being outward.

29. =Lay down your Musket.=

Turning it with the Back upwards, step forwards with your Left-leg, so
with your Right-hand place it on the Ground, that it may lye with the
rest in a strait Line; This some call grounding a _Musket_.

30. =Quit your Musket.=

Here stand upright with a quick Motion, rising with a falling back of
your Left-leg to your Right.

31. =Handle your Musket.=

With your Left-leg step forward, and lay your Right hand on the Muzzle.

32. =Order your Musket.=

Raise the Muzzle, and fall back with your Left-leg to your Right,
turning the Lock outwards by the middle of your Foot.

And thus much for the Exercise of the _Musket_ by it self, which may be
much advantageous to young Trainers, who have occasion to be called or
sent out upon Duty in the City or Country and Country Militia of the
_Trained Bands_, or for any other who is desirous to be knowing in, and
entering upon Military Affairs, from whence I shall proceed to the brief
Exercise of the _Pike_ and _Musket_, jointly, as they are Exercised in
Companies, Battalions, _&c._


_The Exercise of_ Pike _and_ Musket _jointly._

We now supposing the _Muskets_ shouldered, and the _Pikes_ advanced; the
Word next is,


1. =Musketiers, make ready.=

Hereupon you must perform all the Postures and Motions together, till
you stand Cock'd and guarded with your _Musket_ before you; and for the
better Security your Thumb on the Cock; whereupon the _Pikes_ are to be
recovered before the _Pike-men_: The Butt-ends in the Palms of their
Hands, and the Spear upright on their Left hands to the height of their
Mouths, when the Commander gives the Word

=Charge.=

Then the _Muskets_ and _Pikes_ must be brought at once, by turning the
Left-toe that way the Charge is made, and the Left-heel against the
middle of the Right-foot in every Charge, charging directly forward; not
at the first Charging, closing the _Pikes_ to your Breasts; but in
bringing down the _Pike_, charge a little way distant, and when they are
brought down, then close them.

The _Charge_ is, _To the Right_ four times; then to the _Right about_,
and so, _As you were_.

Then to the _Left Charge_ four times; then to the _Left about_, and so,
_As you were_.

Furthermore the _Pike-men_ must turn as the _Musketiers_, bearing up
their Right-heels to their Left-insteps, their Arms being extended as
they turn; so that they bring their _Muskets_ straight before them,
carrying their Left-hands as high as their Mouths, bearing back their
Arms; and when they Face, fall back with their Right-legs, not bringing
down their Arms till the word _Charge_ is given; and then it must be
done with a decent quick Motion, not suffering the _Pikes_ to clatter.

After this, the Words of Command are, _viz._

=Recover your Arms.=
=Half bend your Muskets.=
=Poise your Muskets.=
=Shoulder your Muskets.=

This Exercise is to be observ'd, as is before laid down in the Exercise
of the _Musket_. The _Musketiers_ upon this, being at Shoulder; and the
_Pikes_ that stood recovered falling out with their Right-legs,
whereupon the _Pikes_ are brought to their Thighs in their Advance. Then
the next is.

=Poise your Muskets.=

Upon this, the _Pike-men_ with their Left hands must grasp their _Pikes_
over against their Shoulders, after which the Words are,

=Order your Arms.=
=Pikes, to your inside Order.=
=Lay down your Arms.=
=Quit your Arms.=
=To the Right about.=
=March.=

You must observe these, as directed in the Exercise, only over and
above, when you are clear of your Arms; you must disperse, and upon the
beat of _Drum_, close hastily together with a Huzza, your Swords
unsheathed, with their Points upwards. Then further observe the Words of
Command, _viz._

=Return your Swords.=
=Handle your Arms.=
=Order your Arms.=
=Pikes, to your out-side Order.=
=Advance.=

In ordering your Arms, observe you make a little stop before you let the
Butt-ends come to the Ground; so that each one may bear you company, and
they may fall together at once; and after they are laid down, and
quitted, you must stand up together so suddenly, as all your Risings may
appear as it were but one Motion.

When you March from your Arms, step Front and Rear at once, with the
Left-feet Marching but a little distance.

Then lay your Right-hand on your Sword, taking hold of your Scabbard
with your Left; and then drawing, hold your Swords upright before you;
after you have held them there a while, bring them down at one Motion,
and when by Command your Swords are returned, stand upright to your
Arms, facing to your proper Front; and if any thing is to be further
known, consider the Exercise of the _Pike_ and _Musket_ distinctly, and
you will be informed to your Satisfaction.


_Of the Match-Lock._

These Locks were formerly in more use than _Fire-Locks_, and at this day
they are sometimes mixed among them; wherefore I shall speak somewhat
relating to the Words of Command, that seem to differ from the
_Fire-lock_, _viz._

=1. Lay down your Match,=
=2. Handle your Match,=
=3. Blow your Match,=
=4. Cock and try your Match,=
=5. Return your Match.=

All these chiefly consist in keeping your Match in order, with a good
hard and well lighted Coal, fastning it on Command, advantageous in your
Skrew, blowing the Coal, and so by pulling the Trigger, trying your Pan
with false Flashes, laying it down at Command, and by the same order
taking it up again; shortning it to the Pan, that it may give true Fire,
and upon firing, to return it, and recover the Coal, if it be shattered
by the force of the Powder. You must observe also to keep your Match
dry, that on occasion you may not be disappointed.

And this in brief is all materially relating to the _Match-Lock_; the
other Postures of the _Musket_ are all ready described, being sufficient
to direct the Exercise; yet seeing many lay much stress on the Beat of
_Drum_, Take that a long with you, as it relates to Exercise, and so I
shall take Leave of the foot, and make a visit to the Horse.


_Exercise by Beat of Drum, relating to the Foot._

There are usually observed in this, six Points, which are called Points
of War, and are said to be semi-vocal; because by them the Soldiers
understand what is to be done; and can distinguish their Duty and
Exercise; and of these in their order.

1. _The Call._ This is to Summon the Soldiers together to their Arms, or
upon any other occasion, as to hear Proclamation, or receive Directions,
_&c._ from the Officers, and are not without leave to Ramble, especially
in time of War, beyond the hearing of it, under great Penalties.

2. _The Troop._ When the Soldiers hear this, they must Advance their
_Pikes_, Shoulder their _Muskets_, and close their Ranks and Files to
order, following their Leaders or Commanders to the place of Rendezvous,
Quarters, or elsewhere.

3. _The March._ When you hear this, you must betake you to your open
Orders in Ranks, Shoulder both _Musket_ and _Pike_; and so as the _Drum_
beats, you March slower or quicker.

4. _The Preparative._ Is to warn you to close your proportionable or due
distance, when you are to prepare for Battle or Skirmish; and to see
every thing be in order that may turn to advantage.

5. _The Battle._ This is by some called the Charge, or Signal to Charge
the Enemy, and is beat in the beginning of the Fight to animate the
Soldiers Courage.

6. _The Retreat._ This is beat when being over-powered, it is thought
convenient to draw off and save a total Rout, or sometimes when an Enemy
you suppose stronger than your self advances towards you to engage, but
by Retreating you avoid him.

There are two more things on the _Drum_, somewhat to our purpose, _viz._

1. _The Tatto or Tapto._ This is used in a Rounds and Garisons, to give
notice to the Soldiers and Inhabitants when they ought to repair to
their Quarters and Houses.

2. _Revalley._ Is to let them know when it is time to rise in the
Morning, and attend on their Duty also. In Garisons, to let the People
know when its safe to go abroad, the out Scouts being Relieved.


_The Exercise of Horse in Troops or Squadrons_, &c.

The Exercise of the Horse is various from that of the Foot, and
therefore that I may not be wanting in what is necessary to the young
Soldier in their Exercising in the County Troops, or those that may
enter the present Service Abroad, I shall endeavour to give the Words of
Command proper with their Explanation.

And first, when Troop or Squadron is drawn out to Exercise, I suppose
their _Carbines_ and _Pistols_ loaden, and the Corporals passing through
the Ranks to see they are all ready, upon which, observe the chief
Officer Commands Silence, and gives the following Words of Command,
_viz._

1. =Lay your Right Hands on your Swords.=
2. =Draw your Swords.=
3. =Put your Swords in your Bridle-hand.=
4. =Lay your Hands on your Pistols.=
5. =Hold up your Hands. Give Fire.=

When you have fired, let not your Pistol-hand sink till the next Word of
Command, _viz._

6. =Return your Pistols.=

And this you must observe in Firing to the Left and Right; Then,

7. =Lay your Hands on your Carbines.=
8. =Advance your Carbines.=
9. =Cock your Carbines. Fire.=
10. =Let fall your Carbines.=
11. =Take your Swords from your Bridle-hands.=

These must be done with a swift and exact Motion, all as near as may be
doing it at one and the same time.

If a Squadron of Horse is to Wheel to the Right, the Right-hand-man must
not close to the Left, as has in ancient times been; for that many times
disorders the Rank; but you must keep your Ground, suffering the Left to
come about whilst you only turn your Horses Heads, observing your
Left-hand-man.


_To close the File._

_The Right Wing file stand._

1. =Close your files.=
2. =To The Right.=
3. =To the Left as you were.=
4. =To the Left wing, and stand.=
5. =To the Left by files close the Squadron.=
6. =To the Right as you were.=
7. =The Right and Left Wing Files stand.=
8. =By half Ranks, close Files to the Right and Left.=

And by closing Files you may cleave or divide the Squadron.

_The Order of closing Ranks._

1. =File-leader stand.=        }  {  Or open on the Front,
2. =By ranks close the=        }  {  Or the first distances.
   =Squadron to the Front.=    }  {
3. =On the Front as=           }  {  And so be cautious in
   =you were.=                 }  {  observing each Motion.

_How doubling Ranks must be Ordered._

1. =By half Files to the Right, double your Ranks to the Front.=
2. =File-leaders, advance your Ranks, File-leaders, take your Ground.=

And in this manner Command likewise to the Left, the Order being one and
the same in the Words of Command. [Again,]

3. =The first half Files stand.=
4. =By half file-leaders on the Left-wing, double your Rank to the Front.=

Now to reduce this, take the following Method;

1. =Right-wing half Ranks, advance your Ranks.=
2. =Half File-leader take your Ground.=
3. =The first half File stand.=
4. =By half File-leaders on the Right and Left-wings, double your
   Ranks to the Front, Carocoling to the Right and Left. Then the last
   half File stand, and the first half file by Carocol in the Right
   and Left on the wings; then double our Ranks to the Rear.=

Here observe the first File must open the half Rank to the Right and
Left, the first half File by Carocol. Then

=To the Right and Left double your Ranks to the Rear.=

Here observe the last half File must open the half Rank to the Right and
Left.

As for the word _Carocol_, it signifies no more when you Wheel by it,
than that it is made by the depth of the Flank of the Squadron, by which
Order not the Files, but the Ranks make the Motion.

There is an other Word which some may not well understand at the first
setting out, which is called _Controversion_; and this in Wheeling is
performed by the Front of the Squadron, so that whilst the Rank makes
the Motion, the File remains.


_Instructions for Wheeling, with the proper words of Command._

When the Word is given, _viz._ _To the Right by Conversion_, understand
that you must close your Right-leg to the Horse, your Knee touching that
of your Right-hand-mans, and in like manner observe in the Word of
Command to the Left; as when it is said, _Close to the Left_, then must
the Leg be Closed.

By half Ranks and Conversion, divide the Squadron into two _Troops_.

If you would reduce the Squadron, the Word of Command is.

_By Controversion_: The Squadron into one Troop, else the Left-wing
advance by Conversion.

When you Wheel by Carocol, observe the Word of Command as follows,

_The Right-wing to the Left by Carocol, Face about to the Rear_: Or it
may be done by half Ranks in this manner,

By Quarter Ranks, and by Carocol, divide the Squadron into three Troops.

Then if you would reduce them, order Quarter Ranks and Troops into
Squadrons.

If the Volt, Face or facing about be required, observe thus,

_Face about to the Right: Face to the Right by Controversion; Face about
by Carocol to the Right: Face about to the Left by half Files: Face
about to the Right and Left._

And thus much may serve for Wheeling.


_The manner of Filing off._

In this case observe, To File by Ranks on the Right-wing, from the
Squadron,

_File off by Ranks, on the Left-Wing, from the Squadron on
the Right_,

_File off by three Files from the Squadron, the Left-Wing_: And this is
found the most Expedient way, though some have used to File off by
Ranks.


_In_ Hay, _what Order is to be considered in drawing up._

Do this, by half Ranks to the Right: _To the Right and Left drawing in_
Hay: _To the Front_. And if it requires to be reduced again, then
proceed by Carocol, _viz._

_To the Right and Left as you were._

_By half Ranks, and by Carocol to the Right and Left._

Then draw up in _Hay_ to the Rear.

In Reduction the Command is;

_To the Front as you were._

_By half Ranks to the Right and Left, and draw up in_ Hay.

Reduction by Carocol.

_To the Right draw up in_ Hay.

Reduction by Carocol.

_To the Left as you were._


_Of doublings._

Doublings are very useful, especially in strengthening any Party, that
needs Succour in the Battle; and is to be noted under these general
Heads.

1. Doubling of length, Front and Rear.
2. Doubling of Depth, both Flanks.

But in the particular, they are numbered six, that is to say, first of
Ranks, when every Rank doubles into the odd, and if it so fall out, that
the odd Ranks are to double, then must the Body Face to the Rear,
without any Word of Command expected.

3. Half Files.
4. Bringers up.
Here they are held to double when the Rear is doubled into the Front.
5. In doubling the Rear observe it done, when the half Files double
the Rear.
6. Here take notice that doubling of half Ranks must be by one Rank
doubling the other.




_The Noble Science of Defence, in all its Useful Particulars, for
Defending and Offending, with the Rapier or final Sword; after the
exactest Method now in Use._


This Science, if well understood, as to the fining and using it, is not
only a noble Exercise, but of great importance to the saving our lives
on emergent Occasions, if it extend not to Vain-glory and Presumption,
by too much relying on our Skill, to carry us into quarrels, which we
may reasonably, and without loss of Honour or Reputation avoid.
Wherefore I have thought it convenient to lay down such Rules as may
enable the learner to proceed in the Practice.

The first thing to be considered in this Case, is, the Sword it self,
understanding only in this the small Sword or Rapier, which is divided
into two Parts, _viz._ The Hilt and the Blade.

The Hilt is again divided into three Parts, _viz._ the Pommel or Ball at
the far end, sometimes Round and sometimes Oval in Shape. This keeps the
Hilt fast, by being well riveted, and by its poise makes the Sword well
mounted, or light before the Hand. The next is that part on which you
grasp your Hand, commonly called the Handle: and then the Shell, which
is that part of the Hilt next the Blade, to preserve your Hand (if you
are any thing weary in managing it) from a Thrust or Blow.

The Blade is divided into two Parts only. The first next to the Hilt,
being termed the strong Part or Fort. The other, which is the extream,
is termed the Feeble, or they are otherways termed the Prime, and the
Second. The strong Fort or Prime of the Blade, is measured from the
Shell to the middle of the Blade, and being the strongest, is made use
of in Parying, or to put by Thrusts or Blows. The Feeble, weak or second
part, is accounted from the Middle to the Point, and is properly made
use of in Offending or giving Thrusts or Blows; and thus much may serve
for the Description of the Sword: Now I proceed to the Explanation of
the Terms, fit to be known by a Practitioner.


_A Guard._

This is a proper Posture you must place your self in, for the better
defending your self from the Thrusts or Blows of those you Fence with,
or defend your self from.


_To Parie._

Observe that this is to put by a Blow or Thrust, that it may not touch
you, but be cast off without hurt or danger.


_Quart._

Here you must hold the Nails of your Sword-hand upwards, with a steady
Arm; and then it is said to be held in quart.


_Terce._

This is the contrary to the former, for the Nails of your Hand must be
held downwards; and then the Sword is held in _Terce_.


_Within the Sword._

This is that part of your Body, (which having your Right-side towards
your Adversary) is between your Sword and Left-breast.


_Within the Sword._

This is the part of the Body, that (when you hold your Sword towards
your Left-side) is above it the breadth of your Body.


_The Approach or Advance._

This is done, when being out of your Adversaries reach, or at a pretty
distance from him; you make your Approach or Advance towards him.


_To Retire or Retreat._

This is when you are within your Adversaries reach, that you get put of
it by stepping or Jumping backwards; which you must observe to do on a
strait Line.


_Measure._

This is only a distance between you and your Adversary, which must be
cautiously and exactly observed when he is Thrusting at you; so that you
may be without his measure or reach, and that taking the Advantage of
this, it may be so, that when you Thrust your Thrusts may be home.


_To break Measure._

Observe here, just as your Adversary is Thrusting at you, at his full
Elonge, he may come short of you, because you are, or escape out of his
Measure, or reach, and so break his Measure, of which I shall say
somewhat more hereafter.


_To Elonge._

This is to Streach forward your Right Arm and Leg, and keep a close
Left-foot; and this you do when you give in a Thrust, and when you do
it, you are said to make an Elonge.


_Respost._

This is when you give in a Thrust before you recover your Body,
receiving a Thrust after your Adversary hath Paried your Sword. Then is
it said to be a Thrust on the Respost or back of the Parade, which is
the surest and safest you can give.


_Feinting or Falsifying._

This is a dodging or deceiving your Adversary, making him believe you
give back in earnest, and make an offer to Thrust in one place when you
really design to do it in another.


_Beating._

This is no other than striking the Feeble of your Adversaries Sword with
the Edg and Fort of yours, either with your Right-hand only, or the help
of your Left, joyned to the Blade, about a foot from the Hilt; and so
you will cause the Beat to have the greater Spring or Force.


_Battery._

The difference from Beating in this, is only Striking with the Edg of
the Feeble, upon the Edg of the Feeble of your Adversaries Sword, though
Beating secures his Sword a great deal better than Battery.


_Binding._

This method is taken to secure your Adversaries Sword, with eight or ten
Inches of yours upon five or six Inches of his.


_Caveating or Disengaging._

Here you must, if you can, flip your Adversaries Sword, when you
perceive him about to bind or secure yours.


_To take Time._

In taking Time, you must observe never to Thrust, but when you see a
fair Opportunity, or otherwise it is the Thrusting at your Adversary
when he is making the Feint, or the flipping of him, when you perceive
him about to Bind or Bear your Sword.


_Counter Temps._

This is when you Thrust without a good Opportunity, or when you Thrust,
at the same time your Adversary do's the like.


_Quarting on the Strait Line._

This is done by carrying your Head and Shoulders very much back from
your Adversaries Sword, and are giving in a Thrust within it, and that
each of you at that time receive a Thrust.


_Quarting of the strait Line, called de Quarting._

Here you must Observe to throw in your Left-foot, and Body backwards off
the strait Line, towards your Adversary, keeping your Right-foot firm.


_Volting._

This is a leaping by your Adversaries Left-side quite out of his reach
or measure, which on many emergent occasions is very proper.

These Terms a Practitioner must be knowing in before he proceeds to the
other Lessons, or Adventures on sharp, especially in earnest; from
whence I proceed to the next thing materially to be considered, which is
the


_Holding of the Sword._

In doing this according to Art, and to the most advantage, Hold your
Thumb on the broad side of the Handle, and your Fingers quite round it;
hold it in this manner firm and fair; so that your Adversary, with the
least sudden beat or twist, may not force it out of your hand, which the
hazard in holding it loosely may occasion to your damage.


_Of keeping a Guard._

The Guards are in general but two; The one in _Quart_ and the other in
_Terce_; but again the _Quart_ Guard is subdivided into two, _viz._ The
_Quart_ with the strait Point, and the _Quart_ with the Point sloaping
near to the Ground.

The _Terce_ is so likewise divided, that is, the _Terce_ with the Point
higher than the Hilt, and the _Terce_ with the Point lower than the
Hilt. There is yet another Guard, that requires you to hold your Sword
with both your Hands; and of these in their order.


_Of the Quart Guard, with the strait Point._

You have two ways with this Guard to defend your self, either by Parying
or using Contraries to what your Adversary plays, as I shall more fully
shew you when I come to discourse of the five Parades; however here
observe in the strait Guard, which is most in use, to keep a thin Body,
which is done by shewing your Right-side to your Adversary, managing
your feet in a strait Line from him; so that for your Right he cannot
see your Left-leg, yet set them not too wide, for that will make your
Elong the shorter; nor too close, for that will hinder the firmness of
standing; and let the Point of your Right foot be turned somewhat
outwards from the strait Line, but the broad side of your Left must look
towards your Adversary. You are also to sink with your Thighs your
Left-knee, a little more bent than your Right, which may be done by your
leaning somewhat back on your Left-thigh; when you present your Sword,
you must hold it with your Nails upwards, as has been directed in
_Quart_. The Hilt of your Sword must be as High as your Right-pap,
keeping your Arm a little bent, for the better and easier pursuing your
Adversary; or for the quicker giving in a Thrust: The Point must be
towards your Adversaries Right-side, two or three Inches lower than the
Hilt, your Left-hand held up as high as your Left-ear, about half a Foot
from it, the Palm directly against your Adversaries Face, your Fingers
pointing as it were towards him.


_The Quart-guard, with the sloping Point._

In this Guard you must stand much straiter than in the former, the Point
of your Sword sloping within half a Foot of the Ground, your Hilt as low
as your Wast, your Arm bended, and the Nails of your Sword-hand between
_Terce_ and _Quart_; Here you are also to make use of your Left-hand,
and therefore the more readily to do it, you must advance your Left
Shoulder almost as far forward as your Right, keeping your Belly in as
much as may be, so that it stand well, and your Breast out, your
Left-hand as high as the side of your Head, though about half a Foot
from it. This is a very open Guard, yet to those that know not how to
pursue it, it is much Surprizing. And you may pursue this;

First, by raising up or gathering your Adversaries Sword.

Secondly, by striking at his Sword, and making half Thrusts at the Body,
by which he will be doubtful when you intend to give in your Thrust, and
finding an Opportunity give it home; and ever when you persue this
Guard, let your Left-hand be in a readiness to Parie your Opponents
Thrust, if he Thrust just as you are Thrusting, which is the main
defence on this Guard.

Thirdly you may give a stroak at his Left-hand; after you give a beat at
his sword, and see if by so doing, you can force him to betake himself
to another Guard.

Fourthly, You may Volt, and in your so doing, give him the Thrust, which
being clearly done, will mainly surprize him.


_The-Terce-guard, with the Point higher than the Hilt._

In this you must hold the Nails of your Sword-hand downwards, as in
Terce, and your Hand lower than in the Quart-Guard, with a strait Point,
presenting the Point of your Sword towards your Adversaries
Left-shoulder; if he be a tall Man; but if Short, then to his Left-eye,
keeping your Arm somewhat bent, for the better persuing: Lean therefore
a little forward with your Body, and make use of your Left-hand for a
Parade, holding it somewhat lower than in the former Guard. The rest of
your Body being kept, as in the Quart-Guard, with the strait Point.

This Guard may be pursued either with Striking, Binding, Volting, or
Passing, for a Feint on this Guard will signifie little or nothing if
your Adversary understand it; for as in no Guard, he is to answer
Feints, least of all in this, the Right defence being to secure your
self without your Sword, which is done by presenting your Sword to the
Left-shoulder of your Adversary, or as said, his Eye, so that your Body
be quite covered without your Sword.


_The Terce-Guard, with the Point lower than the Hilt._

Here you must in this bow your Head, holding up your Arm high, so that
if you come to give a Thrust, your Head may be, as it were, under it,
your Nails being in Quart till you make your Thrust, and then change
them into Terce; your Feet must be kept at their due distance, and not
as at a full Elong; your Sword must be presented towards your
Adversaries Left-side, and you must make use of your Left-hand for the
Parade, and it is to be pursued and defended, as the forgoing
Terce-Guard, only in defending it, you must not make so much use of your
Left-hand, but more of your Sword.


_The Guard of Both Hands._

This is a Guard, that I find not any proper Name for, though it is
sometimes used as very necessary, how ever, as to the holding your Sword
in this Guard, keep your Body exactly in the Posture of the Quart-Guard
with the strait Point; but joyn your Left-hand to your Sword, about
eight or ten Inches from the Hilt, the Blade being held between your
formost Finger and Thumb, secure your self within your Sword, as soon as
you present it, _viz._ Present the Point towards your Adversaries
Right-thigh, with your Point sloping towards the Ground a little; for to
pursue this Guard, you must endeavour to take away your Adversaries
Left-hand by striking at it, and immediately after the stroak, proffer a
Thrust at his Body, that he may be doubtful when you really intend to
give in your Thrust; and indeed the pursuit is much like that of the
Quart-Guard, with the sloping Point, and thus much for the Five sorts of
Guards.


_Of the several Parades._

The Parades are generally Two, but are sub-divided as the Guard, and
those two are the Parade in Quart, and the Parade in Terce, which are as
is said, divided again into the Parade in Quart, with the Point a little
higher than the Hilt. The Parade in Quart, with the Point sloping
towards your Adversaries Right-thigh, and as though without it.

2. The Parade in Terce, with the Point a little higher than the Hilt,
and the Parade in Terce, with the Point sloping towards your Adversaries
Thigh on the Left-side.

There is yet an other Parade of some use, and used by many Fencing
Masters, which may be properly termed Counter-Caveating Parade; by
reason what ever Lesson your Adversary makes use of, or upon what side
so ever he Thrusts, if you make use of this Parade, as you ought, you
will undoubtedly meet with his Sword, and the easier cross his purpose,
than by any of the former; and of these I shall give proper Directions,

1. The Quart Parade, or the Parade within the Sword, is so called,
because in putting by the Thrust, you do it on the inside your Sword, or
on that side the Nails of your Hand are next.

2. The next is called the Terce Parade, or the Parade without the Sword;
for here, contrary to the former, you put by the Thrust upon that side
which is without the Sword, and as the other is termed the Quart, for as
much as it is within your Sword, or on that side your Nails look to; so
this is called Terce because it is without your Sword, or on that side
the back of your Hand is to. Observe a little more, _viz._ when you are
to hold your Hand or Nails in Terce, that you hold your Nails quite
downward; And now to Parie these Five several ways.

You must do the first Parade in Quart, with the Point somewhat higher
than the Hilt, _viz._ When you are standing to your Guard, if your
Adversary offers to give a home Thrust on that side his Sword lieth,
which I presume to be within your Sword, without disengaging and is the
Simplest and plainest Thrust that can be given with the small Sword; yet
frequently it surprizes a Man, I say, when so it is, that when you
perceive your Adversary offer to give a home Thrust, which observe by
keeping your Eye steady on the Hilt of his Sword; you must then
immediately turn your Wrist with so small a Motion of the Arm, that it
can scarcely be perceived, to your left-side; and by that means you may
put by his Sword, with the Fort of yours upon the Left-side, keeping the
Point of your Sword after the Parade towards his Right-shoulder; you may
in putting by your Adversaries Sword use a little beat or Spring towards
the Ground, by which you will more certainly disappoint him immediately
bringing your Sword to its right posture again, and by, this way of
Parying you may have the luck to Spring or Beat your Adversaries Sword
out of his Hand.

The second Parade in Quart is with the Point sloping towards your
Adversaries Right-thigh, and as tho' without it, in this manner;

When you perceive your Adversary is thrusting with your Sword, turn the
Nails of your Sword-hand in Quart, with a full stretched Arm, and your
Hand as high as your Face, and when you do this, slope your Point to the
lowness of your Adversaries Thigh; and by that means, with the Fort of
your Sword, on the Feeble of his, put by his Thrust, always observing to
Parie with the Fort of your Sword, and not the Feeble, lest your
Adversary having the stronger Arm, force upon you the Thrust in spite of
all you can do.

The first Parade in Terce, or without the sword, the Point a little
higher than the Hilt, must be thus managed, _viz._ Perceiving your
Adversary giving in the Thrust without your Sword; take notice
immediately to turn your Wrist with some small motion of the Arm, as in
the first Parie in Quart, till your Nails, be in Terce, and so Parie his
Thrust, Remembring in this to keep the Point of your Sword, after you
have Paried him towards your Adversaries Left-shoulder, as in the first
Parade in Quart, you are to keep it towards his Right.

This Parade is most effectually done with a Spring, to put by the Sword
or gain an advantage of disarming your Adversary.

The second Parade in Terce, is called that within the Sword bearing a
sloping Point towards your Adversaries Thigh, and as though within it.
This observe to do when you perceive your Adversary giving in his Thrust
without, or below your Sword, as it were at your Arm-pit, immediately
letting the Point of your Sword sink as low as his Thigh, turning your
Nails quite round to your Right-side, until they are from you, keeping
your Hand as high as your Head, and so put by the Thrust on your
Right-side; and when you are Parading, let your Head be close as if it
were under your Arm; and this preserves your Face from your Adversaries
scattering or Counter-Temps Thrusts.

Thus having shewn you the Defensive part, I shall now proceed to the
Offensive, or how you may offend your Adversary when necessity requires
it; but before I directly enter upon it, let me speak some thing of the
Counter-caveating Parade; though some there are who refuse to use it,
yet it is the safest of all.


_The Counter caveating Parade_, &c.

When you observe your Adversaries Thrust coming home within your Sword,
then immediately slope your Point, and bring it up again with a quick
Motion on the other side of your Adversaries, and Parie his Thrust
without your Sword, that he intended, to give within your Sword, holding
your Nails neither in Terce nor in Quart, but so hold them as when you
presented your Sword; and observe further to do this, Parade with a
Spring, and if you perceive he is about to give in his Thrust without
your Sword, instantly slope your Point, and bring it up again with a
quick Motion upon the inside of his Sword, and so Parie his Thrust, that
was to be given without your Sword, within your Sword, and if you do
this very quick you will rarely be hit with a home Thrust; and in this
Parade there is great advantage, because by it all Feints, which in
other Parades cannot be so well noted or shunned, are by this baffled
and Confounded.


Lessons Offensive. 1. _Of Approaching or Advancing._

Observe here; (when you are standing to your Guard, and your Adversary
without your measure, so that without Approaching you cannot reach him)
that you lift your Right-foot about a Foot Forward, and presently let
your Left-foot follow close by the Ground, your Left-knee a little
bowed, taking notice at the end of every step, that your Feet be at the
same equal distance as when you first presented your Sword, or if in any
thing you vary, let it be in bringing them something nearer; and so
your Elong will come as much nearer to your Adversary as you brought
your Left-foot nearer to your Right: Always then remember to redouble
this Step, or any other that is to be used on this Occasion till you
think your Adversary is within your measure. This step must be always
made on plain Ground, lest you Trip and fall, which is very dangerous;
but if it be on rugged uneven Ground, there is another suitable to it,
called the Double Step, after this manner;

In the first place throw your Left-foot before your Right, (which may be
done, by raising your Body a little on your Right-foot) about a Foot,
then bring your Right-foot forward again, as far before your Left, as
when you presented your Sword; these two Motions must be done
immediately after the other, or else doing of this Step will appear
ungraceful; and here you must keep a thin Body as possible, because the
throwing your Left foot before your Right, lays your Body open, and so
redouble this step, as the former, according to the distance you are
from your Adversary, till you approach within his measure.


Lesson 2. _Of Retiring._

This may be done three ways, first with the single Step, the same way
you approach with it, only whereas in approaching with the single Step
you lift your Right-foot first, here you must lift your Left-foot first,
and the rest observe, as in the Approach with the single Step.

The second is, that with the double Step, and is done the same way as in
the Advance, only in approaching you throw your Left-foot before Right,
when in retiring you must throw your Right-foot backward behind your
Left; and the rest is done as in Advancing with the double Step.

The third is done by a sudden jump backwards on the strait Line, with
both your Feet in the Air at once, but you must lift your Right-foot
first, and after your jump is done, stand to your Guard again, unless
you find occasion to redouble your jump to be farther out of reach.


Lesson 3. _Of giving in the Thrust._

To Thrust or make an Elong, observe (when you stand to your Guard, and
your Adversary be within your Measure) that your Sword be as you please,
either within or without your Adversaries Sword, and suppose within,
then stretch out your Right-arm, and Step forward with your Right-foot
as far as may be, keeping the Point strait forwards, and let the Motion
of your Arm begin a thought before you move your Foot, so that the
Thrust may be given home before your Adversary can hear your Foot touch
the Ground; and when you are at your full stretch, keep your Left-hand
stretched, and ever observe to keep a close Left-foot, which must be
done by keeping your Left-heel and broad side of your Foot close to the
Ground, without any drawing it after you, for keeping a close Foot is
one of the chiefest things to be observed in this Science. When you give
in your Thrust throw your Left-hand behind you, or so place it on your
Left-side, that your Sword and both your Arms may make a strait Line
from your Adversary. This must be when you design not to make use of
your Left-hand for a Parade, but if you do, then in the very time of
giving in your Thrust, throw your Left-arm forward as far as you can,
without putting the rest of your Body into disorder, turning the Palm
from you, by turning your Thumb down, and your little Fingers up, and so
Parie your Adversaries Thrust, if you find he will Thrust, upon the same
time you make your Thrust, always remembring when you Thrust within the
Sword, to do it with your Nails in Quart or upwards, and Quart well your
Hand and Shoulder; but when a Thrust is made without the Sword, then
give it in with your Nails in Terce or downwards, and keep your Hilt
much lower than your Point, and your Head as clear as may be from you
Adversaries Sword.

Take notice in all Lessons in which you do not first secure or bind your
Adversaries Sword, that you are to Thrust close by the Feeble of his
Sword, with the Fort of yours. But there is a difference when you first
secure your Adversaries Sword, for after your securing or binding, you
quit his Sword, and give a strait home Thrust, without touching it,
after it is bound.

In these Rules there is great advantage, as in the Quarting of your
Hand, when you Thrust within, the Sword, preserves them from your
Adversaries Counter-Temps Thrusts in the Face; so likewise does your
Thrusting close by the Feeble of the Sword, and keeping your Hilt lower
than the Point, when you Thrust without the Sword, as also the holding
of your Head to the contrary side your Adversaries Sword is on, preserve
you from Counter-Temps, ever observing as a general Rule; to keep your
Head on the contrary side of your Adversaries Sword, on what side soever
you Thrust, for this will frequently preserve your Face from being hit.


Lesson 4. _Of Caveating or Disengaging._

In this case, when your Sword is presented within your Adversaries
Sword, and you would have it without (keeping your Nails in Quart) slope
your Point so low that you may bring it up under the out-side of his.
This must be done with the Wrist, and not any Motion of the Arm, because
when you Disengage, if the Arm move, your body would be too much
discovered; so that your Adversary would have an advantage to give in
his Thrust, which he could not do if only your Wrist moved, and this
must be done with a sudden Motion; and by this you may learn to slip
your Adversaries Sword at pleasure.


Lesson 5. _Feinting or Falsifying_

Of these, there are several kinds, and the first retreat on is _the
Ordinary single Feint_; When you are on your Guard, and within your
Adversaries Sword, disengage and make your Feint without, which you must
do with a beat of your Right-foot against the Ground, just as you
disengage, and your Sword on the out-side of your Adversaries, and
immediately after, if you perceive him answer your Feint, and offer to
Parie, disengage again, and give him the Thrust within the Sword.


Lesson 6. _The Double Feint._

There is a difference between this and the single Feint; for in the
single one you must make two Motions, _viz._ With the first you make
your Feint, and with the next you give in your Thrust, unless you make
your Feint on that side your Sword lyeth, which may be done without
disengaging, and is the simplest of all others in all single Feints, it
must be given in upon the side your Sword was before you made your
Feint; But in the double Feint you are to make three Motions, and the
Thrust (unless when you make your first Motion on that side your Sword
was presented) is given in on the other side, and not on the side the
Sword was just before you began to make your Feint; and to play this,
there are two ways, _viz._ When you are within Measure, you must play it
one way, and without Measure another way.

As to the first, your Sword being presented within your Adversaries
Sword, then disengage and make your first Motion without his Sword, to
stand a Thought on it to try whether he will answer you, by offering to
proceed to the Parade; if he do not answer, it is useless, but if he do,
then presently make your second Motion within his Sword, and your third
Motion without it, by giving the Thrust; both these Motions must be done
with admirable quickness; at every Motion give a beat with your Foot,
and disengage; turning your Nails in Quart.

If you are without distance, make a Motion to see if he will answer your
Feint, and if he do begin again, make your first Motion, as within
distance, approaching at the same time, and so your second and third.

There is a contrary to these, that is to be observed when your Adversary
makes use of them against you, Then you must make use either of the
Counter-caveating Parade, or keep your Sword Point immoveable towards
his Face that opposes you, your Arm as much stretched out as possible;
and when you do so you must recover your Body, by drawing your Right
foot close to your Left, stand as it were on Tip-toe, and if for all
this your Adversary give a home Thrust, then you must Counter-temps him
in the Face, and Parie his Thrust with your Left-hand; or if you
perceive him make variety of Feints, then upon every one of them make a
half Thrust, which will oblige him to betake himself to the Parade, and
so when you please you may take the pursuit, or when he makes variety of
Feints, give a plain home Thrust, as smart as may be, and endeavour to
defend your self from Counter-temps with your Left-hand, and to prevent
them, it is always in this Case best when you give a Thrust, to use your
Left-hand.


Lesson 7. _The Single Feint at the Head._

Being within distance you may present your Sword within or without your
Opponents Sword, making a Feint or Motion at his Face, if your Sword be
presented without, by a little stretching out your Right-Arm, your Nails
in Quart, and when you make the Motion, give a little beat with your
Right-foot, and if the Feint be answered, then immediately give in your
Thrust at his Arm-pit your Head under your Sword-arm, your Left-hand
held before you, with the Palm of it looking towards your Right-side,
and that part of your Arm, from the Points of your Fingers to your
Elbow, must stand in a manner strait upwards, which posture you must
ever observe when you give in this Thrust, because in doing it, it
defends you from the Thrust of your Adversary, if it be above, and
without your Sword; and you may at the same time make a Motion at his
Face.


Lesson 8. _Of the double Feint at the Head._

Being within distance, make your first Motion or Feint, as before, at
the Face, your second Motion low without your Adversaries Sword, towards
his belly; and with the third, give a Thrust without, and above his
Sword, your Nails in Quart, marking every motion with your Head, Hands
and Feet; and when you make your second Motion, hold your Hand as in the
single Feint, and when you give in your Thrust above Sword, you must
Quart your Head well, because you must give it in with your Nails in
Quart; and by this means your Body will be kept secure within your
Sword, when in Terce it would ly open, especially to Counter-temps.

There is a Parying the contrary, either with the Counter-caveating
Parade, or by answering every Motion, by what means you will fall to
Parie your Adversaries with the first Parade in Terce.


Lesson 9. _Containing the manner of the Feint at the Head on the True
Parade._

The contrary to the second Parade is this, and to do it you must make
your Motion at your Adversaries Face, and if you imagine he intends to
Parie you with the second Counter-caveating Parade, make round his
Sword, as it were going a circle about it, and so give a Thrust at his
Arm-pit, and with your Left-hand avoid Counter-temps, and being within
distance, approach with your first Motion, and in so doing you Caveat
his Sword and shun his Parade, or if your Adversary follows your Sword,
you may make two or three circles till you find a fit time to let in
your Thrust.


Lesson 10. _Of the Low Feint._

When you intend to proceed in this, you must have your Sword without
your Adversaries and when it is so, make directly the Second Motion of
the double Feint at the Head, and give in the Thrust above, and when you
are without distance, make your approach with the Feint, or first
Motion; and make in your Thrust with the second. And this may be Paryed,
by answering every Motion, or using the Counter-caveating Parade.

The contrary to it, is, when your Adversary is making his low Feint, to
take time, and give in the Thrust above his Sword, your Nails in Quart.


Lesson 11. _Of Battery._

This is a kind of a Beat from whence it derives its name, and therefore
when you play it you must present your Sword either without or within
your Adversaries, if within, and he within your Measure, then keep your
Sword half a Foot from his, and when you intend to play, Strike a small
stroak on the Edg, and Feeble of your Sword on the Edg, and Feeble of
his, and at the same Moment give a Beat with your Foot, which will
surprize your Adversary, if not well skilled; if it does not, nor that
he answers you by offering to Parie, give a strait home Thrust at his
Right-Pap, as you give in a plain Thrust within the Sword, moving the
Sword only with your Wrist, and thereby keeping your Body close. If your
Adversary offers to answer your stroak, and go to the Parade, then your
best way is to slip him, and give in a Thrust without, and above the
Sword, or when you perceive him going to Parade, then suddenly slip and
make a double Feint on the other side, and Thrust on that side you gave
the Beat.

In the contrary of this Parie, with the Counter-caveating Parade, or
meet his stroak, and make a half Thrust, which will force him to the
Parade; and so you may pursue.


Lesson 12. _Of Volt Coupe._

In this observe to present your Sword within your Adversaries, he being
within your Measure; then make a Feint at the Face your Nails in Quart,
and upon this give a Beat with your Foot, and carry your Hand well
Quarted, and if by offering to Parie, he answers this, and that high,
then Thrust at the Belly, your Nails in Terce, and keep your Left-hand
as a Guard from Counter-temps; if by Parying low, you are disappointed
of this advantage, then after you have made your Feint, instead of a
Thrust in the Belly, slip his Parade, and give the Thrust without, and
above the Sword; and when you are within distance approach with the
first Motion: If your Sword be presented without your Adversaries, you
must first then disengage.

The contrary to this is either to Parie his Sword with the second Parade
in Quart, or to take time and give your Thrust the way he was to give it
in upon you, at the instant he makes his Motion at your Face, or you may
pass without his Thrust.


Lesson 13. _Of Binding your Adversaries Sword._

This is the securest Play, and chiefest Mistery in the Art of Fencing,
wherefore to do it after you have presented your Sword, either within or
without your Adversaries, on a sudden over-lap six or seven Inches of
his with eight or ten of yours; and this is sufficient to secure it;
but this must be always done with the Edg of the Sword, whether you
present it within or without, and immediately after you have bound it,
give a Thrust strait home. In this case, always observing to keep a
close Left-foot, also to give a Beat with your Foot, and to bind with a
Spring, _viz._ Press your Sword almost to the Ground, but stay not with
it, but immediately bring it up again and then give the Thrust; and this
prevents Counter-temps, and the best Parade against it is, the Counter
caveating Parade, and if your Adversary flips your Sword, you must
endeavour to bind him within or without the Sword again. You may also
put upon him the double or single Feint, or having bound your Sword
without, you may give in your Thrust, as in playing the single Feint at
the Head.


Lesson 14. _Of the Flancanade._

To do this, when you have presented within your Adversaries Sword,
over-lap it with 12 Inches of yours, within eight of his, and give in
the Thrust on his Right-flank, on the other side of the Sword, and
beneath it your Nails side-ways, throwing forward your Left-hand and
turning the Palm from you to keep off Counter-temps in the Belly, and in
Thrusting let your Hilt be lower than the Point, which secures his
Sword; and note when you lap over to do it with the flat, and not with
the Edg as when you bind.

And thus much may serve for an introduction to the learner in the
Science of Defence, and therefore for other Lessons, not here set down,
I refer him to a Master.




_Of HAWKING._


_Of Hawks there are two sorts._

The Long-Winged Hawks.

_Faulcon_ and _Tiercle-gentle_,
_Gerfaulcon_ and _Jerkin_.
_Saker_ and _Sakaret_.
_Lanner_ and _Lanneret_.
_Barbary Falcon._
_Merlin_ and _Jack_.
_Hobby_ and _Jack_.

The Short Winged Hawks.

_Eagle_ and _Iron_.
_Goshawk_ and _Tiercle_.
_Sparrow-Hawk_ and _Musket_.

There are others too of inferiour sort, as,

_Ring-Tail._
_Raven_ and _Buzzard_.
_Forked Kite._
_Hen-driver_, &c.

And as the Age of these _Hawks_ is, so we name them, as

The first Year a _Soarage_.
The second Year an _Intermewer_.
The third Year a _White Hawk_.
The fourth Year a _Hawk of the first Coat_.

Thus much for their Names, now we come to speak of the Flights of these
_Hawks_; which are these,

The _Faulcon-Gentle_, for _Partridge_ or _Mallard_.
_Gerfaulcon_, will fly at the _Herne_.
_Saker_, at the _Crane_ or _Bittern_.
_Lanner_, at the _Partridge_, _Pheasant_ or _Choofe_
_Barbary Faulcon_, at the _Partridge_ only.
_Merlin_ and _Hobby_, at the _Lark_, or any small Bird.
_Goshawk_ and _Tiercle_, at the _Partridge_, or _Hare_.
_Sparrow-Hawk_, at the _Partridge_ or _Black-Bird_.

And the

_Musket_, at the _Bush_.

Your _Hawk_ watch, and keep from Sleep, continually carrying him upon
your Fist, familiarly stroak him with a Wing of some Dead Fowl, or the
like, and play with him; Accustom to gaze, and look in his Face with a
Loving, Smiling, Gentle Countenance; and that will make him acquainted,
and familiar with Men.

Having made him familiar, the next thing is to _Bring him to the Lure_,
(which the _Faulconer_ makes of Feathers and Leather, much like a Fowl,
which he casts into the Air, and calls the _Hawk_ to) which is after
this manner. Set your _Hawk_ on the Perch, unhood him and shew him some
Meat within your Fist, call him by _Chirping_, _Whistling_, or the like,
till he comes, then Feed him with it; if he comes not, let him Fast, and
be sharp set: Short-winged _Hawks_ are properly said to be called, not
_Lured_. Make him bold, and acquainted with Men, Dogs, and Horses, and
let him be eager and sharp-set, before you shew him the _Lure_, knowing
his _Luring_ Hours; and let both sides of the _Lure_, be garnished with
warm and bloody Meat; let him likewise know your Voice well; so that
being well acquainted with Voice, and _Lure_, the Hearing of the one, or
sight of the other, makes him Obedient; which you must reward by
Feeding, or punish by Fasting. But before _Luring_ (or any Flight) it
is requisite to Bathe your _Hawk_ in some quiet and still shallow Brook,
or for want of that in a Large Bason, shallow Tub, or the like, lest
being at liberty, you lose your _Hawk_, (whose Nature requires such
Bathing) and make him range. Now to make him know his _Lure_, is thus:
Give your _Hawk_ to another, and having loosned in readiness his
Hood-strings, and fastened a _Pullet_ to the _Lure_, go a little
distance, cast it half the length of the string about your Head, still
_Luring_ with your Voice, unhood your _Hawk_, and throw it a little way
from him; if he stoop and seize, let his plum the _Pullet_, and feed on
it upon the _Lure_: Then take him and Meat on your Fist, Hood him and
give him the Tiring of the Wing, or Foot of the said _Pullet_.

Having Manned and _Lured_ your _Hawk_ before you bring him to his
Flight, one thing is to be observed and done, called in the _Faulconers
Dialect_, _Enseaming_, which is to cleanse him from Fat, Grease, and
Glut, know by his round Thighs, and full Meutings; and thus you may do
it: In the Morning when you feed him, give him a bit or two of Hot-meat,
and at Night very little or nothing. Then feed him Morning and Evening
with a _Rook_, wash't twice till the Pinions be tender; then give a
Casting of Feathers as his Nature will bear; and once in two or three
dayes give him a Hens-neck well joynted and washt: Then a quick Train
_Pigeon_ every Morning; and after by these and his own Exercise, he has
broken and dissolved the Grease, give him three or four _Pellets_ of the
Root of _Sallandine_, as big as a Garden Pease, steept in the Sirup of
_Roses_; and you have done this part of your Duty.

To Enter your _Hawks_, for _Partridge_ or Fowl, Lay an old Field
_Partridge_ in a Hole, covered with something, and fasten to it a small
_Creance_ (_i.e._ a Fine small long Line of strong and even-wound
Packthread fastned to the _Hawks_ Leash when first Lured,) and
uncoupling your ranging Spaniels, pluck off the Covering of the Train
_Partridge_ and let it go, and the _Hawk_ after it; and as soon as he
has slain it, reward him well with it. And thus to make him fly at Fowl,
feed him well with the Train of the Fowl you would have; doing
afterwards as above.

The Fault of _Hawks_ differ according to their Nature and Make.
Long-Winged _Hawks_ faults are thus helped. If he used to take stand,
flying at the River, or in Champaign Fields, shun flying near Trees or
Covert, or otherwise, let several Persons have Trains, and as he offers
to stand, let him that's next cast out his Train, and he killing it
reward him. And indeed you ought never to be without some live Bird or
Fowl in your Bag, as _Pigeon_, _Duck_, _Mallard_, &c. If he be Froward
and Coy; when he Kills, reward him not as usually, but slide some other
Meat under him and let him take his pleasure on it; giving him some
Feathers to make him scour and cast. If he be _Wild_, _look not inward_;
but mind Check, (_i.e._ other Game, as Crows, &c. that fly cross him)
then lure him back, and stooping to it, reward him presently.

The faults of Short-winged _Hawks_ thus are helped. Sometimes the
_Goshawk_ and _Sparrow-Hawks_, will neither kill, nor fly the Game to
Mark, but will turn Tail to it: Then encourage your Dogs to Hunt, cast a
Train _Partridge_ before your _Hawk_, make him seize it, and feed well
upon it.

If a Hawk take a Tree, and will not fly at all, feed him then upon quick
Birds, and make him foot them, and in the plain Champaign Fields unhood
him, and rising up and down awhile let one cast out a Field _Partridge_
before him, let him fly at it, and footing it, feed on it. If they be
too fond of a Man, that after a stroke or two will not fly, be seldom
familiar with him, and reward him not as he comes so improperly:
Otherwise reward him well.

As for _Mewing_ of _Hawks_, the best time for Long-winged _Hawks_ is
about the middle of _April_, and _March_ for the Short-winged _Hawks_.
There are two kinds of _Mewings_. 1. _At the stock or stone_; so called
from its being low upon the Ground, free from Noise, Vermin or ill Air.
2. _At large_; so called from being in a high Room, with open Windows
towards the _North_ or _North-East_. The former is accounted the best
_Mewing_. The Faulconer, before he _Mews_ his _Hawks_, see if they have
_Lice_, to Pepper and Scower them too. The best time to draw the Field
_Hawk_ from the _Mew_, is in _June_, and he will be ready to fly in
_August_; the _Hawks_ for the River in _August_, will be ready in
_September_.


_Cures for Hawks Diseases._

The Faulconer ought diligently to observe the Complexions of his _Hawks
Castings_ and _Mewtings_, to judge of their Maladies, an assured sign of
knowing whether they are sick or distempered in this. Take your _Hawk_,
turning up her Train, if you see her Tuel or Fundament swelleth, or
looketh red; Or, if her Eyes or Ears be of a fiery Complexion, it is an
infallible sign of her being not well and in good health; and then
Scouring is necessary first; which is done by _Aloes Cicatrine_, about
the quantity of a Pea wrapt up in her Meat; and this avoids Grease, and
kills Worms too.

_For the Cataract_: Take one Scruple of washt _Aloes_ finely beaten, and
two Scruples of _Sugar-candy_, mix these together, and with a Quill blow
it three or four times a day into your _Hawks_ Eye.

_Pantus_ or _Asthma_: Pour the Oyl of sweet _Almonds_ into a Chickens
Gut, well washt, and give it the _Hawk_: Or, scower him with
_Sallandine_-Pellets, and Oyl of _Roses_, and then wash his meat in the
Decoction of _Coltsfoot_.

_Filanders_ or _Worms_: To prevent them, seeing your _Hawk_ low and
poor, give her once a month a Clove of _Garlick_. To cure or kill them;
take half a dozen Cloves of _Garlick_, boil them very tender in Milk,
dry the Milk out of them; put them into a Spoonful of the best Oyl of
_Olives_, and having steept them all Night, give them both to your
_Hawk_, when she has cast, in the morning: feed him not till two hours
after, and then with warm meat, and keep him warm all that day.

_Lice_: Mail your _Hawk_ in some Woollen Cloth, put between his Head and
Hood a little Wool, and take a Pipe of Tobacco, put the little end in at
the Tream, blow the smoak, and the _Lice_ that escape killing, will
creep into the Cloth: _Probatum_.

_Formica_: Take a little of the Gall of a Bull, and beating it with
_Aloes_, anoint the Beak of the _Hawk_, Morning and Evening,

_Frounce_: Take the Powder of _Allume_, reduced to a Salve with strong
Wine Vinegar, and wash her mouth with it; then take Juice of _Lolium_
and _Raddish_, mixt with Salt, and anoint the Sore.

_Apoplex_: Gather the Herb _Asterion_, wash your Hawks meat with the
Juice thereof when you feed him.

_Wounds_: Take the Juice of _English Tobacco_, or _Mouse-ears_, after
you have sticht it up with a little Lint, bathe the place.




_Of BOWLING._


The first and greatest Cunning to be observed in _Bowling_, is the right
chusing your Bowl, which must be suitable to the Grounds you design to
run on, thus: For _close Alleys_, your best choice is the _Flat Bowl_:
2. For _open Grounds_ of Advantage, the Round-byassed-bowl. 3. For
_Green Swarths_, that are plain and level, the Bowl that is _Round as a
Ball_.

The next thing requires your Care is, the chusing out your Ground, and
preventing the Windings, Hangings, and many turning Advantages of the
same, whether it be in open wide places, as Bares & Bowling-greens, or
in close Bowling-alleys.

Lastly, Have your Judgment about you to observe and distinguish the
Risings, Fallings and Advantages of the Places where you Bowl: Have your
Wits about you to avoid being rookt of your Money: And have your
Understanding about you, to know your best Time and Opportunity for this
Recreation; and finally a studious Care of your Words and Passions, and
then Bowl away, and you may deserve, _Well have you bowled indeed_.

But methinks I cannot conclude here, without admiring how aptly a
Bowling-green is by the Divine _Quarles_ characterized, in the following
Verses, thus,

    _Brave Pastime,_ Readers, _to consume that day,
    Which without Pastime flies too swift away!
    See how they labour, as if Day and Night
    Were both too short to serve their loose Delight?
    See how their curved Bodies wreath, and skrue
    Such Antick Shapes as_ Proteus _never knew:
    One rapps an Oath, another deals a Curse,
    He never better bowl'd, this never worse;
    One rubs his itchless Elbow, shrugs and laughs,
    The t'other bends his Beetle-brows, and chafes;
    Sometimes they whoop, sometimes the_ Stygian _cryes,
    Send their black_ Santo's _to the blushing Skies:
    Thus mingling Humours in a mad Confusion
    They make bad premisses and worse Conclusion._

Thus much for Bowling.




_Of TENNIS._


This Recreation is of the Same Date for its Antiquity of Invention with
Bowling, and for the Violence of its Exercise to be preferred before it.
This Sport indeed is of so universal an Acceptance, that Majesty it self
is pleased to design it its Recommendation, by tracking its laborious
steps; and Princes and Lords admire it too for the most proper
Recreation, to suit with Innocence, and true Nobility. Here the Body is
briskly exercised more than ordinary, and inured in Agility and
Nimbleness; this renders the Limbs flexible and mettlesom, and adapts
them for the most Vigorous Enterprize.

_Tennis_ and _Baloon_ are sports which are play'd almost with the same
Instruments; and therefore may be under one and the same Head: The first
is a Pastime, used in close or open Courts, by striking a little Round
Ball to and fro, either with the Palms of the hands (and then is called
_Pila palmaria_ in Latin) or else a _Racket_, made for the purpose,
round with Net or Cat-gut, with a Handle: The other a strong and moving
Sport in the open Fields with a great Ball of a double leather filled
with Wind, and so driven to and fro with the strength of a Mans Arm,
armed in a Brace of Wood. And thus much shall suffice to speak of the
_Baloon_ and _Tennis_; only let me desire you, let not this or any other
Pastime disturb your Minds; divert you from the diligent and careful
Prosecution of your lawful Business; or invite you to throw away your
Time and Money too lavishly and idley; nor engage you in any Passion;
that so you may not offend God, dislike your Neighbour, nor incomode
your Self and Family in your Well-being and Felicity; and then you may
recreate your self without Fear: And in this Recreation observe the
ensuing Morality of

    The =Tennis-Court=.

    _When as the Hand at_ Tennis _Plays,
        And Men to Gaming fall_,
    Love _is the_ Court, Hope _is the_ House,
        _And_ Favour _serves the_ Ball,

    _This_ Ball _it self is due Desert,
        The Line that measure shows
    Is_ Reason _whereon_ Judgment _looks
        Where Players win and lose._

    _The_ Tutties _are Deceitful Shifts,
        The_ Stoppers, Jealousy,
    _Which hath Sir_ Argus _hundred Eyes,
        Wherewith to watch and pry._

    _The Fault whereon_ Fifteen is lost,
        _Is Want of_ Wit _and_ Sense,
    _And he that brings the_ Racket _in
        Is_ Double Diligence.

    _But now the_ Racket _is_ Free-will,
        _Which makes the_ Ball _rebound,
    And Noble_ Beauty _is the_ Choice,
        _And of each Game the Ground._

    _Then_ Racket _strikes the_ Ball _away,
        And there is_ Over-sight,
    _A_ Bandy _ho! the People cry,
        And so the_ Ball _takes flight._

    _Now at the length_ Good-liking _proves
        Content to be their Gain:
    Thus in the Tennis-Court,_ Love is
        A Pleasure mixt with Pain.




_Of RINGING._


Whosoever would become an accurate Master of this excellent Art and
Pleasure, and is very desirous to be esteemed an Elaborate and Ingenious
Ringer, and be enrolled amongst that Honoured Society of =College
Youths=; I must beg leave to instruct him before he enters the
Bell-free, in these ensuing short Rules; which he must strictly observe,
_viz._

1. That as all _Musick_ consists in these six plain _Notes_, _La Sol Fa
Mi Re Ut_; so in _Ringing_, a Peal of Bells is Tuned according to these
Principles of Musick: For as each _Bell takes its Denomination from the
Note it Sounds_, by its being flatter or deeper, as, _First_, or Treble,
_second_, _third_, _fourth_, &c. as they are in number to _ten_ or
_twelve_ Bells, the last being called the _Tenor_; So must they
successively strike one after another both _Fore-stroke_ and
_Back-stroke_, in a due Musical time or Equi-distance, to render their
Harmony the more Pleasant, and to make the Young Practitioner the better
informed to observe the _Life of Musick_, and indeed of true Ringing,
_Time_; and therefore is called, _Round-ringing_.

2. As in Musick, so in Ringing there are three _Concords_, so called
from their Melodious Harmony and Agreement, which Principally are these;
_Thirds_, _viz._ 1 3, 2 4, _&c._ _Fifths_ 1 5, 2 6, _&c._ _Eights_ 1 8,
2 9, 3 10, _&c._ and these are the more pleasant according to the Number
of Bells they are struck on, and as they are struck, whether separately
or mutually. From hence _Changes_ are made, which is only a Changing
place of one _Note_ with another, so variously, as Musick may be heard a
thousand ways of Harmony; which being so obvious to common Observation,
I shall not go about to demonstrate; for that if two may be varied two
ways, surely by the Rule of _Multiplication_, a Man may easily learn how
many times 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, or 12 Bells Notes may be varied; which will
run almost _ad infinitum_.

3. For the better observing the Ringing of _Changes_ or _Rounds_, these
three things are to be noted.

1. _The Raising true in Peal._

2. _Ringing at a low Compass_; and

3. _Ceasing in true Peal_; all which three are the most essential Parts
to render a Practitioner _Excellent_.

1. For _Raising a Peal of Bells true_, the modern and best Practice
recommends the _swiftest and quickest possible_, every one taking
Assistance to raise his Bell, as its going requires: the _lesser_ Bells
as _Treble_, _&c._ being by main strength _held down_ in their first
Sway (or pull) to get time for the striking of the rest of larger
Compass; and so continued to be strong pulled till Frame-high, and then
may be slackned: The bigger, as _Tenor_, &c. must be pincht or checkt
overhead, that the Notes may be hard to strike roundly and hansomely.
Observe that all the Notes strike round at one Pull: I do not mean the
first; but 'tis according to the Bigness and Weightiness of your Bells:
However in raising a Peal, do not let one Bell strike before the rest,
or miss when the rest do; this is contrary to the Strict Rules of _true
Ringing_: And this is called _Round-ringing_. Now if you design to raise
a Peal of Bells for _Changes_, you ought to raise them to a Set-pull, as
the most proper for commanding the Notes, and he who is not well skilled
to manage his Bell at a Set-pull, will be apt to drop or overturn it, be
in a Wood, and fruitlessly toil and moil himself. Therefore in
practising the Setting of a Bell, cast your Eye about the other
Bell-Ropes, during your managing your own, that you may accustom your
self to manage it according to the _Change_.

2. For _Ringing at a low Compass_, is thus observed: By keeping a due
_punctum_ or beat of time, in the successive striking one after another
of every Bell; the best Ringer being set to the _Treble_, that may guide
and direct the rest of the Notes in their due Measure.

3. _For Ceasing a Peal of Bells_; let them fall gradually from a set
Peal, checking them only at Sally, till the low Compass renders it
useless; and when so low, that for want of Compass, they can scarce
strike at Back-stroak; then let the _Treble_-Ringer stamp, as a
Signal, to notify, that the next time they come to strike at the
Fore-stroke, to check them down, to hinder their striking the
Back-stroke; yet Fore-stroke continued, till brought to a neat and
graceful Chime, which may be the Finis to that Peal.

Thus much in short, for _Raising_, _Round-ringing_, and _Ceasing a Peal_
of Bells; I come next to lead you forth into that spacious Field of
Variety of _Changes_, and present you with Instructions that may be
meerly necessary, for the right Understanding the several kinds of them.

Now in _Ringing Changes_, two of our best Senses, are to be employed,
_viz._ The Ear, and the Eye: The Ear, hearing when to make a _Change_;
and the Eye directing the Bell in making it: The Bells being the Object
of the Former, and the Bell-ropes the Object of the Latter: And to
render both the Eye and Ear Useful in Ringing _Changes_, these Five
things are throughly to be Understood.

_First_, Endeavour to distinguish the _Notes_ of a _Peal_ of _Bells_,
one from another while Ringing.

_Secondly_, Learn to apprehend the places of the _Notes_.

_Thirdly_, Understand the Precedency of _Notes_.

_Fourthly_, How to make a _Change_ in _Ringing_.

_Fifthly_, and _Lastly_, How to Practice the four fore-going Notions, in
General.

1. _To know the Notes of a Peal of Bells asunder_ (which is easy in
_Round-Ringing_) in _Changes_ is thus: Get the skill of Tuning them with
your _Voice_, by imitating their Notes while _Ringing_. Or if you are
acquainted, either by your self or Friend, with some _Singing-Master_,
or one who has skill in _Singing_, get him to instruct you in the true
Pitch of any _Note_, and aid your distinguishing them; otherwise you may
be puzzled in this, to know which is _Treble_, which _Second_, &c. as in
532641, _&c._

2. To know the places of the _Notes_, is no way better to be apprehended
than thus: The Practitioner ought to form an _Idea_ in his Head of the
place of each _Note_, whether in a direct _Line_, or _Obliquely_; and
representing them by a _Figure_ in his Mind, see (as it were) by the Eye
of the Understanding, each stroke of the _Bell_, as the _Treble_, 1.
_Second_ 2. _Third_ 3. _&c._ so that as the _Ear_ is to direct him, when
to make the Change, so a right Apprehension of the _Motion_ and _Places_
of the _Notes_, ought to be a means to guide his Ear.

3. The Precedency of _Notes_, is of a very obvious Demonstration; thus:
In Ringing _Changes_ the Fore and Back-stroke, successively following
one another, are properly said to _Lye behind_ one another, according to
their places of striking. Or in short, in 12345, the _Note_ that leads
either at Fore or Back-stroke, is said to _Lye before_ the rest, and the
last to be behind, As the 2 is said to lye behind the 1, so it lyeth
before the 3, as the 3 lyeth behind 2, so it lyeth before the 4. And so
of as many as are _Rung_.

4. The manner of making a _Change_, is very common, and needs no
particular, but general Rule; That it is made by moving one _Note_ into
anothers place, Up and Down, as Occasion requires; but usually made by
two _Notes_ standing one next the other, as hereafter may be observed.

_Lastly_, In your Ringing _Changes_, these two things (in which consists
the practick part of this Art) are to be rightly considered, _First_,
Readily to know which two _Bells_ are to make the succeeding _Change_.
And _Secondly_, to consider (if you are concerned in it) what _Bell_ you
are to follow in making it. To understand which the more perfectly, you
must imprint in your Memory, the Method of the _Changes_ prick'd in
_Figures_, and to be expert likewise in setting them down divers ways,
and making any _Figure_ a _Hunt_ at Pleasure; and thus without pausing
or hesitating to consider the Course, you may throughly understand the
Methods; the Four preceding Observations being first perfectly
understood.

There are two ways of _Ringing Changes_, viz. By _Walking_ them, as the
Artists stile it; or by _Whole Pulls_ or _Half-pulls_: _Walking_ is,
when in one _Change_ the _Bells_ go round, _Four_, _Six_, or _Eight_
times; which is a most incomparable way to improve a Young Practitioner,
by giving him time to consider, which two _Bells_ do make the next
succeeding _Change_, and in making it, what _Bell_ each is to follow; so
that by this means (by his Industry) he may be capable of Ringing at
_Whole pulls_; which is, when the _Bells_ go round in a _Change_ at Fore
and Back-stroke; and a New _Change_ is made every time they are pulled
down at Sally: This was an Ancient Practice, but is now laid aside,
since we have learnt a more advantageous way of hanging our _Bells_,
that we can manage a _Bell_ with more ease at a _Set-pull_ than
formerly: So that Ringing at _Half-Pulls_ is now the modern general
Practice; that is, when one _Change_ is made at Fore-stroke, another at
Back-stroke, _&c._

He that Rings the slowest _Hunt_, ought to notify the _extream Changes_;
which is, when the Leading _Bell_ is pulling down, that he might make
the _Change_ next before the extreme, he ought to say, _Extreme_. By
this means, betwixt the Warning and the Extreme there will be one
compleat _Change_.


_Of Changes_, &c.

There are _two kinds of Changes_, viz. _Plain Changes_, and
_Cross-peals_; which Terms do denote the _Nature_ of them; for as the
first is stiled _Plain_, so are its methods easy; and as the second is
called _Cross_, so are its Methods cross and intricate: The First have a
general Method, in which all the Notes (except Three) have a direct
_Hunting-Course_, moving gradually under each other, plainly and
uniformly: _Plain_ are likewise termed _single Changes_, because there
is but one single Change made in the striking all the Notes round,
either at Fore or Back-stroke. But the Second is _various_, each _Peal_
differing in its Course from all others; and in _Cross-peals as many
changes may be made as the Notes will permit_. In short, as to
_Plain-changes_, I shall not dilate on them here, it being so _plainly_
understood by every one that lately have rung a _Bell_ in peal; all
therefore I shall add is this, that any two Notes that strike next
together may make a Change, which may be done either _single or double_,
as you list. The _single_, by changing two Notes; and the _double_, by
changing Four, _i.e._ Two to make one Change and two another; which is
however called _One double Change_, and not two Changes; because tis
made in striking the Notes of the _Bells_ once round.


_Of Cross-peals._

Or in these _Cross-peals_ we must Observe the _prime Movement_, which
sets the whole Frame a going, and that is called the _Hunt_, which hath
_one constant Uniform Motion throughout the Peal_, and different from
that of the other Notes; and indeed by this the whole Course of the Peal
is Steered. This keeps a continual motion through the other Notes,
_i.e._ from leading, to strike behind, and from thence again to Lead;
which is called one _compleat Course_.

Some Peals upon _five Bells_ consist of single Courses, wherein are ten
Changes, and twelve Courses make the Peal. Others upon five consist of
double Courses, wherein are twenty Changes to every Course, and six
Courses in the Peal.

Upon _six Bells_ there are likewise _single_ and _double_ Courses,
_viz._ Twelve Changes in every single Course, as in _Grandsire-bob_,
_&c._ and Twenty-four Changes in every double Course, as in _College
Bobs_, that being the first Change of every Course, wherein the _Hunt_
leaves Leading: In short, judiciously observe the first Course of any
_Cross-peal_, and you will soon see the general Method of the whole
Peal: All Courses in Cross-Peals agreeing in these following three
Respects. First, _In the Motion of the Hunt_. Secondly _In the motion of
the rest of the Notes_: And Thirdly, _In making the Changes_. Which
three things being well (to omit Instance of Demonstration) and
narrowly observed, will be very helpful both in pricking and ringing
Courses; the first and third for directing you in Pricking them, and the
first and second in Ringing them.

There is one Difficulty to be removed e're I can come to prick down
those Peals I design to be the Subject of the Discourse of this
_Epitome_, and that is, _How to make the first Changes at the beginning
of each Peal_; I mean to make the _Second_, _Third_, _Fourth_, &c.
_whole Hunts_; and this In short is thus directed: In any _Cross-peal_
the _whole Hunt_ may move either up or down at the beginning; and the
Motion of the _whole Hunt_, in the first Course of each of the following
Peals will direct the first Motion of any _Cross-Hunt_, and by
Consequence of making the first Changes in that Peal. Taking along with
you this Observation.

That whensoever the first Change of any Peal happens to be _single_, it
must be made at the back-stroke, to prevent _cutting Compass_, and the
like when a double Change happens first in a Peal of _Triples and
doubles_: But when it happens, that the first Change is made at the
Back-stroke, then Consequently the Bells at the end of the Peal will
come round at a Fore-stroke Change.

I shall omit speaking to any of the several Peals on _four or five
Bells_; for that in my opinion little _Musick_ is heard, though much
_Practical Observation_ is made, from them; and therefore shall begin
with _Grandsire-bob_, as having mentioned it but just before in my
general View I made of _Cross-peals_.


_Grandsire Bob._

_Bob_ Changes take their Name from this; _viz._ When the _Treble_ leads
in the _Second_ and _Third_, and the _Fifth_ and _Sixth's_ places, then
they are called _Bob-changes_. In Ringing which you are to observe these
Rules, _viz._

Whatsoever Bells you follow when you _Hunt up_, the same Bells in the
same order you must follow in _Hunting down_; as in the Changes here
prickt, where the _Treble_ hunting up _First_ follows _Second_, then
_Fourth_, and then _Sixth_; when it comes behind, _First_ follows
_Second_, in hunting down _Fourth_; and when hunting up follows _Sixth_
in the same Order: The like may be observed in Ringing any other Bell,
with this Difference betwixt the whole Hunt and the rest, _viz._ Every
time the Whole hunt leaves the _Treble's_ place, and hunts up, it
followeth different Bells, from what it did at its first hunting up.

In the ensuing Peal here prickt are _Eighteen-score_ Changes, wanting
one. It may be Rung with any _Hunts_, and begin the Changes _Triple_ and
_Double_: You may make your extream at the first, second, or third
_single Bob_; or the first, second, or third time, that the half and
_Quarter-hunts_ dodge behind; the _single_ must be made behind in either
of these.

123456 | _bob._ | 134256 | 143265 | 126435
------ | 156423 | 312465 | 142356 | ------
214365 | 514632 | 321645 | ------ | 162345
241635 | 541362 | 236154 | 124536 | 163254
426153 | 453126 | 263514 | 125463 | ------
462513 | 435216 | 625341 | ------ | 136524
645231 | 342561 | 652431 | 152643 | 135642
654321 | 324651 | 564213 | 156234 | ------
563412 | 236415 | 546123 | ------ | 153462
536142 | 263145 | 451632 | 165324 | _bob._
351624 | 621354 | 415362 | 163542 | 135426
315264 | 612345 | 143526 | ------ | ------
132546 | 165243 | _bob._ | 136452 | 153246
135264 | 162534 | 134562 | _bob._ | 152364
312546 | 615243 | 315426 | 163425 | ------
321456 | 651423 | 351246 | ------ | 125634
234165 | 564132 | 532164 | 136245 | 126543
243615 | 546312 | 523614 | 132654 | ------
426351 | 453621 | 256341 | ------ | 162453
462531 | 435261 | 265431 | 123564 | 164235
645213 | 342516 | 624513 | 125346 | ------
654123 | 324156 | 642153 | ------ | 146325
561432 | 231465 | 461235 | 152436 | _bob._
516342 | 213645 | 416325 | 154263 | 164352
153624 | 126354 | 143652 | ------ | ------
156342 | 123645 | _bob._ | 145623 | 146532
513624 | 216354 | 134625 | _bob._ | _bob._
531264 | 261534 | 316452 | 154632 | 164523
352145 | 625143 | 361542 | ------ | ------
325416 | 652413 | 635124 | 145362 | 146253
234561 | 564231 | 653214 | _bob._ | 142635
243651 | 546321 | 562341 | 154326 | ------
426315 | 453612 | 526431 | ------ | 124365
462135 | 435162 | 254613 | 145236 | ------
641253 | 341526 | 245163 | 142563 | 123456
614523 | 314256 | 421536 | ------ | ======
165432 | 132465 | 412356 | 124653 |

Thus much for the _Grandsire-bob_; I shall next collect what _London
Peals_ I think most Harmonious, and agreeable, without troubling my self
to go to _Oxford_, or _Nottingham_, or _Redding_, to enquire after their
different Methods of Peals, as indeed needless; and my reason is this:
Because I think the same Rules for _Peals_ that are suitable to our
_London Genius_, may challenge likewise an Acceptance amongst other
_Cities_; provided their _Steeples_ are furnished with as many, and as
good _Bells_, and their _Belfree's_ with as ingenious and elaborate
_Ringers_ as here in _London_.

I shall begin then with _Peals upon six Bells,_ and herein in order,
measure out the Delights on _Peals_ from _Six_ to _Eight Bells_, and
setting out early, present you with


_The Morning Exercise._

_Doubles_ and _singles_. The whole _Hunt_ is the _Treble_, which Hunteth
up into the _Second_, _Third_, and _Fourth_ places, lying twice in each;
and then lyeth still in the _Sixth_ place, having dodged behind, and
makes another, and then _Hunts_ down as it _Hunted_ up, and then leads
four times. Observing the manner of its Pricking, and its Practice, may
excuse any further defining it.

123456 |
------ | 265143 | 163425 | 125643 | 143256
213465 | 265134 | ------ | 125634 | 134265
213456 | 265143 | 165243 | ------ | 134256
231465 | 261534 | 165234 | 124365 | ------
231456 | 216543 | 156243 | 124356 | 136524
234165 | 216534 | 156234 | 142365 | 136542
234156 | 126543 | ------ | 142356 | _bob._
243516 | 126534 | 154326 | ------ | 135624
243561 | 162543 | 154362 | 146532 | 135642
245316 | 162534 | _bob._ | 146523 | ------
245361 | ------ | 153426 | _bob._ | 132465
254631 | 164352 | 153462 | 145632 | 132456
254613 | 164325 | ------ | 145623 | 123465
256431 | _bob._ | 152643 | ------ | 123456
256413 | 163452 | 152634 | 143265 | ------

This will go a 120 _Changes_, and by making _Bobs_, 240, 360, 270.


_A Cure for_ Melancholy.

_Doubles_ and _Singles_.

I should think it needless to explain the method of prick'd _Peals_, and
give a large Definition of them, when their plain Demonstration might be
sufficient; However, as the Old _Phrase_ is, _Because 'tis usual_,
something shall be said of this too.

The _Treble_ is the whole _Hunt_, as in the former, and leads four
times, and lyeth behind as many, and twice in every other place; the two
_Bells_ in the 3d. and 4th. places continue dodging, when the _Treble_
moves out of the 4th. place, until it comes down there again, and then
the two hindmost dodge, till the _Treble_ displaceth them; who maketh
every double _Change_, except when it lieth behind, and then the double
is on the four first, and on the four last when it leads. Every single
(except when the _Treble_ lies there) is in the 5th. and 6th. places; or
if possessed by the _Treble_, then in the 3d. and 4th. places: Every
_Bell_ (except the _Treble_) lies four times in the Second place: But
enough; a word is enough to the Wise. See it here Deciphered.

123456 |
------ | 452136 | 165432 | 126534 | 156432
213465 | 452163 | ------ | 126543 | _bob._
213456 | 451236 | 143652 | ------ | 165423
231465 | 451263 | 143625 | 154263 | 165432
231456 | 415236 | _bob._ | 154236 | ------
234165 | 415263 | 134652 | 152463 | 132654
234156 | 145236 | 134625 | 152436 | 132645
243516 | 145263 | ------ | ------ | 136254
245316 | 142536 | 162345 | 143526 | 136245
243561 | 142563 | 162354 | 143562 | ------
245361 | ------ | 163245 | _bob._ | 124365
423561 | 156423 | 163254 | 134526 | 124356
425361 | 156432 | ------ | 134562 | 123465
423516 | _bob._ | 125634 | ------ | 123456
425316 | 165423 | 125643 | 156423 | ------

This will go _Six-score Changes_, but by making _bobs_, it will go 240,
360, or 720. The _Bob_ is a double _Change_ at the leading of the
_Treble_, in which the _Bell_ in the 4th. place lyeth still.


London Nightingale.

_Doubles_ and _Singles_.

The Whole-hunt is the _Treble_, who lyeth four times before, and as many
behind, and twice in every other place: The two hind _Bells_ continue
dodging, when the _Treble_ moves down out of the _Fifth_ place, till he
comes there again, the _Bell_ in the _Fourth_ place lying still all the
while: When the two hind _Bells_ aforesaid leave dodging, then the two
_First Bells_ take their dodging places, till dispossessed again, by the
return of the said Hind _Bells_ to their dodging; and then they Cease.

123456 |
------ | 425316 | 162534 | 142365 | 164532
213465 | 452136 | ------ | 124356 | _bob._
213456 | 452163 | 153624 | 124365 | 165423
231465 | 451236 | 153642 | ------ | 165432
231456 | 451263 | _bob._ | 136245 | ------
234165 | 415236 | 156324 | 136254 | 143652
234156 | 415263 | 156342 | 163245 | 143625
243516 | 145236 | ------ | 163254 | _bob._
423516 | 145263 | 134562 | ------ | 146352
243561 | 154236 | 134526 | 125634 | 146325
243561 | 154263 | _bob._ | 125643 | ------
423561 | ------ | 135462 | 152634 | 132465
245361 | 126543 | 135426 | 152643 | 132456
425361 | 126534 | ------ | ------ | 123465
245316 | 162543 | 142356 | 164523 | 123456

This will go 120, and by making _Bobs_, 240, 360, or 720.


_College Bobs._

In this _Bob_, when the _Treble_ leaves the two Hind _Bells_, they dodge
till it comes there again, and till the _Treble_ gives way for the
dodging again of the said two Hind _Bell_, the two _First Bells_ dodge,
but after Cease dodging, when the two Hind _Bells_ dodge.

123456 |
------ | 243651 | 421635 | 152364 | 165324
214365 | 426315 | 246153 | 135246 | _bob._
124356 | 462135 | 241635 | 153246 | 156342
213465 | 641253 | 426153 | ------ | ------
231456 | 642135 | 462513 | 126543 | 132546
324165 | 461253 |  _&c._ | 125634 | 135264
321456 | 416235 | 165432 | ------ | ------
234165 | 142653 | _bob._ | 164235 | 124365
243615 | 412635 | 156423 | 162453 | 123456
426351 | 146253 | ------ | ------ | ------
246315 | 142635 | 143526 | 143652 |
423651 | 416253 | _bob._ | _bob._ |
246351 | 146235 | 134562 | 134625 |
423615 | 412653 | ------ | ------ |


_Another._

Here, every _Bell_, when it comes to lead, makes a dodge before, then
after one _Change_, it lyeth still; after it has made another dodge, it
moves up into the 4th. place, where twice it lyeth still; and down
again; except the _Treble_ happens to dodge with it in the 4th. place,
then it hunts up behind. When the _Treble_ moves down out of the _3d_.
place, the two _Bells_ in the _3d._ and _4th._ place continue there,
till the _Treble_ comes up thither again, the two hind _Bells_ dodging
in the mean time.

123456 |
------ | 265314 | 132564 | 135426 | 164352
214365 | 625341 | 315246 | ------ | ------
124356 | 263514 | 351426 | 153246 | 146532
213465 | 236154 | 534162 | 152364 | _bob._
231645 | 321645 | 351462 | ------ | 164523
326145 | 236145 | 534126 | 125634 | ------
231654 | 321654 |  _&c._ | 126543 | 146253
326154 | 312564 | 153624 | ------ | 142635
362415 | 135246 | _bob._ | 162453 | ------
634251 | 315264 | 135642 | 164235 | 124365
364215 | 132546 | ------ | ------ | 123456
632451 | 135264 | 153462 | 146325 | ------
623541 | 312546 | _bob._ | _bob._ |

Both these _bobs_ will go _One Hundred_ and _Twenty Changes_, and by
making of _bobs_, they will go, 240, 360, or 720. And thus with little
Variation, there are other _bobs_ may be made after the same manner, and
afford as Admirable Musick, as possibly can be made on _Bells_. I shall
therefore hasten to finish this days Work, only first present you with
this one more called,


The City Delight:

_Doubles and Singles._

The whole _Hunt_ is the _Treble_, and lieth as before in the
_Nightingale_: When the _Treble_ moves out of the _3d._ place, the
_Singles_ are made in the _2d._ and _3d._ place, till the _Treble_
repossesses his _3d._ place, and then behind, till it moves up again out
of the _3d._ place. The two hind _Bells_ dodge, when the _Treble_ moves
out of the _4th._ place, till he returns again; the _Bell_ in the _4th._
place lying still all the while.

123456 | 264351 | 154362 | 162534 | 143265
------ | 265413 | _bob._ | 162543 | 143256
213465 | 256413 | 153426 | 126534 | 134265
213456 | 265143 | 153462 | 126543 | 134256
231465 | 256143 | ------ | ------ | ------
231456 | 251634 | 156234 | 124365 | 135642
234165 | 251643 | 156243 | 124356 | 135624
234156 | 215634 | 165234 | 142365 | _bob._
243156 | 215643 | 165243 | 142356 | 136542
234615 | 125634 | ------ | ------ | 136524
243615 | 125643 | 164352 | 145623 | ------
243615 | 152634 | 164325 | 145632 | 132465
246351 | 152643 | _bob._ | _bob._ | 132456
264351 | ------ | 163452 | 146523 | 123465
246531 | 154326 | 163425 | 146532 | 123456
                | ------ |

This will go as many _Changes_ as the last mentioned, by making _Bobs_.
And here I will shut up this days Peal upon Six _Bells_ with


The Evening Delight.

_Doubles_ and _Singles_.

The Whole _Hunt_ is the _Treble_, and lyes as before specified, with
this exception only: That it dodges in the _2d._ and _3d._ places, every
time it _Hunts_ up, and down. Observe when _Treble_ goes to lead, and
leaves of leading, the _Bells_ in the _3d._ and _4th_ places lye still,
_&c._ Note the pricking this _Peal_.

123456 |
------ | 254163 | 164235 | 145326 | 156324
213465 | 245163 | ------ | 154326 | _bob._
231465 | 241536 | 162453 | ------ | 165342
213645 | 214536 | 126453 | 153462 | 156342
231645 | 241356 | _bob._ | 135462 | ------
236154 | 214356 | 162435 | 153642 | 153624
263154 | 124365 | 126435 | 135642 | 135624
236514 | 142365 | ------ | ------ | 153264
263514 | 124635 | 124653 | 136524 | 135264
265314 | 142635 | 142653 | 163524 | ------
256341 | ------ | 124563 | _bob._ | 132546
265431 | 146253 | 142563 | 136542 | 123546
256431 | 164235 | ------ | 163542 | 132456
254613 | _bob._ | 145236 | ------ | 123456
245163 | 146253 | 154236 | 165324 | ------

This Peal will go 120 _Changes_, and by making _Bobs_, as many as above.

Note that in all the foregoing Peals upon _Six Bells_, the _Bobs_ are
double _Changes_, and made always at the leadings of the _Whole-Hunt_.
He that Rings the _Half-Hunt_, may best call _Bob_ in all Peals.

I come now to the _Changes_ upon Seven _Bells_, which though the seldom
Practice of them might excuse my omitting them; yet, because I promised
to say somewhat of them, I shall be as good as my Word, (the Character
of an Honest man) and present you with a couple of Examples, and then
proceed to _Peals_ upon _Eight_: But this I must crave leave to premise,
That Variety of _Changes_ may be prick'd upon Seven _Bells_, as
_Triples_, and _Doubles_, _Triples Doubles_, and _Single Doubles_, &c.
and the same Methods may be prick'd upon _Seven_, as may be upon _Five_,
the true difference of Proportion being observed; but to proceed.


_Dodging Triples._

_Triples_ and _Doubles_, and indeed all _Peals_ upon Six, may likewise
go upon Seven _Bells_, thus,

1234567 |
------- |
2143576 | 4523671 | 3514276
2415367 | 5432761 | 3152467
4251376 | 4523716 | 1325476
4523167 | 5432176 | 1352746
5432617 | 5341267 |

Plain Triples.

1234567 |
------- |
2143657 | 6745231 | 3517264
2416375 | 7654321 | 3152746
4261735 | 7563412 | 1325476
4627153 | 5736142 |
6472513 | 5371624 |

In this all the Bells have a Hunting _Course_.

_College Triples_, dodging before, and behind,

1234567 |
------- |
2143576 | 2467315 | 4176235
2415367 | 4276135 | 4712653
4251376 | 2471653 | 7421635
2453167 | 4217635 | 4726153
4235617 | 4126753 | 7462513
2436571 | 1462735 | 4765231
4263751 | 1467253 |

This Peal thus prick't, will go, 84 _Changes_, and the _Treble_ leading,
and the _Half Hunt_ lying next it, and a parting _Change_ (which is a
double on the four middlemost of the Six hind _Bells_) being made, it
will go 420, and by making _Bobs_ 5040.

Thus much shall suffice for _Peals_ upon Seven _Bells_, I proceed to
_Changes_ upon _Eight_.


_Peals of Eight Bells._

Without amusing our selves with what Notes are most _Musical_, to _lye
behind_, we will come to the matter of Fact; for those Methods of
_Peals_ that are prick'd on _six_, may be the same upon _Eight_,
Observing only, that _Triples_ and _Doubles_ upon _Six_, must be
_Quadruples_, and _Triples_ upon _Eight_.


The Imperial Bob.

_Quadruples_ and _Triples_.

The _Treble_ hath a dodging _Course_, the two first, and two last
_Bells_ always dodge, till hindered by the _Treble_, the two next to
these, lying still one _Change_, dodge the next, till the _Treble_
hinders them too, Those in the 5th. and 6th. places dodge (the _Treble_
being behind) and those in the 3d. and 4th. places likewise dodge (the
_Treble_ being before) and so till hindered by the _Treble_.

12345678 |
-------- | 42361875 | 16847253 | 14283675
21436587 | 24368157 | 16482735 | --------
12346578 | 42631875 | -------- | 18645273
21436587 | 24613857 | 18765432 | 18462537
24136578 | 42168375 |  _bob._  | --------
42315687 | 24618357 | 17864523 | 16587432
24135678 | 42163857 | -------- |  _bob._
42316587 | 41268357 | 16573824 | 15684732
24361578 | 14623875 |  _bob._  | --------
42635187 | 41263857 | 15678342 | 18753624
24631578 | 14628375 | -------- |  _bob._
42365187 | 14263857 | 17352648 | 17856342
24635817 | 41628375 | 17536284 | --------
42368571 | 14268357 | -------- | 15372846
24365817 | 41623875 | 13274586 | 15738264
42638571 | 46128357 | 13725468 | --------
24365871 | 64213875 | -------- | 13254768
42638517 | 46123857 | 12438765 | 13527486
24635871 | 64218375 | 12347856 | --------
42368517 | 46281357 | -------- | 12436587
24638157 |  _&c._   | 14826357 | 12345678
                                 --------

By this method the Peal will go 224 Changes, and by making of _Bobs_ it
will go 448, 672, 1344. The _Bob_ is a _Triple_ Change at the leading of
the _Treble_, wherein the Bell in the _Fourth_ place lies still.

The next that comes to our Observation, and answers to what we first
hinted at in the beginning of this discourse of _Peals_ upon _Eight_
Bells, I mean _Precedency in Title_, is the


Bob Major.

_Plain Quadruples_ and _Triples_.

In this all the _Bells_ have a direct _Hunting Course_, until the
_Treble_ leads, and then the six hindmost _Bells_ dodge.

12345678 |
-------- |
21436587 | 86745231 | 35172846
24163857 | 87654321 | 31527486
42618375 | 78563412 | 13254768
46281735 | 75836142 | 31527486
64827153 | 57381624 |
68472513 | 53718264 |

By this method this will go 112. And by making _Bobs_, 224, 336, or 672.
The _Bob_ is a _Triple Change_, as in the foregoing _Imperial_ is
specified. By making two _Extreams_, it will go 1344, and with four
_Extreams_, 2688.

All Peals upon Six Bells, wherein half the Changes are _Triples_, will
go upon _Eight_ according to the method before-going, thus; If it be a
Peal upon Six consisting of 360, or 720 Changes, then there must be
five _Hunts_ in the Ringing of it upon _Eight_, the _Treble_ being the
first, 2 the Second, _&c._


College Bob Major.

_Quadruples_ and _Triples_.

There is four ways of pricking these. The first hath single Dodging
behind, and is thus Peal'd.

The First.

12345678 |
-------- |
21436587 | 56348271 | 78136524
24163578 | 53684721 | 71863542
42615387 | 35867412 | 17685324
46251378 | 38576142 | 16758342
64523187 | 83751624 |
65432817 | 87315642 |

The Second.

This hath Single Dodging before and behind, thus prickt.

12345678 |
-------- |
21436587 | 42358671 | 42173865
24163578 | 24385761 | 41237856
42615387 | 42837516 | 14328765
24651378 | 24873156 | 13482756
42563187 | 42781365 |
24536817 | 24718356 |

The Third.

This hath double Dodging behind, thus Prickt.

12345678
-------- |
21436587 | 63548271 | 78153624
24135678 | 65384721 | 71856342
42316587 | 56837412 | 17583624
43261578 | 58673142 | 15786342
34625187 | 85761324 |
36452817 | 87216342 |

The Fourth.

This hath double Dodging before and behind both, thus.

12345678
-------- |
21436587 | 42638571 | 42167358
24135678 | 24368751 | 41263785
42316587 | 42637815 | 14627358
24361578 | 24367185 | 16423785
42635187 | 42631758 |
24365817 | 24613785 |

These may be prick't several other ways, but that I Omit here for
Brevities sake; The _Dodging_ is without Intermission, except an
hinderence comes by the _Treble_; as likewise between two Bells, until
_Treble_ parts the Fray. The _Bobs_ are _Triple Changes_, as the
_Treble_ leads; in the _1st._ _2d._ and _6th._ the Bell in the _4th._
place lies still at the _Bobs_, and in the _3d._ _4th._ and _5th._ that
in the _2d._ place lies still.

Each of these will go 112 Changes, and by making _Bobs_ 224, 336, or
672.


College Triples Dodging both before and behind.

This Peal is the same for _Bobs_, as the _Bob Major_, and will go as
many Changes by making _Bobs_, or otherwise, as any of the foregoing
Four, and is thus Peal'd.

12345678 |
-------- |
21436587 | 42568371 | 42157836
24153678 | 24586731 | 41275863
42513687 | 42587613 | 14725836
24531678 | 24578163 | 17452863
42536187 | 42571836 |
24563817 | 24517863 |


The Wild-Goose Chase

_Triples._

The Explanation shall follow the Peal; intending here to put an end to
my _Epitome_ of the _Art of Ringing_, and therefore shall first present
you with this Prick't thus.

12345678 |          |
-------- |          |
21536784 | 37625481 | 15327684
25163748 | 73265418 | 13572648
52613784 | 72356148 | 31752684
56231748 | 27531684 | 37125648
65327184 | 25713648 | 73215684
63572814 | 52173684 | 72351648
36758241 | 51237648 |

In this Change the 4th. Bell must first hunt up into the Sevenths place,
and then the 4 and 8 always dodge behind throughout the Peal, unless
when obstructed by the _Treble_. The Bell that moves up into the 6th.
place, when the _Treble_ moves thence down, lies still there, till
displaced by the _Treble_; during which time the two hind Bells dodge,
and the _five first_ go a perfect _Hunting-course_: And when likewise
the _Treble_ moveth out of the 5ths. place the five first Bells go a
_Hunting-course_, till it comes down there again: By this method it will
go 80 changes, and by _Bobs_ 160, 240, or 480. The _Bob_ is made as in
the foregoing Changes.

And here I thought to make an end of the _Art of Ringing_, but _Cynthius
aurem vellit_, the young Practitioner, whose only Information is hereby
aimed at, plucks me by the Sleeve, and tells me in the Ear, that tho'
Peals upon six, as _Triples_ and _Doubles_, &c. make excellent Musick
upon Eight _Bells_, 4 8, 6 8, 4 1, or 1 8 lying behind: Or, _Triples_
and _Doubles_ upon the six middle Bells, the _Tenor_ lying behind; yet
for him who is not arrived to such a perfection of Skill, as to Ring
these compleat Peals, the most proper and easy for him are
_Set-changes_, which are founded on these _Grounds_.

First, _Placing the Bells Fifths_; thus the 4 must hunt up behind the 7,
the 3 behind the 6, and the 2 behind the 5; or the one may Hunt down
under the other, as the 5 under the 2, the 6 under 3, and 7 under 4: Or
if you will, first let a _Single_, next a _Double_, and then a _Triple_
Change be made on the middle _Bells_, all coming to the same effect; for
then the Changes will lye _Fifths_ thus: 1 5, 2 6, 3 7, 4 8. In the Peal
four _Concords_ are to be regarded, The first 1 5, the Second 2 6, the
third 3 7, and the fourth 4 8.

These four _Concords_ may go the Methods of any Changes upon four
_Bells_; 1, 5 being taken for the _Treble_; 2, 6 for the _Second_; 3, 6
for the _Third_; and 4, 8 for the _Fourth_; and the _Concords_ may
Change places with one another, as you lift. In which this Observation
is highly necessary, that the two Notes of every _Concord_ must
constantly attend each other in their Motion; that is, whenever one of
the two Notes moves, the other must follow it.

Or Secondly, _Place the Bells Thirds_; thus: The 6 4 and 2 must hunt up,
or else the 3 5 7 down; or otherwise on the middlemost _Bells_ let a
_Triple_, _Double_ or _Single_ Change be made, are to one effect; and
then the _Bells_ will lye _Thirds_ thus, 1 3. 5 7. 2 4. 6 8. Herein are
four _Concords observable_; as in the former Peal, _viz._ 1 3. 5 7. 2 4.
6 8. These _Concords_ may go the Methods of any Changes upon Four
_Bells_, 1, 3 being taking for the _Treble_, 5, 7 for the Second; 2, 4
for the Third; and 6, 8 for the Fourth; moving in the same manner; as
before shewed.

By these _Grounds_ Variety of excellent and Musical Changes are to be
Rung; _any Concord may be made a Hunt_, and to move up and down at the
beginning.

In Ringing these _Set-changes_, the Note will lye sometimes _Fifths_,
sometimes _Thirds_ and both, and then to _Clam_ them, is admirable
Musick: Clamming is, when each _Concord_ strike together; which being
done true the 8 will strike as but four _Bells_, and make a Melodious
Harmony. You may _Clam_ two or three bouts, and then strike as many
times Open, alternatively, one _Clam_ one Pull, and Open the next, &c.




Vocal Musick: _Or, Plain and Easy Directions to Sing by Notes, wherein
with a little Help, any one who is Musically given, may be perfected in
a short time_.


Musick, especially Vocal, has been of such high Esteem in all Ages, that
it is accounted no less than a Divine Science producing such
Concordance, and Harmony, that it cheereth and rejoyceth the Hearts of
Men, and is delightful to every Creature. It is certainly an Addition to
the joy in Heaven, where the Saints and Angels sing Halleluja's and
Songs of Praises before the Throne of God. St. _Austin_ tells us, that
it is the Gift of God to Men, as well as to Angels, and a Representation
and Admonition of the sweet consent and Harmony which his Wisdom hath
made in the Creation and Administration of the World. But not to
Prologue on what everywhere so much commends it self, I shall Sum up
what in that Nature is expedient in a few Verses, and so proceed to the
Subject Matter, _viz._

    _Nature, which is the vast Creations Soul,
    That steady curious Agent in the whole,
    The Art of Heaven, the Order of this Frame
    Is only Musick in an other Name:
    And as some King Conquering what was his own
    Hath choice of various Titles to his Crown,
    So Harmony on this Score now, that then,
    Yet still is all that takes and governs Men:
    Beauty is but Composure, and we find
    Content is but the Concord of the Mind;
    Friendship the Unison of well tun'd Hearts,
    Honour the Chorus of the noblest Parts.
    And all the Worlds good on which we can reflect
    Is Musick to the Ear, or to the Intellect._

There are to make up a Musical Harmony computed seven Notes; now in the
easiest way expressed by the Seven letters of the Alphbet, _viz._ A. B.
C. D. E. F. G. And If it so fall out, that a Voice or Musick gradually
rise or fall more than Seven Notes; The subsequent 8th, 9th, or 10th,
will in the same order proceed, bearing the like Relation each to the
other, as the 1st. 2d. 3d, _&c._ to which they respectively are
_Eights_. And so that from hence every Eighth Note, being in Nature
alike, is called by the name of that to which it is in an Eighth;
however above or below it; and for the better understanding the various
Musical Compositions out of these Notes, Musicians have devised and make
use of Lines and Characters, that as a Language they may be understood
and Communicated by Book, for the Instruction of the unlearned: As in
the following Introductory Example, you will perceive;

[Illustration: Music]

In this example, before I come nearer to particulars in general, observe
first, that those Characters you observe at the beginning of the Lines,
are termed Cliffs or Claves, Keys to open and signify what part or pitch
of Voice, _viz._ the _Treble_, _Mean_, or _Basse_ properly the Notes
belong to; as likewise on what Line or Space the Seven letters
expressing the Notes is placed. And then again, the five Lines and
Spaces between them are useful, as Steps or Gradations whereon the
degrees of Sound are to be expressed, or the Notes ascending and
descending: Then Thirdly, the Characters placed on the five Lines,
express the Notes themselves, or stand for them; and their difference in
form, signify their quality, whether they be longer or shorter.

Your care must therefore be in this, and the Chapters following, to
consider well in the first place, the _Gam-ut_, to learn the use of the
Cliffs: Next to that, the Names of the Lines and Spaces, whereby you may
readily know how to call a Note, as it stands on any of the Lines; and
Thirdly, How you should Sing those Notes in right Tune, as well by
degrees, as leaps; and last of all, to give each Note its due Quantity
of Time.

This in general, being observed, and seriously weighed; that you may
take a prospect of your task, I from it proceed to the _Gam-ut_, so far
as I think necessary to my present design, which is to let you
understand by it the use of the Cliffs, with the order and distances of
the Notes, as the Parts in a Body lye together.

[Illustration: The Gamut or Scale of MUSIC]

The consistence of this Scale is of Eleven Lines, with the Intermediate
Spaces, and contains the places of all the Notes that are made use of
Ordinarily in Vocal Musick. In the first Column you will find placed the
Old Notes, being set down, that you may see what they are. And in the
Second Column you are shewed which of the Seven letters properly belongs
to each Line and Space. The Third Column contains the Cliffs, or signed
Keys, demonstrating how many degrees of Notes they are one above
another, which once Circumspectly observed and known, the other degrees
of Distance are with more ease computed. And here

Five of these Lines, with their Spaces, are usually sufficient for the
pricking down any Tune, for which reason this Scale is divided into
Three Parts or Staves, compassed in with Arched Lines; and of these the
lowermost five are proper and belonging to the _Bass_, and are known by
this mark [Symbol: Bass Clef] on the Line of _F_. usually, therefore
called the _F. Fa-ut_ Cliff or Key; because it opens to us the letters
standing on the other Lines and Spaces, as in the ensuing Chapter will
appear. As for the uppermost five Lines, they contain the highest of the
Notes, and so belong to the Treble or highest Part. The Key to which is
marked in this manner, [Symbol: G clef] and sometimes _G S._ on the
lower Line but one.

The middle part or Tenor, usually takes in two of the upper Treble
Lines; also two of the Bass Lines, that in the middle only being proper
to it self, known by this mark placed on it, [Symbol: Tenor Clef mark]
for the Cliff or Key, its place being properly in the middle Line,
however it is many times placed on one or other of the other Lines; and
note which ever the Cliff stands on, that Line is the place of _C._ and
accordingly the other Lines are to be reckoned: Sometimes likewise we
find the _Bass Cliff_ is removed to the middle Line, and upon such
removal, that Line is _F, &c._ and tho' this manner of Shifting the
_Cliff_ is troublesome, yet Custom and Practice having made the knowing
of them necessary, you ought to be very well understanding in the manner
of them, if you would be well skilled in Vocal or Instrumental Musick.


_The Names of the Lines and Spaces._

Having thus far plainly proceeded to Introduce the beginner or learner,
I now lead a step further to the Names of the Lines and Spaces, which is
a thing very Materal in the beginning of learning. For in the _Gam-ut_
having seen how the Notes lye together in a Body, it will be proper to
know how you must take them into parts according to the several Cliffs,
which are three in number, three beginning usually, as most common with
the uppermost. And in these your first care will be to learn the Names
of the Lines and Spaces, which are opened to you by the Cliff or Key;
and these are in number Seven, expressed in the Seven letters, _A. B. C.
D. E. F. G._ which for a more perfect Sounds sake, and other reasons to
be given, you must pronounce or call _La, B, Ce, D, Lae, Fa, G_. and this
_Fa_ must be pronounced broad, _&c_.

These and the like Names the Notes receive for two Reasons; the first
is, because the Voice is best sent forth in expressing some Syllable; as
likewise that this number of Notes might be known by as many distinct
Names, as for their places in the Cliffs: See the Plate following.

[Illustration: Music]

And it will be very necessary, that you should begin with and keep to
one _Cliff_ at the first, as it pleases you to chuse, or as either of
the three best agrees with your Voice for a high or low Pitch.

Having gone through all the Rules, and being perfect in that, then it is
fit you should proceed to the other. There is no need you should meddle
or trouble your self with the _Tenor_ or _C Cliff_ because it keeps no
certain place; you must observe however, before you go further, to be
ready at naming the Lines and Spaces, so readily to tell, as soon as
you look on them, what letter any Line or Space is called or named by.

As for the rest, the _Cliff_ leads you to them, for beginning there, and
Ascending, you will find the letters lying in Order, and in descending;
it is only your naming them backwards.

The dash Lines, which you perceive above and below, are added only when
the Notes Ascend above the _Staff_, or descend below it.


_Directions as to the Distances of one Note from another, as to Sound._

In this case, the distances are not all equal, but that in the rising
and falling of any Eight Notes, there are two lesser distances; and
these are named _Semitones_, or the _Half Notes_, which must be well
observed and known, in remarquing their places in the _Staff_ of Lines;
and the better to have them in your Memory at all times take a rule from
certain Rhimes that point at their places, _viz._

    _In every octave there are half Notes two,
    Which do to us their proper places shew;
    One half Note you will find from_ B _to_ Ce,
    _The other half one lyes twixt_ Fa _and_ Le.

The _octave_ mentioned as an Eighth, and this Rule denotes the ordinary
places where you are to Sing the Half Notes, when there are no Flats or
Sharps placed or set in the Lines, _viz._ between _B_ and _Ce_, and
twixt _Le_ and _Fa_; these Flats and Sharps you will find thus marked
[Symbol: for Flat] [Symbol: for Sharp] and when the _Semitones_, or
_Half Notes_ are shifted, they are known by them when they are found
upon the Lines.

[Illustration: Music]

Observe, that in these Staves or Lines, you find the Notes Gradually
Ascending, of which the Pairs marked with Arches are half a Note
distant.

  +-------+ G.
  |       |
  +-------+ F.
1 +-------+ E.
  |       |
2 +-------+ D.
  |       |
3 +-------+ C.
4 +-------+ B.
  |       |
5 +-------+ A.
  |       |
6 +-------+ G.

This Marginal Figure, shews to the Eye the distance of the Seven Notes
one from another, the Letters Guiding or Directing to the Particulars,
whereas you perceive _B_, _Ce_, and _La_, _Fa_, lying near unto the
rest, so must their Sounds be nearer when you come to Tune your Voice in
harmony, _&c._ and the better to express with your Voice, and so observe
the difference between half and whole distances of Notes; Sing often
over these six Mona-Syllables, _viz._ _One_, _Two_, _Three_, _Four_,
_Five_, _Six_, distinctly, as is to be observed in the Tune of Six
Bells; and when you have done it many times, Sing only _One_, _Two_,
_Three_, _Four_, and there stop, repeating three four by them selves for
they are _Semitones_ distant in Sound, and the rest are alone, or a
whole Note distant each from the next; so that by a little Judicial
Observation you will perceive the three and four Bells to be a lesser
distant in Sound, than the other.

The Figures or Number 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, in the foregoing Marginal
Figures, shew the several distances to the Eye of the Six Notes where
_Le_ is the first, _D_ the Second, _&c._ and the third and fourth, are
_Ce_, _B_, distant half a Note or Tune.


_Directions for the Tuning of Notes, &c._

The properest and most easy way for Tuning your Notes rightly, must be
considered either in following the Voice of one skilled in Musick, or
Singing, or some such Tuned Instrument, as is accomodated with Frets or
Keys, which are the readiest and only ways as yet made use of by
Practitioners. That of a Matter being most common, but where none of
these can be had by the party desirous to Learn, I shall lay down the
following Directions, which will very much Instruct one that hath a
Musical Ear, especially such a one as has heard, and can Sing the Notes
of the Six Bells, of which, I presume, there are few, whose Genius Leads
them to the Science of Musick, are Ignorant.

Let me put then, Supposing that you can Sing, _One_, _Two_, _Three_,
_Four_, _Five_, _Six_, right; then shall I by the help of these Notes,
proceed to set you further in the right, and lead you to all the rest.

Consider well then, that beginning to Sing the first Note, let it stand
on what Line or Space it will, you may Sing it with what Tune you think
fit, either higher low, (as to the pitch of your Voice) but with this
caution, that you reckon how many Notes you have above or below it, that
your Voice in its pitch may be so managed as to reach them both without
Squeaking or Grumbling, or any harsh or rough Indecency of Sound.

For applying which six Notes, observe this first Example;

Make your beginning with the first _Bar_, and with a high Voice Sing the
_Six Notes_ you view on the _Staff_ divers times, calling them over by
the Number, _viz._ _One_, _Two_, _Three_, _Four_, _Five_, _Six_, as in
the foregoing Section; when that is done; Sing the same Notes by their
Names, _viz._ _La_, _G_, _Fa_, _Le_, _D_, _Ce_, in the Tune of six Bells.

[Illustration: Music]

2. In the Second and third _Bars_, you must Sing the two first Notes of
the six by themselves, forward and backward: Repeat all six in the
fourth _Bar_, and in the fifth and sixth _Bars_, let the two last Notes
be repeated, _viz._ _D_, _Ce_, forward and backward, and these Notes are
a whole Tone distant, and by often repeating these Notes in the second,
third fourth and fifth _Bars_, you will be better capable to know and
distinguish their distance from the Letter.

[Illustration: Music]

In the Seventh _Bar_ repeat the last three often over after all the six.
First, down, _Le_, _D_, _Ce_, _Le_, _D_, _Ce_, &c. and then proceed
backwards, as _Ce_, _D_, _Le_, _Ce_, _D_, _Le_, &c.

[Illustration: Music]

Observe in this Eighth _Bar_ after all six often to repeat the four
first, as, _La_, _G_, _Fa_, _Le_, and when you sing them particularly,
observe the two Notes _Fa_, _Le_, by reason their distance is a
_Semitone_; wherefore you must take notice in the Ninth _Bar_ to Sing
them by themselves so many times as you can conveniently fix them in
your Memory, as to their distance, for in this you will find it somewhat
difficult to Sing the half Notes true in their proper places.

[Illustration: Music]

Observe here in the tenth _Bar_ to Sing the four first Notes in their
order downwards and upwards, and in the Eleventh _Bar_ you must first
Sing the six Notes in their proper order: After this repeat the four
last Notes, _viz._ _Fa_, _Le_, _D_, _Ce_, taking Notice to leave out the
two first Notes, _viz._ _La_, _G_, continually observing to Mark the
_Semitone_ between _Fa_, _Le_, which two Notes you must Sing by
themselves in the Twelfth _Bar_.

[Illustration: Music]

Take notice now further, that in the thirteenth _Bar_ you Sing _Fa_,
_Le_, _D_, _Ce_, down and up, as you find them pricked, and observe
especially the three last, _viz._ _Fa_, _Le_, _Fa_, for this reason,
_viz._ that it is a common close or ending of Tunes.

Also observe, if in any place you doubt you Sing right a repeated part
of the six Notes, premised as are noted in the Eleventh and Thirteenth
_Bars_: Let all the six Notes be Sung over again in order, and so
proceed distinctly to try at the Parts themselves.

The Second Example.

[Illustration: Music]

You having now gone over the former Examples, must proceed by the same
clue of Six Notes to descend three Gradations or Steps lower, _viz._ to
_G._ which is to the Second Note of the first six, an _Octave_ or
Eighth.

First then, in the first _Bar_ you must begin with a high pitch in your
Voice, and so having Sung, as in the former Examples, _La_, _G_, _Fa_,
_Le_, _D_, _Ce_, leave out _La_, and only Sing the Five last: Then
repeat only three in the Second Bar, _viz._ the three last _La_, _D_,
_Ce_, calling them now not by those names, but by that of _One_, _Two_,
_Three_, and though the names are altered, you must not alter the Tune
or Tone.

Having thus proceeded, observe in the third Bar to Sing the Six Notes
from _Le_, to _G_, naming them as the Bells _One_, _Two_, _Three_,
_Four_, _Five_, _Six_; In such a manner, that the three first of these
be in Tune, the same with the three last of the former Six; after, as I
said, you have Sung them as the Bells, _viz._ _One_, _Two_, _Three_,
_Four_, _Five_, at least four or five times, then as often Sing them
again by their proper Names, _viz._ _Le_, _D_, _Ce_, _B_, _La_, _G_.

Observe again, that in the fourth Bar you Sing the four first Notes,
_La_, _D_, _Ce_, _B_, about four times over; after that repeat _Ce_,
_B_, by themselves taking good notice of their distance or differences,
which is a _Semitone_ like to _Fa_, _Le_ above, _&c._

Consider once more, as to this Example, as to the fifth Bar after all
the six are Sung by you, repeat the last four, _viz._ _Ce_, _B_, _La_,
_G_, do it often over, keeping them up in the same Tone they had in all
six, by which means _Ce_ and _B_ will be distant half a Note, whereupon
Sing them backward, _viz._ _G_, _La_, _B_, _Ce_, and at the end repeat
_D Ce_, as you did _Le Fa_ at the thirteenth Bar before set down.

[Illustration: Music]

Observe further now in these Six Bars, that when you have Sung all six
in order, Sing the three first _Le_, _D_, _Ce_, and there stop; then
proceed to Sing those three over again in the same Tune, nor calling
them _Le_, _D_, _Ce_, but _Three_, _Four_, _Five_; do it several times,
and so proceed to the Seventh Bar, adding two Notes above, and Sing them
on the five Bells, _viz._ _One_, _Two_, _Three_, _Four_, _Five_, three
or four times; then call them by their names, _viz._ _G_, _Fa_, _Le_,
_D_, _Ce_, then proceed to the Eighth Bar, and add to the other five
_D_, _La_, _G_, to make up an _Octave_, keeping in your Mind the
distances, as you Sing them in the former Examples; and by this means
you have the whole _Octave_ or Eight Notes from _G_ to _G_, which must
be practised down and up, and when you are perfect in it, so as to Sing
your distances true with the _Semi-tones_ in their right places, the
following directions will lead you through the rest of the Notes to Sing
any other _Octave_, beginning at any other Letter.

[Illustration: Music]

Begin at _Le_ again in the Ninth Bar, and begin the six Notes, _viz._
_Le_, _D_, _Ce_, _B_, _La_, _G_, in proper order, that done, repeat the
two last Notes, _viz._ _La_, _G_, by themselves: so proceed to the tenth
Bar, and Sing _La_, _G_, _Fa_, _Le_, _D_, _Ce_, so that _La_ and _G_,
may be the same in Tune as you found them in the former Six; and if so
be your Voice will not reach _Ce_, at the pitch you began the first Bar,
then Sing as far as you can, or begin at _Le_, at the ninth Bar higher,
Singing these three last Bars distinctly from the Foregoing.

[Illustration: Music]

In the Eleventh Bar you must Sing backward, your six last Notes, _viz._
_Ce_, _D_, _Le_, _Fa_, _G_, _La_. rising from _Ce_, to _La_, so going
one step Backward to _G_, rise to _Ce_, as in the foregoing fifth Bar,
which is an _Octave_ to the lower _Ce_. And thus much may suffice for
the Beginner to practice on, which, if well understood, will bring him
in to Sing Notes in any Tune.




_Of COCK-FIGHTING._


Herein let us first observe the choice of a _Cock_ of the Game, directed
by these four Characters following: That he be:

1. Of a strong _Shape_, proud and upright, and for this the
_Middle-sized_, neither too small or too large, is best, because most
matchable, strong and nimble. His _Head_ small like a _Sparrow-Hawks_;
his _Eye_ large and quick; _Back_ strong crook't at the setting on, and
coloured as the Plume of his Feathers; the _Beam of his Leg_ very
strong, and colour'd as his Plume; _Spurs_ long, rough, and sharp,
hooking inward.

2. Of a good _Colour_, and herein the Gray, Yellow, or Red Pyle, with a
black Breast, are to be preferred; the Pyde rarely good, and the White
and Dun never. A Scarlet Head is a demonstration of Courage, but a Pale
and wan of Faintness.

3. Of _Courage true_, which you shall observe by his proud, stately,
upright landing and walking, and his frequent Crowing in his Pen.

4. _Of a sharp and ready Heel_, which (in the Opinion of the best
_Cock-masters_,) of high Estimation; a _Sharp-heel'd Cock, tho' somewhat
false, is better_ (as dispatching his business soonest) _than a true
Cock with a dull Heel_.

For _Breeding_, the Best season is from the Moon's encrease in
_February_, to her encrease in _March_. The _March_ Bird is best. And
now first get a _perfect Cock, to a perfect Hen_, as the best Breeding,
and see the _Hen_ be of an excellent Complexion (_i.e._) rightly plumed,
as black, brown, speckt, grey, grissel, or yellowish; tufted on her
Crown, large bodied, well poked, and having Weapons, are Demonstrations
of Excellency and Courage. Observe further her Comportment, if Friendly
to her Chickens, and revengeful of Injuries from other Hens.

When the _Cock_ and _Hen-Chickens_, (going till now promiscuously one
with another) begin to quarrel and peck each other, part them and
separate their Walks: And the best for a Fighting Cock, are private and
undisturbed Walks, as, _Wind-mills_, _Water-mills_, _Grange-houses_,
_Park-lodges_, &c. and their _Feeding-place_ on soft Ground, or Boards;
and have for his meet, _white Corn_, or _White-bread Tosts_, steept in
Drink, or Urine, is good, both to Scower, and Cool them. And do not
debilitate and debauch his Courage and Strength, by having too many
_Hens_ to walk with; three _Hens_ are enough for one _Cock_.

If before they be six Months Old, any of your _Chickens Crow_ clear and
loud, and unseasonable, then to the Pot or Spit with them, they are
Cowards; the true _Cock_ is long ere he gets his Voice, and when he has
gotten it, keeps good and judicious Time in Crowing.

Next observe your _Roosting Perch_, for this makes or marrs a _Cock_;
for forming of which, consult the best _Cock-masters_ Feeding pens, and
the Perches there, and accordingly proportion your own; take care that
the Ground underneath the Perch be soft, for if it be rough and hard, in
leaping down he will hurt his Feet, and make them Gouty and Knotty.

For the _Dieting_, and _Ordering_ of your _Cock_ for Battle, observe
these Rules. Let your _Cock_ be full two years Old, then in the latter
end of _August_, take up and Pen him, (it being now _Cocking-time_ till
the end of _May_) and see that he be sound, hard feather'd, and full
summed.

The first four days after Penning, Feed him with the Crumb of Old
_Manchet_ cut into square bits, thrice a day, and with the Coldest, and
Sweetest Spring-water that can be had. And after you think by this time
he is throughly purged of his _Corn_, _Worms_, _Gravel_, and other
course Feeding, take him in the Morning out of the Pen, and let him
_Sparr_ with another _Cock_ some time to heat and chafe their Bodies,
break Fat and Glut, and fit them for Purgation; first having covered
their Spurs with Hots of Leather, to hinder their Wounding and drawing
Blood of one another.

After they have sufficiently _Sparred_, that they pant again, take them
up, and remove their Hots, and prepare them for a Sweating Bout thus:
Take _Butter_, and _Rosemary_, finely chopt, and _White-sugar-candy_,
mixt together; and give them the quantity of a _Wallnut_; which will
Scower, strengthen, and prolong Breath: Then having (purposely) deep
_Straw Baskets_, fill them half way with _Straw_, put in your _Cock_,
and cover him with _Straw_ to the top; lay the lid close, and let him
stove till the Evening. At Five a Clock take him out, and lick his Head
and Eyes with your Tongue, then Pen him, and fill his Trough with
_Manchet_ and hot _Urine_.

After this, take a Gallon of _Wheat_, and _Oatmeal-flower_, and with
_Ale_, half a score _Whites_ of _Eggs_, and _Butter_, work it into a
stiff _Past_; bake it into broad _Cakes_, and when four days Old, cut it
into square Bits.

The Second day after _Sparring_, bring your _Cock_ into a Green-close,
and shew him in your Arms a _Dung-hill-cock_, then run from him, and
allure him thus to follow, suffering him now and then to strike the
_Dung-hill-Cock_, and so Chase him up and down for half an Hour, till he
pants again; and thus Heated, carry him home, and scour him with half a
Pound of _Fresh-butter_, beaten with the Leaves of the _Herb of Grace_,
_Hysop_, and _Rosemary_, to the consistence of a _Salve_, and give him
the quantity of a _Wallnut_; then _Stove_, and _Feed_ him as above. And
thus for the first Fortnight, Spar or Chase him every other day.

The second Fortnight, twice a Week will be enough to Chase or Spar your
_Cock_: Observing that you Stove and Scour him, proportionable to his
Heating.

The third and last Fortnight (for six Weeks is long enough) feed him as
before, but do not Spar him, but Chase him moderately twice, or thrice,
as before; then roll his aforesaid scouring in _Brown-sugar-candy_, to
prevent his being Sick; rest him four days, and then to the Pit.

Now Gentlemen, Match your Cock carefully, or what you have hitherto
done, is nothing. And here observe the Length, and Strength of Cocks.
The Length is thus known: Gripe the Cock by the Waste, and make him
shoot out his Legs, and in this Posture compare, _And have your Judgment
about you_. The Strength is known by this Maxim, _The largest in the
Garth, is the Strongest Cock_. The Dimension of the _Garth_ is thus
known: Gripe the _Cock_ about from the joynts of your Thumb, to the
Points of your great Finger, and you will find the Disadvantage, _The
weak long Cock is the quickest easier Riser, and the short strong one,
the surest Striker._

Thus being well Matcht, accoutre him for the Pit. Clip his _Main_ off
close to his Neck, from his head to his shoulders. Clip his Tail close
to his Rump, the Redder it appears the better. His wings sloping, with
sharp Points; scrape smooth, and sharpen his Spurs; leave no feathers on
his Crown; then moisten his head with Spittle.

The Battle done, search and suck your Cocks wounds, and wash them well
with hot _Urine_, then give him a Roll of your best Scouring, and stove
him for that Night. If he be swelled, the next morning, suck and bathe
his Wounds again, and pounce them with the Powder of the Herb _Robert_,
through a fine Bag; give him an handful of Bread in warm _Urine_, and
stove him, till swelling be down. If he be hurt in his Eye, chew a
little ground _Ivy_, and Spit the Juice in it; which is good for
_Films_, _Haws_, _Warts_, &c. Or if he hath _veined_ himself in his
fight, by narrow striking, or other cross blows, when you have found the
hurt, bind the soft Down of Hair to it, will cure it.

When you visit your wounded _Cocks_, a month or two after you have put
them to their Walks, if you find about their heads any swollen Bunches,
hard and blackish at one end, then there are unsound Cores undoubtedly
in them; therefore open them, and with your Thumb crush them out, suck
out the Corruption, and fill the holes with fresh Butter; and that will
infallibly cure them.


_Cures for Distempers incident to the Cock or Chick of the Game._

For _Lice_, being most common, I begin with; proceeding from corrup
Meat, and want of Bathing, _&c._ Take _Pepper_ beaten to Powder, mix it
with warm Water, and wash them with it.

For the _Roup_; a filthy swelling on the Rump, and very contagious to
the whole body; the staring and turning back of the Feathers is its
Symptom. Pull away the Feathers, open and thrust out the Core, and wash
the Sore with Water and Salt, or Brine.

For the _Pip_; visit the mouth, and examine what hinders your _Cocks_,
_Hen_, or _Chicks_ feeding, and you'll find a white thin Scale on the
Tip of the Tongue, which pull off with your Nail, and rubbing the Tongue
with Salt, will cure it.

For the _Flux_; proceeding from eating too moist Meat, give them
Pease-Bran scalded, will stop it.

For the _Stoppage of the Belly_, that they cannot mute; anoint their
Vents, and give them either small bits of Bread or Corn, steep'd in
_Urine_ of Man.

And now I have one Word of Advice to him that is a Lover (or would be
so) of this _Royal-Sport_: and then have done: _Come not to the Pit
without Money in your Breeches, and a Judgment of Matches_; Done and
Done is _Cock-Pit_ Law, and if you venture beyond your Pocket, you must
look well to it, or you may lose an Eye by the Battle.




_Of FOWLING._


The _Ingenious Fowler_, like a Politick and sagacious Warrier, must
first furnish and store himself with those several Stratagems and
Engines, as suit with the diversities of _Occasion_, _i.e._ _Time_,
_Place_, and _Game_; or else he cannot expect the _Conquest_.

And first of _Nets_, which must be made of the best Pack-thread; and for
taking great _Fowl_, the Meshes must be large, two Inches at least from
point to point, the larger the better; (provided the _Fowl_ creep not
through;) two Fathom deep, and six in length, is the best and most
manageable Proportion; Verged with strong Cord on each side, and
extended with long Poles at each end made on purpose. But for small
_Water-fowl_, let your Nets be of the smallest and strongest
Pack-thread, the Meshes so big, as for the great _Fowl_, about two or
three foot deep: Line these on both sides with false Nets, every Mesh a
foot and half Square. For the _Day-Net_, it must be made of fine
Pack-thread, the Mesh an Inch square, three Fathom long, and one broad,
and extended on Poles according to its Length, as aforesaid.

_Birdlime_ is the next, and thus made. Pill the Bark of _Holly_ from the
Tree at _Midsummer_, fill a Vessel, and put to it running Water; boil it
over the Fire till the Grey and White Bark rise from the Green; take it
off the Fire, drain the Water well away, and separate the Barks; and
take the Green, lay it on some moist floor and close place, and cover it
with Weeds; let it lye a fortnight, and in that time it will rot, and
turn to a Filthy slimy Substance: Then put it into a Morter, beat it
well; take it out and wash it at some running stream, till the Foulness
is gone: Then put it in a close Earthen pot; let it stand Four or Five
days, look to its Purging, and scum it: When clean, put it into another
Earthen Pot, and keep it close for Use.

Your _Setting-Dog_ must be Elected and Train'd thus: He must be of
exquisite Scent, and love naturally to hunt Feathers. The land Spaniel
is best, being of good nimble size, and Couragious mettle, which you may
know by his Breed; being of a good Ranger, _&c._

The first lesson is, to make him _Crouch and lie down_ close to the
ground; its done by frequent laying him on the ground and crying _Lye
close_; upon his doing well reward him with Bread; and on the contrary
chastise him with Words, not Blows.

Next, _To creep to you with his Body and Head close upon the Ground_ by
saying, _Come nearer, Come nearer_, or the like Words; to understand
and do it, entice him with shewing him Bread, or the like: Thrusting
down any rising part of his Body or Head, and roughly threatning him; if
he slight that, a good Jerk or two with a slash of Whip-cord will
reclaim his Obstinacy. Repeat his Lessons, and encourage his well doing.
And this you may exercise in the Fields as you walk, calling him from
his busie Ranging to his Duty. And then teach him to follow you close at
the heels in a Line or string, without straining.

By this time he is a Year old, now (the season fit) into the Field, and
let him range, [obediently.] If he wantonly babble or causelesly open,
correct him by biting soundly the Roots of his Ears, or Lashing. Assoon
as you find he approaches the Haunt of the _Partridge_, known by his
Whining, and willing, but not daring, to open, speak and bid him, _Take
heed_: If notwithstanding this he rush in and Spring the _Partridge_, or
opens, and so they escape, correct him severely. Then cast him off to
another Haunt of a _Covy_, and if he mends his Error, and you take any
by drawing your Net over them swiftly, reward him with the Heads, Necks,
and Pinions.

As for the Water-Dog, the instructions above for the _Setter_ will
serve; only to fetch and bring by losing a Glove, or the like; keep a
Strict Subjection in him, and Observance to your Commands.

The longest _Barrel is the best Fowling Piece_, Five and half, or six
foot long, with an indifferent Bore, under an _Harquebuse_; and shooting
with the Wind, and side-ways, or behind the Fowl, not in their Faces, is
to be observed; having your Dog in Command not to stir till you have
shot.

_A Stalking-Horse_ for shelter, to avoid being seen by the shie Fowl, is
an old Jade trained on purpose; but this being rare and troublesome,
have recourse to Art, to take Canvas stuft and painted in the shape of a
Horse grazing, and so light that you-may carry him on one hand (not too
big:) Others do make them in the shape of _Ox_, _Cow_, for Variety; and
_Stag_, _Trees_, &c.

The _great Fowl_, or those who divide the Foot, reside by shallow Rivers
sides, Brooks and Plashes of Water; and in low and boggy places, and
sedgie, Marish, rotten Grounds. They also delight in the dry parts of
drowned Fens, overgrown with long Reeds, Rushes and Sedges; as likewise
in half Fens drowned Moors, hollow Vales or Downs, Heaths, _&c._ Where
obscurely they may lurk under the Shelter of Hedges, Hills, Bushes,
_&c._

The lesser, or Web footed, _Fowl_, always haunt drowned Fens, as
likewise the main streams of Rivers not subject to Freeze, the deeper
and broader, the better; (tho' of these the _Wild-Goose_ and _Barnacle_,
if they cannot sound the depth, and reach the Ouze, change their
Residence for shallow places, and delight in Green Winter Corn,
especially if the Lands ends have Water about them:) Small Fowl also
frequent hugely little Brooks, Ponds, drowned Meadows, Pastures, Moors,
Plashes, Meres, Loughs, and Lakes, stored with unfrequented Islands,
Shrubs, _&c._


_How to take all manner of Fowl or Birds._

For taking the first (I mean the greater Fowl) with Nets, observe in
general this: Come two hours before their feeding hours, Morning and
Evening; and Spreading your Net on the Ground smooth and flat, stake the
two lower ends firm, and let the upper ends be extended on the long
Cord; of which the further end must be fastned to the Ground, three
Fathoms from the Net, the Stake in a direct Line with the lower Verge of
the Net; the other, ten or twelve fathom long, have in your hand at the
aforsaid distance, and get some shelter of Art or Nature, to keep you
from the curious and shy Eye of the Game; having your Net so ready that
the least pull may do your work, strew'd over with Grass as it lies to
hide it: A live _Hern_, or some other Fowl lately taken, according to
what you seek for, will be very requisite for a Stale. And you will have
sport from the Dawning, till the Sun is about an hour high; but no
longer; and from Sun-set till Twilight; these being their feeding times.

For the small (Water) Fowl. Observe the Evening is best before Sun-set.
Stake down your Nets on each side the River half a foot within the
Water, the lower part so plumb'd as to sink no further; the upper
Slantwise shoaling against, but not touching by two foot, the water, and
the Strings which bear up this upper side fastned to small yielding
sticks prickt in the Bank, that as the Fowl strike may ply to the Nets
to intangle them. And thus lay your Nets (as many as you please) about
twelve score one from another, as the River or Brook will afford. And
doubt not your success. To expedite it however, a Gun Fired three or
four times in the Fens and Plashes, a good distance from your Nets, will
affright and Post them to your Snares; and so do at the Rivers, when you
lay in the Fens.

Winter time is the most proper for taking all manner of Small Birds, as
flocking then promiscuosly together, _Larks_, _Lennets_, _Chaffinches_,
_Goldfinches_, _Yellow-Hammers_, &c. with this _Bird-lime_, Put to a
quarter of a Pound of _Bird-lime_, an ounce of fresh _Lard_, or
_Capons-grease_, and let it gently melt together over the Fire, but not
Boyl; then take a quantity of _Wheat-ears_, as you think your use shall
require, and cut the straw about a foot long besides the Ears, and from
the Ear lime the straw six Inches; the warmer it is, the less
discernible it will be. Then to the Field adjacent, carrying a bag of
Chaff, and thresh'd Ears, scatter them twenty Yards wide, and stick the
lim'd ears (declining downwards) here, and there; Then traverse the
Fields, disturb their Haunts, and they will repair to your Snare, and
pecking at the Ears, finding they stick to them, mount; and the Lim'd
straws, lapping under their Wings, dead their flight, they cannot be
disengaged, but fall and be taken they must. Do not go near them, till
they rise of their own accord, and let not five or six entangled lead
you to Spoil your Game, and incur the loss of Five or Six dozen.

_Lime-Twigs_, is another Expedient for taking of great Fowl, being Rods
that are long, small, strait, and pliable, the upper part apt to play to
and fro; being besmeared with _Bird-lime_ warm. Thus to be used,
Observe the Haunts of the Fowl, have a Stale, (a living Fowl of the same
kind you would take) and cross pricking your Rods, one into, and
another against the Wind sloping, a foot distant one from the other; pin
down your Stale, some distance from them, tying some small string to
him, to pull and make him flutter to allure the Fowl down. If any be
caught, do not run presently upon them, their fluttering will encrease
your Game. A well taught _Spaniel_ is not amiss to retake those that are
entangled, and yet flutter away. Thus likewise for the Water; consult
the Rivers depth, and let your Rods be proportionable; what is Lim'd of
them being above the Water, and a _Mallard_, &c. as a Stale placed here
and there, as aforesaid. You need not wait on them, but three times a
day visit them, and see your Game; if you miss any Rods (therefore know
their Number) some Fowl entangled is got away with it, into some Hole,
_&c._ and here your _Spaniel_ will be serviceable to find him.

For _Small-birds_, a _Lime-bush_ is best; thus, Cut down a great Bough
of a _Birch_, or _Willow-tree_, trim it clean, and Lime it handsomely,
within four Fingers of the bottom: Place this Bush so ordered, in some
quick-set, or dead _Hedge_, in Spring time: In Harvest, or Summer, in
_Groves_, _Bushes_, _Hedges_, _Fruit-trees_, _Flax_, and _Hemp_-Lands:
In Winter, about _Houses_, _Hovells_, _Barns_, _Stacks_, &c. A _Bird-call_
is here also necessary, or your own industrious skill in the Notes of
several Birds.

And because Gentlemen who have Fish-ponds, wonder they lose so many
Fish, and are apt to Censure sometimes undeservedly their Neighbours,
when it is the insatiable _Hern_, that is the true cause: I shall next
lay down the best and most approved way of taking the great
Fish-devouring _Hern_, whose Haunt having found, observe this Method to
take him. Get three or four small _Roaches_, or _Dace_, take a strong
Hook, (not too rank) with Wyre to it, and draw the Wyre just within the
skin, from the side of the Gills, to the Tail of the said Fish, and he
will live four or five days, (If dead the _Hern_ will not touch it.)
Then have a strong Line, of a dark Green-silk, twisted with Wyre, about
three Yards long, tie a round stone of a pound to it, and lay three or
four such hooks, but not too deep in the Water, out of the _Herns_
wading; and two or three Nights will answer your Expectation.


_The several wayes of taking_ Pheasants.

You must learn and understand the several Notes of a Natural
_Pheasant-Call_, and how usefully to apply them. In the Morning just
before or at _Sun-rising_, call them to feed, and so at _Sun-setting_:
In the Fornoon, and Afternoon, your Note must be to Cluck them together
to Brood, or to chide them for straggling, or to notify some danger at
hand.

Thus skilled in their Notes; and by the Darkness, Solitaryness, and
strong undergrowth of the place assured of their Haunts, closely lodge
yourself, and softly at first call; lest being near you, a loud Note
affright them; and no Reply made, raise your Note gradually, to the
highest; and if there be a _Pheasant_ in hearing, he will answer you, in
as loud a Note. Be sure it be Tunable. As soon as you are answered,
creep nearer to it; if far off, and a single Fowl, as you call, and
approach, so will the _Pheasant_. Having gotten sight of her, on the
Ground, or Perch, cease calling, and with all silence possible, spread
your Net conveniently, between the _Pheasant_, and you, one end of the
Net fastned to the Ground, and the other end, hold by a long Line in
your hand, by which you may pull it together, if strained; then call
again, and as you see the _Pheasant_ come under your Net, rise and shew
your self, and affrighting her, she will mount, and so is taken. Thus if
on the contrary you have divers Answers, from several _Corners_, of the
_Coppice_, and you keep your place and not stir, they will come to your
Call; and then having a pair of Nets, spread one on each side, and do as
before. Your Nets, must be made of Green or Black double-twin'd Thread,
the Mesh about an inch square, between Knot, and Knot, the whole Net
about three Fathom long, and Seven foot broad, verged with strong small
Cord on each side and ends, to lye hollow and compass-wise.

The next way of taking _Pheasant-Powts_, is by Driving, thus. Having
found the Haunt of an _Eye of Pheasants_, known by the _Barrenness_ of
the Place, _Mutings_ and loose Feathers, then in the little Pads and
Wayes, like Sheep tracks, they have made, place your Nets (taking the
Wind with you) a-cross these Paths hollow, loose and circularly, the
nether part fixt to the Ground, and the upper side hollow, _&c._ as
aforesaid: Then to their Haunt, and there call them together, if
feattered; then with a Driver, an Instrument like that of
_Cloath-dressers_, rake gently the Bushes and Boughs about you, the
_Powts_ will run, and stop and listen; then give another rake, and so
you will drive them like sheep into your Nets: Observe in this
_Secrecy_, _Time_ and _Leisure_, or you spoil your Sport; _Secrecy_ in
concealing your self from being seen by them; and _Time_ and _Leisure_,
by not being too hasty.

Lastly for taking _Pheasants_ with the _Lime-Bush_, or Rods, order
these, as I have before prescribed; your Rods about twelve inches long,
and your Bush containing not above eight Twigs, with a pretty long
Handle, sharpned to stick in the Ground, or Bushes, Shrubs, _&c._ and
let it be planted as near the _Pheasants pearching Branch_, as may be.
Place your Rods on the Ground, near the Bush; for when some are taken
below by they Rods, they will scare up the others to get on the Bushes
to seek what's become of their Fellows, and there become your Prey
themselves.


_For taking Partridge._

You must first find the _Partridges_ Haunt. Which is mostly in standing
Corn-Fields, where they breed; as likewise in Stubble after the Corn is
cut, especially Wheat-stubble till it is trodden, and then they repair
to Barley-stubble, if fresh; and the Furrows amongst the Clots, Brambles
and long Grass, are sometimes their lurking places, for Twenty and
upward in a Covy. In the Winter in up-land Meadows, in the dead Grass or
Fog under Hedges, among Mole-hills; or under the Roots of Trees, &c.
Various and uncertain are their Haunts. And tho' some by the Eye, by
distinguishing their Colour from the Ground, others by the Ear, by
hearing the Cock call earnestly the Hen, and the Hens answering, and
chattering with Joy at meeting, do find _Partridge_; yet the best,
easiest and safest way of finding them is (as you do the _Pheasant_) by
the Call or Pipe: Notes seasonable, as before prescribed, and they will
come near to you, and you may count their Numbers; and to your sport.

Surround your Covy, prepare your Nets, and pricking a stick fast in the
ground, tye the one end to it, and let your Nets fall as you walk
briskly round without stopping, and cover the _Partridge_; then rush in
upon them to frighten them, and as they rise they are taken.

For taking them with _Bird-Lime_, thus: Call first near the _Haunt_; if
answered, stick about your _Lime-straws_, a-cross in ranks at some
distance from you; then call again, and as they approach you, they are
intercepted by the Straws; and so your Prey. This way is used most
successfully in Stubble-fields, from _August_ to _September_: And Rods
in Woods, Pastures, _&c._ as for the _Pheasant_.

The most pleasant way of taking Partridge is with a _Setting-Dog_, who
having set them, use your Net; and by these Rules and Method, the
_Rails_, _Quales_, _Moorpoots_, &c. are to be taken; and are for _Hawks_
flight too. And here I must make an end of the most material part of
_Fowling_.




_Of FISHING._


It has been the Method of this whole Treatise, to divide the several
distinct Heads of each Recreation into three Parts, to render the
Observations and Rules the more plain and easy, for the prosecuting the
Recreation we treat of.

1. _What_ it is we pursue.

2. _Where_ and _When_ to find that we would delight our selves in.

3. _With what_ proper _Mediums_ or Measures we may obtain the desired
Effects of our endeavours therein.

First then, _What_ we pursue is Fish, distinguish'd according to their
sundry kinds by these following Names.

The _Barbel_, _Bream_, _Bleak_, _Bulhead_, or _Millers-thumb_; _Chevin_,
_Char_, _Chub_, _Carp_; _Dace_; _Dare_; _Ele_; _Flounder_; _Grayling_,
_Gudgeon_, _Guiniad_; _Loach_; _Minnow_; _Pope_ or _Pike_, _Pearch_;
_Rud_, _Roach_; _Sticklebag_ or _Bansticle_, _Salmon_, _Shad_, _Suant_;
_Tench_, _Torcoth_, _Trout_, _Thwait_, and _Umber_. All these
Alphabetically thus named are the different sorts of Fish, in taking
which the Angler commonly exercises his Art. We come next, _Where_ to
find them.

1. To know the Haunts and Resorts of Fish, in which they are to be
usually found, is the most Material thing the Angler ought to be
instructed in, lest he vainly prepare _how to take_ them, and
preposterously seek _where to find_ that he prepar'd for. To prevent
which you are first to understand, That as the season of the Year is, so
Fish change their places: In _Summer_, some keep near the top, others
the bottom of the Waters. In _Winter_, all Fish in general resort to
deep Waters. But more particularly,

The _Barbel_, _Roach_, _Dace_, and _Ruff_, covet most _Sandy, Gravelly
Ground_, the deepest part of the River, and the shadows of _Trees_.

_Bream_, _Pike_, and _Chub_ delight in a _Clay_, and _Owzie Ground_: The
_Bream_ chooseth the middle of the River, in a gentle, not too rapid
Stream: The _Pike_ preferreth still Waters, full of _Fry_, and
absconding himself amongst _Bull-rushes_, _Water-docks_, or under
_Bushes_, that under these shelters he may more securely surprize and
seize his Prey: The _Chub_ too chooses the same Ground, large Rivers and
Streams, and is rarely destitute of some Tree to cover and shade him.

_Carp_, _Tench_ and _Eel_, frequent foul muddy still Waters. The
greatest _Eels_ lurk under stones, or Roots; the smallest ones are found
in all sorts of Rivers or Soils: The _Carp_ is for the deepest stillest
part of Pond or River, and so is the _Tench_, and both delight in green
Weeds.

_Pearch_ delighteth in gentle Streams of a reasonable Depth, not too
shallow; close by a hollow Bank is their common Sanctuary.

_Gudgeon_ covets Sandy, Gravelly, Gentle Streams, and smaller Rivers;
not so much abounding in Brooks. He bites best in Spring, till they
spawn, and a little after till _Wasp_ time.

The _Salmon_ delights in large swift Rivers, which ebb and flow; and are
there plentifully to be found: As likewise Rocky and Weedy Rivers. But
in the latter end of the Year he is to be found high up in the Country,
in swift and violent Cataracts, coming thither to spawn.

The _Trout_ loves small swift purling Brooks or Rivers, that run upon
Stones or Gravel, and in the swiftest deepest part of them, getteth
behind some Stone-block and there feeds. He delights in a Point of a
River where the Water comes Whirling like the Eddy, to catch what the
Stream brings down, especially if he has the shade of a Tree: He hugely
delights to lurk under some hollow Bank or Stone; seldom among Weeds.

_Shad_, _Thwait_, _Plaice_, _Peel_, _Mullet_, _Suant_, and _Flownder_,
covet chiefly to be in or near the Salt or Brackish Waters, which ebb
and flow: The last, _viz._ the _Flownder_, have been taken in fresh
Rivers, as coveting Sand and Gravel, deep gentle streams, near Banks,
_&c._

Lastly the _Umber_ affects Marly Clay Ground, clear and swift Streams,
far from the Sea; the greatest Plenty of these Fish is found in
_Darbyshire_ and _Staffordshire_.

Thus much for the Haunts of Fish; I come next to know _When_ is the most
_seasonable time_ to catch them; which before I speak to, let him that
would become a compleat Angler, take this Rule. That he observe narrowly
what Pond or River soever he Fisheth in, whether it be slimy, muddy,
stony or gravelly, whether of a swift or slow Motion; as likewise that
he know the Nature of each Fish, and what Baits are most proper for
every kind: Not to let his Knowledge be circumscribed to one or two
particular Rivers, whither he is invited to Angle and take his
Observations by the Vicinity of his House; but to let his Knowledge be
_general_, and consequently his Sport will be so too. His Ignorance
otherwise will oblige him to be a Spectator in another River, when his
Excellency is confined to that only experienced one in or near his own
Parish or House. But to proceed,

II. To understand the best _Time when_ to Angle in, We must first
consider Affirmatively, when most _Seasonable_: Or, 2. Negatively, when
_Unseasonable_.

1. _Seasonable_ Angling is, when the Weather is calm, serene and clear;
tho' the Cool cloudy Weather in Summer is to be preferred, provided the
Wind blow not too boistrously, to hinder your easy Guiding your Tools;
In the hottest Months the cooler the better.

2. When a Violent shower hath disturbed the Water and mudded it, then
with a Red Worm, Angle in the Stream at the Ground.

3. A little before Fish spawn, when they repair to gravelly Fords to rub
and loosen their full Bellies; they bite freely.

4. From Sun-rising till eight of the Clock in the Morning, and from four
in the Afternoon till night for _Carp_ and _Tench_. In _June_ and
_July_, _Carps_ shew themselves on the very rim of the Water, then Fish
with a Lob-worm, as you would with a Natural Fly. But be sure to keep
out of sight.

5. In _March_, _April_, and _September_, and all Winter, when the Air is
clear, serene and warm. And after a shower of Rain, which hath only
beaten the _Gnats_, and _Flies_ into the River, without muddying. The
two first mentioned Months with _May_, and part of _June_, are most
proper for the _Fly_; Nine in the Morning, and Three a Clock in the
Afternoon, is the best time; as likewise, when the _Gnats_ play much in
a warm Evening.

6. In a _Cloudy_, and _Windy_ day, after a Moonshine clear Night, for
the brightness of the Night (through fear) making them abstain from
feeding, and the Gloominess of the Day emboldening and rendering them
(through Hunger) sharp, and eager upon food, they bite then freely.

7. Lastly, at the opening of _Milldams_ or _Sluces_, you will find
_Trouts_, &c. come forth seeking food, brought down by the Water. We
come next to demonstrate the time not proper, _i.e._

2. _Unseasonable_ Angling, in short is, when the Earth is parched, and
scorched with Vehement Heat, and Drought; benummed and frozen with
Cold, Frost, and Snow; or refrigerated with Spring Hoar-Frosts; or
blasted with the sharp, bitter, nipping, North, or East Winds: Or when
blustring _Boreas_ disorders your well guiding your Tackling; or the
_Sheep-shearers Washings_ glutted the Fish, and anticipated your Bait;
when the withdrawing of your Sport, foretells a Storm, and advises you
to some shelter; or Lastly, when the night proves Dark, and Cloudy, you
need not trouble your self the next day, 'tis to no purpose, _&c._

III. For providing _Stocks_, the best time is the Winter _Solstice_,
when the Sap is in the Roots of Trees, and their Leaves gone. It is
improper after _January_, the Sap then ascending into the Trunk, and
expending it self over all the Branches. See that your Stocks be
_Taper-grown_, and your Tops of the best _Ground-Hazle_, that can be
had, smooth, slender, and strait, of an Ell long, pliant and bendings
and yet of a strength, that a reasonable jerk cannot break it, but it
will return to its first straightness; left otherwise you endanger your
Line. Keep them two full years, before you use them; having preserved
them from Worm-eating, or Rotting, by thrice a year rubbing, and
chaffing them well with Butter (if sweet) or Linsed or Sallet-Oyl; and
if Bored, Oyl poured into the Holes, and bathed four and twenty hours in
it, and then thrown out again, will exceedingly preserve them.

The line, to make it neat, handsom and strong, twist the Hair you make
it of _even_, having seen if the Hair be of an equal bigness; then steep
your Line in Water, to see if the Hairs shrink, if so, you must twist
them over again. The Colour of the Hair is best of _Sorrel_, _White_
and _Grey_; _Sorrel_ for muddy boggy Rivers, and the two last for clear
Waters. Nor is the _Pale watery green_ contemptible, died thus: Take a
pint of strong _Ale_, half a pound of _Soot_, a little of the Juice of
_Walnut-Leaves_ and _Allum_; Boil these together in a Pipkin half an
hour, take it off, and when 'tis cold, put in your Hair. In making your
Line of Hair mix not Silk; but either all Hair, or all Silk; as likewise
distinguish the Line for the Ground Angle, and that for the Fly-rod, the
last must be stronger than the first; in that for the Artificial Fly,
making the uppermost Link twenty Hairs long, less in the next, and so
less till you come to the Fly. Lastly at each end of your Line make a
Loop (called a _Bout_) the one larger, to fasten to, and take it from
the top of your Rod, and the other Lesser to hang your Hook-line on.

Your Hook must be long in the shank, something Round in compass, the
point strait and even, and bending in the shank. Set on your Hook with
strong small Silk, laying your Hair on the inside of the Hook.

Your _Flote_ challenges divers ways of making. Some using _Muscovy_ Duck
quills for still Waters. Others the best sound Cork without flaws or
holes, bored through with a hot Iron, and a Quill of a fit proportion
put into it; then pared into a pyramidal Form, or in the fashion of a
small Pear, to what bigness you please, and ground smooth with
Grindstone or Pumice; this is best for strong Streams.

In fine, _To plum the Ground_, get a _Carbine_ Bullet bored through, and
in a strong twist hanged on your _Hook_ or Rod. To sharpen your _Hook_,
carry a little _Whetstone_. To carry your several utensils without
incommoding your Tackle, have several _Partitions_ of Parchment. And in
short the ingenious Angler will not be unprovided of his _Bob_ and
_Palmer_; his Boxes of all sizes for his _Hooks_, _Corks_, _Silk_,
_Thread_, _Flies_, _Lead_, &c. His _Linning_ and _Woollen Bait-bags_;
His splinted _Osier light Pannier_; and lastly his _Landen Hook_, with a
Screw at the end to screw it into the socket of a Pole, and stricken
into the Fish, to draw it to Land: To which socket, a Hook to cut up the
Weeds, and another to pull out Wood, may be fastned.

_Baits_ are branched into three Kinds.

First, the _Life-baits_, which are all kind of _Worms_, _Redworm_,
_Maggot_, _Dors_, _Frogs_, _Bobb_, _Brown-flies_, _Grasshoppers_,
_Hornets_, _Wasps_, _Bees_, _Snails_, small _Roaches_, _Bleak_,
_Gudgeon_, or _Loaches_.

Secondly, _Artificial living Baits_, of _Flies_ of all sorts and shapes,
made about your Hooks with Silk and Feathers, at all times seasonable,
especially in blustering Weather.

Lastly, _dead Baits_, Pasts of all makings, Wasps dryed or undryed,
clotted _Sheeps-blood_, _Cheese_, _Bramble-berries_, _Corn_, _Seed_,
_Cherries_, &c. The two first good in _May_, _June_ and _July_, the two
next, in _April_; and the last in the Fall of the Leaf.


_Of Flies._

Of _Natural_ flies there are innumerable, and therefore it cannot be
expected I can particularize all; but some of their names I shall
nominate, _viz._ The _Dun-Fly_, _Red-fly_, _May-Fly_; _Tawny-Fly_,
_Moor-Fly_, _Shell-Fly_, _Flag-Fly_, _Vine-Fly_, _Cloudy_ or
_Blackish-Fly_, _Canker-Flies_, _Bear-Flies_, _Caterpillars_, and
thousands more, differing according to the Soils, Rivers or Plants.

_Artificial Flies_, are made by the Ingenious Angler, according to Art,
in shape, colour and proportion like the Natural Fly, of _Fur_, _Wool_,
_Silk_, _Feathers_, &c. To delineate which I must confess my self not so
accurate and skilful a Painter, nor can any Pen-drawing, illustrate
their Various Colours so, as to direct their Artificial Counterfeit;
Nature will help him in this by Observation, curiously Flourishing their
several Orient and bright Colours, after which they take their names, as
before said: And therefore to furnish your self with both Natural and
Artificial Flies, repair in the Morning to the River, and with a Rod
beat the Bushes that hang over the Water, and take your Choice.

1. Observe to Angle with the Artificial Fly in Rivers disturbed somewhat
by Rain, or in a Cloudy day, the Wind blowing gently: If the Wind be not
so high, but you may well guide your Tackle, in plain Deeps is to be
found the best Fish, and best Sport: If small Wind breeze, in swift
streams is best Angling: Be sure to keep your Fly in perpetual slow
Motion; and observe that the Weather suit the Colour of your Fly, as the
light Colour'd in a Clear day, the Darkish in a dark, _&c._ As likewise
according to the Waters Complexions, have your Fly suitable.

2. Let your Line be twice as long as your Rod: Keep as far as you can
from the Waterside, the Sun on your back; In casting your Fly, let that
fall first; your Line not touching the Water.

3. Have a nimble Eye, and active quick Hand to strike presently upon the
rising of the Fish, lest finding his mistake he spew out the Hook.

4. In slow Rivers cast your Fly cross them, let it sink a little, draw
it back gently, without breaking or circling the Water; let the Fly
float with the Current, and you will not fail of excellent Sport.

5. Observe to let the Wings of your _Salmon-Flies_ to be one behind
another, whether two or four, and they and the Tail long, and of the
finest gaudiest Colours you can choose.

_Lastly_, In clear Rivers a small Fly with slender Wings is best, and in
muddied Rivers a Fly of a more than ordinary large Body.

Thus much for Flies, I come next to that I called _Dead-Baits_, and
shall begin with the several Ways of making Pastes.


_Of Pastes._

1. Beat in a Mortar the Leg of a Young _Coney_ (Vulgarly called the
_Almond_) or of a Whelp or Catling, and a quantity of Virgins Wax and
Sheeps suet, till they are incorporated, and temper them with clarified
_Honey_ into Paste.

2. _Sheeps-Blood_, _Cheese_, fine _Manchet_ and clarified _Honey_
tempered as before.

3. _Sheeps-Kidney-suit_, _Cheese_, fine _Flower_, with clarified _Honey_
tempered.

4. _Cherries_, _Sheeps-Blood_, _Saffron_ and fine _Manchet_ made into a
Paste.

5. Beat into a Paste; the fattest Old _Cheese_, the strongest _Rennet_
can be got, fine _Wheat-flower_ and _Annis-seed_ Water: If for a _Chub_
you make the Paste, put a little rasty _Bacon_,

Lastly, _Mutton-Kidney-suit_, and _Turmerick_ reduced to a fine Powder,
the fattest Old _Cheese_ and strongest _Rennet_, wrought to a Paste,
adding _Turmerick_ till the Paste be of a curious Yellow; and is
excellent for _Chevin_.

Anoint your Bait with this Confection: Take the Oyl of _Aspray_,
_Coculus India_, and _Assa-foetida_ beaten, and mix with it as much
Life-Honey; then dissolve them in the Oyl of _Polypody_, and keep it in
a close Glass for your use. And that your Paste may not wash off your
Hook, beat Cotten-Wool or Flax into it.


_Of keeping Baits._

The _Red-Worm_, must be kept in a bag of Red Cloth, with a handful of
chopt _Fennel_, mixt with half so much fresh, black and fertile Mould
will scoure and preserve them: All other Worms, with the Leaves of Trees
they are bred on, renewing them often in a day. Only the _Cad-bait_,
_Bob_ and _Canker_, &c. must be kept in the same things you find them.

The great _White Maggots_, keep them in Sheeps Tallow, or little bits of
a beasts Liver; and to scour them, hang them warm in a bag of Blanketing
with Sand.

The _Frogs and Grasshoppers_, in wet Moss and long Grass, frequently
moistned; and when used, the Legs of the first, and the Wings of the
other must be cut close off.

The _Flies_, use them as you take them. Only, the _Wasps_, _Hornets_ and
_Humble-Bee_, must be dryed in an Oven, their heads dipt in Sheeps
blood, and dryed again, may be kept in a Box for use.

And now thus equipt let us walk to the Rivers side.

To begin then with the _Barbel_. The best time for Angling for this Fish
is at the latter end of _May_, _June_, _July_, and beginning of
_August_, in his Haunts aforementioned; and the best Bait (omitting
others) is the well scoured _Lob-worm _(being of a curious cleanly
Palate as well as shape) or Cheese steept an hour or two in clarified
Honey. He is a subtile Fish, extraordinary strong, and dogged to be
dealt with, and therefore be sure to have your Rod and Line strong and
long, or you may endanger to break it.

For the _Breame_. The most seasonable time to Angle is from St. _James_
tide till _Bartholomew_ tide. He spawneth in _June_ or beginning of
_July_; is easily taken, as falling on his side after one or two gentle
turns, and so drawn easily to Land. The best Bait for him (most
delightful to him) is the _Red-Worm_ (found in Commons and Chalky
Grounds after Rain) at the root of a great Dock, wrapt up in a round
Clue. He loves also Paste, Flag-Worms, Wasps, Green-Flies, Butter-Flies
and a Grass-hopper, without Legs.

Bait your Ground the Night before with gross-ground Malt, boiled and
strained, and then in the morning with the Red-Worm, bait your Hook, and
plumbing your Ground within half an Inch, Fish.

The _Bleak_, an eager Fish, is caught with all sorts of Worms bred on
Trees or Herbs, also with _Flies_, _Cad-bait_, _Bobs_, _Paste_,
_Sheeps-Blood_, _White Snails_, _Wasps_, _Gnats_, &c. In a warm clear
day the small Fly at the rim of the Water is best; in a Cloudy day,
_Gentles_ or _Cad_-baits two foot in the Water.

The _Bull-head_ or _Millers-Thumb_, being Childrens recreation, I shall
speak little of them, only being serviceable for Baits, I shall only say
he is easily taken with a small Worm, being lazy and simple, and will
swallow any thing; and the _Minnow_, _Loach_, and _Bansticle_ being of
the same diet, I place here too.

The _Chevin_, loveth all sorts of Worms, _Flies_, _Cheese_, _Grain_, and
_Black Worms_, their Bellies being slit, that the White may be seen: And
very much delighteth in the Pith of an Oxes back, the tough outward skin
being carefully taken off, without breaking the inward tender skin. In
the Morning early angle for _Chevins_, with a _Snail_; in the heat of
the day, with some other Bait; in the afternoon with the Fly; the great
_Moth_, with a great Head, yellow Body, and whitish Wings, usually found
in Gardens, about the Evening: The larger the _Chevin_, the sooner
taken; loving his Bait larger, and variety on a Hook.

The _Char_ is a _Lancashire_ Fish, found in a _Mere_, called
_Winander-Mere_ in that Country, the largest in _England_.

For the _Chub_, called by some a _Chevin_, by others a _Villain_. Bait
your Hook with a Grass-hopper, find the hole where he lies, accompanied
in a hot-day, with twenty or more, floating almost on the very
superficies of the Water; choose which you think best, and fairest, and
drop your Hook some two foot before him, and he will bite at it
greedily, and cannot break hold with his _Leather Mouth_; let him play
and tire, lest you break your Line. If you cannot get a _Grass-hopper_,
then any Worm, or Fly you will. In cold Weather, Fish for him near the
bottom, and the _Humble-Bee_ is the best Bait. Some appropriate Baits
according to the Month, but I shall Omit that; The _Chub_ (being best
and in his Prime in the Winter) a Paste made of Cheese, and Turpentine,
is the only Bait to take him.

The _Carp_ is subtle, and full of Policy, will never bite in Cold
Weather, but in Hot you cannot be too Early, or too Late. In _March_, he
seldom refuseth the _Red-worm_, in _June_ the _Cad_ bait and the three
next Months the _Grass-hopper_: Pastes that are sweet, of which I have
spoken before, are very delightful to _Carps_: And especially, if you
Bait your ground two or three dayes before you angle, with Pellets of
course Paste, _Chickens-guts_, _Garbage_, &c. _Gentles_ anointed, and a
Piece of _Scarlet_ dipt in _Honey_, put them on the Hook, is an approved
way.

The _Dace_, _Dare_, _Rudd_, and _Roach_, being much of a kind, and
feeding, I shall put together, and are easily taken with small Worms,
_Bobs_, _Cad-baits_, _Flies_, _Sheeps-Blood_, all sorts of Worms bred on
Trees or Herbs, _Paste_, _Wasps_, _Gnats_, _Lipberries_, &c. The Heads
of the _Wasps_, being dipt in Blood, is good for _Dace_, and _Dare_; as
is likewise the _Ant Fly_.

The _Eel_, takes great _Red-worms_, _Beef_, _Wasps_, _Guts_ of _Fowl_,
or _Fish_, _Menows_, or small _Roaches_ are good Bait for Night Hooks;
the Hooks being in the Mouth of the _Fish_. Now because this is very
delightful to most, I shall prescribe three ways of taking them, as are
most full of Pleasure. The first way is called; _Sniggling_, or
_Broggling_ for _Eels_, thus: Take a strong Line and Hook baited with a
_Lob_, or _Garden-Worm_, and observing where _Eels_ lurk in the day
time, with a stick forked at the Top, gently put your Bait into the
Hole, and if there be any _Eels_ there, you will not fail of a Bite, of
as large as can be had, but pull not too hard lest you spoyl all. The
second is called _Bobbing_, which is thus done: Take some large well
scoured _Lobs_, and with a Needle, run some strong twisted Silk through
them, from end to end, so many as are enough to wrap about a Board near
a dozen times; tye them fast with the two ends of the Silk to hang in so
many Hanks; then fasten all to a strong Cord, and a handful above the
worms fasten a Plumbet of three quarters of a pound, and your Cord to a
strong Pole, and in muddy Waters, you may Fish, and find the _Eels_ tug
lustily, and when you think they have swallowed them, draw up your Line,
and ashore with them. Lastly the _Eel-spear_ made with four teeth,
jagged on both sides, stricken into the Mud, on the bottom of a River,
and if you chance to strike where they lye, you infallibly take.

There is likewise an assured way of taking _Eels_, thus done: Take some
Bottles of Hay, mixt with green _Osiers_ of _Willows_, Bait them with
Sheeps-Guts, or other Beasts Garbage, sink them down in the middle, to
the bottom of your Pond or by the Bank sides, having fastned a Cord to
the Bottles, that you may twitch them up at your pleasure, and all the
best _Eels_ will resort to them.

The _Flounder_, _Shad_, _Thwait_, _Suant_, and _Mullet_, are taken with
_Red-Worms_ of all sorts, _Wasps_, and _Gentles_.

For the _Grayling_, you must head your Hook upon the shank, with a
slender and narrow plate of Lead, that the Bait (a large Grass-hopper)
may the more easily come over it; and at the point put a _Cad-bait_, and
keep the Bait in continual motion; not forgetting to pull off the
Grass-hoppers Wings.

The _Gudgeon_, takes the smallest Red-Worm, _Wasps_, _Gentles_, and
_Cadbaits_. When you Fish for him, stir up the Sand or Gravel with a
Pole, which will make them gather thither, and bite more eagerly.

The _Guiniad_, I shall remit speaking to, only mentioning it in course,
being no where found, but in a place called _Pemble-Mere_, in which
place they abound, as the River _Dee_ does with _Salmon_.

The _Pope_, or _Ruff_, is excellent for a young Angler, bites greedily,
and quantities may be taken, by Baiting the Ground with fat Earth, and
your Hook with small Red-Worms.

The _Pike_, loveth all sorts of Baits (unless the Fly) _Gudgeon_,
_Dace_, _Roaches_ and _Loaches_; and young _Frogs_ in Summer time, of
which the yellowest is best.

The _Pearch_, taketh all sorts of Earth-worms, especially the
_Lob-worm_, and _Brandling_, well scowred, _Bobs_, _Oak-worms_, _Dors_,
_Gentles_, _Cole-wort-worms_, _Wasps_, _Cad-baits_, and _Menow_, or a
little _Frog_, the Hook being fastned through the skin of his Leg,
towards the upper part of it. Be sure you give the _Pearch_ time enough
to pouch his Bait, before you strike.

The _Salmon_, is taken best with _Lob-worms_, scented with the Oyl of
Ivy Berries, or the Oyl of _Polypody_, of the _Oak_ mixt with
_Turpentine_: Or the well scowred Garden-worm, is an excellent Bait: The
_Salmon_, bites best in _May_, _June_, and _July_, at three a Clock in
the Afternoon, if the Water be clear, a little Wind stirring, especially
near the Sea.

The _Tench_, is a great lover of large Red worms first dipt in Tar. As
also all sorts of Paste, made up with strong scented Oyls, or Tar, or a
Paste made up of Brown Bread, and Honey. He will bite too at a _Cad-worm_,
_Lob-worm_, _Flag-worm_, green _Gentle_, _Cadbait_, _Marsh-worm_,
or soft boil'd _Bread-grain_, &c.

The _Torcoth_, being before mentioned, I only let you know, that he is
only found, in the Pool _Linperis_ in _Carnarvon-shire_; and leave you
to the _Welchmens_ description, both of him and his Bait.

The _Trout_, is fattest, and in his prime in _May_, and is caught with
all sorts of Worms, especially _Brandlings_, commonly found in an Old
_Dung-hill_, _Cow-dung_, _Hogs-dung_, or _Tanners-bark_: Also with
Flies, Natural and Artificial, with young _Frogs_, _Menow_, _Marsh_,
_Dock_, or _Flag-worms_; all sorts of _Cadbait_, _Dors_, _Bobs_,
_Palmers_, _Gentles_, _Wasps_, _Hornets_, &c. and with the
_Caterpillar_, used according to the Rule before prescribed for the
_Grayling_. _Lastly_

The _Umber_, is taken as the _Trout_, just now mentioned; And therefore
now to your Sport: To assist your well effecting which, I have but this
to add; Cast into your Haunts where you use to Fish, once in four or
five days, soft boiled Corn (or oftner for Carp, and Tench) Also
Garbage, Beasts Livers, chopt Worms, Grains steept in Blood, to attract
them to the place; and to keep them together, throw in half a handful of
Grains or ground Malt: But in a stream, cast it above your Hook, that
floating towards you you may draw the Fish thither.


_Sundry curious Baits for Fish._

These grow on the Cuccow pints, or wak-Robin, and are found in dry
ditches, overgrown with Brambles; they are about the bigness of Pease,
and in _July_ and _August_, are of a lovely transparent Red, and are
excellent baits for Roaches, and Chubs; and for the first, two will
serve, but for the latter, you may put four or five at a time on the
Hook.


_Oat-Cakes with Cheese._

Beat these together into a Paste, the Cheese being new, and stick them
together, with a little Honey, letting the Paste Lye all Night in a wet
Linnen Cloath, then fit it up in baits, and cover your Hook with it.


_To keep Baits for the Pike, or Night-hooks._

For this, take a small Roach, Dace, Loach, Minnow, Smelt, small Trout,
or Pearch, cutting off the Finns on the back, or small Eels well scoured
in Wheat-Bran, which will keep them better and longer, taking a way the
slime and watery substance, that causes them to rot or decay the sooner.


_Fishes Eyes._

Take out the Eyes of such Fish as you catch, and put three or four of
them on a Hook, and they will prove an excellent bait for most sorts of
Fish.


_Fat Bacon._

Cut this in little small Long snips, and especially at Snap, it is
exceeding good to take a Chub or Pike, from the latter end of _August_
to the beginning of _April_.


_The Pith of the Back-bone of a Sheep._

Take out the Pith that runs through the Back-bone, and take off the
Tough outward Skin, and leave the thin tender white Skin on, and bait
with about half an Inch of it, and it takes a Chevin to admiration.


_Grain, Wheat, Malt._

Bruise either of these finely, fry them in Honey, make them up into
Pasts with Oyl of Peter; and either in Winter or Summer they take Chub,
Roach, Dace or Bleak.


_How to bring Fish, if any in the Pond or River, to the place you
desire._

Boyl clean Barly in Water till it bursts, with Licorice, and a little
Mummy; add some Honey and beat them together in a Mortar into a stiff
Paste, and boyl about the quantity of a Wall-nut of this Paste with a
quart of Barly till it grows Glutenous, and then lay it for a ground
bait, and the Fish will flock about it from all parts.


_To make worms for Baits come out of the Ground._

Boyl an Ounce of Verdigrise in a quart of strong Vinegar, and Sprinkle a
little in places where you suspect Worms are, and they will Crawl out of
the Ground.


_Another approved Bait._

Take the Fat of a Heron, Mummy, and Galbanum; of each two drams, Scent
them with a Grain of Musk, and make them up with two Ounces of
_Aqua-vitae_, stir them over a gentle Fire in an Earthen Vessel till they
become thick, and with this rub the Hook, and end of the Line, and the
Scent of it will draw the Fish to it; you must also have at the same
time a proper Bait on your Hook for such Fish as are in the place you
Angle.


_The Artificial Cod or Cad Bait._

Make the Body of yellow Bees-wax, and head of black Dubin and black
Silk, or you may make the Body of yellow washed Leather, Shamey or Buff,
and the head all of black Silk, and this is an Incomparable bait for
Trout, Salmon or Smelts, and those that are natural are most Excellent
baits for Trout, Grayling, Salmons, Tench, Roach, Chub, Dace, Carp,
Tench, Ruff, Bream and Bleak; but then you must Fish with it in clear
Water only.


_Rules and Considerations about Baits in general._

Fish in general take all such baits freely, as nature at that season
affords in or near the places where you Angle, for being used to them
they are not afraid of any deceit, but take them as their common food.
And for flies in this case, in a Morning or Evening, when you go to
Angle beat the bushes about the Rivers or Ponds, and such Flies as you
rouse there, Fish with, either Natural, or imitate them by Art; as also
see what Worms or other Insects fit for baits stick on the Leaves,
Grass, or are in the Water; and in this Observation you cannot miss of
good Sport; and when you have struck gently the backway, draw a little,
and be not too hasty to take up before the Fish has had her play and
spent her strength lest she break your Tackle. If your Fish be large,
you must use your Landing Net.


_To take Fish in the Night with a Light._

This is an Admirable way to supply you with a sudden Dish, _viz._ Take a
Glass in the form of a Urinal very deep, put as much Clay in the bottom
of it as will sink the Mouth of it within an Inch of the Water, floating
on pieces of Cork, tied about the Neck to keep it steadily upright, then
place a Candle in it, by sticking it in the Clay-socket, anointing the
out side of the Glass with Oyl of Asper. This Light will shine a great
way in a still Water, so that the Fish being amazed at so unusual a
Sight, will come out of their holes about it, and be detained with the
scent of the Oyl so long, that with a Hoop-net you may take great store
of them.


_Flies proper for every Month._

_For February_, little red brow Palmer flies, the Plain Hackle, the
Silver Hackle, the Gold Hackle, the great Dun, the great blew Dun, the
dark brown.

_For March_, the little whirling Dun, the early bright Brown, the
whitish Dun, the Thorn-tree fly, the blue Dun, the little black Gnat,
the little bright Brown.

_For April_, the small bright Brown, the little dark brown, the great
whirling Dun, the Violet Fly, the yellow Dun, the Horse-flesh-fly.

_For May_, the Dun-cout, the Green-drake, the Stone-fly, the black May
fly, the little yellow May Fly, the Gray-drake, the Camlet fly, the
Turkey Fly, the yellow Palmer, the black-flat Fly, the light-brown, the
little Dun, the white Gnat, the Peacock Fly, the Cow-Lady, the
Cowturd-fly.

_For June_, From the first to the 24th the Green Drake and Stone Fly,
the Owl fly, the Barn fly, the purple Hackle, the purple Gold Hackle,
the flesh Fly, the little flesh Fly, the Peacock fly, the Ant fly, the
brown Gnat, the little black Gnat, the Green-Grasshopper, the Dun
Grasshopper, the Brown Hackle.

_For July_, The Badger fly, the Orange fly, the little white Dun, the
Wasp fly, the Black Hackle, the Shell fly, the black brown Dun.

_For August_. The late Ant fly, the Fern fly, the white Hackle, the
Harry-long-Legs.

_For September_. The Cammel brown fly, the late Badger fly.

_For October_. The same Flies that were used in _March_.


_The best time to Angle in._

1. If in the hot Months, cloudy Weather is best, when a small Gale stirs
the Water.

2. When the Floods have carryed away the fish that sudden Showers
Incumbered the Water withall, and the River and Pond retains its usual
bounds, looking of a whitish Colour.

3. When a violent Shower has troubled or muddied the River, or a little
before the Fish spawn, at what time they come into the sandy Ground to
loosen their Bellies.

4. After Rains, when the Rivers keep their bounds, yet rise and run
swiftly, for then they seek shelter in Creeks and little Rivulets
running into the River.

5. Fish for Carp and Tench early, that is, before Sun rise, till Eight
in the Morning, and from four in the Afternoon till after Sun set. In
_March_, the beginning of _April_, and the latter end of _September_ and
all Winter, when there are no great Frosts, the Fish bite in the warm of
the day, the wind being still; but in Summer Months, Morning and Evening
is best.

6. Fish rise best at the Fly, after the shower has muddied or Clouded
the Waters, and Fish with Flies in generally _March_, _April_, _May_,
and the beginning of _June_, is the best for Trout; you may Angle in a
clear star light Night, for they are then roaving about for prey; he
bites best in muddy water, and the best time of Fishing for him is from
8 to 10 in the Morning, and from three till five in the Afternoon.

7. The Salmon Fishery is best in _May_, _June_, _July_, and _August_,
from three in the Afternoon till Sun set, and in the Morning as before.

8. The Barble bites best early in the Morning, till Ten or Eleven in
_May_, _June_, _July_, and the beginning of _August_.

9. The Pearch and Ruff bites best all day in cool Cloudy Weather.

10. The Carp and Tench bite early and late in the still parts of the
River; _June_, _July_, and _August_; as likewise do the Chevin, whose
chief bait is white Snails, and small Lamperies.

11. The Breem bites from Sun rise till nine or ten in the Morning in
muddy Water, especially the Wind blowing hard, for the most part;
keeping in the Middle of the Pond or River in _May_, _June_, _July_, and
_August_.

12. Angle for the Pike in clear Water, when it is stirred by a gentle
Gale in _July_, _August_, _September_, and _October_, and then he bites
best about three in the Afternoon; but all the day in Winter, and in
_April_, _May_, and the beginning of _June_, early in the Morning and
late at Evening.

13. The Roach and Dace bite all the day long at the Top of the Water at
flies natural, and Artificial, also at Grass-hoppers, and all sorts of
Worms, if the Water be shady.

14. The Gudgeon bites best in _April_, till she has Spawned in _May_, or
if the Weather be cold till Wasp time, and at the end of the year all
day long, near to a gentle Stream. Observe when you Angle for her, to
stir and rake the Ground, and the Bait will be taken the better.

15. The Flounder in _April_ bites all day, _May_, _June_, and _July_,
especially in swift Streams, yet he will bite, tho' not so freely in a
still Deep.


_Of Fish-ponds_.

Grounds most fit and proper to be cast into a Pond, are those which are
Marshy, or Boggy, or full of Springs, unfit for Grazing, or to be put to
any profitable use besides. Of these the last, full of Springs, will
yield the best Water; that which is Marshy will feed Fish; and what is
Boggy is best for a Defence against Thieves.

First draw by small Trenches all the Springs into one place, and so
drain the rest of the Ground; then mark out the Head of your Pond, and
make it the highest part of the ground in the Eye, tho' it be the lowest
in a Level: Cut the Trench of your Floodgate so, that when the Water is
let out, it may have a swift fall: On each side of which Trench drive in
stakes of Oak, Ash or Elm six foot long, and six Inches square; place
these in Rows near four foot distance, as broad and wide from the
_Floodgate_ as you intend the Head of your Pond shall go: Dig it in as
big and large a Compass as the Ground will permit; throw your Earth
amongst the said stakes, and ram it down hard till you have covered the
stakes: Drive in as many new ones next the first stakes, and ram more
Earth above them, with stakes above stakes till the head-sides be of a
convenient height: Taking care, that the inside of your Banks be smooth,
even, hard and strong, that the Current of the Water, may not wear off
the Earth.

Having thus digged eight foot deep, that so it may carry six foot Water,
pave the bottom and Banks of the Pond with Sods of _Flot-Grass_, laying
them close together, pin them down with stakes and windings: This Grass
is a great feeder of Fish, and grows naturally under Water. Stake to the
bottom of one side of the Pond Bavens and Brush-Wood-Faggots, into which
the Fish may cast their spawn. Lay Sods upon Sods, to nourish and breed
Eels.

The Pond being made, let in Water, and thus store it: Put Carp, Bream
and Tench by themselves: Pike, Pearch, Eel, and Tench (the Fishes
Physician) by themselves; for Food of the greater Fishes, put store of
Roach, Dace, Loach and Menow; and Lastly to one Melter, put three
Spawners, and in three Years the increase will be great, and in five
Years with difficulty be destroyed.

In 3 Years _Sue your Pond_; which you must continue to do, for the Roach
will increase in such abundance, that eating up the sweet food, will
make other Fish, as Carps, &c. be very lean: Therefore every Year view
your Pond, and observe if any such Fry appears, thin them.


_To make_ Carps _grow large_, &c.

About _April_, when your Pond is low rake the sides where the Water is
fallen with an Iron rake, sow _Hay-seeds_ there, rake it well; and at
the end of Summer you shall have store of Grass: In _Winter_ the Water
will over-top the Grass, and being Water enough for them, the Carps will
resort to the sides, and feed briskly, and grow fat: Thus do every
Summer, till you sue your Pond, and no River Carp can surpass them.


_FINIS._





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The School of Recreation (1696 edition), by
Robert Howlett

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SCHOOL OF RECREATION ***

***** This file should be named 17727.txt or 17727.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/7/7/2/17727/

Produced by Jonathan Ingram, Sjaani and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
