The Project Gutenberg EBook of Comfort Pease and her Gold Ring, by 
Mary E. Wilkins Freeman

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Comfort Pease and her Gold Ring

Author: Mary E. Wilkins Freeman

Release Date: March 1, 2006 [EBook #17888]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK COMFORT PEASE AND HER GOLD RING ***




Produced by Jeff Kaylin and Andrew Sly






Comfort Pease

And her Gold Ring


By

Mary E. Wilkins

Author of Prembroke, Jane Field, A Humble Romance, etc., etc.


Fleming H. Revell Company
New-York Chicago Toronto
MDCCCXCV




One of the first things which Comfort remembered being told was that
she had been named for her Aunt Comfort, who had given her a gold
ring and a gold dollar for her name. Comfort could not understand
why. It always seemed to her that her aunt, and not she, had given
the name, and that she should have given the ring and the dollar; but
that was what her mother had told her. "Your Aunt Comfort gave you
this beautiful gold ring and this gold dollar for your name," said
she.

The ring and the dollar were kept in Mrs. Pease's little rosewood
work-box, which she never used for needlework, but as a repository
for her treasures. Her best cameo brooch was in there, too, and a
lock of hair of Comfort's baby brother who died.

One of Comfort's chiefest delights was looking at her gold ring and
gold dollar. When she was very good her mother would unlock the
rosewood box and let her see them. She had never worn the ring--it
was much too large for her. Aunt Comfort and her mother had each
thought that it was foolish to buy a gold ring that she could
outgrow. "If it was a chameleon ring I wouldn't care," said Aunt
Comfort; "but it does seem a pity when it's a real gold ring."  So
the ring was bought a little too large for Comfort's mother. She was
a very small woman, and Comfort was a large baby, and, moreover,
favored her father's family, who were all well grown, and Aunt
Comfort feared she might have larger fingers.

"Why, I've seen girls eight years old with fingers a good deal bigger
than yours, Emily," she said. "Suppose Comfort shouldn't be able to
get that ring on her finger after she's eight years old, what a pity
'twould be, when it's real gold, too!"

But when Comfort was eight years old she was very small for her age,
and she could actually crowd two of her fingers--the little one and
the third--into the ring. She begged her mother to let her wear it
so, but she would not. "No," said she, "I sha'n't let you make
yourself a laughing-stock by wearing a ring any such way as that.
Besides, you couldn't use your fingers. You've got to wait till your
hand grows to it."

So poor little Comfort waited, but she had a discouraged feeling
sometimes that her hand never would grow to it. "Suppose I shouldn't
be any bigger than you, mother," she said, "couldn't I ever wear the
ring?"

"Hush! you will be bigger than I am. All your father's folks are, and
you look just like them," said her mother, conclusively, and Comfort
tried to have faith. The gold dollar also could only impart the
simple delight of possession, for it was not to be spent. "I am going
to give her a gold dollar to keep beside the ring," Aunt Comfort had
said.

"What is it for?" Comfort asked sometimes when she gazed at it
shining in its pink cotton bed in the top of the work-box.

"It's to keep," answered her mother.

Comfort grew to have a feeling, which she never expressed to anybody,
that her gold dollar was somehow like Esau's birthright, and
something dreadful would happen to her if she parted with it. She
felt safer, because a "mess of pottage" didn't sound attractive to
her, and she did not think she would ever be tempted to spend her
gold dollar for that.

Comfort went to school when she was ten years old. She had not begun
as early as most of the other girls, because she lived three quarters
of a mile from the school-house and had many sore throats. The
doctors had advised her mother to teach her at home; and she could do
that, because she had been a teacher herself when she was a girl.

Comfort had not been to school one day before everybody in it knew
about her gold ring and her dollar, and it happened in this way: She
sat on the bench between Rosy and Matilda Stebbins, and Rosy had a
ring on the middle finger of her left hand. Rosy was a fair, pretty
little girl, with long light curls, which all the other girls admired
and begged for the privilege of twisting. Rosy at recess usually had
one or two of her friends standing at her back twisting her soft
curls over their fingers.

Rosy wore pretty gowns and aprons, too, and she was always glancing
down to see if her skirt was spread out nicely when she sat on the
bench. Her sister Matilda had just as pretty gowns, but she was not
pretty herself. However, she was a better scholar, although she was a
year younger. That day she kept glancing across Comfort at her
sister, and her black eyes twinkled angrily. Rosy sometimes sat with
her left hand pressed affectedly against her pink cheek, with the
ring-finger bent slightly outward; and then she held up her
spelling-book before her with her left hand, and the same
ostentatious finger.

Finally Matilda lost her patience, and she whispered across Comfort
Pease. "You act like a ninny," said she to Rosy, with a fierce pucker
of her red lips and a twinkle of her black eyes.

Rosy looked at her, and the pink spread softly all over her face and
neck; but she still held her spelling-book high, and the middle
finger with the ring wiggled at the back of it.

"It ain't anything but brass, neither," whispered Matilda.

"It ain't," Rosy whispered back.

"Smell of it."

Rosy crooked her arm around her face and began to cry. However, she
cried quite easily, and everybody was accustomed to seeing her fair
head bent over the hollow of her arm several times a day, so she
created no excitement at all. Even the school-teacher simply glanced
at her and said nothing. The school-teacher was an elderly woman who
had taught school ever since she was sixteen. She was called very
strict, and the little girls were all afraid of her. She could ferule
a boy just as well as a man could. Her name was Miss Tabitha Hanks.
She did not like Rosy Stebbins very well, although she tried to be
impartial. Once at recess she pushed Charlotte Hutchins and Sarah
Allen, who were twisting Rosy's curls, away, and gathered them all up
herself in one hard hand. "I'd cut them all off if I were your
mother," said she, with a sharp little tug; but when Rosy rolled her
scared blue eyes up at her, she only laughed grimly and let go.

Now Miss Hanks just looked absently at Rosy weeping in the hollow of
her blue gingham arm, then went over to the blackboard and began
writing, in fair, large characters, "A rolling stone gathers no
moss," for the scholars to copy in their copy-books. The temptation
and the opportunity were too much for Comfort Pease. She nudged
Matilda Stebbins and whispered in her ear, although she knew that
whispering in school was wrong. "I've got a real gold ring,"
whispered Comfort.

Matilda turned astonished eyes upon her. "You ain't."

"Yes, I have."

"Who gave it to you?"

"My Aunt Comfort, for my name."

"Were you named for her?"

"Yes, and she gave me a real gold ring for it."

"Matilda Stebbins and Comfort Pease, stand out on the floor," said
Miss Tabitha Hanks, sharply. Comfort gave a great jump--the teacher
had been standing at the blackboard with her back toward them, and
how had she seen? Never after that did Comfort feel quite safe from
Miss Tabitha's eyes; even if they were on the other side of the wall
she could not quite trust it.

"Step right out on the floor, Matilda and Comfort," repeated Miss
Tabitha, and out the two little girls stepped. Comfort's knees shook,
and she was quite pale. Matilda looked very sober, but her black eyes
gave a defiant flash when she was out on the floor and saw that her
sister Rosy had lowered her arm and was looking at her with gentle
triumph. "You see what you've got because you called my ring brass,"
Rosy seemed to say; and Matilda gave a stern little nod at her, as if
she replied, "It is brass."

Poor little Comfort did not feel much sustained by the possession of
her real gold ring. It was dreadful to stand out there facing the
school, which seemed to be a perfect dazzle of blue and black eyes
all fastened upon her in her little red gown and gingham tier, in her
little stout shoes, which turned in for very meekness, with her
little dangling hands, which could not wear the gold ring, and her
little strained face and whispering lips, and little vain heart,
which was being punished for its little vanity.

They stood on the floor until recess. Comfort felt so weak and stiff
that she could scarcely move when Miss Hanks said harshly, "Now you
can go."  She cast a piteous glance at Matilda, who immediately put
her arms around her waist and pulled her along to the entry, where
their hoods and cloaks hung. "Don't you cry," she whispered. "She's
awful strict, but she won't hurt you a mite. She brought me a whole
tumbler of currant jelly when I had the measles."

"I sha'n't whisper again as long as I live," half sobbed Comfort,
putting on her hood.

"I sha'n't, either," said Matilda. "I never had to stand out on the
floor before. I don't know what my mother will say when I tell her."

The two little girls went out in the snowy yard, and there was Rosy,
with Charlotte Hutchins and Sarah Allen, and she was showing them her
ring. It was again too much for sensible little Matilda, weary from
her long stand on the floor. "Rosy Stebbins, you are a great ninny,
acting so stuck up over that old brass ring," said she. "Comfort
Pease has a real solid gold one, and she don't even wear it."

Rosy and Charlotte Hutchins and Sarah Allen all stared at Comfort.
"Have you?" asked Charlotte Hutchins, in an awed tone. She was a
doctor's daughter, and had many things that the other little girls
had not; but even she had no gold ring--nothing but a chameleon.

"Yes, I have," replied Comfort, blushing modestly.

"Real gold?" asked Rosy, in a subdued voice.

"Yes."

Some other girls came up--some of the older ones, with their hair
done up; and even some of the boys, towering lankily on the
outskirts. Not one of these scholars in this country district school
fifty years ago had ever owned a gold ring. All they had ever seen
were their mothers' well-worn wedding-circlets.

"Comfort Pease has got a real gold ring," went from one to the other.

"Why don't she wear it, then?" demanded one of the big girls. She had
very red cheeks, and her black hair was in two glossy braids, crossed
and pinned at the back of her head, and surmounted by her mother's
shell comb she had let her wear to school that day. She had come out
to recess without her hood to show it.

"She's waiting for her hand to grow to it," explained Matilda, to
whom Comfort had shyly whispered the whole story.

"Hold up your hand," ordered the big girl; and Comfort held up her
little hand pink with the cold.

"H'm! looks big enough," said the big girl, and she adjusted her
shell comb.

"I call it a likely story," said another big girl, in an audible
whisper.

"The Peases don't have any more than other folks," said still another
big girl. The little crowd dispersed with scornful giggles. Comfort
turned redder and redder. Rosy and Charlotte and Sarah were looking
at her curiously; only Matilda stood firm. "You are all just as mean
as you can be!" she cried. "She has got a gold ring!"

Matilda Stebbins put her arm around Comfort, who was fairly crying.
"Come," said she, "don't you mind anything about 'em, Comfort. Le'ss
go in the school-house. I've got a splendid Baldwin apple in my
dinner-pail, and I'll give you half of it. They're mad 'cause they
haven't got any gold ring."

"I have got a gold ring," sobbed Comfort:

         "Honest and true,
  Black and blue,
  Lay me down and cut me in two."

That was the awful truth-testing formula of the village children.

"Course you have," said Matilda, with indignant backward glances at
the others. "Le'ss go and get that Baldwin apple."

Comfort went with Matilda; but it took more than a Baldwin apple to
solace her; and her first day at school was a most unhappy one. It
was very probable that the other scholars, and especially the elder
ones, who had many important matters of their own in mind, thought
little more about her and her gold ring after school had begun; but
Comfort could not understand that. She had a feeling that the minds
of the whole school were fixed upon her, and she was standing upon a
sort of spiritual platform of shame, which was much worse than the
school-room floor. If she saw one girl whisper to another, she
directly thought it was about her. If a girl looked at her, her color
rose, and her heart began to beat loudly, for she thought she was
saying to herself, "Likely story!"

Comfort was thankful when it was time to go home, and she could
trudge off alone down the snowy road. None of the others lived her
way. She left them all at the turn of the road just below the
school-house.

"Good-night, Comfort," Matilda Stebbins sang out loyally; but the big
girl with red cheeks followed her with, "Wear that gold ring to
school to-morrow, an' let us see it."  Then everybody giggled, and
poor Comfort fled out of sight. It seemed to her that she must wear
that ring to school the next day. She made up her mind that she would
ask her mother; but when she got home she found that her Grandmother
Atkins had come, and also her Uncle Ebenezer and Aunt Susan. They had
driven over from Barre, where they lived, and her grandmother was
going to stay and make a little visit; but her uncle and aunt were
going home soon, and her mother was hurrying to make some hot
biscuits for supper.

So when Comfort came in she stopped short at the sight of the
company, and had to kiss them all and answer their questions with shy
politeness. Comfort was very fond of her grandmother, but this time
she did not feel quite so delighted to see her as usual. As soon as
she had got a chance she slipped into the pantry after her mother.
"Mother," she whispered, pulling her apron softly, "can't I wear my
gold ring to school to-morrow?"

"No, you can't. How many times have I got to tell you?" said her
mother, mixing her biscuit dough energetically.

"Please let me, mother. They didn't believe I've got one."

"Let them believe it or not, just as they have a mind to," said her
mother.

"They think I'm telling stories."

"What have you been telling about your ring in school for, when you
ought to have been studying? Now, Comfort, I can't have you standing
there teasing me any longer. I've got to get these biscuits into the
oven; they must have some supper before they go home. You go right
out and set the table. Get the clean table-cloth out of the drawer,
and you may put on the best knives and forks. Not another word. You
can't wear that gold ring until your hand grows to it, and that
settles it."

Comfort went out and set the table, but she looked so dejected that
the company all noticed it. She could not eat any of the hot biscuits
when they sat down to supper, and she did not eat much of the company
cake. "You don't feel sick, do you, child?" asked her grandmother,
anxiously.

"No, ma'am," replied Comfort, and she swallowed a big lump in her
throat.

"She ain't sick," said her mother, severely. "She's fretting because
she can't wear her gold ring to school."

"O Comfort, you must wait till your hand grows to it," said her Aunt
Susan.

"Yes, of course she must," said her Uncle Ebenezer.

"Eat your supper, and your hand will grow to it before long," said
her father, who, left to himself, would have let Comfort wear the
ring.

"It wouldn't do for you to wear that ring and lose it. It's real
gold," said her grandmother. "Have another piece of the sweet-cake."

But Comfort wanted no more sweet-cake. She put both hands to her face
and wept, and her mother sent her promptly out of the room and to
bed. Comfort lay there and sobbed, and heard her Uncle Ebenezer's
covered wagon roll out of the yard, and sobbed again. Then she fell
asleep, and did not know it when her mother and grandmother came in
and looked at her and kissed her.

"I'm sorry she feels so bad," said Comfort's mother, "but I can't let
her wear that ring."

"No, you can't," said her grandmother. And they went out shading the
candle.

Comfort said no more about the ring the next morning. She knew her
mother too well. She did not eat much breakfast, and crept off
miserably to school at a quarter past eight, and she had another
unhappy day. Nobody had forgotten about the gold ring. She was teased
about it at every opportunity. "Why didn't you wear that handsome
gold ring?" asked the big girl with red cheeks, until poor Comfort
got nearly distracted. It seemed to her that the time to go home
would never come, and as if she could never endure to go to school
again. That night she begged her mother to let her stay at home the
next day. "No," said her mother; "you've begun to go to school, and
you're going to school unless you're sick. Now this evening you had
better sit down and write a letter to your Aunt Comfort. It's a long
time since you wrote to her."

So Comfort sat down and wrote laboriously a letter to her Aunt
Comfort, and thanked her anew, as she always did, for her gold ring
and the gold dollar. "I wish to express my thanks again for the
beautiful and valuable gifts which you presented me for my name,"
wrote Comfort, in the little stilted style of the day.

After the letter was written it was eight o'clock, and Comfort's
mother said she had better go to bed.

"You look tired out," said she; "I guess you'll have to go to bed
early if you're going to school."

"Can't I stay home to-morrow, mother?" pleaded Comfort, with sudden
hope.

"No," said her mother; "you've got to go if you're able."

"Mother, can't I wear it just once?"

"Don't you bring that ring up again," said her mother. "Take your
candle and go right upstairs."

Comfort gave a pitiful little sob.

"Now don't you go to crying over it," ordered her mother; and Comfort
tried to choke back another sob as she went out of the room.

Comfort's father looked up from the _Old Farmer's Almanac_. He was
going to Bolton the next day with a load of wood, and wanted to see
what the weather would be, and so was consulting the almanac.

"What was it Comfort wanted?" he inquired.

"She wanted to wear that gold ring her Aunt Comfort gave her to
school," replied Mrs. Pease. "And I've told her over and over again I
shouldn't let her do it."

"It's a mile too big for her, and she'd be sure to lose it off," said
Grandmother Atkins; "and it would be a pity to have anything happen
to it, when it's real gold, too."

"She couldn't wind a rag round her finger under it, could she?" asked
Comfort's father, hesitatingly.

"Wear a rag round her finger under it!" repeated Mrs. Pease. "I
rather guess she can wait till her finger grows to it. You'd let that
child do anything."

Mr. Pease did not say anything more, but studied the _Old Farmer's
Almanac_ again, and found out it was likely to be fair weather for
the season.

It was past midnight, and the hearth fire was raked down, and
Comfort's father and mother and grandmother were all in bed and
asleep, when a little figure in a white nightgown, holding a lighted
candle, padding softly on little cold bare feet, came down the
stairs. Comfort paused in the entry and listened. She could hear the
clock tick and her father snore. The best parlor door was on the
right. She lifted the brass catch cautiously, and pushed the door
open. Then she stole into the best parlor. The close, icy air smote
her like a breath from the north pole. There was no fire in the best
parlor except on Thanksgiving day, and perhaps twice besides, when
there was company to tea, from fall to spring. The cold therein
seemed condensed and concentrated; the haircloth sofa and chairs and
the mahogany table seemed to give out cold as stoves did heat.

There were two coffin-plates and funeral wreaths, which had belonged
to the uncles of Comfort who had died before she was born, in frames
on the wall, and these always scared Comfort.

She kept her eyes away from them as she went swiftly on her little
bare feet, which had no feeling in them as they pressed the icy
floor, across to the mahogany card-table, whereon was set the
rosewood work-box.

Comfort set her candle on the table, and turned the key of the box
with her stiff fingers. Then she raised the lid noiselessly, and
there lay the ring in a little square compartment of the tray. Next
to it, in the corner square, lay the gold dollar.

Comfort took the ring out, shut the box-lid down, turned the key, and
fled. She thought some one called her name as she went upstairs, and
she stopped and listened; but all she heard was the clock ticking and
her father snoring and her heart beating. Then she kept on to her own
chamber, and put out her candle, and crept into her feather-bed under
the patchwork quilts. There she lay all night, wide awake, with the
gold ring clasped tightly in her little cold fist.

When Comfort came downstairs the next morning there was a bright red
spot on each cheek, and she was trembling as if she had a chill.

Her mother noticed it, and asked if she was cold, and Comfort said,
"Yes, ma'am."

"Well, draw your stool up close to the fire and get warm," said her
mother. "Breakfast is 'tmost ready. You can have some of the pancakes
to carry to school for your dinner."

Comfort sat soberly in the chimney-corner until breakfast was ready,
as her mother bade her. She was very silent, and did not say anything
during breakfast unless some one asked her a question.

When she started for school her mother and grandmother stood in the
window and watched her.

It was a very cold morning, and Mrs. Pease had put her green shawl on
Comfort over her coat; and the little girl looked very short and
stout as she trudged along between the snow-ridges which bordered the
path, and yet there was a forlorn air about her.

"I don't know as the child was fit to go to school to-day," Mrs.
Pease said, doubtfully.

"She didn't look very well, and she didn't eat much breakfast,
either," said Grandmother Atkins.

"She was always crazy after hot pancakes, too," said her mother.

"Hadn't you better call her back, Em'ly?"

"No, I won't," said Mrs. Pease, turning away from the window. "She's
begun to go to school, and I'm not going to take her out unless I'm
sure she ain't able to go."

So Comfort Pease went on to school; and she had the gold ring in her
pocket, which was tied around her waist with a string under her dress
skirt, as was the fashion then. Comfort often felt of the pocket to
be sure the ring was safe as she went along. It was bitterly cold;
the snow creaked under her stout shoes. Besides the green shawl, her
red tippet was wound twice around her neck and face; but her blue
eyes peering over it were full of tears which the frosty wind forced
into them, and her breath came short and quick. When she came in
sight of the school-house she could see the straight column of smoke
rising out of the chimney, it was so thin in the cold air. There were
no scholars out in the yard, only a group coming down the road from
the opposite direction. It was too cold to play out of doors before
school, as usual.

Comfort pulled off her mittens, thrust her hand in her pocket
dangling against her blue woolen petticoat, and drew out the gold
ring.

Then she slipped it on over the third and fourth fingers of her left
hand, put her mittens on again, and went on.

It was quite still in the school-house, although school had not
begun, because Miss Tabitha Hanks had arrived. Her spare form, stiff
and wide, and perpendicular as a board, showed above the desk. She
wore a purple merino dress buttoned down the front with dark black
buttons, and a great breastpin of twisted gold. Her hair was looped
down over her ears in two folds like shiny drab satin. It scarcely
looked like hair, the surface was so smooth and unbroken; and a great
tortoise-shell comb topped it like a coronet.

Miss Tabitha's nose was red and rasped with the cold; her thin lips
were blue, and her bony hands were numb; but she set copies in
writing-books with stern patience. Not one to yield to a little fall
in temperature was Tabitha Hanks. Moreover, she kept a sharp eye on
the school, and she saw every scholar who entered, while not seeming
to do so.

She saw Comfort Pease when she came shyly in, and at once noticed
something peculiar about her. Comfort wore the same red tibet dress
and the same gingham apron that she had worn the day before; her
brown hair was combed off her high, serious forehead and braided in
the same smooth tails; her blue eyes looked abroad in the same sober
and timid fashion; and yet there was a change.

Miss Tabitha gave a quick frown and a sharp glance of her gray eyes
at her, then she continued setting her copy. "That child's up to
something," she thought, while she wrote out in her beautiful shaded
hand, "All is not gold that glitters."

Comfort went forward to the stove, which was surrounded by a ring of
girls and boys. Matilda Stebbins and Rosy were there with the rest.
Matilda moved aside at once when she saw Comfort, and made room for
her near the stove.

"Hullo, Comfort Pease!" said she.

"Hullo!" returned Comfort.

Comfort held out her numb right hand to the stove, but the other she
kept clenched in a little blue fist hidden in her dress folds.

"Cold, ain't it?" said Matilda.

"Dreadful," said Comfort, with a shiver.

"Why don't you warm your other hand?" asked Matilda.

"My other hand ain't cold," said Comfort. And she really did not
think it was. She was not aware of any sensation in that hand, except
that of the gold ring binding together the third and fourth fingers.

Pretty soon the big girl with red cheeks came in. Her cheeks were
redder than ever, and her black eyes seemed to have caught something
of the sparkle of the frost outside. "Hullo!" said she, when she
caught sight of Comfort. "That you, Comfort Pease?"

"Hullo!" Comfort returned, faintly. She was dreadfully afraid of this
big girl, who was as much as sixteen years old, and studied algebra,
and was also said to have a beau.

"Got that gold ring" inquired the big girl, with a giggle, as she
held out her hands to the stove.

Comfort looked at her as if she was going to cry.

"You're real mean to tease her, so there!" said Matilda Stebbins,
bravely, in the face of the big girl, who persisted nevertheless.

"Got that gold ring?" she asked again, with her teasing giggle, which
the others echoed.

Comfort slowly raised her left arm. She unfolded her little blue
fist, and there on the third and fourth fingers of her hand shone the
gold ring.

Then there was such an outcry that Miss Tabitha Hanks looked up from
her copy, and kept her wary eyes fixed upon the group at the stove.

"My sakes alive, look at Comfort Pease with a gold ring on two
fingers!" screamed the big girl. And all the rest joined in. The
other scholars in the room came crowding up to the stove. "Le'ss see
it!" they demanded of Comfort. They teased her to let them take it.
"Lemme take it for just a minute. I'll give it right back, honest,"
they begged. But Comfort was firm about that; she would not let that
ring go from her own two fingers for one minute.

"Ain't she stingy with her old ring?" said Sarah Allen to Rosy
Stebbins.

"Maybe it ain't real gold," whispered Rosy; but Comfort heard her.

"'Tis, too," said she, stoutly.

"It's brass; I can tell by the color," teased one of the big boys.
"'Fore I'd wear a brass ring if I was a girl!"

"It ain't brass," almost sobbed Comfort.

Miss Tabitha Hanks arose slowly and came over to the stove. She came
so silently and secretly that the scholars did not notice it, and
they all jumped when she spoke.

"You may all take your seats," said she, "if it is a little before
nine. You can study until school begins. I can't have so much noise
and confusion."

The scholars flocked discontentedly to their seats.

"It's all the fault of your old brass ring," whispered the big boy to
Comfort, with a malicious grin, and she trembled.

"Your mother let you wear it, didn't she?" whispered Matilda to
Comfort, as the two took their seats on the bench. But Comfort did
not seem to hear her, and Miss Tabitha looked that way, and Matilda
dared not whisper again. Miss Tabitha, moreover, looked as though she
had heard what she said, although that did not seem possible.

However, Miss Tabitha's ears had a reputation among the scholars for
almost as fabulous powers as her eyes. Matilda Stebbins was quite
sure that she heard, and Miss Tabitha's after-course confirmed her
opinion.

The reading-class was out on the floor fixing its toes on the line,
and Miss Tabitha walked behind it straight to Comfort.

"Comfort Pease," said she, "I don't believe your mother ever sent you
to school wearing a ring after that fashion. You may take it off."

Comfort took it off. The eyes of the whole school watched her; even
the reading-class looked over its shoulders.

"Now," said Miss Tabitha, "put it in your pocket."

Comfort put the ring in her pocket. Her face was flushing redder and
redder, and the tears rolled down her cheeks.

Miss Tabitha drew out a large pin, which was quilted into the bosom
of her dress, and proceeded to pin up Comfort's pocket. "There," said
she, "now you leave that ring in there, and don't you touch it till
you go home; then you give it right to your mother. And don't you
take that pin out; if you do I shall whip you."

Miss Tabitha turned suddenly on the reading-class, and the faces went
about with a jerk. "Turn to the fifty-sixth page," she commanded; and
the books all rustled open as she went to the front. Matilda gave
Comfort a sympathizing poke and Miss Tabitha an indignant scowl under
cover of the reading-class, but Comfort sat still, with the tears
dropping down on her spelling-book. She had never felt so guilty or
so humble in her life. She made up her mind she would tell her mother
about it, and put the ring back in the box that night, and never take
it out again until her finger grew to it; and if it never did she
would try to be resigned.

When it was time for recess Miss Tabitha sent them all out of doors.
"I know it's cold," said she, "but a little fresh air won't hurt any
of you. You can run around and keep warm."

Poor Comfort dreaded to go out. She knew just how the boys and girls
would tease her. But Matilda Stebbins stood by her, and the two
hurried out before the others and ran together down the road.

"We've got time to run down to the old Loomis place and back before
the bell rings," said Matilda. "If you stay here they'll all tease
you dreadfully to show that ring, and if you do she'll whip you. She
always does what she says she will."

The two girls got back to the school-house just as the bell rang,
and, beyond sundry elbow-nudges and teasing whispers as they went in,
Comfort had no trouble. She took her seat and meekly opened her
geography.

Once in a while she wondered, with a qualm of anxiety, if her ring
was safe. She dared not even feel of her pocket under her dress.
Whenever she thought of it Miss Tabitha seemed to be looking straight
at her. Poor Comfort had a feeling that Miss Tabitha could see her
very thoughts.

The Stebbinses and Sarah Allen usually stayed at noon, but that day
they all went home. Sarah Allen had company and the Stebbinses had a
chicken dinner. So Comfort stayed alone. The other scholars lived
near enough to the school-house to go home every day unless it was
very stormy weather.

After everybody was gone, Miss Tabitha and all, the first thing
Comfort did was to slide her hand down over the bottom of her pocket,
and carefully feel of it under her dress skirt.

Her heart gave a great leap and seemed to stand still--she could not
feel any ring there.

Comfort felt again and again, with trembling fingers. She could not
believe that the ring was gone, but she certainly could not feel it.
She was quite pale, and shook as if she had a chill. She was too
frightened to cry. Had she lost Aunt Comfort's ring--the real gold
ring she had given her for her name? She looked at the pin which Miss
Tabitha had quilted into the top of her pocket, but she dared not
take it out. Suppose Miss Tabitha should ask if she had, and she had
to tell her and be whipped? That would be almost worse than losing
the ring.

Comfort had never been whipped in her life, and her blood ran cold at
the thought of it.

She kept feeling wildly of the pocket. There was a little roll of
writing-paper in it--some leaves of an old account-book which her
mother had given her to write on. All the hope she had was that the
ring had slipped inside that, and that was the reason why she could
not feel it. She longed so to take out that pin and make sure, but
she had to wait for that until she got home at night.

Comfort began to search all over the school-room floor, but all she
found were wads of paper and apple-cores, slate-pencil stumps and
pins. Then she went out in the yard and looked carefully, then she
went down the road to the old Loomis place, where she and Matilda had
walked at recess--Miss Tabitha Hanks went home that way--but no sign
of the ring could she find. The road was as smooth as a white floor,
too, for the snow was old and well trodden.

Comfort Pease went back to the school-house and opened her
dinner-pail. She looked miserably at the pancakes, the bread and
butter, and the apple-pie and cheese, and tried to eat, but she could
not. She put the cover on the pail, leaned her head on the desk in
front, and sat quite still until the scholars began to return. Then
she lifted her head, got out her spelling-book, and tried to study.
Miss Tabitha came back early, so nobody dared tease her; and the cold
was so bitter and the sky so overcast that they were not obliged to
go out at recess. Comfort studied and recited, and never a smile came
on her pale, sober little face. Matilda whispered to know if she were
sick, but Comfort only shook her head.

Sometimes Comfort saw Miss Tabitha watching her with an odd
expression, and she wondered forlornly what it meant. She did not
dream of going to Miss Tabitha with her trouble. She felt quite sure
she would get no sympathy in that quarter.

All the solace Comfort had was that one little forlorn hope that the
ring might be in that roll of paper, and she should find it when she
got home.

It seemed to her that school never would be done. She thought wildly
of asking Miss Tabitha if she could not go home because she had the
toothache. Indeed, her tooth did begin to ache, and her head too; but
she waited, and sped home like a rabbit when she was let out at last.
She did not wait even to say a word to Matilda. Comfort, when she got
home, went right through the sitting-room and upstairs to her own
chamber.

"Where are you going, Comfort?" her mother called after her.

"What ails the child?" said Grandmother Atkins.

"I'm coming right back," Comfort panted as she fled.

The minute she was in her own cold little chamber she took the pin
from her pocket, drew forth the roll of paper, and smoothed it out.
The ring was not there. Then she turned the pocket and examined it.
There was a little rip in the seam.

"Comfort, Comfort!" called her mother from the foot of the stairs.
"You'll get your death of cold up there," chimed in her grandmother
from the room beyond.

"I'm coming," Comfort gasped in reply. She turned the pocket back and
went downstairs.

It was odd that, although Comfort looked so disturbed, neither her
mother nor grandmother asked her what was the matter. They looked at
her, then exchanged a meaning look with each other. And all her
mother said was to bid her go and sit down by the fire and toast her
feet. She also mixed a bowl of hot ginger-tea plentifully sweetened
with molasses, and bade her drink that, so she could not catch cold;
and yet there was something strange in her manner all the time. She
made no remark, either, when she opened Comfort's dinner-pail and saw
how little had been eaten. She merely showed it silently to
Grandmother Atkins behind Comfort's back, and they nodded to each
other with solemn meaning.

However, Mrs. Pease made the cream-toast that Comfort loved for
supper, and obliged her to eat a whole plate of it.

"I can't have her get sick," she said to Grandmother Atkins after
Comfort had gone to bed that night.

"She ain't got enough constitution, poor child," assented Grandmother
Atkins.

Mrs. Pease opened the door and listened. "I believe she's crying
now," said she. "I guess I'll go up there."

"I would if I was you," said Grandmother Atkins.

Comfort's sobs sounded louder and louder all the way, as her mother
went upstairs.

"What's the matter, child?" she asked when she opened the door; and
there was still something strange in her tone. While there was
concern there was certainly no surprise.

"My tooth aches dreadfully," sobbed Comfort.

"You had better have some cotton-wool and paregoric on it, then,"
said her mother. Then she went downstairs for cotton-wool and
paregoric, and she ministered to Comfort's aching tooth; but no
cotton-wool or paregoric was there for Comfort's aching heart.

She sobbed so bitterly that her mother looked alarmed. "Comfort, look
here; is there anything else the matter?" she asked, suddenly; and
she put her hand on Comfort's shoulder.

"My tooth aches dreadfully--oh!" Comfort wailed.

"If your tooth aches so bad as all that, you'd better go to Dr.
Hutchins in the morning and have it out," said her mother. "Now you'd
better lie still and try to go to sleep, or you'll be sick."

Comfort's sobs followed her mother all the way downstairs. "Don't you
cry so another minute, or you'll get so nervous you'll be sick," Mrs.
Pease called back; but she sat down and cried awhile herself after
she returned to the sitting-room.

Poor Comfort stifled her sobs under the patchwork quilt, but she
could not stop crying for a long time, and she slept very little that
night. When she did she dreamed that she had found the ring, but had
to wear it around her aching tooth for a punishment, and the tooth
was growing larger and larger, and the ring painfully tighter and
tighter.

She looked so wan and ill the next morning that her mother told her
she need not go to school. But Comfort begged hard to go, and said
she did not feel sick; her tooth was better.

"Well, mind you get Miss Hanks to excuse you, and come home, if your
tooth aches again," said her mother.

"Yes, ma'am," replied Comfort.

When the door shut behind Comfort her Grandmother Atkins looked at
her mother. "Em'ly," said she, "I don't believe you can carry it out;
she'll be sick."

"I'm dreadfully afraid she will," returned Comfort's mother.

"You'll have to tell her."

Mrs. Pease turned on Grandmother Atkins, and New England motherhood
was strong in her face. "Mother," said she, "I don't want Comfort to
be sick, and she sha'n't be if I can help it; but I've got a duty to
her that's beyond looking out for her health. She's got a lesson to
learn that's more important than any she's got in school, and I'm
afraid she won't learn it at all unless she learns it by the hardest;
and it won't do for me to help her."

"Well, I suppose you're right, Em'ly," said Grandmother Atkins; "but
I declare I'm dreadfully sorry for the child."

"You ain't any sorrier than I am," said Comfort's mother. And she
wiped her eyes now and then as she cleared away the breakfast dishes.

As for Comfort, she went on her way to school, looking as
industriously and anxiously at the ground as if she were a little
robin seeking for her daily food. Under the snowy blackberry-vines
peered Comfort, under frozen twigs, and in the blue hollows of the
snow, seeking, as it were, in the little secret places of nature for
her own little secret of childish vanity and disobedience. It made no
difference to her that it was not reasonable to look on that part of
the road, since she could not have lost the ring there. She had a
desperate hope, which was not affected by reason at all, and she
determined to look everywhere.

It was very cold still, and when she came in sight of the
school-house not a scholar was to be seen. Either they had not
arrived, or were huddling over the red-hot stove inside.

Comfort trudged past the school-house and went down the road to the
old Loomis place. She searched again every foot of the road, but
there was no gleam of gold in its white, frozen surface. There was
the cold sparkle of the frost-crystals, and that was all.

Comfort went back. At the turn of that road she saw Matilda Stebbins
coming down the other. The pink tip of Matilda's nose, and her
winking black eyes, just appeared above her red tippet.

"Hullo!" she sung out, in a muffled voice.

"Hullo!" responded Comfort, faintly.

Matilda looked at her curiously when she came up.

"What's the matter?" said she.

"Nothing," replied Comfort.

"I thought you acted funny. What have you been up that road for?"

Comfort walked along beside Matilda in silence.

"What have you been up that road for?" repeated Matilda.

"Won't you ever tell?" said Comfort.

"No, I won't:

             "Honest and true,
  Black and blue,
  Lay me down and cut me in two."

"Well, I've lost it."

Matilda knew at once what Comfort meant. "You ain't!" she cried,
stopping short and opening wide eyes of dismay at Comfort over the
red tippet.

"Yes, I have."

"Where'd you lose it?"

"I felt of my pocket after I got back to school yesterday, after we'd
been up to the old Loomis house, and I couldn't find the ring."

"My!" said Matilda.

Comfort gave a stifled sob.

Matilda turned short around with a jerk. "Le'ss go up that road and
hunt again," said she; "there's plenty of time before the bell rings.
Come along, Comfort Pease."

So the two little girls went up the road and hunted, but they did not
find the ring. "Nobody would have picked it up and kept it; everybody
around here is honest," said Matilda. "It's dreadfully funny."

Comfort wept painfully under the folds of her mother's green shawl as
they went back.

"Did your mother scold you?" asked Matilda. There was something very
innocent and sympathizing and honest about Matilda's black eyes as
she asked the question.

"No," faltered Comfort. She did not dare tell Matilda that her mother
knew nothing at all about it.

Matilda, as they went along, put an arm around Comfort under her
shawl. "Don't cry; it's too bad," said she. But Comfort wept harder.

"Look here," said Matilda. "Comfort, your mother wouldn't let you buy
another ring with that gold dollar, would she?"

"That gold dollar's to keep," sobbed Comfort; "it ain't to spend."
And, indeed, she felt as if spending that gold dollar would be almost
as bad as losing the ring; the bare idea of it horrified her.

"Well, I didn't s'pose it was," said Matilda, abashedly. "I just
happened to think of it."  Suddenly she gave Comfort a little poke
with her red-mittened hand. "Don't you cry another minute, Comfort
Pease," she cried. "I'll tell you what I'll do. I'll ask my Uncle
Jared to give me a gold dollar, and then I'll give it to you to buy a
gold ring."

"I don't believe he will," sobbed Comfort.

"Yes, he will. He always gives me everything I ask him for. He thinks
more of me than he does of Rosy and Imogen, you know, 'cause he was
going to get married once, when he was young, and she died, and I
look like her."

"Were you named after her?" inquired Comfort.

"No; her name was Ann Maria; but I look like her. Uncle Jared will
give me a gold dollar, and I'll ask him to take us to Bolton in his
sleigh Saturday afternoon, and then you can buy another ring. Don't
you cry another mite, Comfort Pease."

And poor Comfort tried to keep the tears back as the bell began to
ring, and she and Matilda hastened to the school-house.

Matilda put up her hand and whispered to her in school-time. "You
come over to my house Saturday afternoon, and I'll get Uncle Jared to
take us," she whispered. And Comfort nodded soberly. Comfort tried to
learn her arithmetic lesson, but she could not remember the seven
multiplication table, and said in the class that five times seven
were fifty-seven, and went to the foot. She cried at that, and felt a
curious satisfaction in having something to cry for besides the loss
of the ring.

Comfort did not look any more for the ring that day nor the next. The
next day was Friday, and Matilda met her at school in the morning
with an air of triumph. She plunged her hand deep in her pocket, and
drew it out closed in a tight pink fist. "Guess what I've got in
here, Comfort Pease," said she. She unclosed her fingers a little at
a time, until a gold dollar was visible in the hollow of her palm.
"There, what did I tell you" she said. "And he says he'll take us to
Bolton if he don't have to go to Ware to see about buying a horse.
You come over to-morrow, right after dinner."

The next morning after breakfast Comfort asked her mother if she
might go over to Matilda's that afternoon.

"Do you feel fit to go?" her mother said, with a keen look at her.
Comfort was pale and sober and did not have much appetite. It had
struck her several times that her mother's and also her grandmother's
manner toward her was a little odd, but she did not try to understand
it.

"Yes, ma'am," said Comfort.

"What are you going to do over there?"

Comfort hesitated. A pink flush came on her face and neck. Her
mother's eyes upon her were sharper than ever. "Matilda said maybe
her Uncle Jared would take us a sleigh-ride to Bolton," she faltered.

"Well," said her mother, "if you're going a sleigh-ride you'd better
take some yarn stockings to pull over your shoes, and wear my fur
tippet. It's most too cold to go sleigh-riding, anyway."

Directly after dinner Comfort went over to Matilda Stebbins's, with
her mother's stone-marten tippet around her neck and the blue yarn
stockings to wear in the sleigh under her arm.

But when she got to the Stebbins's house, Matilda met her at the door
with a crestfallen air. "Only think," said she; "ain't it too bad?
Uncle Jared had to go to Ware to buy the horse, and we can't go to
Bolton."

Comfort looked at her piteously.

"Guess I'd better go home," said she.

But Matilda was gazing at her doubtfully. "Look here," said she.

"What?" said Comfort.

"It ain't mor'n three miles to Bolton. Mother's walked there, and so
has Imogen--"

"Do you s'pose--we could?"

"I don't b'lieve it would hurt us one mite. Say, I tell you what we
can do: I'll take my sled, and I'll drag you a spell and then you can
drag me, and that will be riding half the way for both of us,
anyhow."

"So it will," said Comfort.

But Matilda looked doubtful again. "There's only one thing," she
said. "Mother ain't at home--she and Rosy went over to grandma's to
spend the day this morning--and I can't ask her. I don't see how I
can go without asking her, exactly."

Comfort thought miserably, "What would Matilda Stebbins say if she
knew I took that ring when my mother told me not to?"

"Well," said Matilda, brightening, "I don't know but it will do just
as well if I ask Imogen. Mother told me once that if there was
anything very important came up when she was away that I could ask
Imogen."

Imogen was Matilda's eldest sister. She was almost eighteen, and she
was going to a party that night, and was hurrying to finish a
beautiful crimson tibet dress to wear.

"Now don't you talk to me and hinder me one moment. I've everything I
can do to finish this dress to wear to the party," she said, when
Matilda and Comfort went into the sitting-room.

"Can't I go to Bolton with Comfort Pease, Imogen?" asked Matilda.

"I thought you were going with Uncle Jared--didn't mother say you
might? Now don't talk to me, Matilda."

"Uncle Jared's got to go to Ware to buy the horse, and he can't take
us."

"Oh, I forgot. Well, how can you go, then? You and Comfort had better
sit down and play checkers, and be contented."

"We _could_ walk," ventured Matilda.

"Walk to Bolton? You couldn't."

"It's only three miles, and we'd drag each other on my sled."

Imogen frowned over a wrong pucker in the crimson tibet, and did not
appreciate the absurdity of the last. "I do wish you wouldn't bother
me, Matilda," said she. "If I don't get this dress done I can't go to
the party to-night. I don't know what mother would say to your going
to Bolton any such way."

"It wouldn't hurt us a mite. Do let us go, Imogen."

"Well, I'll tell you what you can do," said Imogen. "You can walk
over there--I guess it won't hurt you to walk one way--and then you
can ride home in the stage-coach; it comes over about half-past four.
I'll give you some money."

"Oh, that's beautiful! Thank you, Imogen," cried Matilda, gratefully.

"Well, run along and don't say another word to me," said Imogen,
scowling over the crimson tibet. "Wrap up warm."

When they started, Matilda insisted upon dragging Comfort first in
the sled. "I'll drag you as far as Dr. Hutchins's," said she. "Then
you get off and drag me as far as the meeting-house. I guess that's
about even."

It was arduous, and it is probable that the little girls were much
longer reaching Bolton than they would have been had they traveled on
their two sets of feet all the way; but they persuaded themselves
otherwise.

"We can't be--a mite--tired," panted Matilda, as she tugged Comfort
over the last stretch, "for we each of us rode half the way, and a
mile and a half ain't anything. You walk that every day to school and
back."

"Yes, I do," assented Comfort. She could not believe that she was
tired, either, although every muscle in her body ached.

Bolton was a large town, and the people from all the neighboring
villages went there to do their trading and shopping. There was a
wide main street, with stores on each side; and that day it was full
of sleighs and pungs and wood-sleds, and there were so many people
that Comfort felt frightened. She had never been to Bolton without
her father or mother. "Just look at all the folks," said she. And she
had an uncomfortable feeling that they all stared at her
suspiciously, although she did not see how they could know about the
ring. But Matilda was bolder. "It's such a pleasant day that they're
all out trading," said she. "Guess it'll storm to-morrow. Now we want
to go to Gerrish's. I went there once with mother and Imogen to buy a
silver spoon for Cousin Hannah Green when she got married."

Comfort, trailing the sled behind her, started timidly after Matilda.

Gerrish's was a small store, but there was a large window full of
watches and chains and clocks, and a man with spectacles sat behind
it mending watches.

The two little girls went in and stood at the counter, and a thin man
with gray whiskers, who was Mr. Gerrish himself, came forward to wait
upon them. Matilda nudged Comfort.

"You ask him--it's your ring," she whispered.

But Comfort shook her head. She was almost ready to cry. "You'd ought
to when I'm giving you the dollar," whispered Matilda, with another
nudge. Mr. Gerrish stood waiting, and he frowned a little; he was a
nervous man. "Ask him," whispered Matilda, fiercely.

Suddenly Comfort Pease turned herself about and ran out of Gerrish's,
with a great wail of inarticulate words about not wanting any ring.
The door banged violently after her. Matilda Stebbins looked after
her in a bewildered way; then she looked up at Mr. Gerrish, who was
frowning harder. "If you girls don't want anything, you'd better stay
out of doors with your sled," said he. And Matilda trembled and
gathered up the sled-rope, and the door banged after her. Then Mr.
Gerrish said something to the man mending watches in the window, and
went back to his desk in the rear of the store.

Matilda could just see Comfort running down the street toward home,
and she ran after her. She could run faster than Comfort. As she got
nearer she could see people turning and looking curiously after
Comfort, and when she came up to her she saw she was crying. "Why,
you great baby, Comfort Pease," said she, "going along the road
crying!"

Comfort sobbed harder, and people stared more and more curiously.
Finally one stout woman in a black velvet bonnet stopped. "I hope you
haven't done anything to hurt this other little girl?" she said,
suspiciously, to Matilda.

"No, ma'am, I ain't," replied Matilda.

"What's the matter, child?" said the woman in the black velvet bonnet
to Comfort. And Comfort choked out something about losing her ring.

"Where did you lose it?" asked the woman.

"I don't k--n--o--w," sobbed Comfort.

"Well, you'd better go right home and tell your mother about it,"
said the stout woman, and went her way with many backward glances.

Matilda dragged her sled to Comfort's side and eyed her dubiously.

"Why didn't you get the ring when we were right there with the gold
dollar?" she demanded. "What made you run out of Gerrish's that way?"

"I'm--go--ing--home," sobbed Comfort.

"Ain't you going to wait and ride in the stage coach?"

"I'm--going--right--home."

"Imogen said to go in the stage-coach. I don't know as mother'll like
it if we walk. Why didn't you get the ring, Comfort Pease?"

"I don't want--any--ring. I'm going home--to--tell--my mother."

"Your mother would have been real pleased to have you get the ring,"
said Matilda, in an injured tone; for she fancied Comfort meant to
complain of her to her mother.

Then Comfort turned on Matilda in an agony of confession. "My mother
don't know anything about it," said she. "I took the ring unbeknownst
to her when she said I couldn't, and then I lost it, and I was going
to get the new ring to put in the box so she wouldn't ever know. I'm
going right home and tell her."

Matilda looked at her. "Comfort Pease, didn't you ask your mother?"
said she.

Comfort shook her head.

"Then," said Matilda, solemnly, "we'd better go home just as quick as
we can. We won't wait for any stage-coach--I know my mother wouldn't
want me to. S'pose your mother should die, or anything, before you
have a chance to tell her, Comfort Pease! I read a story once about a
little girl that told a lie, and her mother died, and she hadn't
owned up. It was dreadful. Now you get right on the sled, and I'll
drag you as far as the meeting-house, and then you can drag me as far
as the saw-mill."

Comfort huddled herself up on the sled in a miserable little bunch,
and Matilda dragged her. Her very back looked censorious to Comfort,
but finally she turned around.

"The big girls were real mean, so there; and they pestered you
dreadfully," said she. "Don't you cry any more, Comfort. Just you
tell your mother all about it, and I don't believe she'll scold much.
You can have this gold dollar to buy you another ring, anyway, if
she'll let you."

The road home from Bolton seemed much longer than the road there had
done, although the little girls hurried, and dragged each other with
fierce jerks. "Now," said Matilda, when they reached her house at
length, "I'll go home with you while you tell your mother, if you
want me to, Comfort. My mother's got home--I can see her head in the
window. I'll run and ask her."

"I'd just as lief go alone, I guess," replied Comfort, who was not
crying any more, but was quite pale. "I'm real obliged to you,
Matilda."

"Well, I'd just as lief go as not, if you wanted me to," said
Matilda. "I hope your mother won't say much. Good-by, Comfort."

"Good-by," returned Comfort.

Then Matilda went into her house, and Comfort hurried home alone down
the snowy road in the deepening dusk. She kept thinking of that
dreadful story which Matilda had read. She was panting for breath.
Anxiety and remorse and the journey to Bolton had almost exhausted
poor little Comfort Pease. She hurried as fast as she could, but her
feet felt like lead, and it seemed to her that she should never reach
home. But when at last she came in sight of the lighted kitchen
windows her heart gave a joyful leap, for she saw her mother's figure
moving behind them, and knew that Matilda's story was not true in her
case.

When she reached the door she leaned against it a minute. She was so
out of breath, and her knees seemed failing under her. Then she
opened the door and went in.

Her father and mother and grandmother were all in there, and they
turned round and stared at her.

"Comfort Pease," cried her mother, "what is the matter?"

"You didn't fall down, or anythin', did you?" asked her grandmother.

Then Comfort burst out with a great sob of confession. "I--took--it,"
she gasped. "I took my gold ring that Aunt Comfort gave me for her
name--and--I wore it to school, and Miss Tabitha pinned it in my
pocket, and I lost it. And Matilda she gave me the gold dollar her
Uncle Jared gave her to buy me another, and we walked a mile and a
half apiece to Bolton, to buy it in Gerrish's, and I couldn't; and I
was afraid something had happened to mother; and I'm sorry."  Then
Comfort sobbed until her very sobs seemed failing her.

Her father wiped his eyes. "Don't let that child cry that way,
Em'ly," said he to Mrs. Pease. Then he turned to Comfort. "Don't you
feel so bad, Comfort," he coaxed. "Father'll get you some peppermints
when he goes down to the store to-night."  Comfort's father gave her
a hard pat on her head; then he went out of the room with something
that sounded like an echo of Comfort's own sobs.

"Comfort," said Mrs. Pease, "look here, child. Stop crying, and
listen to what I've got to say. I want you to come into the parlor
with me a minute."

Comfort followed her mother weakly into the best parlor. There on the
table stood the rosewood work-box, and her mother went straight
across to it and opened it.

"Look here, Comfort," said she; and Comfort looked. There in its own
little compartment lay the ring. "Miss Tabitha Hanks found it in the
road, and she thought you had taken it unbeknownst to me, and so she
brought it here," explained her mother. "I didn't let you know
because I wanted to see if you would be a good girl enough to tell me
of your own accord, and I'm glad you have, Comfort."

Then Comfort's mother carried her almost bodily back to the warm
kitchen and sat her before the fire to toast her feet, while she made
some cream-toast for her supper.

Her grandmother had a peppermint in her pocket, and she slid it into
Comfort's hand. "Grandma knew she would tell, and she won't never do
such a thing again, will she?" said she.

"No, ma'am," replied Comfort. And the peppermint in her mouth seemed
to be the very flavor of peace and forgiveness.

After Comfort was in bed and asleep that night her elders talked the
matter over. "I knew she would tell finally," said Mrs. Pease; "but
it's been a hard lesson for her, poor child, and she's all worn
out--that long tramp to Bolton, too"

"I 'most wish her Aunt Comfort hadn't been so dreadful careful about
getting her a ring big enough," said Grandmother Atkins.

Mr. Pease looked at his wife and cleared his throat. "What do you
think of my getting her a ring that would fit her finger, Em'ly?" he
asked, timidly.

"Now, father, that's all a man knows!" cried Mrs. Pease. "If you went
and bought that child a ring now it would look just as if you were
paying her for not minding. You'd spoil all the lesson she's got,
when she's worked so dreadful hard to learn it. You wait awhile."

"Well, I suppose you know best, Em'ly," said Mr. Pease; but he made a
private resolution. And so it happened that three months later, when
it was examination day at school, and Comfort had a new blue tibet
dress to wear, and some new ribbon to tie her hair, that her mother
handed her a little box just before she started.

"Here," said she. "Your father has been over to Gerrish's, and here's
something he bought you. I hope you'll be careful and not lose it."

And Comfort opened the box, and there was a beautiful gold ring,
which just fitted her third finger; and she wore it to school, and
the girls all seemed to see it at once, and exclaimed, "Comfort Pease
has got a new gold ring that fits her finger!"

And that was not all, for Matilda and Rosy Stebbins also wore gold
rings. "Mother said I might as well spend Uncle Jared's dollar for
it, 'cause your mother didn't want you to have it," said Matilda,
holding her finger up; "and father bought one for Rosy, too."

Then the two little girls took their seats, and presently went
forward to be examined in spelling before the committee-men, the
doctor, the minister, and all the visiting friends.

And Comfort Pease, with all the spelling lessons of the term in her
head, her gold ring on her finger, and peace in her heart, went to
the head of the class, and Miss Tabitha Hanks presented her with a
prize. It was a green silk pincushion with "Good Girl" worked on it
in red silk, and she had it among her treasures long after her finger
had grown large enough to wear her Aunt Comfort's ring.







End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Comfort Pease and her Gold Ring, by 
Mary E. Wilkins Freeman

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK COMFORT PEASE AND HER GOLD RING ***

***** This file should be named 17888.txt or 17888.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/7/8/8/17888/

Produced by Jeff Kaylin and Andrew Sly

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
