The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Olden Time Series, Vol. 1: Curiosities
of the Old Lottery, by Henry M. Brooks

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Olden Time Series, Vol. 1: Curiosities of the Old Lottery
       Gleanings Chiefly from Old Newspapers of Boston and Salem, Massachusetts

Author: Henry M. Brooks

Release Date: March 12, 2006 [EBook #17970]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE OLDEN TIME SERIES, VOL. ***




Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Christine D. and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









_THE OLDEN-TIME SERIES._

16mo. Per vol., 50 cents.

There appears to be, from year to year, a growing popular taste for
quaint and curious reminiscences of "Ye Olden Time," and to meet this,
Mr. Henry M. Brooks has prepared a series of interesting handbooks. The
materials have been gleaned chiefly from old newspapers of Boston and
Salem, sources not easily accessible, and while not professing to be
history, the volumes contain much material for history, so combined and
presented as to be both amusing and instructive. The titles of some of
the volumes indicate their scope and their promise of entertainment:--

    CURIOSITIES OF THE OLD LOTTERY.
    DAYS OF THE SPINNING-WHEEL.
    SOME STRANGE AND CURIOUS PUNISHMENTS.
    QUAINT AND CURIOUS ADVERTISEMENTS.
    LITERARY CURIOSITIES.
    NEW-ENGLAND SUNDAY, ETC.

"It has been the good fortune of the writer to be allowed a peep at the
manuscript for this series and he can assure the lovers of the
historical and the quaint in literature that something both valuable and
pleasant is in store for them. In the specialties treated of in these
books Mr. Brooks has been for many years a careful collector and
student, and it is gratifying to learn that the material is to be
committed to book form."--_Salem Gazette._

_For sale by all Booksellers. Sent, post-paid, upon receipt of price.
Catalogues of our books mailed free._

TICKNOR & CO., BOSTON.




THE OLDEN TIME SERIES

CURIOSITIES OF THE OLD LOTTERY




    _"There is some soul of goodness in things evil,
    Would men observingly distil it out."_
                           SHAKSPEARE, _King Henry V._

    _"The earth hath bubbles, as the water has,
    And these are of them."_
                                SHAKSPEARE, _Macbeth._

    _"How widely its agencies vary,--
    To save, to ruin, to curse, to bless."_
                                          THOMAS HOOD.




THE OLDEN TIME SERIES

GLEANINGS CHIEFLY FROM OLD NEWSPAPERS OF BOSTON

AND SALEM, MASSACHUSETTS

SELECTED AND ARRANGED, WITH BRIEF COMMENTS

BY

HENRY M. BROOKS


       *       *       *       *       *

Curiosities of the Old Lottery

"Old and new make the warp and woof of every moment. There is no thread
that is not a twist of these two strands. By necessity, by proclivity,
and by delight, we all quote."--EMERSON


[Illustration: Crest]

BOSTON

TICKNOR AND COMPANY

1886




_Copyright, 1885,_

BY TICKNOR AND COMPANY.


_All rights reserved._

University Press:

JOHN WILSON AND SON, CAMBRIDGE.




INDEX OF NAMES.


                                                         PAGE

    ARNOLD, WELCOME                                        50
    Atkins, William                                        10
    Austin, Benjamin                                       14
    Austin, Benjamin, Jr.                                  53

    BARLOW, JOEL                                       56, 57
    Barton, William                                        35
    Beeman, D.                                             47
    Beers, Elias                                           33
    Beers, Nathan                                          33
    Bemis, Mr.                                             25
    Blake, William P.                                      22
    Blodgett, Benjamin                                     42
    Bonaparte                                          62, 63
    Bridge & Renouf                                    39, 54
    Bridge, Mr.                                            36
    Brooks, Peter C.                                       70
    Brown, John                                            50
    Bryant, William                                        61
    Burr, Aaron                                        62, 63

    CABOT, ANDREW                                          59
    Cabot, George                                          59
    Carlton, W.                                            53
    Carter, Ephraim                                        16
    Clark, Mary Ann                                    62, 63
    Colman, George                                         44
    Connor, Benjamin                                       38
    Cooper, Samuel                                         53
    Cushing & Appleton                 17, 42, 44, 46, 61, 63
    Cushing & Carlton                                      38
    Cushing, Caleb                                         10
    Cushing, Thomas                                        14
    Cushing, Thomas C.                                      8

    DABNEY, JOHN                                        8, 53
    Daggett, Henry                                         33
    Dana & Fenno                                           65
    Dutch, John                                            51

    EDES & GILL                                            15
    Ellsler, Fanny                                          8
    Esty, Edward                                           35
    Everett, Edward                                        70

    FARNHAM, DANIEL                                        10
    Fisk, General                                          19
    Franklin, Benjamin                                     43
    Freeman, Jonathan                                      38

    GERRISH, JOSEPH                                        10
    Gilbert & Dean                                     30, 48
    Giles, William B.                                  62, 63
    Gould & Company                                        12
    Green & Russell                                    12, 15

    HAMILTON, ALEXANDER                                62, 63
    Hancock, John                                          70
    Hardcastle, Samuel                                     61
    Hathorne, John                                      8, 53
    Heard, Edmund                                          16
    Hewes, Samuel                                          14
    Higginson, Henry                                       59
    Hilldrup, Thomas                                   33, 65
    Hillhouse, James                                   62, 63
    Huntington, Ralph                                      28

    IVES, JOHN P.                                          50

    JACKSON, WILLIAM AND JAMES                             12
    Jefferson, Thomas                                  62, 63
    Jenks, Daniel                                       8, 53
    Jenks, John                                     8, 38, 53
    Johnson, Oliver                                        35
    Jones, Timothy                                         33

    KELLEY, DANIEL                                         35
    Kent, William A.                                       41
    Kent, William J.                                       38
    Kidder & Co.                                           28
    Kidder, W. & T.                                        30
    King George III.                                   62, 63
    King James I.                                          72
    Kneeland, John                                     36, 53

    LARKIN, E. & S.                                        47
    Larkin, Ebenezer                                       22
    Leach & Fosdick                                        25
    Lewis, Ezekiel                                         14
    Luther, Martin                                         35
    Lyon, William                                          33

    MACOMBER, EBENEZER                                     22
    Madison, James                                     62, 63
    Martin, Luther                                         42
    Mason, John                                            50
    McIntosh, William                                      33
    Minot, George R.                                       53

    NAPOLEON                                               63
    Nauche, Dr.                                            43
    Newell, Timothy                                        12

    PAYSON, E.H.                                        8, 65
    Pickering, Timothy                                 62, 63
    Phillips, Margaret                                     25

    RANDAL, STEPHEN                                        22
    Russell, Benjamin                                      53
    Russell, John                           8, 16, 17, 22, 23
    Russell, William                                       50

    SAMPSON, EZRA                                          59
    Savage, Samuel Phillips                                14
    Scollay, John                                          14
    Sewall, Samuel                                         14
    Sharplys, Thomas                                       72
    Sheldon, Pardon                                        64
    Sigourney, Andrew                                      41
    Simpson & Caldwell                                     39
    Smith, Robert                                          63
    Sprague, Joseph                                        19
    Stone, E.M.                                            59
    Storer & Son, Ebenezer                                 12

    THORNDIKE, ISRAEL                                      59
    Thurber, Samuel, Jr.                               22, 51
    Tracy, Patrick                                         10
    Turpin, Benjamin                                       22

    WARREN, HENRY                                          53
    Washington, George                         31, 59, 62, 63
    Weld, Benjamin                                         41
    Whipple, Henry                                  8, 39, 45
    Whipple, John                                          51
    Williams, George                                       19




LOTTERIES MENTIONED.


                                                         PAGE

    AMOSKEAG                                           16, 17
    Amoskeag Canal                                         68

    BALTIMORE HOSPITAL                                     42
    Bible Supply                                       61, 62
    Bunker Hill Monument                                    7

    CHARLESTOWN                                            68
    Cologne Cathedral                                      72
    Congregational Churches                                 7
    Connecticut Manufactory                            32, 33
    Continental Congress                                   18

    DARTMOUTH COLLEGE                              36, 37, 68

    EASTERN STAGE ROAD                                     65
    English Colonies in Virginia                           72
    Episcopal Churches                                      7

    FANEUIL HALL                                7, 13, 14, 15

    GLOUCESTER ROAD                                        68

    HARVARD COLLEGE     7, 23, 38, 42, 44, 45, 46, 47, 51, 52,
                                               53, 57, 64, 70
    Hatfield Bridge                                17, 23, 68

    KENNEBEC                                               68
    Kennebec Bridge                                        28

    LAND BANK                                          15, 68
    Leicester Academy, Lancaster                           16

    MARBLEHEAD                                             42
    Massachusetts State 7, 20, 25, 29, 36, 41, 42, 58, 59, 64
    Matrimonial                                    66, 67, 68
    Milton Paper Mill                                      15

    NEWPORT CONGREGATIONAL CHURCH                          19
    New York                                               41
    New York Literature                                    65
    North and South Rivers, Salem                          19
    North Carolina                                         64

    PAVEMENT ON BOSTON NECK                                68
    Philanthropic                                          68
    Plymouth Beach                         44, 54, 55, 61, 68
    Providence Episcopal Church                            47
    Providence Street                              20, 21, 22

    RHODE ISLAND                                           64
    Rhode Island College                        7, 49, 50, 51
    Rhode Island Lottery for Advancement of Religion       34
    River Parker Bridge                          7, 9, 10, 11

    SOUTH HADLEY CANAL                                 48, 68
    Stonington Point Meeting-House                     65, 66
    Sudbury                                            61, 68

    TAUNTON GREAT RIVER                                    12

    UNION CANAL                                    31, 40, 41

    WASHINGTON MONUMENT                                    39
    Williamstown Free School                7, 20, 25, 42, 43




[Illustration]




INTRODUCTION.


WHILE this work does not pretend to be a history, it will yet present
many historical facts. Its object is to show from old newspapers, which
are not accessible to all, such items and comments upon a variety of
subjects as might be supposed to amuse or instruct both old and young.

It is not the easy thing that many imagine to examine, read, and select
from a vast number of newspapers such matter as is believed to be worth
reproducing. Possibly to some it would seem to be a stupid and an
uninteresting work. The Compiler, however, has found it a source of
pleasure to make and arrange these selections; and the value of his work
will be greatly enhanced if these volumes should prove of interest to
any considerable number of persons.

There appears to be from year to year a growing taste among the most
cultivated people for quaint and curious reminiscences of the Olden
Time; and as these volumes will be of a handy size for the pocket or
carpetbag, it is hoped that they will be welcomed by many who would not
undertake to read a more pretentious or cumbersome work on similar
topics.

    SALEM, MASS.,
       _April, 1885._

[Illustration]

[Illustration]




CURIOSITIES OF THE OLD LOTTERY.


PEOPLE of the present generation who look over files of old newspapers
are filled with astonishment to see the great number of lotteries which
are advertised, for many years, down to as late a period as the year
1826. The Faneuil Hall Lottery, the Harvard College Lottery, the Rhode
Island College Lottery, the Massachusetts State Lottery, and lotteries
for a bridge over the River Parker, for Marblehead, for the Williamstown
Free-school, for Episcopal and Congregational Churches, were all
advertised, with numerous other projects. A lottery was proposed for the
purpose of finishing Bunker Hill Monument, although the scheme was not
carried out. It is perhaps not generally remembered that this monument
was at length completed by means furnished by a Ladies' Fair, in 1840,
and handsome contributions by several individuals. Among other
contributors was the celebrated _danseuse_ Fanny Ellsler, who was at
that time giving performances in Boston. Some of the best men in the
community were interested in recommending the various schemes, and
members of churches, men in high repute, bought and sold the tickets. In
Salem, Mass., such well-known and esteemed citizens as John Jenks,
Daniel Jenks, Thomas C. Cushing, of the "Gazette," John Dabney, the
postmaster, Colonel John Russell, and the now venerable and respected
Edward H. Payson--who, at the age of eighty, is still cashier of the
First National (formerly the Commercial) Bank, to which office he was
elected in 1826--sold tickets; so did Colonel John Hathorne. Colonel
Henry Whipple, who is remembered as one of our best citizens, kept, in
connection with his bookstore, a "Fortunate Lottery Office." Other names
might be mentioned, but we think we have given enough to show the
respectability of the calling. The better the man, the better the agent.
Indeed, it was generally thought to be just as respectable to sell
lottery-tickets as to sell Bibles; and we have seen them classed
together in the same advertisement. Our observations have been confined
chiefly to Boston and Salem prints, but we have no doubt that similar
matter could be found in other papers. We propose now to give liberal
extracts from some of the old advertisements of the different schemes,
which will, we think, confirm what we have already said on the subject.
Let us take first from the "Boston Gazette" of May 19, 1760, the lottery
to raise $1,000 towards building a bridge over the River Parker, in
Newbury. The managers were the first men in the place, and the tickets
were sold by men of excellent standing in Boston.


    [Illustration]

                                         NEWBURY, _May 17, 1760._

                       SCHEME of a LOTTERY,

   FOR raising a Sum of Money for the building and maintaining a
   Bridge over the River _Parker,_ in the Town of _Newbury,_ at
   the Place called Old Town Ferry (in pursuance of an Act of
   the General Court, passed in _April_ 1760) Wherein _Daniel
   Farnham, Caleb Cushing, Joseph Gerrish, William Atkins,_ Esq.,
   and Mr. _Patrick Tracy,_ Merchant, (or any Three of them) are
   appointed Managers. The acting Managers are sworn to the
   faithful Performance of their Trust.

    _Newbury_-Lottery Number Four, consists of

    5000 Tickets, at Two Dollars each; 1655 of which are Benefit
    Tickets of the following Value.


       1     of    500 Dollars,  is     500 Dollars.
       4     of    100          are     400
       5     of     50          are     250
       6     of     40          are     240
      10     of     30          are     300
      14     of     20          are     280
      45     of     10          are     450
      75     of      8          are     600
    1495     of      4          are    5980
    ----                               ----
    1655 Prizes, amounting to          9000 Dollars.
    3345 Blanks.
    ----
    5000 Tickets, at Two Dollars each 10000
            To be paid in Prizes,      9000
                                       ----
                                       1000 Dollars.

    Remains to be applied for the Purpose aforesaid.

    Two Blanks only to one PRIZE.

    _THE Bridge aforesaid is already built, and upon a Settlement
    of the Accounts, and Demands relative thereto, the Managers
    of the former Lottery for that Purpose, were found to be
    greatly in Debt: The Charges of building the Bridge, and
    prosecuting the Lottery, amounting to much more than what was
    allowed to be raised by the former Act of the General
    Court--therefore the present Lottery is allowed._

    _AND since the said Bridge so well answers the Expectation of
    the Public, and the Travelling that Way thereby is rendered
    much more easy and pleasant; the Managers doubt not there
    will be a great Demand of the Tickets, from a Principle of
    encouraging and promoting a Work of such general Utility, if
    there were no other Inducement. But when they consider how
    much this Scheme is calculated in Favour of the Adventurers,
    there being many Prizes of great Value, and but two Blanks to
    a Prize; they doubt not of a very speedy Sale of the
    Tickets._

    _Tickets purchas'd at_ Boston, _if fortunate, will be paid
    off there. Public Notice will be given of the Time and Place
    of Drawing; and as soon as finished, the Prizes will be
    published in the_ Boston Gazette and Country Journal. _Gold
    as well as Silver will be received for Tickets; and the
    Prizes paid off accordingly. Prizes not demanded in Twelve
    Months after Drawing, will be considered as given to the
    common Stock for building and maintaining the said Bridge,
    and will be so applied._

    _Tickets are to be Sold by the Managers in_ Newbury, _by_
    Ebenezer Storer, _Esq., and Son; Mr._ Timothy Newell; William
    & James Jackson, _and the Printers hereof in_ Boston.

       *       *       *       *       *

The town of Taunton, Mass., was favored by a lottery grant in 1761 to
aid in clearing the Great River.

                                       _Taunton, March 16. 1761._

    PUBLICK NOTICE is hereby given to all Persons who are so
    disposed to encourage the Clearing of _Taunton_ Great-River,
    (so beneficial to the Trade of this Province) by adventuring
    in the LOTTERY granted for that Purpose, That the Managers of
    said Lottery have determined to begin to draw the First Class
    on Tuesday the 27th Day of _April_ next; the Town of
    _Taunton_ having voted to take off all the Tickets that shall
    remain unsold at that Day;--And all Persons who have taken
    Tickets to dispose of, are desired to return them, or the
    Money for them, by the First Day of said _April._


    --> Tickets are yet to be had of Messir's _Gould_ and
    Company, and of _Green & Russell,_ Printers in Queen Street,
    _Boston._--As also of the Managers at their respective
    Dwellings in _Taunton._

Next we will take from the "Boston Post Boy" of November, 1762, the
scheme to raise money to rebuild Faneuil Hall, after the fire of 1761.
It will be noticed how small an amount was reserved for the purpose for
which the Lottery was granted,--only $1,200. It seems as if a very small
sum subscribed by every freeholder would have produced more money. If
the population of Boston at that time was, say, twenty thousand, or
three thousand families, fifty cents for every head of a family would
have raised a larger sum than could possibly have been raised by the
expensive and questionable process resorted to. At first sight it may
seem strange to us that this was not thought of at the time; but when we
reflect that even in our enlightened times people are quite as
thoughtless about the processes of raising money for charitable or
public purposes,--witness the numerous fairs and raffles which are
constantly taking place,--we are not so much amazed at these old
financial operations, nor do we think we can boast much of our superior
morality when we look around and see how some things are managed
nowadays.

                                    _BOSTON, November 1, 1762._

                                SCHEME

                             OF A LOTTERY,

   FOR Raising a Sum of Money for Re-building FANEUIL _Hall_;
   agreeable to an Act of the General Court, wherein Messieurs
   _Thomas Cushing, Samuel Hewes, John Scollay, Benjamin Austin,
   Samuel Sewall, Samuel Phillips Savage,_ and _Ezekiel Lewis,_
   or any Three of them, are appointed Managers, who are Sworn to
   the faithful Discharge of their Trust.

    FANEUIL-HALL Lottery, No. One, Consists of 6000 Tickets, at
    Two Dollars each, 1486 of which are Benefit Tickets of the
    following Value, _viz._

                                                Dollars.
       1  Prize of  1000 Dollars,   is     1000
       1        of   500            is      500
       2        of   200            are     400
      12        of   100            are    1200
      20        of    50            are    1000
      20        of    20            are     400
      30        of    10            are     300
     200        of     6            are    1200
    1200        of     4            are    4800
    ----                                   ----
    1486 Prizes,                          10800 Dollars.
    4514 Blanks.
    ----
    6000 Tickets at 2 Dollars each, is   12,000 Dollars.
              To be paid in Prizes,      10,800
                                         ------
                                 Remains   1200 Dollars,

    to be applied to the Purpose aforesaid.

    The Necessity of a large and convenient Hall in such a Town
    as this, upon all Public Occasions, can't be disputed. The
    Rebuilding _Faneuil-Hall_ has therefore been generally
    approved of; and the Encouragement it will meet with from the
    Public, will, we doubt not, be in some Measure proportionable
    to its Importance: We promise ourselves therefore a speedy
    Sale of the Tickets; and hope we shall soon be able to draw.

    Public Notice will be given of the Time and Place of Drawing;
    and as soon as the Drawing is finished, a List of the Prizes
    will be published in _Edes_ and _Gill's Boston Gazette,_ &c.
    and the Money paid to the Possessors of the Benefit Tickets,
    in Twenty Days. Gold as well as Silver will be received for
    the Tickets, and the Prizes paid off in like Manner.

    Prizes not demanded within Twelve Months after Drawing, will
    be deem'd as generously given for the Purpose aforesaid, and
    will be applied accordingly.

    --> Tickets may be had of the Managers, or of _Green &
    Russell,_ in Queen-street, who will receive Prize Tickets in
    LAND-BANK LOTTERY.

       *       *       *       *       *

In 1782 the State of Massachusetts granted a lottery for the benefit of
the paper-mill at Milton.

The Clergy were often asked to use their influence to promote special
schemes. For instance, the Leicester Academy at Lancaster, Mass.,
wishing to raise about $800, advertised on June 28, 1790, a lottery, the
scheme comprising three thousand tickets at $2.00; and the managers,
Edmund Heard and Ephraim Carter, say, "_As the design of this Lottery is
for promoting Piety, Virtue, and such of the liberal Arts and Sciences
as may qualify the Youth to become useful Members of Society, the
Managers wish for and expect the aid of the Gentlemen Trustees of the
Academy,_ the REVEREND CLERGY, _and all persons who have a taste for
encouraging said Seminary of Learning_." Comment on this is unnecessary.
As unscrupulous persons often sold drawn tickets,--for it seems there
were irregularities even in those days,--the following advertisement
warrants the tickets undrawn,--

                          Wheels very rich!

    A FEW undrawn Tickets in Amoskeag Lottery for sale by
                                                 _John Russell._

    --> The highest prize being so fixed as to come out whenever
    Chance shall direct it, it stands purchasers in hand to be
    seasonable in their applications.             July 24, 1807.

    _Lottery Price Current._--In Boston, Amoskeag Tickets,
    warranted undrawn, 6 dolls. In Salem, at Russell's 5.50--at
    Cushing and Appleton's, not warranted, 5.

       *       *       *       *       *

    _Further Information._--The Amoskeag highest prize, of Eight
    Thousand Dollars, is still undrawn, and the wheels are
    extraordinarily rich, having gained, since the drawing began,
    upwards of Six Thousand Dollars. There is therefore every
    probability that the scrip will soon rise. Those who intend
    to purchase for the sake of a chance for the highest prize,
    are advised to do it _before_ it is drawn out of the wheel,
    which may be to-morrow. Those who purchase for the sake of a
    cheap ticket, would do well to wait till _afterwards._ July
    24, 1807.

       *       *       *       *       *


                   *** If any body wants
                   TEN THOUSAND DOLLARS,
                they are requested to call on
                                            JOHN RUSSELL,
    who will, for a trifling consideration, put them in a
           way to realize that, or another sum of less
             magnitude, in the course of September
             next, when the rich Wheels of Hatfield
                   Bridge Lottery will begin
                          to move.

    --> Tickets will rise on the first of September to
    5.50--Prize Tickets exchanged.                 (1807)

In 1776 the Continental Congress endeavored to raise a large sum by
means of a lottery. On the first of November of that year the following
Resolve was passed,--"That a sum of money be raised by way of lottery,
to be drawn at Philadelphia." A committee was then empowered to manage
this lottery, and agents were appointed in the several States to sell
the tickets. From causes difficult now to explain, the drawing, which
was to have taken place in 1777, was postponed from time to time, until
finally, it is said, the whole scheme proved a failure. Many of the
adventurers being large losers, much bad feeling was produced towards
the Government. The design was to raise the money in the way of a loan.
There were four classes of tickets, a hundred thousand in each,--$10,
$20, $30, and $40; in all $10,000,000. In Lossing's "Field-Book of the
Revolution," from which we derive this account, may be seen a copy of
one of these lottery tickets. Probably the people were too poor at that
time to furnish the requisite sum of money, and so the tickets did not
sell readily; or the lottery may have been badly managed.

Congregational Churches used to raise money by lottery, as appears by
the following advertisement in the "Columbian Centinel," May 5, 1792,--

                      _NEWPORT LOTTERY TICKETS._

    --> _A few TICKETS, in the Newport Congregational Church
    Lottery, which commences drawing the 10th instant, may be had
    at No._ 61 LONG-WHARF _if applied for immediately.    May 5._

       *       *       *       *       *

At a town meeting held in Salem, Mass., on Dec. 28, 1789, "George
Williams, Esq., General Fisk, and Joseph Sprague, Esq., were chosen a
Committee to estimate the expense of clearing out the Channels in the
North and South rivers; and to prefer a petition to the General Court
for the grant of a _Lottery_ to aid the town in so beneficial an
undertaking." We believe this project was never carried through; but we
are of opinion that some residents of Salem would now welcome even a
_raffle,_ if in that way their North River could be purified, as at
present no other method seems so likely to succeed, judging from the
controversy which has been going on in that city for several years
without effecting any result.

The "Massachusetts Centinel," May 22, 1790, notifies the "_Friends of
Science_" that "a few ... Williamstown Free-school Lottery Tickets ...
may be had of the Printer."

    MARBLEHEAD, APRIL 3. The highest Prize in the State Lottery
    was drawn by a number of Females: About thirty were joint
    possessors of that fortunate number and five others: The
    highest share in them did not exceed one dollar, and the
    lowest was nine pence, expressive of the different abilities
    of the concerned; by which circumstance, the property of the
    prize is most agreeably divided: It has excited a smile in
    the cheek of poverty, nor diminished the pleasure of those in
    easy circumstances.

                                   _Massachusetts Gazette,_ 1786.

       *       *       *       *       *

                      _Providence Street-Lottery._

                              CLASS 3d.

    THE Managers present the public with the following SCHEME of
    a LOTTERY, granted by the Hon. General Assembly of this
    State, at their January Session, A.D. 1795, for raising a Sum
    of Money to defray the Expences of Finishing, in a durable
    Manner, a Street at the North End of this Town.

    This being the great Continental Thoroughfare and Post Road,
    and much frequented at all Seasons by Persons on Foot and
    Horse-Back, and by Teams and Carriages, merits the greatest
    Attention to its Improvement from Town and Country.

    The old Road was crooked and inconvenient, the new Street is
    Streight, and secured in such a Manner as to be passed in
    Carriages at all Times with Ease and Safety.

    The Utility and Necessity of this work, so obvious to every
    one, and the great Chance to Adventurers, there being only
    _about Two_ Blanks to a Prize, induce the Managers to rely on
    the Patronage of the Public, for a rapid Sale of the Tickets.

    5340 Tickets, at TWO DOLLARS each, are 10,680 Dollars, to be
    paid in the following Prizes, subject to no Deduction.

                              _Dolls._                  _Dolls._
    1 Prize of                 1000      is              1000
    1                           300                       300
    1                           200                       200
    4                           100      are              400
    10                           50                       500
    20                           30                       600
    40                           20                       800
    50                           10                       500
    100                           6                       600
    1482                          3                      4446
    ----                                                 ----
    1709 Prizes,                                         9346
    3631 Blanks,                                         1334
    ----                                                 ----
    5340 Tickets, at 2 Dolls. each, is                  10680

    To commence drawing the 1st June next.

    TICKETS may be had by applying to the subscribers; and the
    Prizes paid on demand. Prizes not demanded within six months
    after the drawing, will be considered as generously given for
    the finishing the work.

                               EBENEZER MACOMBER,    }
                               SAMUEL THURBER, jun.  }  Managers.
                               STEPHEN RANDAL,       }
                               BENJ. TURPIN,         }

    --> TICKETS in the above Lottery, may be had of EBEN. LARKIN,
    of WM. P. BLAKE, and at the Post-Office, Boston,
                                                   Feb. 21, 1795.

       *       *       *       *       *

Those who remember the late Colonel John Russell, at one time president
of the Bank of General Interest in Salem, and a kindly, benevolent
"gentleman of the old school," will read with interest his advertisement
of "A New Dispensary," from the "Salem Gazette," March 24, 1807.

                         _A New Dispensary!_

    NUMEROUS are the instances that can be cited of a less, a
    much less, sum than _Twenty Thousand Dollars_ having restored
    to their pristine vigor precarious circumstances, and of
    making the _poor become rich!_ Let stubborn prejudices be
    laid aside, and an immediate resort made to that GRAND
    ANTIPOVERTY CORRECTIVE, CASH, which is now proffered as a
    sovereign remedy for all the complaints that poverty is heir
    to:--in asserting the superior efficacy of this preventive of
    the evils attendant on a state of poverty, it is not intended
    to trespass on truth--let it be fairly tried, when the
    'majesty of its own worth' will be manifest. The door is now
    open for the reception of such as would like to try the
    experiment:--There is _Hatfield Bridge Lottery,_ which
    commences drawing the 15th of next month; this affords a
    _potion_ of EIGHT THOUSAND DOLLARS; if, after a fair trial
    here, the desired effect is not produced, then there is the
    _Harvard College Lottery,_ which commences in May, which has
    the highly _balsamic cordial_ of TWENTY THOUSAND DOLLARS,
    which will produce the most wonderful effects, by giving a
    _solid tone_ to the regions of the pocket, and by enriching
    and invigorating the whole system, as can be satisfactorily
    tested:--Twenty Thousand Dollars would

          "Cheer the heart, and make the spirits flow!"

    Perseverance is highly recommended, and if the wishes are not
    gratified by the attainment of the desired object, the
    consoling reflection will recur, that--"_there are not quite
    two blanks to a prize_"--which is more than can be said of
    quackery in general. Tickets and Quarters for sale by
                                                    John Russell.

    --> To-Morrow the price of Tickets rise--purchasers can be
    accommodated until 9 o'clock, this evening.

    --> A handsome Premium given for Essex County Money.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Boston "Herald of Freedom," in December, 1789, advocates a lottery
for that town for the benefit of the poor, among other things, and to
supply the town with lamps to light occasionally for the "safety of the
citizens," etc.

    A citizen would wish to know why among the many lotteries now
    in being, there is not one for the benefit of this town? Can
    it be said we have no need of any?--Sure there are many uses
    the net proceeds of a lottery may be converted to, for this
    town's benefit: Though he means not to dictate, yet would
    suggest the following;--that a granary might thereby be
    opened, and the poor supplied with different kinds of grain,
    at a reduced price;--that several parts of the town might be
    paved; which would serve to employ many of the industrious
    poor among us;--and that the town might be supplied with
    Lamps, which by being occasionally lighted would tend to the
    safety of the citizens. From these, among other beneficial
    effects, he hopes the town will have a meeting, and petition
    the General Assembly at their approaching session for leave
    to establish a lottery for the above, and other, useful
    purposes.

       *       *       *       *       *


From the "Salem Gazette," May 10, 1791.

    No. 17221, which drew 2000 dollars in the Semi-annual State
    lottery, was paid on Friday last, by Messrs. Leach and
    Fosdick, in Boston. The proprietors were _four Africans_
    belonging to Newport.

       *       *       *       *       *

From the "Columbian Centinel," June 5, 1790.

    Two apprentices belonging to Mr. _Bemis,_ Paper-Maker, in
    Watertown drew the 1000 dollar prize in Williamstown Lottery.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration]

    _STATE LOTTERY TICKETS._

    TICKETS in the _State Lottery_ may be had at MARGARET
    PHILLIPS's Shop, CORNHILL, _Boston. Also,_ TICKETS in the 7th
    Class of _Williamstown Free-School_ Lottery. April 28.

                            _Columbian Centinel,_ April 28, 1790.

Lines on the prizes drawn by the poor widows of Marblehead. From the
"Columbian Centinel," April 24, 1790.

                           _CASTALIAN FOUNT._

                          _FOR THE CENTINEL._

                                 LINES,

    _On the Prize of_ FIFTEEN HUNDRED DOLLARS _being drawn by the
    poor Widows of Marblehead, written there._

    WHENCE this increase of wealth? What bounteous hand
    Grants more than sanguine Hope could e'en demand?
    Nor _Chance_ nor _Fortune_ shall the merit claim,
    Those fancied forms to _Folly_ owe their name:
    Such airy phantoms ill deserve our lays;
    A nobler object calls forth all our praise.
    That Pow'r Supreme, who knows no great or small,
    But looks unchang'd with equal eye on all--
    Who lifts the poor from their unnoted state,
    And humbles at his will th' aspiring great--
    Whose hand divine hath held us in its span,
    And fed, and cloth'd us since our lives began--
    Hath, sure, this last rich gift in kindness sent,
    To be improv'd, and not in riot spent;
    A further proof of Heav'n's indulgent care,
    In which our poorer neighbours ought to share.
    Accept, Great God, what thankful hearts can give,
    For life and health, and all the means to live!
    Much thou hast added to our former store;
    O keep us still as humble as before!
    What thou hast lent, direct us how to use,
    And teach us when to give, and when refuse.
    To others freely let our bounty flow,
    But not beyond Discretion's limits go.
    Then let us live as useful as we can--
    Grateful to God--beneficent to man--
    Possess obscure the bliss of doing good,
    Never so well _explain'd_ as _understood._

       *       *       *       *       *

    [Illustration]

                  20,000!! 5,000!! 1000!!! Dollars.

    WHO is there that would not give 6 dols. 50 for one of the
    above sums, or 1 dollar 75 cts. for a quarter of one of them.
    Chances to gain one are now selling at the above prices, at
    KIDDER & CO's, _Lottery, Insurance on Tickets, and
    Intelligence Office, No. 9, Market-square._

    Tickets and Quarters will be insured during the drawing of
    the Lottery, which presents an excellent chance for saving
    the cost of Tickets!! Adventurers will do well to call!!!

                                _Boston Palladium,_ June 9, 1807.

       *       *       *       *       *

                        --> _LUCK INDEED!!_

    YESTERDAY No. 2159 in the Kennebec Bridge Lottery, came up
    the valuable Prize of

                      _ONE THOUSAND DOLLARS!!_

    and as usual was sold, at the most fortunate and truly lucky
    Office of

                          RALPH HUNTINGTON,

    No. 14, Exchange-street, 3 doors from State-street. This is
    the 5th Capital Prize in the Kennebec Lottery, sold by RALPH
    HUNTINGTON.

    The highest Prize of $25,000 will be drawn this afternoon, at
    3 o'clock. R.H. has for sale, a few shares in a Company of
    100 Tickets, and a few Quarters. Jan. 19.
                                        _Boston Palladium,_ 1819.

    No. 4072, the _most fortunate_ number, in the State Lottery,
    sold at the Printing-Office, in Salem, we hear is the
    property of upwards of a dozen poor widows belonging to
    Marblehead.

                            _Columbian Centinel,_ April 10, 1790.

       *       *       *       *       *

    [Illustration]

                       _FORTUNE'S ANGLERS_:

                        A NEW LOTTERY SONG.

    _TUNE_--"_There are sweepers in high life as well as in
                              low._"

    In the fish pond of fortune men angle always,
    Some angle for titles, some angle for praise,
    Some angle for favor, some angle for wives,
    And some angle for nought all the days of their lives:
      _Ye who'd angle for_ Wealth, _and would_ Fortunes _obtain,_
      _Get your hooks baited by_ Kidder, Gilbert & Dean.
    Some angle for pleasure, some angle for pain,
    Some angle for trifles, some angle for gain,
    Some angle for glory, some angle for strife,
    Some angle to make themselves happy for life:
      _Ye who'd angle, &c._
    Some angle for wit, and some angle for fame,
    Some angle for nonsense, and some e'en for shame,
    Some angle for horses, some angle for hounds,
    For angling's infinite, it never new bounds:
      _Ye who'd angle, &c._

    G. & D. and W. & T.K. for the accommodation of those who
    purchase Tickets of them, keep _Daily Lists of Prizes and
    Blanks,_ and a complete statement of the wheels, which can be
    examined at the close of each day's drawing, free of expense.
    And for the convenience of their country-customers publish in
    every paper, while any lottery is drawing, the numbers of all
    prizes over _seven dollars,_ state of the lottery, &c. &c.

    --> Persons at a distance may be assured, that the most
    punctual and strict attention will be given their orders for
    tickets, (_post paid_) enclosing cash or prize tickets,
    addressed to GILBERT & DEAN, 79, _State street,_ or W. & T.
    KIDDER, 9, _Market-square,_ and the earliest information sent
    them respecting the fate of their numbers.

    *** _Prize Tickets in all the Lotteries taken in pay for
    other tickets._                                      March 24

                              _Boston Repertory,_ March 24, 1809.

       *       *       *       *       *

                    --> Washington's Birth Day.

    IT is a little remarkable, that the great

                      _UNION CANAL LOTTERY,_

    commences drawing on the 22d inst. being the birthday of
    WASHINGTON--and the first drawn blank will be entitled to

                     _FOUR THOUSAND DOLLARS!_

                                    _Boston Palladium, 1819._

       *       *       *       *       *

                   _PATRIOTISM OF THE LADIES._

    The Ladies of Massachusetts have ever been distinguished for
    their patriotism; and although their peculiar province is to
    soften the cares, and soothe the sorrows of life, yet they
    have never neglected any proper and decent opportunity of
    advancing the publick good:--When the Ladies found that
    Government had established a Lottery to ease the taxes of the
    people, they generally became adventurers, and it is pleasing
    to find that this their Patriotism has been in some measure
    rewarded, by _their sex_ sharing the FIRST CAPITAL PRIZE.

                            _Columbian Centinel,_ April 28, 1790.

       *       *       *       *       *

                        CONNECTICUT MANUFACTORY

                                LOTTERY,

    For raising the Sum of three Thousand two Hundred Pounds.

    The Managers being under oath, and having given bond for the
    faithful discharge of their trust, present the Public with
    the following

                                SCHEME.

         1   Prize of   5,000  Dollars, is   5,000
         1      -       2,500     -     -    2,500
         1      -       1,500     -     -    1,500
         5      -       1,000     -     -    5,000
        10      -         500     -     -    5,000
        15      -         200     -     -    3,000
        50      -         100     -     -    5,000
       100      -          50     -     -    5,000
       300      -          25     -     -    7,500
       325      -          15     -     -    4,875
       500      -          10     -     -    5,000
     4,400      -           8     -     -   35,200
         1   last drawn Blank,    -     -      760
    ------                                  ------
     5,709   Prizes,                        85,335
    11,358   Blanks.
    ------                                  ------
    17,067   Tickets at 5 Dollars each, is  85,335

                Not two Blanks to a Prize.

    Subject to a Deduction of 12 and an half _per Cent._

    This Lottery was granted by the honorable General Assembly
    for the encouragement of a Manufactory of Woolen, Worsted,
    and Cotton, in this State, under the superintendance of
    William M'Intosh, (late of London) a Gentleman of Information
    and Experience in the construction and use of the new
    invented Machines for that Purpose, a Number of which being
    completed he hath now in use.

    The Managers flatter themselves that all Persons will become
    Adventurers in this Lottery, who consider the importance of
    the Object for which it was granted, as they will thereby aid
    one of the most valuable Manufactories attempted in this
    State, since the era of Independence.

    They contemplate a speedy sale of the Tickets, and engage a
    punctual payment of the Prizes, if demanded in six Months
    after drawing, which is to commence on the 21st day of
    October next, and when finished, the fortunate numbers will
    be published in the Connecticut Journal.

                                  TIMOTHY JONES,     }
                                  HENRY DAGGETT,     }
                                  ELIAS BEERS,       } Managers.
                                  WILLIAM LYON,      }
                                  NATHAN BEERS,      }

    New-Haven, May 16, 1794.

    _Tickets to be had of the Managers,_ _and of_ Thomas
    Hilldrup, _at the Post Office Hartford._

                               _Connecticut Courant,_ Hartford.

The General Assembly of Rhode Island grant a lottery for the
"advancement of religion" in 1794. Advertised in Boston.

                             SCHEME _of a_
                              _LOTTERY_--

    Granted by the Honourable General Assembly of the State of
    _Rhode-Island,_ &c. at their Session held in October, 1794,
    for the purpose of finishing a HOUSE for PUBLIC
    WORSHIP--Consisting of 3000 Tickets, at 3 dollars each, to be
    paid in the following Prizes, subject to a Deduction of
    _Twelve and an Half per Cent._

       1 _Prize of_  1000 _Dollars, is_ 1000
       1              500                500
       2 _Prizes of_  250                500
       5              100                500
      10               50                500
      20               25                500
      50               10                500
    1000                5               5000
    ____                                ____
    1089 _Prizes._                      9000
    1911 _Blanks._
    ____
    3000 _Tickets._

    As this Lottery was granted for promoting Public Worship, and
    the advancement of Religion, we flatter ourselves that every
    well-wisher to Society and good Order will become cheerful
    adventurers. For those who adventure from Motives of Gain,
    the Scheme is advantageously calculated, there being less
    than two _Blanks_ to one _Prize_--and Bonds given for the
    faithful performance of the trust reposed in us.

    As a considerable number of the Tickets are already engaged,
    we expect to draw said Lottery by the first of May next.
    Prizes not demanded within six months after drawing will be
    deemed as generously given towards finishing said House. The
    time and place of drawing will be notified--a List of the
    Prizes will be immediately published in the _Herald of the
    United States_--and paid on demand.

                                     MARTIN LUTHER,  }
                                     WILLIAM BARTON, } Managers.
                                     DANIEL KELLEY;  }

    Warren, Nov. 28, 1794.

    --> Tickets and Quarters of Tickets in the above Lottery, may
    be had at the Post-Office, Boston.

    Jan. 31, 1795.

       *       *       *       *       *

               _GOOD FORTUNE IN THE LOTTERY REALIZED._

                     _Boston, May_ 12, 1791.

    ON Monday last, Messrs. _Edward Esty_ and _Oliver Johnson,_
    of Westmoreland in the State of New-hampshire, produced the
    ticket No. 6052, which drew the highest prize (TEN THOUSAND
    DOLLARS) in the Semi-annual Lottery, to Mr. JOHN KNEELAND,
    (the Manager who signed that number, and whose tickets have
    been remarkable for drawing the highest prizes) who gave them
    a check on the Bank for their money, which they received the
    next day.

    A circumstance relating to the purchase of this ticket may be
    worth relating. The owners of it were at Charlestown, late on
    the Saturday evening preceding the drawing of the lottery,
    and had mounted their horses to go on their way home, before
    they recollected wanting a ticket. Mr. Bridge (who sold
    tickets in Charlestown) happened to be then up, at his
    house--and went to his store, in the dark, and from his desk
    took the fortunate number, and sold it to the above fortunate
    persons.

                                   _Salem Gazette,_ May 17, 1791.

       *       *       *       *       *

Dartmouth College scheme, as advertised in the "Salem Gazette" in 1796.

                     _Dartmouth College Lottery._

                            CLASS SECOND.

    THE Managers of Dartmouth College Lottery present to the
    Public the following Scheme of the Second Class, in which
    they have aimed to meet their wishes by making a larger
    proportion of valuable prizes than usual; they flatter
    themselves that the same Public Spirit will be displayed, by
    encouraging the sale of Tickets in this, that was so fully
    manifested in the former Class.

                            _SCHEME._

       _Prizes_        _Dolls._             _Dolls._

         1       of     3000         is      3000
         1              1000                 1000
         4               500         are     2000
        10               200                 2000
        20               100                 2000
        30                50                 1500
        80                20                 1600
       100                10                 1000
      1650                 6                 9900
      -----                                ------
      1896 _Prizes._                  24,000
      4140 _Blanks._
     -----
      6000 _Tickets, at 4 Dollars each, are_ 24,000.

    Subject to a deduction of twelve and an half per cent.

    Of the above prizes of 500 Dollars, one of them will be
    placed to the first drawn blank, and the other three to the
    three last drawn blanks.

    This Class will positively commence drawing at Concord, on
    the 1st day of December next; and when completed, a list of
    Prizes will be immediately published, and the prizes paid on
    demand.

                                   JONATHAN FREEMAN, }
                                   BENJAMIN CONNOR,  } Managers.
                                   WILLIAM J. KENT,  }

    Concord, Aug. 17, 1796.

    TICKETS sold by JOHN JENKS and CUSHING & CARLTON.

       *       *       *       *       *

Harvard College appears to have seen the "misery of adventurers drawing
blanks which were worth nothing," and remedied the matter in 1811,
according to the following advertisement from the "Salem Gazette."

                            Look on this!

    THE serious evil which has fallen upon a great many
    adventurers, by purchasing Tickets in former lotteries, and
    drawing blanks which were worth nothing; appears now to be
    remedied.--The managers of the Fifth Class of Harvard College
    Lottery, have in their wisdom taken the misery of this evil
    into consideration and have given us a scheme preferable to
    any former one; by which it seems that from 20,000 to 50,000
    dollars will be distributed among persons whose tickets are
    drawn blanks in this lottery, which commences drawing in a
    few days; and the greater part of the Tickets are now sold.
    _Whole and Quarter Tickets_ for sale at the Bookstore and
    Lottery Office of

                                            HENRY WHIPPLE,

    June 7, 1811.                   _No. 6, Wakefield Place._


       *       *       *       *       *

A Boston paper of 1811 has the following:

                   Washington Monument Lottery

    WILL commence drawing in Baltimore the 4th day of September
    next.

    The Capital Prizes are
     1 of 50,000 dollars,
     1 of 30,000,
     1 of 20,000,
     2 of 10,000,
     3 of  5,000,
    20 of 100 Tickets,
    And many of 2000, 1000, 500, &c. &c.

    Tickets and Quarters for Sale by Simpson and Caldwell, of
    Baltimore, who request all persons who wish to purchase
    Tickets and Quarters in the above Lottery, to forward their
    orders, post paid, enclosing cash, to Messrs. BRIDGE &
    RENOUF, No. 79, state street, Boston; and they may depend on
    their orders being promptly executed.

    Price of Tickets 11 dollars--Quarters 2 87.

    Aug. 13, 1811.

       *       *       *       *       *

The "Union Canal Lottery" was got up in 1814 to benefit Boston and "make
it advance like New York." Here is a notice of the scheme from a Salem
paper,--

                      _Union Canal Lottery._

            First Class.--Twenty-Five Thousand Dollars.

    It rarely happens that the object of a Lottery is interesting
    to the whole community. To save the _Metropolis of
    New-England_ from declining in its commerce and consequence
    on the return of a general peace--to open its internal
    resources, to unite New-Hampshire & Vermont to Massachusetts,
    by bonds of mutual benefit, as permanent as the rivers and
    canals, by which their intercourse will be carried on--to
    make Boston advance like New York, supported by a populous,
    extensive and productive back country, are _considerations_
    into which every reflecting man, every merchant, and every
    owner of real estate, must enter and must feel. It is
    therefore, confidently expected, that a Lottery, granted to
    complete the great undertaking of opening Inland Navigation,
    will receive peculiar support; and that _many_ who have not
    been in the habit of adventuring in Lotteries, will be
    willing and desirous of contributing to the success of this
    for the sake of _its object._

    The Highest Prize will be paid in ninety days after the
    drawing shall be completed; and all other Prizes in sixty
    days, and payment will be made in bills generally current in
    Boston. Prizes must be demanded in one year from the end of
    the drawing of the Class.

    This Class will commence drawing in Boston, on the 12th
    December next.

    Tickets to be returned on or before the 2d December.

                                          BENJAMIN WELD,
                                        WILLIAM A. KENT,
                                       ANDREW SIGOURNEY,

    _Boston, Nov._ 8, 1814.                 _Managers._


       *       *       *       *       *

After lotteries had been drawn, notices frequently appeared in the
papers announcing the names of the lucky prize-winners. For instance, a
Boston paper of 1790 says: "The highest Prize (L3,000) in the New York
Lottery was drawn by 2 deserving Servant girls of New York;" and in
Sept. 21, 1793: "The highest prize in the 4th Class of the State
Lottery ($1,000) was drawn by Mr. Benjamin Blodgett, of this town;" and
the "Salem Gazette" of 1815 says: "Luther Martin, Esq., has drawn
$15,000, the Highest prize in the Baltimore Hospital Lottery;" and it
adds: "Those who envy the good Fortune of Mr. Martin will call on
Cushing & Appleton for Tickets in the Harvard College Lottery." In
November, 1790, the "Salem Gazette" says that the call for tickets in
the Massachusetts Semi-annual Lottery "has been so great in the other
States that the Managers expect to draw much sooner than the time which
was at first mentioned;" also that the tickets in the Marblehead Lottery
are meeting with a rapid sale; and concludes that "this does not
indicate a scarcity of Cash."

Here are some curious advertisements:--

         From the "Columbian Centinel," Boston, May 22, 1790.

                 WILLIAMSTOWN _FREE SCHOOL_ LOTTERY.

    We are authorised to _assure_ the Publick, and we do _assure_
    them--that the 7th Class of this Lottery will not only
    commence drawing on Monday next, but will _positively_ be
    _completed_ on _Tuesday_ morning--and a list of Prizes will
    be published in the CENTINEL the same week.

    The metropolis of Massachusetts hath ever been celebrated for
    the attention it hath paid to the education of its youth. In
    the elder world, a FRANKLIN hath been a living testimony of
    it, as well as in the younger. But not confined to the youth
    of the town is this benevolent disposition--it extends to the
    remotest parts of the Commonwealth; and hath been abundantly
    manifested in the liberal encouragement given to the
    Williamstown Free-School Lottery. The Class to be drawn on
    Monday next, will perhaps, be the last opportunity our
    citizens may have to gratify their humane wishes--which they
    will not let pass unimproved, especially as great pecuniary
    profit _may_ attend the gratification.

       *       *       *       *       *

                    "Salem Gazette," Nov. 24, 1812.

                             GALVANISM.

    It has been found by Dr. NAUCHE, at Paris, that a person
    perfectly blind may be made to see very lively and numerous
    flashes of light, by bringing one extremity of the voltaic
    pile into communication with the hand or foot, and the other
    with the face, skin of the head, or even the neck. In like
    manner, a person in the gloom of poverty may be made to
    perceive very lively and numerous flashes (say 20,000) of
    good fortune by bringing one extremity of a ragged bank bill
    into communication with the Book-Store and the other with
    the Lottery-Office, one door west of Central Building.

    N.B.--Two grand piles are now offered to the public--Harvard
    College, where the process is now in active operation, and
    Plymouth Beach which is in a state of preparation.

       *       *       *       *       *

                           "Salem Gazette."

                              _Writing_

                      _Taught in One Lesson!!_

    PERSONS of any age, sex, or capacity, _let their Chirography
    be never so bad,_ may by _one_ exercise _make a_ VERY GOOD
    HAND _of it._ The means are found in the Scheme of Harvard
    College Lottery, which contains a most superb assortment of
    capital prizes. Persons desirous of securing the advantage of
    this _dispatchful_ tuition will apply (wholes $5, quarters
    1.38) to CUSHING & APPLETON, at their Lottery Office and
    Bookstore, one door west of Central Building.           1811.

       *       *       *       *       *

                         From "Salem Gazette."

                       _"WHO WANTS A GUINEA?"_

    THIS Comedy by Coleman, has for some years past, been often
    read and justly admired; the name now appears to have lost
    its novelty.

    Something of greater magnitude is wished for; something which
    will furnish the possessor with more than a competency; which
    will assist the industrious and enterprizing man, in
    accomplishing his laudable wishes.

    This surely must be the true Philosopher's Stone, which wise
    men of all ages have sought for in vain.--This inestimable
    Gem, with some of the virtues usually ascribed to it--will,
    after the Fifth Class of Harvard College Lottery has
    completed drawing, belong to some person or persons who will
    now generously lend a hand to patronise this excellent
    institution.

    Those who are disposed from motives of interest or actuated
    by a wish to promote and encourage literature; will please
    call for WHOLE or QUARTER TICKETS, at the _Book-Store_ and
    _Lottery Office_ of

                         HENRY WHIPPLE,

    May 17, 1711. _No.                      6, Wakefield Place._

       *       *       *       *       *

                           "Salem Gazette."

                           Surprising Gain!

    IT is true as strange, and strange as true, that the wheels
    of Harvard College Lottery have actually gained, in the few
    revolutions they have made, no less than

                        --> 5157 Dollars! <--

    Now is the tide, which, taken at the flood, leads on to
    fortune, as the immortal Shakespeare would say. The undrawn
    tickets have all the advantage of this gain, in addition to
    the common chance at the outset. A few for sale (wholes 6
    dolls. quarters 1.63) at Cushing and Appleton's superlatively
    lucky Lottery & Exchange office, and federal book shop, one
    door west of Central Building, Essex street.

       *       *       *       *       *

In 1808 there was a "Real and truly Fortunate Lottery Office" at No. 1
Summer Street, Boston, and Detroit Bank bills were taken in payment for
tickets.

    [Illustration]

                     _Real and truly Fortunate_

    LOTTERY OFFICE, No. 1 Summer street, opposite the North west
    corner of the _New State House_--

    D. BEMAN'S list of Capital Prizes, sold by him at his _Real
    and truly Fortunate Lottery Office_--as follows,

    No. 9031, a Prize of 8000 Dolls.
        14459 a Prize of 1000  do.
         8638 a Prize of  500  do.
         8950 a Prize of  500  do.
           39 a Prize of  500  do.
         3988 a Prize of  500  do.
        12722 a Prize of  200  do.

    Besides a great number of 100--50--20, and 7 Dollar
    Prizes--amounting to a handsome Fortune--over the whole cost
    of all the Tickets ever sold at his office.... This is to be
    considered the _Real_ and _Truly_ Fortunate Lottery Office.

    --> Tickets, Quarters & Eighths in the 4th Class of Harvard
    College, which is now drawing--10,000 Dollars highest prize.
    A complete list of all the Drawing may be seen days and
    evenings, gratis.

    Prize Tickets and Detroit Bank Bills taken in payment; such
    as are guaranteed are taken at par. and those of another kind
    at a discount.

    June 3.                           (5W)

       *       *       *       *       *

The highest prize in the Providence _Episcopal Church_ Lottery was
$8,000, and the drawing was to begin on Sept. 29, 1800. Tickets were
sold in Boston at E. & S. Larkin's, 47 Cornhill. Gilbert & Dean, 56
State Street, Boston, make the following exhibit of the Golden Shower in
1803.

    _It is impossible to tell on whom the_ GOLDEN SHOWER _will
    fall!_

    [Illustration]

    YE that have the least relish to obtain 8000 dollars for a
    trifling sum, be "_up and doing!_" The third class of Hadley
    Lottery, will commence drawing the 15th of June.

    _Remark._--The object of this Lottery is of great public
    utility--that of improving SOUTH HADLEY CANAL, in order to
    make it permanent and beneficial to the public--and the
    Proprietors, in this arduous undertaking, have to cut through
    an entire mass of rocks for _three_ miles! Laudable and
    praise-worthy perseverance!

    Tickets for sale by GILBERT & DEAN, MAGAZINE and LOTTERY
    OFFICE, No. 56, _State-Street,_ where a correct list of all
    the prizes and blanks will be exhibited, during the drawing.

    _May 25, 1803._

       *       *       *       *       *

In the "Salem Gazette" will be found the advertisements of two of the
College Lotteries. Rhode Island College is now Brown University.

       *       *       *       *       *

                     _R. Island College Lottery._

    THE Corporation of the College, wishing to discharge in the
    best manner the trusts reposed in them for the education of
    youth, and finding their funds inadequate to this purpose,
    have obtained of the General Assembly of the state of
    _Rhode-Island_ and _Providence Plantations_ the grant of a
    Lottery. As the sole object of this is the public good, it is
    hoped that the exertions of the Corporation will meet the
    wishes and secure the co-operation of all the friends of
    science and virtue. The College was founded entirely by the
    generosity of individuals. Though it has received no
    patronage from the legislative body, yet through the
    assiduous labours of its officers it has become considerably
    distinguished, &, it is hoped, has merited the attention of
    the public. It, however, is under great disadvantages for
    want of larger pecuniary resources. Of the necessity of these
    for the establishment of a complete system of liberal
    education, every one must be sensible who entertains a just
    conception of the vast extent of science.--Those who are
    disposed to promote the Lottery now brought forward, may be
    assured that the whole business will be transacted with the
    utmost exactitude and fidelity. Of this they cannot doubt,
    when they are informed that the management of it is wholly
    under the direction of the following respectable Committee,
    appointed by the Corporation, viz. JOHN BROWN, Esq. WELCOME
    ARNOLD, Esq. Mr. JOHN MASON, Col. WILLIAM RUSSELL, and Mr.
    JOHN P. IVES.

    The Subscribers, being appointed by the Committee as Managers
    of the Lottery, and having given bonds according to law, now
    offer to the public the following

                           _SCHEME._

                          CLASS FIRST.

                           dols.            dols.

        1     Prize of     4000     is      4000
        1                  2000             2000
        2                  1000     are     2000
        4                   500             2000
       20                   100             2000
       40                    50             2000
       60                    30             1800
      100                    20             2000
     1000                    12            12000
     3000                     9            27000
    -----                                  -----
     3328  Prizes, amounting to            46000
                        Drawback,           8000
                                           -----
     9000  Tickets, at 6 dollars each, are 54000

    The drawing of this Lottery will commence on MONDAY, the 16th
    day of APRIL next, and continue till it shall be completed. A
    list of Prizes will be published in the Providence Gazette,
    and the Prizes paid on demand. Those not called for within
    six months after the drawing of the Lottery, will be
    considered as generously given to the College.

                                             JOHN WHIPPLE,
                                             SAMUEL THURBER, jun.

    _Providence, November 17, 1797._

    --> _TICKETS in the above Lottery to be sold at this Office,
    and at_ JOHN DUTCH'S AUCTION ROOM, _Essex-Street._

       *       *       *       *       *

                      _Harvard College Lottery._

                             CLASS FIRST,
                     Not two Blanks to a Prize.

    TWENTY-FIVE THOUSAND TICKETS, at 5 Dollars each, are 125,000
    Dollars, to be paid in the following Prizes, subject to a
    Deduction, of _twelve and an half per Cent._ for the purposes
    of the Lottery.

    _Prizes_         _Dols._          _Dols._

          1    of    10,000    is     10,000
          2           5,000           10,000
          3           2,000            6,000
          6           1,000            6,000
         10             500            5,000
         20             200            4,000
         60             100            6,000
         90              50            4,500
        100              40            4,000
        120              30            3,600
        161              20            3,220
        200              10            2,000
      7,585               8           60,680
     ------                           ------
      8,358 _Prizes,_           125,000
     16,642 _Blanks._
     ------
     25,000

    --> THE above Class will _positively_ commence drawing in the
    REPRESENTATIVES' CHAMBER, in BOSTON, on THURSDAY, 13th
    November next, and will continue from day to day, and be
    _completed_ with all _possible dispatch._ A list of Prizes
    will be _immediately_ published, and the Prizes paid _on
    demand._

    The Managers believe it enough, to induce the Public to
    become Adventurers, to inform them, that the object of this
    _Lottery_ is to erect a new Building, at the UNIVERSITY in
    Cambridge, for the further accommodation of the Students. The
    Friends of literature are to be found every where, and when
    its cause can be served, and a _good chance_ for personal
    emolument at the same time presents itself; this double
    inducement, it is conceived, _must_ operate in favor of the
    Lottery.

    The Managers of this Lottery, had the conducting of the late
    State Lottery--the Public will do them the justice to say,
    that the _strictest punctuality_ as to the time fixed for
    Drawing, and in the payment of Prizes, was observed by them
    in that Lottery--they pledge themselves for the same
    punctuality in this.

                          BENJAMIN AUSTIN, jun.  }
                          GEORGE R. MINOT,       }
                          SAMUEL COOPER,         }    Managers.
                          HENRY WARREN,          }
                          JOHN KNEELAND,         }

    _Boston, July 14, 1794._

       *       *       *       *       *

    --> TICKETS are sold by J. JENKS, D. JENKS, J. HATHORNE, J.
    DABNEY, and W. CARLTON, Salem.

       *       *       *       *       *

Major Benjamin Russell, in the "Boston Columbian Centinel," March 26,
1791, says:

    The _National_ and _State Legislatures_ being in recess,
    there is a "plentiful scarcity" of domestick occurrences, at
    this time.--This is locally remedied by the Lottery, which
    seems to arrest the attention of all ranks of citizens.--To
    describe the symptoms of the _disease_ is impossible--all are
    fascinated--all expect to be the favoured children of
    Fortune.--The rich court her smiles, as eagerly as the
    poor--and whilst, O! fickle Goddess, the _Young_ pour forth
    their supplications for thy favours,

    "_With falt'ring pace, and feeble knee,
      See_ Age _advance, in shameless haste;
    The palsied hand is stretch'd to thee,
      For_ Wealth, _it wants the pow'r to taste._"

    The delusion is general--and general must the mortification
    be. But as attention must be paid to the infatuation--we have
    endeavoured, by a regular publication of the fortunate
    numbers, to alleviate its frenzy.

       *       *       *       *       *

On March 29, 1814, Messrs. Bridge and Renouf, the well-known brokers, of
79 State Street, Boston, gave notice that a prize of $500--No.
3,394--"had" been "drawn in the Plymouth Beach Lottery." This number had
been "sold by them to several young Gentlemen who purchased 30 Tickets;"
and they also announced that the drawing was "suspended until the next
Tuesday, when the first drawn ticket will be the highest prize, _Twenty
thousand Dollars;_" and besides this, that "there are remaining to be
drawn four prizes of $1,000 each, and four prizes of $500 each."

It should be noticed that there was, even in its most flourishing days,
a difference of opinion among individuals in regard to the morality of
the lottery, as men must differ on all subjects; so that it is perhaps
only fair to cite a specimen or two of the communications which appeared
in the papers in reference thereto. A writer in the "Salem Gazette,"
June 29, 1790, says:--

                             _OF LOTTERIES._

    Lotteries have of late been a very productive source of
    revenue in this State.--The moral tendency of them has been
    supposed by some to be injurious to society; and government
    have been careful to grant them for such purposes only, as
    that the probable benefit should outweigh the evil. By this
    means we have seen the interests of literature supported--the
    arts encouraged--the wastes of war repaired--inundations
    prevented--the burthen of taxes lessened, &c. Manufactures
    might also in this way be established. Those which will not
    support themselves, it is true, will not benefit the
    community; but there are very important ones, which in their
    infancy require the nursing hand of government--to such the
    produce of lotteries might be beneficially applied. There
    exists a spirit of adventure in all societies, which will
    lead a number to throw themselves into the hands of Chance in
    one way or another, & which, under the direction of a wise
    Legislature, may be made to subserve their best interests.
    The monies raised by lotteries cannot impoverish the
    community--as they are not sent abroad, but only taken out of
    one pocket and put into another.

       *       *       *       *       *

There is also in the same paper, of Feb. 25, 1794, another communication,
in which the writer apparently takes an entirely opposite view, and
quotes a letter of Joel Barlow to the National Convention of France, in
which will be found some rather strong language. When one considers the
place where these views appear to have been adopted, and recollects the
horrible scenes of the French Revolution, which were even then being
enacted, one wonders whether the French authorities valued human life as
much as they did property.

                          ON PUBLIC LOTTERIES.

    MR. CUSHING,

    AS our Legislature have lately had under consideration a
    bill, for granting a Lottery to Harvard College, I beg you
    will publish what our countryman, Mr. BARLOW, said on the
    subject of Public Lotteries, in his Letter to the National
    Convention of France. It is as follows:

    "SINCE I am treating of morals, the great object of all
    political instructions, I cannot avoid bestowing some remarks
    on the subject of PUBLIC LOTTERIES. It is a shocking disgrace
    of modern governments, that they are driven to this pitiful
    piece of knavery, to draw money from the people. But no
    circumstance of this kind is so extraordinary as that this
    policy should be continued in France, since the revolution;
    and that a state lottery should still be reckoned among the
    permanent sources of revenue. It has its origin in deception;
    and depends for its support, on _raising and disappointing
    the hopes of individuals_--on perpetually agitating the mind
    with _unreasonable desires of gain_--on clouding the
    understanding with superstitious ideas of _chance,_ _destiny_
    and _fate_--on diverting the attention from regular industry,
    and promoting a _universal spirit of gambling,_ which carries
    all sorts of vices into all classes of people. Whatever way
    we look into human affairs, we shall ever find that the bad
    organization of society is the cause of more disorders than
    could possibly arise from the natural temper of the heart.
    And what shall we say of a government that avowedly steps
    forward, with the insolence of an open enemy, and creates a
    new vice, for the sake of loading it with a tax? What right
    has such a government to punish our follies? And who can look
    without disgust on the impious figure it makes, in holding
    the scourge in one hand, and the temptation in the other? You
    cannot hesitate to declare, in your constitution, THAT ALL
    LOTTERIES SHALL BE FOREVER ABOLISHED."

    In November last, the Convention, in conformity with the
    foregoing sentiments, passed the following decree:

    "Lotteries, of whatever nature they may be, or under whatever
    denomination they may exist, are suppressed."

       *       *       *       *       *

In 1791 the Massachusetts Legislature granted to the proprietors of the
Cotton Manufactory in Beverly four hundred tickets in the lottery about
to be drawn, and three hundred in the next Semi-annual State Lottery.
"Some people, out-doors," says the "Salem Gazette," March 8, 1791,
"murmur at this as an ill-judged act of liberality; but perhaps they are
not acquainted with the arguments which induced the grant. The
disposition of Government to foster our infant manufactures is
certainly laudable." This is unquestionably good reasoning; for, granted
the premises that lotteries are ever beneficial, then there was no
reason why aid should not in this way be extended to business
enterprises which were to give employment to the people, as well as to
schools and colleges. Employment must be provided as well as education.
The Beverly Cotton Manufactory, Stone, in his History of Beverly, claims
to be the first manufactory of its kind established in America, that at
Pawtucket having been the second; and he also states that it was visited
by General Washington on his tour through the country in 1789. The
leading proprietors in this enterprise were George and Andrew Cabot,
Israel Thorndike and Henry Higginson, men of the highest reputation in
New England for integrity and honor.

                  From the "Salem Gazette," Dec. 25, 1812:

                         _The Historical Dictionary,_

    By EZRA SAMPSON, author of the Beauties of the Bible, is one
    of the most useful little works of this nature which we have
    seen. It contains _much in a small compass._ Its subjects are
    Natural and Civil History, Geography, Zoology, Botany and
    Mineralogy, arranged in alphabetical order, and explained in
    such a neat and intelligible manner, as to render it worthy
    of being (according to its design) a _Companion for Youth._
    We select the following article as a specimen of the work.


                                LOTTERY,

    A kind of public game at hazard, in order to raise money for
    the service of the state. A lottery consists of several
    numbers of blanks and prizes, which are drawn out of wheels,
    one of which contains the numbers of the tickets, and the
    other the corresponding blanks and prizes. Besides the
    consideration that this, as well as all other kinds of
    gambling for money, tends to corrupt the public morals, it is
    also to be considered that the purchasers of the tickets are
    never permitted to play the game on fair and equal ground.
    The world neither ever saw, nor ever will see, a perfectly
    fair lottery; or one in which the whole gain compensated the
    whole loss; because the undertaker could make nothing by it.
    In lotteries the tickets are really not worth the price which
    is paid by the original purchasers, and yet they often sell
    in the market at a considerable advance: the vain hope of
    gaining some of the great prizes is the cause of this demand.
    In order to have a better chance for some of the large
    prizes, some people purchase several tickets, and others
    small shares in a still greater number. There is not,
    however, a more certain proposition in mathematics, than that
    the more tickets you adventure upon, the more likely you are
    to be a loser. Adventure upon all the tickets in the lottery
    and you lose for certain; and the greater the number of your
    tickets, the nearer you approach to this certainty.

    The above is surely a just account of the nature and
    principles of a Lottery; yet it does not destroy the fact,
    that, distributed as the tickets always are among thousands,
    there must be some gainers, and that, in spite of
    mathematics, there is a lucky number, which must draw the
    capital prize in the Plymouth Beach Lottery (without any
    deduction) of 12000 dollars. Both the _Historical Dictionary_
    and Lottery _Tickets_ may be had at Cushing & Appleton's old
    stand, one door west of Central Building;--where BANK BILLS
    are exchanged.

       *       *       *       *       *

Lottery at the celebrated "Wayside Inn" at Sudbury in 1760.

   THE Managers of _Sudbury_ Lottery, No. Two, hereby notify the
   Public, That they shall commence Drawing said Lottery, on
   Friday the Thirtieth Day of May Instant, at the House of Mr.
   _William Bryant_ Inholder in said _Sudbury._ --> A few Tickets
   are yet to be had of the Managers, and _Samuel Hardcastle_ and
   the Printers hereof.

                                      _Boston Gazette,_ May, 1760.

       *       *       *       *       *

Some remarks in reference to supplying Bibles in the eastern part of
Massachusetts by means of a lottery.

    MR. RUSSELL,

    A FRIEND to religion, and one who wishes the memorial of a
    certain respectable society may have a happy effect, but a
    zealous enemy to lotteries, asked a member of an important
    body, the other day, whether he thought the General Court
    would grant a Lottery for the purpose of supplying every
    person in the eastern part of the Commonwealth with a bible,
    who is unable to purchase one, and for the pay of a
    missionary.--Let not the serious reader frown, as that member
    did; for if there is nothing contained in that sacred book
    which can be thought opposed to this method of gambling,
    neither the one nor the other can give a substantial reason
    why, in the present rage for lotteries, the people should not
    be indulged in raising money in the way most agreeable to
    their humour.

                                                   PERSOLUS.

                             _Columbian Centinel,_ Feb. 26, 1791.

       *       *       *       *       *

                        _MRS. CLARK AFLOAT._

    In the Ship Ann Maria arrived at New-Haven the following wax
    passengers, viz. King George III, _Bonaparte,_ Washington,
    _Jefferson,_ Hamilton, _Burr,_ Hillhouse, _Madison,_
    Pickering, _Giles_ and _Mrs. Mary Ann Clark._ The
    Custom-House officers made prisoners of all these passengers
    for violating the Non-Importation Act, but being proved that
    they were of East-Haven manufacture and unconscious of crime,
    we are happy to hear they have been all liberated. King
    George III. was taken in such bad company as is a sufficient
    proof that he is _crazy._ Napoleon undoubtedly rejoiced when
    he beheld the faithful execution in our waters, of his
    continental system. Washington and Hamilton were glad that
    they were in their graves, before their country had been
    plunged so deeply in disgrace. Had not Pickering and
    Hillhouse been indeed made of _wax,_ they would have thrown
    Bonaparte and Jefferson overboard and given them the freedom
    of the Seas. If the custom-house officers had kept possession
    of Poor Madison, they could never have obtained much money
    for him, as he now is a sorry _figure,_ since he has been
    scalped and tomahawked by Smith. Burr, the democratic
    vice-president and traitor, who has now gone home to France,
    ought to be exhibited for the instruction of the People, in
    every village. Giles must have been liable to have been
    York-_sheared_ by Mrs. Clark, who, on a July day, when the
    weather was at blood heat, must have been in a _melting_ mood
    and susceptible of impressions. But he is an advocate of
    Non-Intercourse. The officers of the Revenue, notwithstanding
    they were in such a _taking_ fit, and had conceived such vain
    & high blown hope of the immense wealth they should receive
    as the ransom of their Captives, have not half so good a
    chance of a _prize_ as those adventurers who will call at
    Cushing and Appleton's, one door west of central Building,
    and purchase a Ticket or quarter in Harvard College Lottery
    now drawing.

                                  _Salem Gazette,_ July 12, 1811.

       *       *       *       *       *

    Mr. Pardon Sheldon, a respectable citizen of Providence, was
    the fortunate holder of the $20,000 prize in the North
    Carolina Lottery which was drawn some days since.

                                 _Salem Observer,_ Dec. 17, 1825.

       *       *       *       *       *

                   A Speedy Cure for a Broken Fortune.

    TO all those who bitterly complain of the great dearth of
    "the root of all evil," and a want of confidence in these
    speculating times, and who, tremblingly anticipate a long and
    doubtful conflict, in money operations the coming season, the
    following beautiful and brilliant schemes offer the means of
    a sure and an immediate relief.

    The Grand State Lottery, Fourth Class Extra, with a capital
    prize of $10,000, a prize of 500, and 5 prizes of 1000, will
    draw THIS DAY. Tickets $3 & parts in proportion.

    The Rhode-Island Lottery, First Class, New Series, highest
    prize 10,000, five prizes of 1,000, and a variety of smaller
    prizes, will draw on the 24th inst. Tickets $3 and parts in
    proportion. And last, though not least,

    The New-York Literature Lottery, Class No. 3, for 1825, with
    the truly splendid prizes of 100,000, 50,000, and 10,500 and
    smaller prizes to the amount of more than half a MILLION of
    DOLLARS, will draw on the 4th of January next. Tickets $50,
    and parts in proportion.

    For PRIZES in the above Lotteries apply to

                               E.H. PAYSON,

    At Dana & Fenno's Office, Central street.

    Official Lists of the two first Lotteries will be received by
    E.H.P. on the evenings of the days of the drawings.
                                     tf         Dec 10.

                                          _Salem Observer,_ 1825.


       *       *       *       *       *

                      Fortune's Favourite Sons,

    ARE informed that _Stonington Point Meeting-House Lottery_
    will positively commence drawing the 19th of May--viz. this
    day four weeks. In this Lottery of only 6000 Tickets, are one
    of 3000 dollars--one of 1000--five of 500--two of 400--three
    of 300--ten of 200--twenty of 100, &c. Tickets for 3 Dollars,
    for sale, and prizes in the _Eastern Stage Road Lottery,_
    taken in pay.--Also Cash paid for those sold by THOMAS
    HILDRUP.

    N.B. Adventurers may know their fate from his List of Prizes.

                                        Hartford, April 21, 1794.

                                           _Connecticut Courant._

       *       *       *       *       *

To show how largely men's minds--and perhaps women's too--were filled
with the lottery mania, if we may so call it, in the days of which we
are writing, we will introduce a Southern scheme from the "Petersburg
Intelligencer" of 1816, copied in the "Salem Register," September 11 of
that year. Some of our readers may think that it is not a bad idea.

                            _From the Petersburg Intelligencer._

                       MATRIMONIAL LOTTERY.

    On the 21st day of December last, I was passing through the
    state of South Carolina, and in the evening arrived in the
    suburbs of the town of ----, where I had an acquaintance, on
    whom I called. I was quickly informed that the family was
    invited to a wedding at a neighboring house, and on being
    requested, I changed my clothes and went with them. As soon
    as the young couple were married, the company was seated, and
    a profound silence ensued--(the man of the house was
    religious.) A young Lawyer then arose, and addressed the
    company very handsomely, and in finishing his discourse
    begged leave to offer a new scheme of matrimony, which he
    believed and hoped would be beneficial. And obtaining leave
    he proposed:

    That one man in the company should be selected as president;
    that this president should be duly sworn to keep entirely
    secret all the communications that should be forwarded to him
    in his official department that night: and each unmarried
    gentleman and lady should write his or her name on a piece of
    paper, and under it place the person's name whom they wished
    to marry; then hand it to the president for inspection, and
    if any gentleman and lady had reciprocally chosen each other,
    the president was to inform each of the result; and those who
    had not been reciprocal in their choices, should have their
    choice kept entirely secret.

    After the appointment of the president, the communications
    were accordingly handed up to the chair, and it was found
    that twelve young gentlemen and ladies had made reciprocal
    choices; but whom they had chosen remained a secret to all
    but themselves and the president.--The conversation changed
    and the company respectively retired.

    Now hear the conclusion. I was passing through the same place
    on the 14th of March following, and was informed that eleven
    of the twelve matches had been solemnized, and that the young
    gentlemen of eight couples of the eleven had declared that
    their diffidence was so great that they certainly should not
    have addressed their respective wives, if the above scheme
    had not been introduced.----> Gentlemen under 20 and ladies
    under 15 were excluded as unmarriageable.

    You will be pleased to let the public hear of this scheme,
    and I hope it will be productive of much good, by being
    practised in Virginia.

                             _A Married Man without Children._

The weak spot in this plan, we imagine, would be the difficulty in
keeping the _blanks_ entirely secret.

       *       *       *       *       *

We have not undertaken to give an account of all the lotteries of which
we have seen advertisements, as our limits would not admit of it, even
if it could be made interesting to those who like to read about such
matters; New England alone would fill a large volume. We will name only
a few of the more prominent lotteries,--the Land Bank, in 1759; the
Pavement on Boston Neck, the same year. Then there was the Charlestown
lottery, the Hatfield Bridge, Sudbury, the Amoskeag Canal, the South
Hadley Canal, the Philanthropic, the Kennebec, the Dartmouth College,
the Gloucester Road, the Plymouth Beach, etc. All these, of course,
were public lotteries, and were managed by the first men in the
community. In relation to private lotteries it would now be difficult to
ascertain the facts. There must have been a great number of these;
probably they were not always honestly conducted. We have heard that
there were shops where the inexperienced were supplied with bogus
tickets,--blanks of some drawn lottery. Bad men, unfortunately, are to
be found in all kinds of business; but we know that in Salem all the men
whose names we have mentioned were among the very best in the community.

Although laws are now in force in Massachusetts and some other States
against lotteries, there appears to be no essential difference, as far
as the morality of the thing is concerned, between the old lottery and
the modern raffle,--and indeed a certain species of stock gambling, it
seems to us, is worse than either in its moral effects. After the year
1826, or thereabout, lotteries appear to have become unpopular, and laws
were passed prohibiting them. Their unprofitableness, moreover, seems
then to have been more clearly seen. As we have already said, there had
always been some who saw the evils which must result from such schemes.
Notably among prominent men who in Massachusetts used their influence
against them were John Hancock,[1] of Revolutionary fame, and afterwards
governor of the Commonwealth, and Peter C. Brooks, a distinguished
merchant of Boston, father-in-law of Edward Everett. The "Salem Gazette"
of Sept. 16, 1794, says: "Considering the acknowledged immoral tendency
of _Lotteries,_ it is astonishing how much is said in the Boston papers
in favor of that which our Legislature has lately instituted for Harvard
College. Our late worthy Governor Hancock, in a public address to the
General Court, gave his testimony against this species of gambling, so
calculated to ensnare and injure those classes of worthy citizens who
are guiltless of that vice in its common form."

[Footnote 1: Although we have seen lottery tickets signed by Hancock
earlier in life.]

In some foreign countries and in a few of the States of our Union
lotteries are still lawful; yet we believe there is a growing feeling
against them. But if stock gambling is destined to take the place of the
lottery, we do not think much will be gained by the change. The losses
by lotteries were generally in small sums, and could be better borne by
the adventurers than the entire loss of property, health, and reputation
which is now too apt to follow a large proportion of the speculative
stock operations. In the lottery, too, the risks were generally so small
that the ticket-buyer alone suffered; whereas now, whole families are
often involved in financial ruin, if not in disgrace, by the operations
of a father, brother, or near relative. But we will say no more on this
point, as it is a consideration foreign to the object of this book.

Thus far we have written mainly of American lotteries; as it is not our
intention to take an exhaustive view of the subject, we will merely say,
in reference to foreign countries, that lotteries were instituted in
England in 1567, and abolished by Act of Parliament in 1823, although
allowed until 1826, when the last drawing of a legal lottery took place.
During this period they were patronized by all classes,--royalty, the
nobility, gentry, and commoners. The first lottery was for the repairs
of harbors and fortifications. The drawing took place at the "west door
of St. Paul's Church." In 1612 King James I. granted a lottery for the
"English Colonies in Virginia, ... to be held at the _west end of St.
Paul's,_" and "one Thomas Sharplys, a tailor, drew the chief Prize,
which was 4000 crowns in fair plate."

To this day the lottery flourishes in most of the chief cities in
Europe, and lottery tickets are vended in many shops as well as in
regular offices. The Cologne Cathedral, as is well known, was only
recently finished by the aid of a lottery. Lotteries are upheld, we
believe, by the Roman Catholic Church in Europe, and many of the priests
aid in disposing of the tickets,--at least so we have been told.

The sum of the whole matter as regards this country is that a good work
was undoubtedly accomplished through the agency of the lottery in the
early days of our national history. By its aid schools, colleges, and
charities were founded, bridges, roads, and canals were constructed. In
our time public opinion is, of course, as it ought to be, against
gambling in any form; but although our ways are almost always thought to
be more honest, it is a question, after all, whether we are really more
upright than our fathers, who sometimes engaged in transactions that are
condemned by modern society, but who, on the other hand, knew nothing of
"defaulted" railroad bonds, of "wild cat" oil companies, or of "watered"
mining stocks. It is easy enough to

    "Compound for sins [we] are inclined to,
    By damning those [we] have no mind to."

[Illustration]

       *       *       *       *       *

University Press: John Wilson & Son, Cambridge.




BENJAMIN H. TICKNOR.      THOMAS B. TICKNOR.     GEORGE F. GODFREY.

[Illustration]

A LIST OF BOOKS

PUBLISHED BY

TICKNOR AND COMPANY

=BOSTON.=

_AMERICAN-ACTOR SERIES_ (THE). Edited by LAURENCE HUTTON. A series of
12mo. volumes by the best writers, embracing the lives of the most
famous and popular American Actors. Illustrated. Six volumes in three.
Sold only in sets. Per set, $5.00.

   Vol. I. Edwin Forrest. By Lawrence Barrett. The Jeffersons. By
   William Winter.

   Vol. II. The Elder and the Younger Booth. By Mrs. Asia Booth
   Clarke. Charlotte Cushman. By Clara Erskine Clement.

   Vol. III. Mrs. Duff. By Joseph N. Ireland. Fechter. By Kate
   Field.

   Also a limited edition on large paper, especially adapted to
   the use of collectors and bibliophiles, for extending, extra
   illustrating, etc. 6 vols. Per vol., $5.00.

_AMERICAN ARCHITECT._ See last page.

_ARCHITECTURE._ See MONOGRAPH.

_ARNOLD'S_ (EDWIN) The Light of Asia. Beautiful illustrated edition.
8vo. $6.00. In antique morocco, or tree-calf, $10.00.

_ARNOLD'S_ (GEORGE) Poems. Edited, with a Biographical Sketch of the
Poet, by WILLIAM WINTER. With Portrait. 16mo. $1.50. Half-calf, $3.00.
Morocco antique or tree-calf, $4.00.

_AUSTIN'S_ (JANE G.) Nantucket Scraps; Being Experiences of an
Off-Islander, in Season and out of Season, among a Passing People. 16mo.
$1.50.

_BACON'S_ (HENRY) Parisian Art and Artists. 8vo. Profusely illustrated.
$3.00.

_BALLOU'S_ (MATURIN M.) Edge-Tools of Speech. 1 vol. 8vo. $3.50.

_BARTLETT'S_ (TRUMAN H.) The Art-Life of William Rimmer. With
Illustrations after his Paintings, Drawings, and Sculptures. 4to. Full
gilt. $10.00.

_BELLAMY'S_ (EDWARD) Miss Ludington's Sister. $1.25.

_BENT'S_ (SAMUEL ARTHUR) Short Sayings of Great Men. 8vo. Third edition.
$3.00. Half-calf, $5.50.

_BOIT'S_ (ROBERT APTHORP) Eustis. 12mo. $1.50.

_BOSTON,_ Memorial History of. See page 21.

_BOWDOIN COLLEGE._ See CLEAVELAND.

_BROWN'S_ (HELEN DAWES) Two College Girls. 12mo. $1.50.

_BROWN'S_ (SUSAN ANNA) The Invalid's Tea-Tray. Illuminated boards. 50
cents.

---- How the Ends Met. 12mo. 50 cents.

---- In Bridget's Vacation. Leaflets to hang up. 50 cents. On gilt bar
and rings. 75 cents.

_BUDDHIST RECORDS OF THE WESTERN WORLD._ Translated from the original
Chinese, with Introduction, Index, etc. By Samuel Beal, Trinity College,
Cambridge. 2 vols. 12mo. $7.00.

_BUDGE'S_ (ERNEST A.) The History of Esarhaddon (Son of Sennacherib),
King of Assyria, B.C. 681-668. From Cuneiform Inscriptions. 8vo. Gilt
top. $4.00.

_BUNNER'S_ (H.C.) A Woman of Honor. 16mo. $1.25.

_BURNETT'S_ (MRS. F.H.) A Fair Barbarian. 16mo. $1.00.

---- Through One Administration. 12mo. $1.50.

---- Vagabondia. A Novel. 12mo. $1.50.

_BUSH'S_ (JAMES S.) The Evidence of Faith. 12mo. $2.00.

_BYRON'S_ (LORD) Childe Harold. A sumptuous new illustrated edition. In
box. $6.00. In antique morocco, or tree-calf, $10.00. in crushed Levant,
with silk linings, $25.00.

_The great holiday book of_ 1885-1886.

_CABLE'S_ (GEORGE W.) Doctor Sevier. 12mo. $1.50.

_CARLYLE_ (THOMAS) and _RALPH WALDO EMERSON,_ The Correspondence of.
Edited by CHARLES ELIOT NORTON. 2 vols. 12mo. Gilt tops and rough edges.
With new Portraits. $4.00. Half-calf, $8.00. Half-morocco, gilt top,
uncut edges, $8.00.

_New revised edition with 100 pages of newly-found letters._

---- Supplementary Volume, including the newly-found letters. 16mo.
$1.00.

_CAROLINO'S_ (PEDRO) New Guide of the Conversation in Portuguese and
English. First American edition. With an Introduction by Mark Twain.
16mo. $1.00. Paper, 50 cents.

_CARRYL'S_ (CHARLES E.) Davy and the Goblin. 1 vol. 8vo. Fully
illustrated. $1.50.

_CESNOLA'S_ (GEN. L.P. DI) The Cesnola Collection of Cyprus Antiquities.
A Descriptive and Pictorial Atlas. Large folio. 500 Plates. _Sold by
subscription only._ Send for Prospectus.

_CHAMBERLAIN'S_ (BASIL HALL) The Classical Poetry of the Japanese. 8vo.
$3.00.

_CHASE'S_ (MISS E.B.) Over the Border. 1 vol. 12mo. Illustrated with
Heliotype Engravings from Original Drawings of Scenery in Nova Scotia.
With Map. 12mo. Third edition. $1.50.

_CHENOWETH'S_ (MRS. C. VAN D.) Stories of the Saints. Illustrated. 12mo.
$2.00.

_CLARK'S_ (T.M.) Building Superintendence. 8vo. With Plans, etc. $3.00.

_CLARKE'S_ (REV. JAMES FREEMAN) Every-Day Religion. 1 vol. 12mo. $1.50.

---- Events and Epochs in Religious History. Crown 8vo. Illustrated.
$3.00. Half-calf, $5.50.

---- The Ideas of the Apostle Paul. 12mo. $1.50.

---- Self-Culture. Eleventh edition. 12mo. $1.50. Half-calf, $3.00.

_CLEAVELAND'S_ (NEHEMIAH) and _PACKARD'S_ (ALPHEUS SPRING) History of
Bowdoin College. With Biographical Sketches of its Graduates, from 1806
to 1870, inclusive. With many full-page Portraits, and other
Illustrations. 8vo. $5.00.

_CLEMENT'S_ (CLARA ERSKINE) and Laurence Hutton's Artists of the
Nineteenth Century. 12mo. Fully revised up to 1885. $3.00. Half-calf,
$5.00. Tree-calf, $7.00.

---- A Handbook of Legendary and Mythological Art. Eighteenth edition.
12mo. $3. Half-calf, $5. Tree-calf, $7.

---- Painters, Sculptors, Architects, Engravers, and their Works.
Illustrated profusely. Ninth edition. 12mo. $3.00. Half-calf, $5.00.
Tree-calf, $7.00.

---- Eleanor Maitland. A Novel. 16mo. $1.25.

_CLEMMER'S_ (MARY) Poems of Life and Nature. $1.50.

_COLLIER'S_ (ROBERT LAIRD) English Home Life. 16mo. Gilt top. $1.00.

_COLLING'S_ (J.K.) Art Foliage. Entirely new plates from the latest
enlarged London edition. Folio. $10.00.

_CONWAY'S_ (M.D.) Emerson at Home and Abroad. $1.50.

_COOKE'S_ (GEORGE WILLIS) George Eliot; A Critical Study of her Life,
Writings, and Philosophy. 12mo. With Portrait. $2.00. Half-calf, $4.00.

---- Ralph Waldo Emerson; His Life, Writings, and Philosophy. 12mo. With
Portrait. $2.00. Half-calf, $4.00.

---- (MRS. LAURA S.H.) Dimple Dopp. Small 4to. Illustrated. $1.25.

---- (ROSE TERRY) Somebody's Neighbors. 12mo. Fourth edition. $1.50.
Half-calf, $3.00.

_CRADDOCK'S_ (CHARLES EGBERT) Where the Battle Was Fought. A Novel.
12mo. Fourth edition. $1.50.

_CUNNINGHAM'S_ (FRANK H.) Familiar Sketches of the Phillips Exeter
Academy and Surroundings. Illustrated. $2.50.

_DAHLGREN'S_ (MRS. MADELEINE VINTON) A Washington Winter. 12mo. $1.50.

---- Memoir of John A. Dahlgren, Rear-Admiral U.S. Navy. 8vo. With
Portrait and Illustrations. $3.00.

---- South-Sea Sketches. 12mo. $1.50.

---- South-Mountain Magic. 12mo. $1.50.

_DAMEN'S GHOST._ Vol. VI. of the Round-Robin Series of novels. 16mo.
$1.00. In paper covers, 50 cents.

_DANENHOWER'S_ (LIEUT. J.W.) Narrative of the Jeannette. Paper covers.
25 cents.

_DESMOND HUNDRED_ (THE). Vol. XI. of the Round-Robin Series of novels.
$1.00. In paper covers, 50 cents.

_DOBSON'S_ (AUSTIN) Thomas Bewick and his Pupils. With numerous
Illustrations. Crown 8vo, $3.50. Limited large-paper edition. $10.00.

_DOCTOR BEN._ Vol. XIII. of the Round-Robin Series of novels. $1.00. In
paper covers, 50 cents.

_DODGE'S_ (THEODORE AYRAULT, U.S.A.) A Bird's-Eye View of our Civil War.
1 vol. 8vo. With Maps and Illustrations. $3.00

---- The Campaign of Chancellorsville. 8vo. $3.00.

_DOROTHEA._ Vol. X. of the Round-Robin Series of novels. 16mo. $1.00. In
paper covers, 50 cents.

_DU MAURIER'S_ (GEORGE) Pictures from Society. 50 full-page Pictures
from _Punch._ 1 vol. 4to. Full gilt. $5.00.

_EASTWICK'S_ (EDWARD B., F.R.S., M.R.A.S.) The Gulistan; or, Rose Garden
of Shekh Mushlin'ddin Sadi. 8vo. $3.50.

_EATON'S_ (D. CADY) Handbook of Greek and Roman Sculpture. Second
edition, revised and enlarged. 12mo. $2.00.

_EDMUNDSON'S_ (GEORGE) Milton and Vondel. A Curiosity of Literature. 1
vol. Crown 8vo. $2.50.

_EMERSON,_ The Genius and Character of. A Series of Lectures delivered
at the Concord School of Philosophy, by eminent authors and critics.
Edited by F.B. SANBORN. Illustrated. 12mo. $2.00.

_EMERSON-CARLYLE CORRESPONDENCE_ (THE). See CARLYLE.

_EMERSON'S_ (MRS. ELLEN RUSSELL) Myths of the Indians; or, Legends,
Traditions, and Symbols of the Aborigines of America. 8vo. Gilt top.
With numerous Plates and Diagrams. $5.00.

_FANCHETTE._ Vol. XV. of the Round-Robin Series of novels. $1.00. In
paper covers, 50 cents.

_FAVORITE-AUTHORS SERIES._ Favorite Authors, Household Friends, Good
Company. Three volumes in one. Illustrated. 8vo. Full gilt. $3.50.

_FAWCETT'S_ (EDGAR) Social Silhouettes. 12mo. $1.50.

---- The Adventures of a Widow. 12mo. $1.50.

---- Tinkling Cymbals. A Novel. 12mo. $1.50.

---- Song and Story. A volume of Poems. $1.50.

_FEATHERMAN'S_ (A.) The Aramaeans; Social History of the Races of
Mankind. 8vo. Uncut edges, gilt top. $5.00.

_FENOLLOSA'S_ (ERNEST F.) Review of the Chapter on Painting in Gonse's
"L'Art Japonais." 12mo. Paper covers. 25 cents.

_FOOTE'S_ (MRS. MARY HALLOCK) The Led-Horse Claim. A Novel. Illustrated
by the Author. 16mo. $1.25.

_FROMENTIN_ (EUGENE): Painter and Writer. From the French of Louis
Gonse, by Mrs. MARY C. ROBBINS. 8vo. Illustrated. $3.00.

_FROMENTIN'S_ (EUGENE) The Old Masters of Belgium and Holland. 8vo. With
eight full-page Heliotypes. Translated by Mrs. MARY C. ROBBINS. $3.00.

_FULLER'S_ (ALBERT W.) Artistic Homes in City and Country. Oblong folio.
76 full-page Illustrations. $3.50.

_GARDNER'S_ (E.C.) Homes and all about them. 3 vols. in 1. Profusely
illustrated. 12mo. $2.50.

_GARFIELD_ (PRESIDENT JAMES ABRAM) The Works of. Edited by BURKE A.
HINSDALE. 2 vols. 8vo. With new Steel Portraits. $6.00. Sheep, $8.50.
Half-morocco or half-calf, $10.00. Edition de luxe. 2 vols. 8vo. $25.00.
_Sold by subscription only._

_GAYARRE'S_ (CHARLES) Aubert Dubayet. 12mo. $2.00.

_GEORGIANS_ (THE). Vol. III. of the Round-Robin Series of novels. 16mo.
$1.00. In paper covers, 50 cents.

_GERALDINE_: A Souvenir of the St. Lawrence. A Poetical Romance. 16mo.
Seventh edition. $1.25. Half-calf, $3.00.

_GOETHE,_ The Life and Genius of. Concord Lectures for 1885. Edited by
F.B. Sanborn and W.T. Harris. With Portraits. $2.00.

_GOETHE'S_ Faust. Translated by A. Hayward. $1.25.

_GRANT'S_ (ROBERT) An Average Man. 12mo. $1.50.

---- The Confessions of a Frivolous Girl. $1.25.

---- The Knave of Hearts. $1.25.

_GREENOUGH'S_ (MRS. R.) Mary Magdalene. $1.50.

_GREVILLE'S_ (HENRY) Cleopatra. A Russian Romance. 1 vol. 16mo. With
portrait of the author. $1.25.

---- Dosia's Daughter. Translated by Mrs. CLARA ERSKINE CLEMENT. $1.25.

_HALE'S_ (LUCRETIA P.) The Peterkin Papers. 16mo. $1.00.

_HAMLIN'S_ (AUGUSTUS C.) Leisure Hours among the Gems. Illustrated.
12mo. $2.00.

_HARRIS'S_ (JOEL CHANDLER) Mingo, and other Sketches in Black and White.
16mo. $1.25.

---- Nights with Uncle Remus. Illustrated, $1.50.

_HARTING'S_ (JAMES EDMUND, F.L.S., F.Z.S.) British Animals Extinct
within Historic Times. With some Account of British Wild White Cattle.
Illustrated. 8vo. Gilt top. $4.50.

_HARTT'S_ (PROFESSOR C.F.) Geology and Physical Geography of Brazil. _In
preparation._

_HASSARD'S_ (J.R.G.) A Pickwickian Pilgrimage. 16mo. $1.00.

_HATTON'S_ (JOSEPH) Henry Irving's Impressions of America. 1 vol. 12mo.
$1.50.

_HAWTHORNE'S_ (JULIAN) Nathaniel Hawthorne and his Wife. A Biography.
With New Portraits on Steel, and Etched Vignettes. 2 vols. 12mo. $5.00.
Half-morocco or half-calf, $9.00. Edition de luxe. $12.00.

---- Love--or a Name. 12mo. $1.50.

---- Beatrix Randolph. 12mo. $1.50.

---- Fortune's Fool. 12mo. $1.50.

_HAWTHORNE'S_ (NATHANIEL) Dr. Grimshawe's Secret. 12mo. $1.50. Library
edition. Gilt top. $2.00.

_HAYES'S_ (HENRY) The Story of Margaret Kent. $1.50.

_HAYWARD'S_ (ALMIRA L.) The Illustrated Birthday Book of American Poets.
Revised and enlarged edition, with index for names, and portraits of
thirteen great American poets. 1 vol. 18mo. $1.00. Half-calf, $2.25.
Flexible morocco, seal or calf, $3.00.

_HAZEN'S_ (GEN. W.B.) A Narrative of Military Service. 8vo. With Maps,
Plans, and Illustrations. $3.00.

_HEARN'S_ (LAFCADIO) Stray Leaves from Strange Literature. Stories
reconstructed from the Anvari-Soheili, Baital-Pachisi, Mahabharata,
Gulistan, etc. 1 vol. 16mo. $1.50.

_HINSDALE'S_ (BURKE A.) President Garfield and Education. Portraits of
Gen. Garfield, Mrs. Garfield, etc. 12mo. $1.50. Half-calf, $3.00.
Morocco antique, $4.00.

---- Schools and Studies. 16mo. $1.50.

_HIS SECOND CAMPAIGN._ Vol. XVI. of the Round-Robin Series of novels.
16mo. $1.00. In paper covers, 50 cents.

_HOME-BOOK OF ART_ (THE). Heliotype Plates after One Hundred Classical
and Popular Pictures by the most famous Artists of the World. With
descriptions. Twenty-five parts at one dollar each. Or all bound in 1
vol. Cloth, $28.00. Half morocco, $31.00. Full morocco, $33.00. _By
subscription only._

_HOMOSELLE._ Vol. V. of the Round-Robin Series of novels. 16mo. $1.00.
In paper covers, 50 cents.

_HOSMER'S_ (G.W.) The People and Politics. 8vo. $3.00.

_HOWARD'S_ (BLANCHE W.) Aulnay Tower. 12mo. $1.50.

---- Aunt Serena. A Novel. 16mo. Thirteenth edition. $1.25.

---- Guenn. 12mo. Fifth edition. $1.50.

_HOWE'S_ (E.W.) The Mystery of the Locks. 12mo. $1.50.

---- The Story of a Country Town. 12mo. Fourth edition. $1.50.

_HOWELLS'S_ (W.D.) Tuscan Cities. With many fine Illustrations, by
Joseph Pennell. Richly bound, full gilt edges, in box, $5.00. In
tree-calf, or antique morocco, $10.00.

---- Indian Summer. 12mo. $1.50.

---- The Rise of Silas Lapham. 12mo. $1.50.

---- A Fearful Responsibility. 12mo. $1.50.

---- A Modern Instance. 12mo. $1.50.

---- A Woman's Reason. 12mo. $1.50.

---- Dr. Breen's Practice. 12mo. $1 50.

---- The Elevator. 32mo. 50 cents.

---- The Sleeping-Car. 32mo. 50 cents.

---- The Parlor Car. 32mo. 50 cents.

---- The Register. 32mo. 50 cents.

---- Three Villages. Little-Classic size. $1.25.

---- Poems. New revised edition. 1 vol. 12mo. In box. Printed on fine
hand-made paper. Parchment covers. $2.00.

---- A Counterfeit Presentment. A Comedy. Little-Classic size. $1.25.

_HOWELLS'S_ (W.D.) Out of the Question. A Comedy. Little-Classic size.
$1.25.

---- A Little Girl among the Old Masters. Being her own Compositions and
Inventions in Sacred and Legendary Art. With Introduction and Commentary
by W.D. Howells. Oblong. Fifty-four Illustrations. $2.00.

---- Choice Autobiographies. A collection of the most entertaining
autobiographies, carefully edited, and with preliminary Critical and
Biographical Essays. Little-Classic size. 8 vols. Each, $1.25.

        I., II.   Memoirs of Frederica Sophia Wilhelmina, Margravine
                  of Baireuth.
           III.   Lord Herbert of Cherbury, and Thomas Ellwood.
            IV.   Vittorio Alfieri.
             V.   Carlo Goldoni.
            VI.   Edward Gibbon.
    VII., VIII.   Francois Marmontel.

_HUBBARD'S_ (LUCIUS L.) Woods and Lakes of Maine. A Trip from Moosehead
Lake to New Brunswick in a Birch Bark Canoe. With Indian place-names and
their meanings. 1 vol. 8vo. With Illustrations, and a large map. $3.00.
Half-calf, $5.50. Tree-calf, or antique morocco, $8.00.

_HUNNEWELL'S_ (JAMES F.) The Historical Monuments of France. 1 vol. 8vo.
Illustrated. $3.50.

---- Bibliography of Charlestown, Mass., and Bunker Hill. 1 vol. 8vo.
Illustrated. $2.00.

_HUTCHINSON'S_ (ELLEN M.) Songs and Lyrics. 16mo. With Frontispiece.
$1.25.

_HUTTON'S_ (LAURENCE) Literary Landmarks of London. 1 vol. 12mo. $1.50.

_IRVING_ (HENRY). See HATTON.

_JAMES_ (HENRY, SR.), The Literary Remains of. Edited by WILLIAM JAMES.
1 vol. 12mo. With Portrait. $2.00.

_JAMES'S_ (HENRY) The Author of Beltraffio; Pandora; Georgina's Reasons;
The Path of Duty; Four Meetings. 12mo. $1.50.

---- The Siege of London; The Pension Beaurepas; and The Point of View.
12mo. $1.50.

---- Tales of Three Cities (The Impressions of a Cousin; Lady Barberina;
A New-England Winter). 12mo. $1.50.

---- A Little Tour in France. 12mo. $1.50.

---- Portraits of Places. 12mo. $1.50.

---- Daisy Miller: A Comedy. 12mo. $1.50.

_JOHNSON'S_ (ROSSITER) Idler and Poet. 16mo. $1.25.

_JOHNSTON'S_ (ELIZABETH BRYANT) Original Portraits of Washington. Sixty
Portraits, from paintings, sculptures, etc. With descriptive text. 1
vol. 4to. $15.00. Half morocco, $20.00. _By subscription only._

_KEENE'S_ (CHARLES) Our People. Four Hundred Pictures from _Punch._ 4to.
$5.00.

_KENDRICK'S_ (PROFESSOR A.C.) Our Poetical Favorites. Three volumes in
one. Illustrated. 8vo. Full gilt. $3.50.

_KIEFFER'S_ (REV. H.M.) Recollections of a Drummer Boy. 16mo.
Illustrated. $1.25.

_KING'S_ (CLARENCE) Mountaineering in the Sierra Nevada. 12mo. With
Maps. Eighth edition. $2.00.

_KING'S_ (EDWARD) The Golden Spike. 12mo. $1.50.

---- The Gentle Savage. 12mo. $2.00.

_KIRK'S_ (MRS. ELLEN OLNEY) A Midsummer Madness. A Novel. 1 vol. 16mo.
$1.25.

_LEONE._ Vol. XII. of the Round-Robin Series of novels. 16mo. $1.00. In
paper covers, 50 cents.

_LEOPARDI'S_ (G.) Essays and Dialogues. 8vo. $3.00.

_LESSON IN LOVE_ (A). Vol. II. of the Round-Robin Series of novels.
16mo. $1.00. In paper covers, 50 cents.

_LIEBER,_ The Life and Letters of Francis. Edited by Thomas Sergeant
Perry. 8vo. With Portrait. $3.00. Half-calf, $5.50.

_LIGHT ON THE HIDDEN WAY._ With Introduction by JAMES FREEMAN CLARKE. 1
vol. 16mo. $1.00.

_LINCOLN'S_ (MRS. JEANIE GOULD) Her Washington Season. A Novel. 12mo.
$1.50.

_LOWELL'S_ (PERCIVAL) Chosoen: The Land of the Morning Calm. A Sketch of
Korea. 1 vol. 8vo. Illustrated. $5.00.

_MACHIAVELLI_ (NICCOLO), The Historical, Political, and Diplomatic Works
of. Translated by Christian E. Detmold. 4 vols. 8vo, with Steel
Frontispieces, in a box. $15. Half-calf, $30.

_MADAME LUCAS._ Vol. VIII. of the Round-Robin Series of novels. 16mo.
$1.00. In paper covers, 50 cents.

_MADDEN'S_ (F.W.) The Coins of the Jews. 4to. $12.00.

_MEREDITH'S_ (OWEN) Lucile, Illustrated. Holiday Edition. With 160 new
Illustrations. Elegantly bound, with full gilt edges, in box, $6.00.
Tree-calf or antique morocco, $10.00. Calf or morocco, inlaid mosaic,
$12.50. Crushed levant, silk linings, $25.00.

---- Lucile. Tremont Edition. 1 vol. 16mo. Beautifully illustrated. With
red lines and gilt edges, $2.50. Half-calf, $4.00. Antique morocco,
tree-calf, flexible calf or seal, $6.00.

---- Lucile. Pocket Edition. 1 vol. Little-Classic size. Thirty
Illustrations. Elegantly bound, $1.00. Half-calf, $2.25. Antique
morocco, flexible calf or seal, $3.00. Tree-calf, $3.50.

_MONOGRAPHS OF AMERICAN ARCHITECTURE,_ No. 1. Harvard Law School. H.H.
Richardson, architect. 18 Plates (Gelatine, from nature), 13 x 16. In
portfolio. $5.00.

No. 2. The State Capitol, at Hartford, Conn., Richard M. Upjohn,
architect. 22 Plates (Gelatine, from nature), 13 x 16. $6.00.

_MORSE'S_ (EDWARD S., PH.D.) Japanese Homes and their Surroundings. 8vo.
With 300 Illustrations. $5.00.

_NAMELESS NOBLEMAN_ (A.) Vol. I. of the Round-Robin Series of novels.
16mo. $1.00. In paper covers, 50 cents.

_NELSON'S_ (HENRY L.) John Rantoul. 12mo. $1.50.

_NORTON'S_ (GEN. C.B.) American Inventions in Breech-loading Small Arms,
Heavy Ordnance, etc. 4to. 250 Engravings. $10.00.

_OWEN'S_ (WILLIAM MILLER) In Camp and Battle with the Washington
Artillery of New Orleans. Illustrated with Maps and Engravings, 1 vol.
8vo. $3.00.

_PALFREY'S_ (JOHN GORHAM) A Compendious History of New England. 4 vols.
12mo. With new Index. In a box. $6.00. Half-calf, $12.00.

_PATTY'S PERVERSITIES._ Vol. IV. of the Round-Robin Series of novels,
16mo. $1.00. In paper covers, 50 cents.

_PEIRCE'S_ (MRS. MELUSINA FAY) Co-operative House-keeping. Square 16mo.
60 cents.

_PENINSULAR CAMPAIGN_ (THE) of General McClellan in 1862. (Vol. I.,
Papers of the Military Historical Society of Massachusetts.) 8vo. With
Maps. $8.00.

_PERRY'S_ (NORA) For a Woman. 16mo. $1.00.

---- A Book of Love. Stories. 16mo. $1.00.

_PERRY'S_ (THOMAS SERGEANT) From Opitz to Lessing. 1 vol. 16mo. $1.25.

_PICTURESQUE SKETCHES._ Statues, Monuments, Fountains, Cathedrals,
Towers, etc. 1 vol. Oblong folio. $1.50.

_PLYMPTON'S_ (MISS A.G.) The Glad Year Round. Square 8vo. $2.50.

_POETS AND ETCHERS._ Twenty full-page etchings, by James D. Smillie,
Samuel Colman, A.F. Bellows, H. Farrer, R. Swain Gifford, illustrating
poems by Longfellow, Whittier, Bryant, Aldrich, etc. 4to. $10.00. _Also
limited editions on China and Japan paper._

_POOLE'S_ (W.F., L.L.D.) An Index to Periodical Literature. 1 vol. Royal
8vo. $15.00. Sheep, $17.00. Half-morocco, $18.00. Half-morocco, extra.
Gilt top. Uncut edges, $19.00.

_POPE_ in 1862, The Virginia Campaign of General. Vol. II. of Papers
read before the Military Historical Society of Massachusetts. 8vo. With
Maps and Plans. $3.00.

_PORTER'S_ (ROBERT P.) Protection and Free Trade To-Day: At Home and
Abroad. 16mo. Paper covers, 10 cents.

_PREBLE'S_ (ADMIRAL GEORGE H.) History of the Flag of the United States
of America, etc. Third Revised Edition. 240 Illustrations, many of them
in colors. 1 vol. Royal quarto. $7.50.

_PRESTON'S_ (MISS H.W.) The Georgics of Vergil. 18mo. $1.00

---- The Georgics of Vergil. Holiday Edition. Four full-page
Illustrations. 1 vol. Small 4to. Full gilt. $2.00.

_PUTNAM'S_ (J. PICKERING) The Open Fire-Place in all Ages. With 300
Illustrations, 53 full-page. 12mo. $4.00.

---- Lectures on the Principles of House Drainage. With Plates and
Diagrams. 16mo. 75 cents.

_QUINCY'S_ (EDMUND) The Haunted Adjutant; and other Stories. Edited by
his son, EDMUND QUINCY. 1 vol. 12mo. $1.50.

---- Wensley; and other Stories. Edited by his son, EDMUND QUINCY. 1
vol. 12mo. $1.50.

_RACHEL'S SHARE OF THE ROAD._ Vol. XVI. of the Round-Robin Series of
novels. $1.00. In paper covers, 50 cents.

_REVEREND IDOL_ (A). A Novel. 12mo. Twelfth edition. $1.50.

_RICHARDSON'S_ (ABBY SAGE) Abelard and Heloise. 1 vol. Little-Classic
size. $1.00.

---- Old Love-Letters; or, Letters of Sentiment. Written by persons
eminent in English Literature and History. 1 vol. Little-Classic size.
$1.25.

_ROCKHILL'S_ (W. WOODVILLE) The Life of the Buddha, and the Early
History of his Order. 1 vol. 12mo. Gilt top. $3.00.

_ROLFE'S_ (WILLIAM J.) Scott's The Lady of the Lake, etc. See SCOTT.

---- The Princess, etc. See TENNYSON.

_ROSEMARY AND RUE._ Vol. VII. of the Round-Robin Series of novels. 16mo.
$1.00. In paper covers, 50 cents.

_ROUND-ROBIN SERIES_ (THE). A series of original novels by the best
writers. Each is complete in 1 vol. 16mo. $1.00. Also, new popular
edition, in paper covers, each, 50 cents.

    A Nameless Nobleman.
    A Lesson in Love.
    The Georgians.
    Patty's Perversities.
    Homoselle.
    Damen's Ghost.
    Rosemary and Rue.
    Madame Lucas.
    A Tallahassee Girl.
    Dorothea.
    The Desmond Hundred.
    Leone.
    Doctor Ben.
    Rachel's Share of the Road.
    Fanchette.
    His Second Campaign.

_SADI'S GULISTAN._ See EASTWICK.

_SANBORN'S_ (KATE) A Year of Sunshine. Comprising cheerful selections
for every day in the year. 1 vol. 16mo. $1.00.

---- Grandma's Garden. Leaflets, with illuminated covers. $1.25.

---- Purple and Gold. Choice Poems. Leaflets, with illuminated covers by
ROSINA EMMET. $1.25.

---- Round-Table Series of Literature Lessons. Printed separately on
sheets. Twenty-five authors. Price for each author, enclosed in
envelope, 25 cents.

_SANGSTER'S_ (MARGARET E.) Poems of the Household. 1 vol. 16mo. $1.50.

_SCHIEFNER'S_ (PROFESSOR) Tibetan Tales. Translated by W.R.S. RALSTON,
M.A. $5.00.

_SCHOPENHAUER'S_ (ARTHUR) The World as Will and Idea. Translated from
the German by R.B. HALDANE, M.A., and JOHN KEMP, M.A. 3 vols. 8vo. Vol.
I. $5.00.

_SCOTT'S_ (SIR WALTER) Marmion. Holiday Edition. Over 100 new
Illustrations by famous artists. Elegantly bound. Full gilt edges. In
box, $6.00. Tree-calf, or antique morocco, $10.00. Crushed levant, with
silk linings, $25.00.

---- Marmion. Tremont Edition. 1 vol. 16mo. Beautifully illustrated.
With red lines, bevelled boards, and gilt edges, $2.50. Half-calf,
$4.00. Antique morocco, flexible calf, flexible seal or tree-calf,
$6.00.

---- Marmion. Pocket Edition, 1 vol. Little-Classic size. With thirty
Illustrations. Elegantly bound, $1.00. Half-calf, $2.25. Antique
morocco, or flexible calf or seal, $3.00. Tree-calf, $3.50.

---- Marmion. Students' Edition. Edited, with Notes and Introduction, by
W.J. ROLFE. 12mo. Illustrated. 75 cents.

----- The Lady of the Lake. Holiday Edition. 1 vol. 8vo. In box. 120
Illustrations. $6.00. Tree-calf or antique morocco, $10.00. Calf or
morocco, inlaid mosaic, $12.50. Crushed levant, with silk linings,
$25.00.

---- The Lady of the Lake. Tremont Edition. 16mo. Beautifully
illustrated. Red lines. $2.50. Half-calf, $4.00. Tree-calf, antique
morocco, flexible calf or seal, $6.00.

---- The Lady of the Lake. Pocket Edition. 1 vol. Little-Classic size.
30 Illustrations. $1.00. Half-calf, $2.25. Antique morocco, flexible
calf, or seal, $3.00. Tree-calf, $3.50.

---- The Lady of the Lake. Students' Edition. Edited, with Notes and
Introduction, by W.J. ROLFE. 1 vol. 12mo. Beautifully illustrated. 75
cents.

_SENSIER'S_ (ALFRED) Jean-Francois Millet: Peasant and Painter.
Translated by HELENA DE KAY. With Illustrations. $3.00.

_SHALER'S_ (PROFESSOR N.S.) and _DAVIS'S_ (WILLIAM M.) Illustrations of
the Earth's Surface. Part I. Glaciers. Copiously illustrated. Large
folio. $10.00.

_SHEDD'S_ (MRS. JULIA A.) Famous Painters and Paintings. Revised
edition. With 13 Heliotypes. 1 vol. 12mo. $3.00. Half-calf, $5.00.
Tree-calf, $7.00.

----Famous Sculptors and Sculpture. With thirteen Heliotype Engravings.
12mo. $3.00. Half-calf, $5.00. Tree-calf, $7.00.

---- Raphael: His Madonnas and Holy Families. Illustrated with 22
full-page Heliotypes. 1 vol. 4to. Full gilt. $7.50.

_SHERIDAN'S_ (RICHARD BRINSLEY) Comedies: The Rivals, and the School for
Scandal. Edited, with Biography and Notes and Introduction, by BRANDER
MATTHEWS. Illustrated. 1 vol. 8vo. $3.00.

_SHERRATT'S_ (R.J.) The Elements of Hand-Railing. 38 Plates. Small
folio. $2.00.

_SIKES'S_ (WIRT) British Goblins. Welsh Folk-Lore, Fairy Mythology, and
Traditions. Illustrated. 8vo. Gilt top. $4.00.

_SNIDER'S_ (DENTON J.) Agamemnon's Daughter. A poem. 1 vol. Square 16mo.
Fine laid paper. $1.50.

---- A Walk in Hellas. 1 vol. 8vo. $2.50.

_SPOONER'S_ (SAMUEL) and _CLEMENT'S_ (MRS. CLARA E.) A Biographical
History of the Fine Arts. _In preparation._

_STANWOOD'S_ (EDWARD) A History of Presidential Elections. 1 vol. 12mo.
$1.50.

_STERNBERG'S_ (GEORGE M., M.D.) Photo-Micrographs, and How to Make them.
Illustrated by 47 Photographs of Microscopic Objects, reproduced by the
Heliotype process. 1 vol. 8vo. $3.00.

_STEVENSON'S_ (ALEXANDER F.) The Battle of Stone River, near
Murfreesboro, Tenn., December 30, 1862, to January 3, 1863. 1 vol. 8vo.
With Maps. $3.00.

_STILLMAN'S_(DR. J.D.B.) The Horse in Motion, as Shown in a Series of
Views by Instantaneous Photography, and Anatomical Illustrations in
Chromo, after Drawings by William Hahn. With a Preface by Leland
Stanford. 1 vol. Royal quarto. Fully illustrated. $10.00.

_STIRLING'S_ (A.) At Daybreak. A Novel. 16mo. $1.25.

_STODDARD'S_ (JOHN L.) Red-Letter Days Abroad. 8vo. With 130 fine
Illustrations. Richly bound, full gilt edges, in box. $5.00. In
tree-calf or antique morocco, $10.00. In mosaic inlaid, calf, $12.50.

_STONE'S_ (CHARLES J., F.R.S.L., F.R.Hist.C.) Christianity before
Christ; or, Prototypes of our Faith and Culture. Crown 8vo. $3.

_SWEETSER'S_ (M.F.) Artist-Biographies. With twelve Heliotypes in each
volume. 5 vols. 16mo. Cloth. Each, $1.50.

    Vol. I.   Raphael, Leonardo, Angelo.
    Vol. II.  Titian, Guido, Claude.
    Vol. III. Reynolds, Turner, Landseer.
    Vol. IV.  Duerer, Rembrandt, Van Dyck.
    Vol. V.   Angelico, Murillo, Allston.

The set, in box, 5 vols. $7.50. Half-calf, $15.00. Tree-calf, $25.00.
Flexible calf, elegant leather case, $28.00.

_TALLAHASSEE GIRL_ (A). Vol. IX. of the Round-Robin Series of novels.
16mo. $1.00. In paper covers, 50 cents.

_TENNYSON'S_ (LORD) A Dream of Fair Women. Forty Illustrations. 4to.
$5.00. In morocco antique or tree-calf, $9.00.

---- The Princess. Holiday Edition. 120 Illustrations. Rich binding. In
a box. 8vo. $6.00. Morocco antique or tree-calf, $10.00. Crushed levant,
with silk linings, $25.00.

---- The Princess. Tremont Edition. 1 vol. 16mo. Beautifully
illustrated. With red lines, bevelled boards, and gilt edges, $2.50.
Half-calf, $4.00. Antique morocco, flexible calf, flexible seal or
tree-calf, $6.00.

_TENNYSON'S_ (LORD) The Princess. Pocket Edition. 1 vol. Little-Classic
size. With 30 Illustrations. Elegantly bound, $1.00. Half-calf. $2.25.
Antique morocco, or flexible calf or seal, $3.00. Tree-calf, $3.50.

---- The Princess. Students' Edition. Edited, with Notes and
Introduction, by W.J. ROLFE. 12mo. Illustrated. 75 cents.

---- Select Poems. Students' Edition. Edited, with Notes and
Introduction, by W.J. ROLFE. Beautifully illustrated, 1 vol. 12mo. 75
cents.

_THACKERAY_ (WILLIAM M.), The Ballads of. Complete illustrated edition.
Small quarto. Handsomely bound. $1.50.

_THOMAS A KEMPIS'S_ The Imitation of Christ. 16mo. Red edges. 300 cuts.
$1.50. Flexible calf or morocco, $4.00.

Pocket edition. Round corners. $1.00. Flexible calf, $3.00.

Edition de luxe. 8vo. Many full-page etchings, red ruling, etc. Full
leather binding, $9.00. In parchment covers, $5.00.

_THOMPSON'S_ (MAURICE) Songs of Fair Weather. $1.50.

_TICKNOR'S AMERICAN GUIDE-BOOKS: Newly revised and Augmented Editions._

New England. With nineteen Maps and Plans. Ninth edition. 16mo. $1.50.

The Maritime Provinces. With ten Maps and Plans. Fifth edition. 16mo.
$1.50.

The White Mountains. With six Maps and six Panoramas. Seventh edition.
16mo. $1.50.

The Middle States. With twenty-two Maps and Plans. 16mo. _Seventh
Edition in preparation._

_TICKNOR'S COMPLETE POCKET GUIDE TO EUROPE._ Revised edition. With six
Maps. 32mo. $1.50.

_TOWLE'S_ (GEORGE MAKEPEACE) England and Russia in Central Asia. No. 1,
Timely-Topics Series. 1 vol. 16mo. With Maps. 50 cents.

---- England in Egypt. No. 2, Timely-Topics Series. 1 vol. 16mo. With
Maps. 50 cents.

_TOWNSEND'S_ (MARY ASHLEY) Down the Bayou. A volume of Poems. 12mo.
$1.50.

_TOWNSEND'S_ (S. NUGENT) Our Indian Summer in the Far West. With
full-page Photographs of Scenes in Kansas, Colorado, New Mexico, Texas,
etc. 4to. $20.00.

_UNDERWOOD'S_ (FRANCIS H.) John Greenleaf Whittier. A Biography. 1 vol.
12mo. Illustrated. $1.50.

---- Henry Wadsworth Longfellow. 12mo. Illustrated. $1.50.

---- James Russell Lowell. A Biographical Sketch. 1 vol. Small quarto. 6
Heliotypes. $1.50.

_VIOLLET-LE-DUC'S_ (E.E.) Discourses on Architecture. Vol. I. Translated
by HENRY VAN BRUNT. With 18 large Plates and 110 Woodcuts. 8vo. $5.00.

_VIOLLET-LE-DUC_ (E.E.). _The Same._ Vol. II. With Steel Plates,
Chromos, and Woodcuts. 8vo. $5.00.

_WALLACE'S_ (SUSAN E.) The Storied Sea. 1 vol. Little-Classic size.
$1.00.

_WARE'S_ (PROFESSOR WILLIAM R.) Modern Perspective. A Treatise upon the
Principles and Practice of Plane and Cylindrical Perspective. 1 vol.
12mo. With Portfolio of 27 Plates. $5.00.

_WARING'S_ (COL. GEORGE E., JR.) Whip and Spur. Little-Classic size.
$1.25.

---- Village Improvements and Farm Villages. Little-Classic size.
Illustrated. 75 cents.

---- The Bride of the Rhine. Two Hundred Miles in a Mosel Row-Boat. To
which is added a paper on the Latin poet AUSONIUS and his poem
"Mosella," by REV. CHARLES T. BROOKS. 1 vol. Square 16mo. Fully
illustrated. $1.50.

---- Vix. No. 1 of Waring's Horse-Stories. 10 cents.

---- Ruby. No. 2 of Waring's Horse-Stories. 10 cents.

_WARNER'S_ (CHARLES DUDLEY) The American Newspaper. 32mo. 25 cents.

_WARREN'S_ (JOSEPH H., M.D.) A Plea for the Cure of Rupture. 12mo. In
cloth, $1.25. In parchment paper covers, $1.00.

---- A Practical Treatise on Hernia. 8vo. $5.00. Sheep. $6.50.

_WEDGWOOD'S_ (HENSLEIGH) Contested Etymologies in the Dictionary of the
Rev. W.W. SKEAT. 1 vol. 12mo. $2.00.

_WEEKS'S_ (LYMAN H.) Among the Azores. 1 vol. Square 16mo. With Map and
25 Illustrations. $1.50.

_WELLS'S_ (KATE GANNETT) About People. A volume of Essays.
Little-Classic size. $1.25.

_WENDELL'S_ (BARRETT) The Duchess Emilia. 1 vol. 16mo. $1.00.

_WHEELER'S_ (CHARLES GARDNER) The Course of Empire; Being Outlines of
the Chief Political Changes in the History of the World. 1 vol. 8vo.
With 25 colored Maps. $3.00. Half-calf, $5.50.

_WHEELER'S_ (WILLIAM A. and CHARLES G.) Familiar Allusions: A Handbook
of Miscellaneous Information. 12mo. $3.00. Half-calf, $5.50.

_WHIST,_ American or Standard. By G.W.P. Sixth edition. Revised and
enlarged. 16mo. $1.00.

_WILLIAMS'S_ (ALFRED M.) The Poets and Poetry of Ireland. With Critical
Essays and Notes. 1 vol. 12mo. $2.00.

_WINCKELMANN'S_ (JOHN) The History of Ancient Art. Translated by Dr.
G.H. LODGE With 78 copperplate Engravings. 2 vols. 8vo. $9.00.
Half-calf, $18.00. Morocco antique or tree-calf, $25.00.

_WINTER'S_ (WILLIAM) English Rambles, and other Fugitive Pieces in Prose
and Verse. 1 vol. 12mo. $1.50.

---- Poems. New revised edition. 1 vol. 16mo. Cloth, $1.50. Half-calf,
$3.00. Morocco antique or tree-calf, $4.00.

---- The Trip to England. With Illustrations by Joseph Jefferson. 16mo.
$2.00. Half calf, $4.00. Morocco antique or tree-calf, $5.00.

_WOODS'S_ (REV. LEONARD) History of the Andover Theological Seminary. 1
vol. 8vo. $3.50.

       *       *       *       *       *

=MR. HOWELLS'S WORKS.=

MR. HOWELLS'S LATEST NOVELS.

=Indian Summer. The Rise of Silas Lapham. A Woman's Reason. A Modern
Instance. Dr. Breen's Practice. A Fearful Responsibility.= Each in 1
vol. 12mo. $1.50. The 6 volumes in a neat box, $9.00.

    "There has been no more rigidly artistic writing done in
    America since Hawthorne's time."--_The Critic (N.Y.)._

    "Exquisite pieces of workmanship."--_New Orleans Democrat._

=MR. HOWELLS'S COMEDIES.= Each in 1 vol. 16mo. $1.25.

    =Out of the Question.=
    =A Counterfeit Presentment.=

    "He is equal as an artist to the best French writers. His
    books are not only artistically fine, but morally
    wholesome."--_Magazin fuer die Literatur._

=MR. HOWELLS'S PLAYS.= Each in 1 vol. 32mo. 50 cents.

    =The Register.=
    =The Parlor-Car.=
    =The Sleeping-Car.=
    =The Elevator.=

    "Written with all the exquisite literary skill of which Mr.
    Howells is so thoroughly a master, and every page sparkles
    with bright touches of dainty humor."--_Syracuse Journal._

=MR. HOWELLS'S POEMS.= Printed on imported hand-made paper. White
parchment covers. Enlarged edition. $2. 00.

=THREE VILLAGES.= 1 vol. Little-Classic size. $1.25.

=CHOICE AUTOBIOGRAPHIES.= 8 vols. 16mo. $1.25 each. Edited and provided
with Critical and Biographical Essays by Mr. HOWELLS. The Margravine of
Baireuth, Lord Herbert of Cherbury, Ellwood, Alfieri, Goldoni, Gibbon,
and Marmontel.

=TICKNOR & COMPANY'S NEW BOOKS,=

SPRING OF 1886.

The prices named below are subject to revision on publication.


_THE STORY OF MARGARET KENT._ By HENRY HAYES. 1 vol. 12mo. $1.50.

A new and thrilling novel of literary life in New York, written with
masterly skill. One of the most exacting of reviewers says that it will
"convince and touch thoughtful and sensitive readers"; and another, a
well-known novelist and poet, says: "The plot and situations are
original and natural. It is out of the common run, and sparkles with
life--real life--and deep feeling."


_AMERICAN WHIST._ By G.W.P. 1 vol. 16mo. Sixth Edition, Revised. $1.00.

A new and fully revised and much-enlarged edition of this foremost
classic, best teacher, and wisest companion as to the most enjoyable
game of cards. After running through several successful editions during
the past five years, this invaluable book is now to be brought out
improved in many ways, and will be indispensable to all who play Whist.


_CLEOPATRA._ By HENRY GREVILLE. Original Copyright Edition, with new
Portrait. 1 vol. 16mo. $1.25.

"Cleopatra" is a brilliant new novel by the author of "Dosia" and
"Dosia's Daughter," who is acknowledged as foremost among the European
novelists of to-day. The remarkable success that has attended Henry
Greville's previous works, foreshadows the popular demand for
"Cleopatra," her latest (and in many respects, her best) novel.


_EVERY-DAY RELIGION._ By REV. JAMES FREEMAN CLARKE, D.D., Author of
"Self-Culture," "The Ideas of Paul," &c., &c. 1 vol. 12mo. $1.50.

An admirable group of terse, strong, and practical discourses on the
religion of the home, the office, the work-shop, and the field. It tells
how, amid the cares and annoyances of this workaday world, one may grow
towards a noble and peaceful life. It will be an invaluable companion,
an indispensable "guide, philosopher, and friend." The eminent success
of JAMES FREEMAN CLARKE in works of this high class is shown by the
great popularity of his "Self-Culture," which is now in its eleventh
edition.


_EDGE-TOOLS OF SPEECH._ By MATURIN M. BALLOU, Author of "A Treasury of
Thought," "Due South," &c., &c. 1 vol. 8vo. $3.50.

A great new work, in which are preserved the choicest expressions and
opinions of the great thinkers and writers of all ages, from Confucius to
Ruskin. These pungent apothegms and brilliant memorabilia are all
carefully classified by topics; so that the choicest work of many years
of patient labor in the libraries of America and Europe is condensed into
perfect form and made readily available. It will be indispensable to all
writers and speakers, and should be in every library.--_Traveller._


_LIGHT ON THE HIDDEN WAY._ With an Introduction by JAMES FREEMAN CLARKE.
1 vol. 16mo. $1.00.

A remarkable and thrilling romance of immortality, illustrating by an
account of personal experiences the relations between the seen and the
unseen. All readers of the literature of the supernatural in books like
"The Little Pilgrim," &c., will be profoundly interested in this strange
record of the nearness of the spiritual and material worlds.

_TWO COLLEGE GIRLS._ By HELEN DAWES BROWN. 1 vol. 12mo. $1.50.

One of the most important of forthcoming books. It is a capital study of
girl-students from Boston, New York, and Chicago, exemplifying the most
piquant characteristics of the respective phases of civilization and
social criteria of the three cities. It is suited alike to old and
young, being rich in beautiful passages of tender pathos, strong, simple
and vivid, and full of sustaining interest. Nothing has been published
since "Little Women" that will so strike the popular taste.

_INDIAN SUMMER._ By W.D. HOWELLS, Author of "The Rise of Silas Lapham,"
&c. 1 vol. 12mo. $1.50.

"Mr. Howells's new story is in his pleasantest vein, full of his quiet
humor clothed in the neatest expressions. It is international; the
contrast of American and foreign ways runs through it, and Mr. Howells
has added the contrast of the old and the new Americanism. The hero is a
Western journalist, a Mugwump, much given to banter of the American
sort."--_The Nation._

_THE PRELATE._ By ISAAC HENDERSON. 1 vol. 12mo. $1.50.

A story of the American colony and native society in Rome. The
situations in this powerful book are among the most intense and dramatic
of anything that has been offered by an American author for years.

_CHRISTIAN SYMBOLS AND STORIES OF THE SAINTS._ By CLARA ERSKINE CLEMENT.
Assisted by KATHERINE E. CONWAY. 1 vol. Large 12mo., with many full page
illustrations. $2.50.

This is a revised version of the greater part of the author's "Hand-book
of Legendary Art,"--of which seventeen large editions have been
exhausted. The clear and beautiful explanation of the expressive symbols
by which men's minds are helped to reverent contemplation of the
mysteries of revealed religion, leaves nothing to be desired. The
"Stories of the Saints" will be illustrated by numerous full page
engravings from the rarest and finest works of the great masters of
Christian Art--prominence being given to scenes from the life of the
Blessed Virgin, and pictures of the Evangelists, and the Founders and
notable Saints of the Religious Orders.

_JOHN BODEWIN'S TESTIMONY._ By MARY HALLOCK FOOTE, Author of "The Led
Horse Claim," &c. 1 vol. 12mo. $1.50.

"Mrs. Foote's first novel raised her to a level on which she is only to
be compared with our best women novelists. To make this comparison
briefly, Miss Woolson observes keenly, Mrs. Burnett writes charmingly,
and Mrs. Foote feels intensely."--_The Critic._

_MONOGRAPHS OF AMERICAN ARCHITECTURE._

No. II. THE HARTFORD CAPITOL. R.M. Upjohn, Architect.

No. III. AMES MEMORIAL BUILDINGS, NORTH EASTON. H.H. Richardson,
Architect.

Gelatine Plates (from nature), 13 x 16. Each in portfolio. $5.00.

The remarkable success of the first Monograph shows the demand existing
for artistic work of this high grade; and an equal sale may be predicted
for the portfolio that illustrates the beautiful marble Gothic building
of the Connecticut State Capitol. This possesses perhaps even a higher
interest than the Harvard Law School, because it is a great public
building, and not an appendage of an institution.

_The American Architect_ says: "The execution of the work is all that
could be asked. It would be hard to offer a more encouraging example of
the kind of work to be expected in this series."

_A STROLL WITH KEATS._ By FRANCES CLIFFORD BROWN. 1 vol. Illustrated.
Square 16mo. $1.50.

One of the choicest gems of art in illustration, consisting of
illuminated pages, in beautiful designs, illustrating some of the finest
verses of the great English poet.

_NEXT DOOR._ By CLARA LOUISE BURNHAM, Author of "Dearly Bought," "A Sane
Lunatic," &c. 1 vol. 12mo. $1.50.

One of the brightest, prettiest, and most charming tales yet offered to
the public. The scene is in Boston, the time the present, the plot
exciting, the characters lifelike, while the style is graceful and
skilful.

_POETS AND PROBLEMS._ By GEORGE WILLIS COOKE, Author of "Emerson; His
Life, Writings and Philosophy." 1 vol. 12mo. $2.00.

Mr. Cooke brings to his work the most inexhaustible and painstaking
patience, the most thorough devotion to the labor he has undertaken, and
the deepest mental sympathy with his subjects. His present work embraces
Tennyson, Ruskin, and Browning.

_THE SPHINX'S CHILDREN AND OTHER PEOPLE'S._ By ROSE TERRY COOKE, Author
of "Somebody's Neighbors," &c. 1 vol. 12mo. $1.50.

This volume of short stories, reprinted from the author's contributions
to the "_Atlantic,_" "_Harper's,_" "_The Galaxy,_" &c., will be found
like "Somebody's Neighbors," to show "that profound insight into Puritan
character, and that remarkable command of Yankee dialect, in which Mrs.
Cooke has but one equal, and no superior. These exquisite chronicles are
full of high local color, pathos and piquancy, and their perusal is
attended with alternate tears and smiles. Their narration is vigorous
and spirited, sparkling in all points, and outlined with rare dramatic
skill."

_THE LIFE AND GENIUS OF GOETHE._ The Lectures at the Concord School of
Philosophy for 1885. Edited by F.B. SANBORN and W.T. HARRIS. 1 vol.
12mo. With 2 portraits. $2.00.

A work of exceptional interest, containing fifteen of the lectures
concerning Goethe which were read at the Concord School of Philosophy
last summer. Prof. Hewett furnishes an account of the newly-discovered
Goethe manuscripts for the introduction to the volume. Among the writers
are Drs. Bartol and Hedge, Mrs. Howe, Mrs. Cheney, Mrs. Sherman of
Chicago, Mr. Soldan of St. Louis, Mr. Snider of Cincinnati, Mr.
Partridge of Brooklyn, N.Y., Mr. Davidson of New Jersey, Prof. White of
Ithaca, N.Y., and Messrs. Emery, Harris, and Sanborn of Concord, the
last named the editor.--_Traveller._

_THE OLDEN-TIME SERIES._ 16mo. Per vol., 50 cents.

There appears to be, from year to year, a growing popular taste for
quaint and curious reminiscences of "Ye Olden Time," and to meet this,
Mr. Henry M. Brooks has prepared a series of interesting handbooks. The
materials have been gleaned chiefly from old newspapers of Boston and
Salem, sources not easily accessible, and while not professing to be
history, the volumes will contain much material for history, so combined
and presented as to be both amusing and instructive. The titles of some
of the volumes indicate their scope and their promise of
entertainment:--"Curiosities of the Old Lottery," "Days of the Spinning
Wheel," "Some Strange and Curious Punishments," "Quaint and Curious
Advertisements," "Literary Curiosities," "New-England Sunday," etc.

_THE IMPERIAL ISLAND--ENGLAND'S CHRONICLE IN STONE._ By JAMES F.
HUNNEWELL. 1 vol. 8vo. Richly illustrated. $3.50.

This admirable and impressive work is a companion to the same author's
well-known "Historical Monuments of France," and contains a vivid record
of the life of Merrie England, as exemplified by her august castles and
palaces, abbeys and cathedrals.

LIFE AND WORKS OF MRS. CLEMMER.

_AN AMERICAN WOMAN'S LIFE AND WORK._ A Memorial of Mary Clemmer, by
EDMUND HUDSON, with Portrait.

_POEMS OF LIFE AND NATURE._

_HIS TWO WIVES._

_MEN, WOMEN, AND THINGS._ Revised and augmented.

The whole in four 12mo. volumes, tastefully bound, forming a beautiful,
uniform set of the selected works, together with the memorial biography
of this popular and lamented writer.

_THE SAUNTERER._ By CHARLES GOODRICH WHITING. 1 vol. 16mo. $1.25.

A rare and choice collection of charming little essays and poems about
nature, some of which have won the highest possible commendation from
Stedman and other eminent critics. The author has for many years been
connected with the editorial staff of "The Springfield Republican."

_THE LOST NAME._ By MRS. MADELEINE VINTON DAHLGREN, author of "A
Washington Winter," "South-sea Sketches," etc. 1 vol. 12mo. $1.50.

The remarkable success of Mrs. Dahlgren's previous portrayals of society
make it certain that her forthcoming work will be full of life and
purpose, and therefore sure to attract and interest.

_LIFE AND LETTERS OF HENRY WADSWORTH LONGFELLOW._ Edited by Rev. Samuel
Longfellow. 2 vols. 12mo. $6.00. With new steel engraved Portraits and
many wood Engravings.

_Also a limited edition de Luxe, with Proof Portraits._

The biography of the foremost American poet, written by his brother, is
probably the most important work of the kind brought out in the United
States for years. It is rich in domestic, personal, and family interest,
anecdotes, reminiscences, and other thoroughly charming _memorabilia._

_ITALIAN POETS._ By W.D. HOWELLS. 12mo. $1.50.

Biographical and Critical Notices of the masters of Italian poetry.

_A SEA CHANGE_; or, Love's Stowaway. A Comic opera. By W.D. HOWELLS. 1
vol. 16mo. Little-Classic size.

_THE VIRGINIA CAMPAIGN OF GENERAL POPE IN 1862._ Being Volume II. of
Papers read before the Military Historical Society of Massachusetts.
With Maps and Plans. 1 vol. 8vo. $3.00.

_THE YOUNG PEOPLE'S TENNYSON._ Students' Edition. 1 vol. 16mo. Edited,
with Notes and Introduction, by W.J. Rolfe. Beautifully illustrated. 75
cents.

_SELECT POEMS OF TENNYSON._ Second Part. Students' Edition. Edited, with
Notes and Introduction, by W.J. Rolfe 1 vol. 16mo. Beautifully
illustrated. 75 cents.

_SONGS AND BALLADS OF THE OLD PLANTATIONS, BY UNCLE REMUS._ By JOEL
CHANDLER HARRIS. 1 vol. 12mo. $1.50.

"Uncle Remus's" legends have created a strong demand for his songs,
which will be eagerly welcomed.

_A ROMANTIC YOUNG LADY._ By ROBERT GRANT, author of "The Confessions of
a Frivolous Girl," "An Average Man," etc. 1 vol. 12mo. $1.50.

This is the latest and one of the strongest works of the successful
delineator of modern society life and manners. It will be read eagerly
and enjoyably by thousands of lovers of the best fiction.

_A NEW AND ENLARGED CONCORDANCE TO THE HOLY SCRIPTURES._ By Rev. J.B.R.
WALKER.

This monumental work of patient industry and iron diligence is
indispensable to all students of the Bible, to which it is the key and
introduction. Many errors and omissions in the plans of the older
Concordances have been avoided in this one, which also bears reference
to the Revised Bible, as well as to the King-James version.

       *       *       *       *       *

=THE STUDENTS' SERIES OF=

STANDARD POETRY.

EDITED BY W.J. ROLFE, A.M.

--> All these books are equally suited to the use of the student, and
that of the general reader. They should have a place in every library.
Price, 75 cents each.

=I. SCOTT'S LADY OF THE LAKE.=

The text is correctly printed for the first time in fifty years. The
_notes_ (88 pp.) include Scott's and Lockhart's, and are fuller than in
any other edition, English or American. The _illustrations_ are mainly
of the _scenery_ of the poem, from sketches made on the spot.

=II. TENNYSON'S THE PRINCESS.=

The _notes_ (50 pp.) give the history of the poem, _all_ the readings of
the earlier editions, selected comments by the best English and American
critics, full explanations of all allusions, &c. The _illustrations_ are
from the elegant Holiday edition.

=III. SELECT POEMS OF TENNYSON.=

Including the Lady of Shalott, the Miller's Daughter, OEnone, the
Lotos-Eaters, The Palace of Art, A Dream of Fair Women, Morte d'Arthur,
The Talking Oak, Ulysses, Locksley Hall, The Two Voices, St. Agnes' Eve,
Sir Galahad, The Brook, &c. The text is from the latest English edition
(1884).

=IV. SCOTT'S MARMION.=

With copious Notes and introductory matter. The Text is now correctly
printed _for the first time._

=V. THE YOUNG PEOPLE'S TENNYSON.= (IN PRESS.)

=VI. SELECT POEMS OF TENNYSON.= SECOND PART. (IN PRESS.)


=THE MEMORIAL HISTORY OF BOSTON,=

In Four Volumes. Quarto.

With more than 500 Illustrations by famous artists and engravers, all
made for this work.

Edited by JUSTIN WINSOR, LIBRARIAN OF HARVARD UNIVERSITY.

Among the contributors are:

    Gov. JOHN D. LONG,
    Hon. CHARLES FRANCIS ADAMS,
    Rev. PHILLIPS BROOKS, D.D.,
    Rev. E.E. HALE, D.D.,
    Hon. ROBERT C. WINTHROP,
    Hon. J. HAMMOND TRUMBULL,
    Admiral G.U. PREBLE,
    Dr. O.W. HOLMES,
    JOHN G. WHITTIER,
    Rev. J.F. CLARKE, D.D.,
    Rev. A.P. PEABODY, D.D.,
    Col. T.W. HIGGINSON,
    Professor ASA GRAY,
    Gen. F.W. PALFREY,
    HENRY CABOT LODGE.

VOLUME I. treats of the Geology, Fauna, and Flora; the Voyages and Maps
of the Northmen, Italians, Captain John Smith, and the Plymouth
Settlers; the Massachusetts Company, Puritanism, and the Aborigines; the
Literature, Life, and Chief Families of the Colonial Period.

VOL. II. treats of the Royal Governors; French and Indian Wars; Witches
and Pirates; The Religion, Literature, Customs, and Chief Families of
the Provincial Period.

VOL. III. treats of the Revolutionary Period and the Conflict around
Boston; and the Statesmen, Sailors, and Soldiers, the Topography,
Literature, and Life of Boston during that time; and also of the Last
Hundred Years' History, the War of 1812, Abolitionism, and the Press.

VOL. IV. treats of the Social Life, Topography, and Landmarks,
Industries, Commerce, Railroads, and Financial History of this Century
in Boston; with Monographic Chapters on Boston's Libraries, Women,
Science, Art, Music, Philosophy, Architecture, Charities, etc.

*** _Sold by subscription only. Send for a Prospectus to the Publisher,_

TICKNOR AND COMPANY, Boston.


THE CHOICEST EDITIONS

OF THE

=FIVE GREAT MODERN POEMS.=

Drawn and engraved under the care of A.V.S. ANTHONY. Each in one volume,
8vo, elegantly bound, with full gilt edges, in a neat box. Each poem, in
cloth, $6.00; in tree calf, or antique morocco, $10.00; in crushed
levant, extra, with silk linings, $25.00. Copiously illustrated after
drawings by Thomas Moran, E.H. Garrett, Harry Fenn, A.B. Frost, and
other distinguished artists.

=CHILDE HAROLD.=

The choicest gift-book of 1885-1886. With nearly 100 noble
Illustrations, of great artistic value and beauty, representing the
splendid scenery and architecture of the Rhine, Greece, Italy, etc.

=THE PRINCESS.=

The most famous poem of ALFRED, LORD TENNYSON. With 120 new and
beautiful Illustrations.

"The most superb book of the season. The exquisite binding makes a fit
casket for Tennyson's enchanting 'Princess.'"--_Hartford Journal._

=THE LADY OF THE LAKE.=

A superb fine-art edition, with 120 Illustrations. The choicest edition
of Scott's wonderful poem of Scottish chivalry.

"On page after page are seen the great dome of Ben-an rising in mid-air,
huge Ben-venue throwing his shadowed masses upon the lakes, and the long
heights of Ben Lomond hemming the horizon."--_Atlantic Monthly._

=LUCILE.=

By OWEN MEREDITH. With 160 Illustrations.

The high peaks of the Pyrenees, the golden valleys of the Rhineland, and
the battle-swept heights of the Crimea.

"This new edition is simply perfect--paper, type, printing, and
especially the illustrations,--a most charming Christmas
gift."--_American Literary Churchman._

=MARMION.=

With more than 100 Illustrations, and Borders.

"Wild Scottish beauty. Never had a poem of stately and immortal beauty a
more fitting setting."--_Chicago Inter-Ocean._

_For Sale by Booksellers. Sent, postpaid, on receipt of price, by the
Publishers,_

TICKNOR AND COMPANY, Boston.


THE

=AMERICAN ARCHITECT=

_AND BUILDING NEWS._

An Illustrated Weekly Journal of Architecture and the Building Trades.

Each number is accompanied by six fine quarto illustrations, while
illustrative cuts are liberally used in the text. Although the paper
addresses itself primarily to architects and builders, by its
discussions upon matters of interest common to those engaged in building
pursuits, it is the object of the editors to make it acceptable and
necessary to that large portion of the educated classes who are
interested in and appreciate the importance of good architectural
surroundings, to civil and sanitary engineers, draughtsmen, antiquaries,
craftsmen of all kinds, and all intelligent readers.

As an indication of the feeling with which this journal is regarded by
the profession, we quote the following extract from a report of a
committee of the American Institute of Architects upon "American
Architectural Journals":--

    "At Boston, Mass., is issued the AMERICAN ARCHITECT AND
    BUILDING NEWS, a weekly of the first class, and, it must be
    acknowledged, the only journal in this country that can
    compare favorably with the great London architectural
    publications. It is very liberally illustrated with full-page
    lithographic impressions of the latest designs of our most
    noted architects, and with occasional views of celebrated
    European buildings. Once a month a fine gelatine print is
    issued in a special edition. Its editorial department is
    conducted in a scholarly, courteous, and, at the same time,
    independent tone, and its selections made with excellent
    judgment. It is the accepted exemplar of American
    architectural practice, and is found in the office of almost
    every architect in the Union."--_April 15, 1885._

=Subscription Prices. (In Advance.)=

REGULAR EDITION.--$6.00 per year; $3.50 per half year.

GELATINE EDITION (the same as the regular edition, but including 12 or
more Gelatine Prints).--$7.00 per year; $4.00 per half year.

MONTHLY EDITION (identical with the first weekly issue for each month,
but containing no Gelatine Prints).--$1.75 per year; $1.00 per half
year.

Bound volumes for 1876, 1877, 1878, 1879, 1880, 1881, $10.50; 1882,
1883, 1884, and 1885, $9.00 each.

Specimen numbers and advertising rates furnished on application to the
publishers,

TICKNOR AND COMPANY,

_211 TREMONT STREET, BOSTON, MASS._


    Transcriber's notes

      Pointing hand symbol represented by --> in .txt version.
      *** used to represent Inverted Asterism in .txt version.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Olden Time Series, Vol. 1:
Curiosities of the Old Lottery, by Henry M. Brooks

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE OLDEN TIME SERIES, VOL. ***

***** This file should be named 17970.txt or 17970.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/7/9/7/17970/

Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Christine D. and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

*** END: FULL LICENSE ***

