Project Gutenberg's Some Spring Days in Iowa, by Frederick John Lazell

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Some Spring Days in Iowa

Author: Frederick John Lazell

Release Date: April 22, 2006 [EBook #18227]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SOME SPRING DAYS IN IOWA ***




Produced by Brian Sogard, Julia Miller, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net





Transcriber's Note: A number of typographical errors and inconsistencies
have been maintained in this version of this book. They have been marked
with a [TN-#], which refers to a description in the complete list found
at the end of the text.




Some Spring Days in Iowa


           BY
  Frederick John Lazell


     [Illustration]


   CEDAR RAPIDS, IOWA
     THE TORCH PRESS
 NINETEEN HUNDRED EIGHT




     COPYRIGHT, 1908
           BY
     FRED J. LAZELL




FOREWORD


It is indeed a pleasure thus to open the gate while my friend leads us
away from the din and rush of the city into "God's great out-of-doors."
Having walked with him on "Some Winter Days," one is all the more eager
to follow him in the gentler months of Spring--that mother-season, with
its brooding pathos, and its seeds stirring in their sleep as if they
dreamed of flowers.

Our guide is at once an expert and a friend, a man of science and a poet.
If he should sleep a year, like dear old Rip, he would know, by the
calendar of the flowers, what day of the month he awoke. He knows the
story of trees, the arts of insects, the habits of birds and their parts
of speech. His wealth of detail is amazing, but never wearying, and he is
happily allusive to the nature-lore of the poets, and to the legends and
myths of the woodland. He has the insight of Thoreau, the patience of
Burroughs, and a nameless quality of his own--a blend of joyous love and
wonder. His style is as lucid as sunlight, investing his pages with
something of the simplicity and calm of Nature herself. The fine sanity
and health of the man are in the book, as of one to whom the beauty of
the world is reason enough for life, and an invitation to live well. He
does not preach--though he sometimes stops to point to a forest vista, or
a sunset, where the colors are melted into a beauty too fair and frail
for this earth.

Let us hope that the author will complete his history of the seasons, and
tell of us of Summer with its riot of life and loveliness, and of the
Autumn-time with its pensive, dreamy beauty that is akin to death. He is
a teacher of truth and good-will, of health and wisdom, of the
brotherhood of all breathing things. Having opened the gate, I leave it
open for those who have eyes to see and ears to hear.

JOSEPH NEWTON

CEDAR RAPIDS, IOWA
  DECEMBER 1, 1908




APRIL--BUDS AND BIRD SONGS




IV. APRIL--BUDS AND BIRD SONGS


              _"Has she not shown us all?
    From the clear space of ether, to the small
    Breath of new buds unfolding? From the meaning
    Of Jove's large eyebrow, to the tender greening
    Of April meadows?"_

  _"And whiles Zeus gives the sunshine, whiles the rain."_


A strong southeast wind is blowing straight up the broad river, driving
big undulations up the stream, counter to the current which, in turn,
pushes at the base of the waves and causes their wind-driven crests to
fall forward and break into spray. The whole surface of the river is
flecked with these whitecaps, a rare sight on an inland stream but
characteristic of April. We sit on a ledge of rock high up the slope of
the canon and listen as they break, break, break. We may close our eyes
and fancy we are with Edmund Danton in his sea-girt dungeon, or with
Tennyson and his "cold, gray stones," or with King Canute and his
flattering courtiers on the sandy shore. But a song sparrow with his
recitative "Oleet, oleet, oleet," followed by the well-known cadenza,
dispels the fancies and calls our attention to himself as he sits on a
hop hornbeam and sings at half-minute intervals. The wind ruffles his
sober coat of brown and gray and he looks like a careless artist,
thrilling with the soul of song.

Notwithstanding the high wind there is a heavy haze through which the sun
casts but faint shadows. Across the white-flecked river the emerald
meadow rises in a mile long slope until it meets the sky in a mist of
silver blue. To the right a big tract of woodland is haloed by a denser
cloud of vivid violet as if the pillar of cloud which led the Israelites
by day had rested there; or as if mingled smoke and incense were rising
from Druid altars around the sacred grove. As a matter of fact, it is a
mingling of the ever increasing humidity, the dust particles in the air
and the smoke from many April grass fires. To the left of the meadow
there is a sweep of arable land where disc harrows, seeders, and ploughs
are at work. The unsightly corn stalks of the winter have been laid low,
the brown fields are as neat and tidy as if they had been newly swept;
and this is Iowa in April.

Up and down the river the willow leaves are just unfolding, bordering the
stream with tender green. The tassels of the pussy willows, which were
white in March, are now rosy and gold, due to the development of the
anthers. The aspens at the front of the wood are thickly hung with the
long yellowish-white tassels and look like masses of floss silk among the
tops of the darker trees. A big cottonwood is at its most picturesque
period in the whole year. The dark red anthers make the myriads of
catkins look like elongated strawberries. Tomorrow, or the next day,
these red anthers will break and discharge their yellow pollen and then
the tassels will be golden instead of strawberry-colored. Spring seems to
unfold her beauties slowly but she has something new each day for the
faithful.

The ash, the hackberry, the oaks, the linden, the locusts on the hill and
the solitary old honey-locust down by the river's brink are as yet
unresponsive to the smiles of spring. The plum, the crab apple, the
hawthorn and the wild cherry are but just beginning to push green points
between their bud scales. But the elms are a glory of dull gold; every
twig is fringed with blossoms. The maples have lost their fleecy white
softness, for the staminate flowers which were so beautiful in March have
withered now. But the fruit blossoms remind us of Lowell's line, "The
maple puts her corals on in May." In Iowa he might have made it April
instead of May. But that would have spoiled his verse.

       *       *       *       *       *

For long we sit and drink in the beauty of the scene. Meanwhile the birds
on this wooded slope are asking us to use our ears as well as our eyes.
Such a mingling of bird voices! The "spring o' th' year" of the meadow
larks and the mingled squeaks and music of the robins are brought up by
the wind from the river bottom, and the shrill clear "phe-be" of the
chickadee is one of the prettiest sounds now, just as it was in February.
Pretty soon a bevy of them come flitting and talking along, like a girl
botany class on the search. Before they have passed out of sight the
loud and prolonged "O-wick-o-wick-o-wick-o-wick" of the flicker makes us
lift our eyes to the top of a scarlet oak and anon three or four of the
handsome fellows alight nearer by so that we may the better admire their
white-tailed coats, brown shoulders, scarlet napes and the beautiful
black crescent on their breasts. When we hear the call of the flicker we
may know that spring is here to stay. They are as infallible as the
yellow-breasted larks in the meadows.

"Chip-chip-chip-chip,"--yes, of course that's the chipping sparrow;
another of the engaging creatures which almost has been driven from the
habitations of his human friends by the miserable English sparrows. Often
have we seen the little fellow set upon and brutally hurt by these
pirates. Now he stays around rural homes, and his chestnut crown, brown
coat mixed with black and gray, his whitish vest and black bill are
always a welcome sight. He takes up the chant of the year where the
departing junco left it off, throws back his tiny head and his little
throat flutters with the oft-repeated syllable, continued rapidly for
about four seconds. A while longer we wait and are rewarded by a few bars
of the musicful song of the brown thrasher who has just arrived with Mrs.
Thrasher for two weeks of courtship and song, after which they will build
a new home in the hazel thicket and go to housekeeping.

Just as we are rising to leave there is the glimmer of the blue-bird's
wing and the brilliant fellow and his pretty mate appear at the top of
the bank, where the staghorn sumac still bears its berries. None of the
birds of the winter seems to care much for these berries but the
bluebirds evidently love them. As another instance of their tastes in
this direction may be mentioned the fact that for the past three weeks a
pair of blue birds have made many visits every day to a Chinese matrimony
vine, by the dining room window of the writer's home. This vine, as
everyone knows, has a wreath of juicy red berries in the fall, which hang
through the winter and are dried, but still red, in the spring. It was
the first week of March when the family first heard the pleasing notes of
the blue bird outside the window at breakfast time, and saw the
brilliant male sitting on a post on the back lawn and his less
brilliant, but equally attractive mate sitting on the clothesline. A
little later and he flew to the vine, picked off one berry and ate it,
took another one in his mouth and then returned to his post, while she
followed his example. Both chirped and pronounced the berries good,
though up to that time the members of the household had supposed they
were poisonous. After a few more bites of the morning meal the birds went
all around the house, inspecting every nook and crevice. But they found
every place fully occupied by the pestiferous English sparrows, who
darted at them maliciously. For two whole days the blue birds stayed
around the lawn and garden, but the sparrows made their lives miserable
and finally they went to the timber an eighth of a mile away and selected
an abiding place in the cavity of a basswood. But every morning and
evening, sometimes many times during the day, they came for their meal of
berries from the vine. Usually they were on hand as soon as the sun was
up, and a more devoted and well behaved couple was never seen either in
the bird or the human world.

       *       *       *       *       *

We rise at length and walk along the wooded slope admiring new beauties
at every step. Here is a thicket of wild gooseberry filled with dark
green leaves and the tinkling notes of tree sparrows, and we hardly know
which is the more beautiful. A little farther and we are in a tangle of
pink and magenta raspberry vines from which the green leaves are just
pushing out. The elder has made a great start; the yellowish-green shoots
from the stems and from the roots are already more than six inches long.
The panicled dogwood and the red-osier dogwood (no, not the flowering
dogwood) as yet show no signs of foliage, but the fine white lines in the
bark of the bladdernut, which have been so attractive all winter, are now
enhanced by the soft myrtle green of the tender young leaves. The shrubby
red cedar is twice as fresh and green as it was a month ago, as it hangs
down the face of the splintered rock where the farmer boys have set a
trap to catch the mother mink. But Mrs. Mink is wary. Here is a pile of
feathers, evidently from a wild duck, which seems to indicate that while
the duck was making a meal of a fish which she had brought to shore, the
mink pounced upon her and ate both duck and fish.

While we stand looking there is a slight movement among the roots of a
silver maple at the river's brink. A moment later Mrs. Mink comes around
the tree and towards us. She is about eighteen inches long, with a bushy
tail about another eight inches, her blackish-brown body about as big
round as a big man's wrist, and she has a "business-looking" face and
jaw. Did you ever try to take the young minks from their nest in the
latter part of April and did Mrs. Mink fight? She hasn't seen or smelled
us yet, but suddenly when she is within seven feet of us, there is an
upward movement of that supple, snakelike neck, a quick glance of those
black diamond eyes, and she turns at right angles and dives into the
river. A frog could not enter the water so silently.

       *       *       *       *       *

We climb the slope again and pause in front of a big sugar maple, a
rather rare sight hereabouts. The sap-sucker has bored a row of fresh
holes in the bark of the tree and the syrup has flowed out so freely that
the whole south side of the tree is wet with it. Scores of wasps, bees
and flies of all sizes and colors are revelling in the sweetness.

Finally we come to where there is less grass but more dead leaves and
leaf mould, and here is the first real herbaceous flower of this spring,
the dwarf white trillium, or wake-robin. How beautiful it looks, its
three pure, waxy-white petals, its six golden anthers and three long
styles, and its pretty whorl of three ovate leaves, at the summit of a
stem about four inches high. A little farther and we find a group of them
and then other clusters, fresh and pure and sweet enough to make a
bouquet for Euphrosyne.

Oh, but someone says, the hepatica is the first flower of spring; all the
nature writers say so. Well, but they don't seem to say much about the
trillium; possibly they haven't found it so often. Indeed, it seems to be
more choice of its location. It is hardly ever, perhaps it would be safe
to say never, found on a southern or a southwestern slope. Almost
invariably it is found on the steep slope of a river bank, facing
northeast or east. Hepaticas nearly always grow on the same slope, but
they come into blossom about two days later than the trillium. But on
another bank which faces the noon and the afternoon sun the hepaticas are
up with the trilliums in the calendar of spring. This year the trillium
was found blooming, on a northeastern slope, March 24. At this place the
hepatica did not bloom until March 26. But it bloomed March 24, on a
southwest slope, fifteen miles away.

By-the-way, the list of March blooming plants for 1908, is probably one
of the longest for years: March 20, aspen; twenty-first, hazel and silver
maple; twenty-third, pussy willow, prairie willow and white elm;
twenty-fourth, dwarf white trillium and hepatica (also known as
liverleaf, squirrelcup, and blue anemone); twenty-fifth, slippery elm,
cottonwood; twenty-ninth, box elder and fragrant sumac; thirtieth,
dandelion; thirty-first, Dutchman's breeches.

How some of these early flowers secure the perpetuation of their species
is an interesting study for amateur botanists. In the case of the
trillium the fruit is a three-lobed reddish berry, but one has to search
for it as diligently as Diogenes did for an honest man before he finds
it. The plant seldom sets seed in this vicinity, but seems to depend
rather upon its tuber-like rootstocks in which the leaves lie curled all
through the winter. The hepatica attracts pollen-feeding flies, female
hive-bees and the earliest butterflies, and is thus cross-fertilized to
some extent; but it is thought also to be able to effect
self-fertilization. In the case of the _hepatica acutiloba_, however, it
has been found that staminate flowers grow on one plant and pistillate
flowers on another, hence insects are essential to the perpetuation of
this species.

After bringing us the trilliums and hepaticas in numbers, Nature pauses.
She means to give us time to inhale the fragrance of some of the
hepaticas, and to learn that other hepaticas of the same species have no
fragrance at all; that there is a variety of delicate colors, white,
pink, purple, lavender, and blue; that the colored parts, which look
like petals are really sepals; that they usually number six, but may be
as many as twelve; that there are three small sessile leaves forming an
involucre directly under the flower; that if we search we shall find some
with four, more rare than four-leaved clovers; that the plant which was
fragrant last year will also be fragrant this year; that the furry stems
are slightly pungent,--enough to give spice to a sandwich; these
preliminary observations fit us for more intricate problems later on.

       *       *       *       *       *

Spenser, the divinely tongued, pictures April as a lusty youth, riding
upon the bull with the golden horns (_Taurus_), wading through a flood,
and adorned with garlands of the fairest flowers and buds. A better
figure would have been Europa riding Zeus. And Chaucer also makes April a
masculine month:

  _"When that Aprille with his schoweres swoote
    The drought of Marche had perced to the roote."_

But surely April, with her smiles anl[TN-1] tears, ought to be regarded
as a feminine month. Ovid has shown that she was not named from
_aperire_, to open, as some have supposed, but from Aphrodite, the Greek
name for Venus, goddess of beauty and mother of love. She is chaste, even
cold, but grows sweeter and more affectionate every day and her tears all
end in smiles. Her flowers are pure and mostly white, fitting for a
maiden. Look at the list (if the weather is warm):

White or whitish:--Rue-anemone, hepatica, spring beauty, blood-root,
toothwort, Dutchman's breeches, dog's tooth violet, wild ginger,
chickweed, Isopyrum, plantain-leaved everlasting, shepherd's purse,
shad-bush, wild strawberry, whitlow-grass, wind-flower, hackberry
(greenish white), false Solomon's seal, catnip, spring cress, wild black
currant, wild plum.

Yellow or yellowish:--Marsh marigold, creeping buttercup, marsh
buttercup, small-flowered crowfoot, dandelion, yellow woodsorrel,
bell-wort, star-grass, downy yellow violet, pappoose root, lousewort,
prickly ash, hop hornbeam, white oak, mossy-cup oak, butternut, sugar
maple.

Purple or blue:--Common blue violet, trillium (_recurvatum_ and
_erectum_) hepatica, Virginian cowslip (_lung-wort_ or _bluebells_),
woodsorrel, common blue phlox, ground plum.

Green:--The Indian turnip, and several of the sedges.

Pink:--Spring beauty, toothwort, dog's tooth violet, hepatica.

Scarlet:--Columbine.

From this list it ought to be plain that April is a dainty queen, wearing
a dress of cheerful green, a bodice of white, with violets in her hands,
pink in her cheeks, and a single scarlet columbine in her wealth of
golden hair, which indeed comes nearly being the portrait of Dione
herself. Or, as one of the poets has better described her:

        _April stood with tearful face
    With violets in her hands, and in her hair
    Pale wild anemones; the fragrant lace
    Half-parted from her breast, which seemed like fair,
    Dawn-tinted mountain snow, smooth-drifted there._

In this long list of April flowers--some observers will be able to make
it still longer--there are many favorites. The pretty rue-anemone recalls
the tradition that Anemos, the wind, chose the delicate little flowers of
this family as the heralds of his coming in early spring. And in the
legend of Venus and Adonis the anemone is the flower that sprang from the
tears of the queen as she mourned the death of her loved one. Theocritus
put the wind-flowers into his Idylls, and Pliny said that only the wind
could open them. The Spring beauty has as rich a legend, for it was the
Indian Miskodeed, left behind when Peboan, the winter, the Mighty One,
was melted by the breath of spring. The toothwort (_dentaria laciniata_)
is sometimes known as the pepper-root, and every school boy and girl
living near the woods is familiar with the taste of its tubers and the
appearance of its cross-shaped flowers. The plumy dicentra, or Dutchman's
breeches, seems so feminine as to be grossly misnamed until we remember
that it was first discovered in the Rip Van Winkle country. The wild
ginger with its two large leaves and its queer little blossoms close to
the ground is another delight to the saunterer along the rocky slopes,
where the feathery shad-bush--the aronia of Whittier--with its wealth of
snowy blossoms and the wild plum not far away, with its masses of pure
white, are inspirations to clean and sweet lives, calling to mind the
lines of Wordsworth:

   _One impulse from a vernal wood
      May teach you more of man,
    Of moral evil and of good
      Than all the sages can._

In rocky fields and hillsides and dry open woods, the dwarf everlasting
(_Antennaria plantaginifolia_) with its silvery-white little florets set
in delicate cups, is one of the first species of the great composite
family to bloom. We take it from between the rocks and think of those
lines of Tennyson, which John Fiske declared to be among the deepest
thoughts ever uttered by poet:

   _Flower in the crannied wall
    I pluck you out of the crannies,
    I hold you here, root and all in my hand
    Little flower,--but if I could understand
    What you are, root and all, and all in all,
    I should know what God and man is._

Even more innocent, fresh and fair, is the bloodroot, with its snowy
petals, golden center and ensanguined root-stock which crimsons the
fingers that touch it. This is the herb, so the legend says, which the
Israelites in Egypt dipped in sacrificial blood to mark their doorposts.
As long ago as last November we dug up one of the papery sheaths and
found the flower, then about a half inch long, snugly wrapped in its
single leaf; and now the pale green leaf has pushed up and unfolded,
showing the fragile flower in all its beauty.

       *       *       *       *       *

Strange contrasts we see in some of these April flowers. Some of them
open their star-like eyes for a day or two and dot the floor of the woods
with beauty and then their little contribution to the spring is done and
they are seen no more until another year. They bring us beauty and
sweetness and then they pass from us, like the sweet and childish but
perfect lives we all have known and loved. In contrast to such as these
there is the Jack-in-the-pulpit of the April woods which has no floral
envelope of beauty, no fragrance, no inspiration, so busy is it storing
up its swollen fortunes down in the bank, leaving behind it a tuber so
rank and tainted that even the Indians couldn't eat it until they had
first roasted it, then ground it into powder, and finally made it into a
kind of bread. But sordid-lived accumulators, herbaceous and human, have
been with us since the world began. Laban was a monopolist of pretty
daughters and fine live stock,[TN-2] and Theocritus, in his day, was
moved to say that "Money is monarch and Master," and to exclaim:

   _Fools, what gain is a world of wealth in your houses lying?
    Wise men deem that in that dwells not true pleasure of riches,
    But to delight one's soul....
    Only the muses grant unto mortals a guerdon of glory;
    Dead men's wealth shall be spent by the quick that are heirs to
          their riches._

Toward the end of the month, when the gelatinous masses in the water
courses have developed the little black dots sufficiently so that we can
see they are tadpoles, when the songsters have been joined by the
catbird, the rose-breasted grosbeak, the woodthrush, the whippoorwill,
the cheerful and friendly chewink and several of the warblers and
flycatchers, the rivers and creeks will be fringed with the brilliant
yellow of the marsh marigold, and we shall think of Shakespeare, walking
the meadows of Avon, getting material for that song of the musicians in
Cymbeline:

   _And winking Mary-buds begin
    To ope their golden eyes._

And meanwhile the violet, which was among the plants sacred to Aphrodite,
was also appealing to this master poet, who was born this month, as were
Wordsworth, George Herbert, John Keble, Anthony Trollope, David Hume, and
Edward Gibbon, and who died this month as did Edward Young, who wrote
_Night Thoughts_, and Abraham Lincoln, who freed a race and saved a
nation. Who can ever forget the month of Lincoln's death after he has
once read that exquisite description of an April day and the song of the
hermit thrush, written by Whitman to commemorate the funeral of his
friend?

The violets have been especially loved by the poets. Theocritus placed
them foremost in his coronals and put them into Thyrsis's song of
Daphnis's fatal constancy. Chaucer had them in his garlands, and
Spenser's "flock of nymphes" gather them "pallid blew" in a meadow by the
river side. In Percy's _Reliques_ they are the "violets that first
appear, by purple mantles known." Milton allows Zephyr to find Aurora
lying "on beds of violet blue." Shakespeare places them upon Ophelia's
grave and says they are "sweeter than the lids of Juno's eyes."
Wordsworth, Tennyson, and all our own poets have loved them.

       *       *       *       *       *

But we have lingered too long among our flowers and thoughts in the April
woods. The filmy haze which veiled the sun has thickened into threatening
clouds, and as we look across the meadow to where the silver blue haze
rested on the delectable mountain in the morning we see instead the
rain-fringe, veiling and obscuring the landscape. The wind has died to a
dead calm and the river is still. As the shower comes nearer the whole
landscape is shrouded in an ever darkening gray and presently big round
drops splash upon the surface of the river. In a moment we are surrounded
by the rain. How beautiful is the first spring rain! It does not run down
the slope as in the winter when the ground was frozen, but the thirsty
earth seems eager to drink every drop. The unfolding leaves of the shrubs
are bathed in it and the tender firstlings of the flowers are revelling
in it. It dims the singing of the birds, but the robins and the meadow
larks carol on and the spring music of the frogs in the nearby pond has
not yet ceased.

What makes the raindrops round? And why are the drops at the beginning of
the shower much larger than those which follow? We do not know. Perhaps
it is well. Walt Whitman says that "you must not know too much or be too
scientific about these things." He holds that a little indefiniteness
adds to the enjoyment, a hazy borderland of thought as it were, like that
which rests in April mornings on enchanted highlands away across the
river, which we have never yet--as Thoreau says--"tarnished with our
feet."

And, anyway, before we can reason it out, the rain has ceased and the
last rays of the descending sun come through an opening in the clouds in
that beautiful phenomenon known as a "sunburst.'[TN-3] The white beams
come diagonally through the moisture-laden air, as if in a good-night
smile to the tender flowers and buds.

Warming with the sunshine and watering with the showers--that is Miss
April making her flower garden grow.




MAY--PERFECTION OF BEAUTY




V. MAY--PERFECTION OF BEAUTY

   _Among the changing months May stands confessed
    The sweetest and in fairest colors dressed._
                                --THOMSON.


Surely the poet sang truly. We would not forget Lowell's challenge "What
is so rare as a day in June," but as we sit here on the top of a
limestone cliff nearly a hundred feet above the bed of the creek, and
watch the red sun brightening the gray of the eastern sky, while the
robins and the meadow larks are singing joyous matins we steep our senses
in the delicate colorings of earth and sky that signalize the awakening
of another day and the real revival of another year. April was
encouraging, but there were many bare boughs and many of the last year's
leaves still clung to the oaks and made a conspicuous feature of the
landscape. The leafy month of June will show us more foliage, but it will
be of a darker and more uniform shade of green. Now, as the sun rises
higher and sends his rays through both the woodlands and the brushlands
we thrill with delight at the kaleidoscope of color. There are no
withered leaves to mar the beauty now. Seen in mass, and at a distance,
the woodlands are a soft cinerous purple. But the tops, where the ruddy
rays of the sun are glancing, are a hazy cloud of tender green, pink,
yellow and pale purple. Nearer trees show in their opening leaves pale
tints of the same gorgeous colors which we see in the fall. The maple
keys and the edges of the tender leaves glow blood-red in the morning
sun. The half-developed leaves of the birch and the poplar are a
yellowish-green, not unlike the yellow which they show in autumn. The
neatly plaited folds of the leaves of the oak display a greenish or
cinerous purple, a soft and delicate presentment of the stronger colors
which come in October, just as the overture gives us faint voicings of
the beauty which the opera is to bring; just as Lowell's organist gives
us

          _"The faint auroral flushes sent
    Along the wavering vista of his dream."_

The edge of the cliff is lined with shad-trees. Each twig is a plume of
feathery dainty white The drooping racemes of white blossoms, with the
ruby and early-falling bracts among them look like gala decorations to
fringe the way of Flora as she travels up the valley. The shad-trees have
blossomed rather late. In them and under them it is fully spring. There
is a sound of bees and a sense of sweetness which make us forget all the
cold days and think only of the glory of the coming summer. There comes a
song sparrow and perches on one of the twigs. He throws back his little
head, opens his mouth and pours forth a flood of melody. Next comes a
myrtle warbler, eager to show us the yellow on his crown, on his two
sides and the lower part of his back. He is one of the most abundant of
the warblers and one of the most charming and fearless. He perches on a
hop hornbeam tree from which the catkins have just shed their yellow
pollen and goes over it somewhat after the manner of a chickadee or a
nuthatch, showing us as he does so the white under his chin, the two
heavy black marks below that, the two white cross bars on his wings, and
his coat of slate color, striped and streaked with black. He goes over
every twig of the little tree and then flies off to another, first
pausing, however, to give his little call note "tschip, tschip" and then
his little song, "Tschip-tweeter-tweeter." A pair of kingfishers, showing
their blue wings and splendid crests, fly screaming down the creek. Their
nest is in a tunnel four feet in the clay banks on the opposite side.

Purple finches, a bit late in the season, are feeding on the seeds of the
big elm. The snows of late April and early May must have delayed their
journey northward. When the bird-designer made this bird he set out to
make a different kind of sparrow, but then had pity upon the amateur
ornithologist who finds the sparrows even now almost as difficult to
classify as the amateur botanists do their asters; so he dipped the bird
in some raspberry juice--John Burroughs says pokeberry juice--and the
finch came out of the dye with a wash of raspberry red on his head,
shoulders and upper breast, brightest on the head and the lower part of
his back. Otherwise he looks much like an English sparrow.

       *       *       *       *       *

Now the belated April flowers are seen at their best, mingled with many
of the May arrivals. It is such a day as that when Bryant wrote "The Old
Man's Counsel." On the sloping hillsides, around the leafing hazel
"gay-circles of anemones dance on their stalks." In the more open places
the little wind flower, with its pretty leaves and solitary white
blossoms, blooms in cheerful companionship with its fellows, and the more
sterile parts of the hillside are snowed with the white plumes of the
plantain-leaved everlasting. Downy yellow violets and the common blue
violets grow everywhere and down on the sand near the river the birdfoot
violet, with its quaintly cut leaves and handsome blossoms grows
abundantly for the children who love to gather the "sand violets." On the
bottom which was flooded in March the satiny yellow flowers of the marsh
buttercup shine and the beautiful green of the uplands is spotted with
the pure gold of the buttercup. There is no longer need to be satisfied
with a few pretty flowers. May scatters her brightest and best in
abundance. On the rocky slopes the wild ginger shows its red-brown,
long-eared urns, the white baneberry its short white plumes, the
branchlets of the bladdernut are breaking into white clusters and
columbine soon will "sprinkle on the rocks a scarlet rain" as it did in
Bayard Taylor's time, although the "scarlet rain," like that of the
painted cup in the lowlands, grows less and less each year. The white
glory of the plum thickets at its height and the hawthornes, whose young
leaves have been a picture of pink and red, will soon break into blossom
and vie with the crabapple thickets in calling attention to the beauty of
masses of color when arranged by the Master Painter.

       *       *       *       *       *

The carpet of the woodlands grows softer and thicker, and more varied
each day. Ferns and brakes are coming thickly. The flowers grow more
splendid. The large, wholesome looking leaves of the blue bell are a
fitting setting for the masses of bloom which show pink in the bud, then
purple, and lastly a brilliant blue. Jack-in-the-pulpits make us smile
with keen pleasure as memories of happy childhood days come crowding
thickly upon us. The pretty pinnate leaves of the blue-flowered
polemonium are sufficient explanation for the common name Jacobs-ladder,
even though that name does not properly belong to our species. The purple
trilliums, like the Dutchman's breeches, felt the effects of the many
April and early May frosts but now they are coming into their beauty.
Great colonies of umbrella-leaved May-apple are breaking into white
flowers. The broad, lily-like leaves of the true and false Solomon's seal
are even more attractive than their blossoms. Ferns, bellwort, wild
sarsaparilla, all help to soften our footfalls, while overhead the light
daily grows more subdued as the leaf-buds break and the leaves unfold.
The throb of the year's life grows stronger. All the blossoms and buds
which were formed last summer now break quickly into beauty. And,
already, before the year has fairly started, there are signs of
preparation for the following year. The dandelion is pushing up its fairy
balloons, waiting for the first breeze. The shepherd's purse already
shows many mature seeds below its little white blossoms. The keys of the
soft maple will soon be ready to fall and send out rootlets, and the
winged seeds of the white elm already lie thickly beneath the leafing
branches.

       *       *       *       *       *

Each flower invites admiration and study. Dig up the root of the
Solomon's seal, a rootstock, the botanists call it. It is long, more or
less thickened and here and there is a circular scar which marks the
place from which former stems have arisen. When these leaf-bearing stems
die down they leave on this rootstock down in the ground, a record of
their having lived. The scar looks something like a wax seal and the man
who gave the plant the name of Solomon's seal had probably read that tale
in the Arabian Nights, where King Solomon's seal penned up the giant
genie who had troubled the fishermen.

Then there's the May-apple. Who does not remember his childhood days when
he pulled the little umbrellas? Even now as they come up in little
colonies, they call up memories of the fairy tales of childhood and we
almost expect to see a fairy, or a brownie, or Queen Mab herself, coming
from under them, when the summer shower, which makes their tops so
beautifully moist gray, has passed. And they also bring to mind that
charming first edition of Dr. Gray's botany, which had in it much of the
man's humor as well as his learning. Too bad that the learned scientists
who succeeded him have cut it out. "Common Honesty, very rare in some
places," he wrote, speaking of that plant. "Ailanthus, Tree of Heaven,
flowers smell of anything but heaven," was his comment on the blossoms of
our picturesque importation from China. And when he came to the May-apple
he wrote that the sweetish fruit was "eaten by pigs and boys." This made
William Hamilton Gibson remember his own boyish gorgings and he wrote:
"Think of it boys. And think of what else he says of it: 'Ovary ovoid,
stigma sessile, undulate, seeds covering the lateral placenta, each
enclosed in an aril.' Now it may be safe for pigs and billy-goats to
tackle such a compound as that, but we boys all like to know what we are
eating, and I cannot but feel that the public health officials of every
township should require this formula of Dr. Gray's to be printed on every
one of these big loaded pills, if that is what they are really made of."

Another interesting plant is the _trillium erectum_, which with the
_trillium recurvatum_, is now to be found in the woods hereabouts. The
flowers of the _trillium erectum_ are ill scented, carrion scented, if
you please. Now the botanists have found that this odor, which is so
unpleasant to the human nostrils, does the plant a real service by
attracting the common green flesh-flies, such as are seen in the
butchershops in the summer-time. They eat the pollen, which is supposed
to taste as it smells and thus as they go from flower to flower they
carry pollen from one blossom to another and so secure for the plant
cross-pollination.

So we may walk from one flower to another until the morning wears to a
bright noon and the afternoon wanes into a songful sunset.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the swamp, where the red-winged blackbird is building her bulky nest
between the stems of the cat tail, and the prairie marsh wren is making
her second or third little globular nest in a similar place, there is a
blaze of yellow from the marsh marigolds which make masses of succulent
stems and leaves, crowned with pale gold, as far up the marsh as the eye
can reach. In Iowa, it is in May, rather than in June, that "the cowslip
startles the meadows green" and "the buttercup catches the sun in its
chalice." And it is in late April or early May that "the robin is
plastering his house hard by." By the way, ought not the poet to have
made it "her" house? It is the mother bird who seems to do the
plastering. Both birds work on the structure, but it appears to be the
female who carries most of the mud and who uses her faded red apron for a
trowel as she moves round in her nest pushing her breast against the
round wall of the adobe dwelling to spread the mud evenly. The work on
one particular nest was done in late April when there was nothing on the
elm but the seed fringes to screen the builder as she worked. Then the
four light greenish-blue eggs were laid. A red squirrel got one of them
one day. Disregarding the squeakings and scoldings of the anxious
robins, he sat on a limb holding the egg in his forepaws and bit a hole
in one side of it. Then he drained the contents, dropped the shell to the
ground and was about to get another egg when he was driven off.
Apparently he forgot the location of the nest after that, for the other
three eggs hatched out safely.

       *       *       *       *       *

The air is filled with bird music. It began with the larks, closely
followed by the robins, and then the noise of the crows. No change in the
program since the days of Shakespeare's Troilus and Cressida when:

                _"The busy day
    Wak'd by the lark, hath roused the ribald crows."_

Then came the liquid notes of the cowbirds, like the pouring of mingled
molasses and olive oil. Three handsome fellows in ebony and dark brown
sit on the branch of a tall elm and just beneath them sit three brownish
gray females, all in a row. Cowbird No. 1 comes nearer the end of the
branch, ruffles out his head as if he were about to have a sick spell
and then emits that famous molasses and oil kind of whistle, sufficient
to identify the cowbird anywhere. The other males repeat his example and
meanwhile the females look on with approving eyes, as if it was a
vaudeville performance by amateurs in polite society. The cowbirds, male
and female, are all free lovers. There is no mating among them. The
female lays her eggs in some other bird's nest, like the English cuckoo,
as if she were too busy with the duties and pleasures of society to care
for her own children.

A diskcissel[TN-4] sits on a tree instead of a reed or a bush as usual
and sings "See, see, Dick Cissel, Cissel." Chewinks are down scratching
among the dry leaves with the white-throated sparrows, their
strong-muscled legs sending the leaves flying as if a barnyard hen were
doing the scratching. A beautiful hermit thrush is near but he is silent.
The chewink in his harlequin suit of black, white, and chestnut varies
his sharp and cheerful "Chewink" with a musical little strain, "Do-fah,
fah-fah-fah-fah," and one of the white-throated sparrows now and then
stops feeding and flies up to a hazel twig to give his sweet and
plaintive little "pea-a-body, peabody, peabody." Very pretty, but not so
beautiful as the three broad white stripes on his crown and the white
choker under his chin.

Suddenly a brown thrasher breaks into a melody from the top of a wild
cherry, and then it is as if a famous operatic coloratura soprano had
joined the village choir. For power and continuity of song he is without
a peer. With head erect and long tail pendant he pours forth such a flood
of melody, so varied and so sweet that we forget the exquisite hymn-like
notes of the wood-thrush and yield ourselves wholly to the spell of his
rich recital. Make the most of it while it lasts. Like all the glories of
the May woods it is evanescent. When the nest down in the brush is
finished, and his mate "feels the eggs beneath her wings," his song will
grow less full and rich and by the time the young birds come he will have
grown silent, as if weighed down with the responsibilities of a family.

We get too near the thrasher for his liking and he slips down into the
brush. And then, by rare good fortune, a blue-bird begins his song. He
has been chided by some because he has a magnificent contralto voice and
scarcely ever uses it. Have we not been taught to chide the man who hides
his talent in a napkin, or his light under a bushel? But how he can sing
when he does sing! This is one of the mornings. The rich contralto
thrush-like melody, with its ever recurring "sol-la," "sol-la," fills the
woodlands with beauty. It is as if the pearly gates had been opened for a
brief interval to let the earth hear the "quiring of the young-eyed
cherubims."

       *       *       *       *       *

In later May, the season "betwixt May and June," beauty and fragrance and
melody comes in a rich flood. The flaming breast of the oriole and the
wondrous mingling of colors in the multiplied warblers glint like jewels
among the ever enlarging leaves. The light in the woodlands becomes more
subdued and the carpet of ferns and flowers grows richer and more
beautiful. The vireos, the cardinal and the tanager add to the brilliancy
and the ovenbird and veery to the melody. As good old John Milton once
wrote: "In these vernal seasons of the year, when the air is clear and
pleasant, it were an injury and a sullenness against nature not to go out
and see her riches, and partake of her rejoicing with heaven and earth."

       *       *       *       *       *

The beauty of the world is at every man's door, if he will only pause to
see. It offers every man real riches if only he will now and then quit
his muckraking or pause from paying his life for a cap and bells. It
sweetens honest labor, helps earthly endeavor, strengthens human
affection and leads the soul naturally from the beauty of this world to
the greater beauty of that which is to come.




WALKS IN JUNE WOODS AND FIELDS




VI. WALKS IN JUNE WOODS AND FIELDS.

   _Whether we look or whether we listen
    We can hear life murmur or see it glisten._
                             --LOWELL.


As we walk along the bank of the creek on a warm afternoon in June we
realize how true are these lines of Lowell. The frog chorus is dying
down, though now and then we catch sight of a big fellow blowing out his
big balloon throat and filling the air with a hoarse bass, while another
across the creek has a bagpipe apparently as big but pitched in a higher
key. Two months ago one could not get near enough to see this queer
inflation, but now the frogs do not seem so shy. Garter snakes wiggle
through the grass down the bank of the creek and the crickets are just
beginning to chirp the love chorus which is soon to swell incessantly
till the fall frosts come. Butterflies, dragon flies, saw flies and gall
flies are busy and we see evidences of their work in the crimson galls
on the willow leaves and the purple-spotted oak apples, some of which
have fallen to the ground from the scarlet oak above. Nature's first
great law is the perpetuation of species, and everything we see in the
June woods and fields, from the giant white oak to the busy ant, is
diligently obeying that law. The red-winged blackbird circles over our
heads with sharp, anxious chirps, for we have disturbed the young
red-wings down in the sedge who are taking their first lessons in flying.
The catbird's nest, with four greenish-blue eggs, is in a wild gooseberry
bush and the catbird is up among the shad-trees feasting on the ripening
June berries. The gentle notes of soft pedal music come floating sweetly
down. Did you ever stop long enough to listen to the full song of the
catbird? First, the brilliant, ringing strains, often softening into a
subdued sympathetic melody, and then, just as the music seems almost
divine, the long cat-like squeal which ends it all--much like an old
organist and choirmaster of boyhood days who used to break in with a
horrible discord at the lower end of the keyboard when the anthem
rehearsal wasn't going to his liking.

A fruit-lover is the catbird, beginning with the June berries on the
banks of streams near which she often builds her nest and continuing with
wild strawberries, blackberries, wild grapes and the berries of the
Virginia creeper--sometimes also seen busily scooping out a big hole on
the rosy side of a tempting apple in the orchard. Some observers say the
catbird eats the eggs of the fly-catcher and other birds, but this must
be seen to be believed.

There comes an outbreak of melody from the top of a tall black willow,
much like the tones of the robin and yet suggestive of the warbling
vireo, but finer than the former, clearer, louder and richer than the
latter. We lift our eyes and see the pointed carmine shield of the
rose-breasted grosbeak, one of the most beautiful, useful and music-full
birds in the forest or the garden. Many mornings and evenings during the
month of May one of these handsome fellows was busy in my garden,
diligently picking the potato bugs from the young vines, stopping now
and then, especially in his morning visits, to pour out a happy, ringing
lyric and to show his handsome plumage. On one occasion he took a couple
of potato bugs in his "gros" beak as he flew to the nearby woodland,
probably a tempting morsel for his spouse's breakfast. A bird that can
sing better than a warbling vireo, whose carmine breast is comparable
only to the rich, red rose of June, who picks bugs from potato vines,
singing chansons meanwhile and who is so good to his wife that he does a
large share of the incubation, and takes largely upon himself the care of
their children is surely a "rara avis" and worth having for a friend. He
is a typical bird of June. His color matches the June roses, his songs
are full and sweet and rich as the June days, and the eggs of his soberly
dressed spouse are usually laid and hatched in June. There is a nest in a
hawthorn bush where the wild grape twines her crimson-green clusters and
by the time the blossoms break and fill the air with fragrance, no
accidents coming meanwhile, four young grosbeaks will be the pride of as
warm a paternal heart as ever beat in bird or human breast.

Perceiving that we are watching him the grosbeak ceases his ringing tones
and drops into that dreamy, soft, melodious warble, which is
characteristic of this songster as it is of the catbird. But he leaves
when a belted kingfisher comes screaming along the stream.

       *       *       *       *       *

But there is more of interest on the willow. Unseen till now, no fewer
than three nighthawks are squatted lengthwise on its lower limbs, two on
one limb and one on another. Strange we did not see them before, but the
explanation is the grosbeak was singing. They are as motionless and
apparently lifeless as if they had been mummified or petrified for a
thousand years. Their mottled back and rusty feathers, their heads drawn
down and eyes almost closed, make them look like uncanny visitants from
beyond the Styx. Poe's raven was not so ominous and strangely silent;
these will not say even the one word, "Nevermore." They look like relics
of a Saturnian reign before beauty and music and joy were known upon the
earth. If there were charred stumps of trees in the Bracken which was
shown to Faust, we should expect to see nighthawks squatted on them,
wholly indifferent to the lamentations of lost souls. We go directly
under the branch where one of them is sitting ten feet above and still he
makes no sign. We throw a clod, but yet there is no movement of his
wings. Not till a stick hits the limb close to where he is sitting does
he stretch his long wings with their telltale white spots and fly rapidly
away. And the other two sit unmoved. But some night we hear the whirr of
the nighthawk's wings as he drops rapidly from a great height, or we see
him skimming close to the surface of the stream in search of insects in
some twilight hour and then he is the embodiment of strength, agility,
and swiftness. And some day we perchance find the two dirt colored eggs
on the bare ground, or the tiny young, like bits of rabbit fur, with only
the earth beneath them and the sky above them, apparently as deserted and
destitute as Romulus and Remus; and all this adds wonderfully to our
interest in this strange bird, which is so common in the June woods.

The whip-poor-will is much like the nighthawk. Both are of about the same
size and color. Both sit lengthwise on limbs. Both are weird creatures
that sleep by day and hunt by night. But the nighthawk has a V-shaped
patch of white on his throat; the large mouth of the whip-poor-will is
fringed with bristles. The nighthawk has a patch of white extending
through his long wings; the whip-poor-will has none. The nighthawk is not
usually heard after the twilight hours; the whip-poor-will is heard much
later. The whip-poor-will calls its name aloud, sometimes startlingly
close to the chamber window; the nighthawk only screams.

       *       *       *       *       *

We cautiously approach a sand flat and are fortunate to see one of the
sights of a lifetime. The mud turtle is preparing to lay her eggs in the
moist sand. She digs the hole almost entirely with her hind feet, using
first one and then the other, working rapidly for perhaps eight or ten
minutes until the hole is about six inches in diameter and apparently
about three or four inches deep. Then she draws in her head, and drops,
at intervals of two or three minutes, five eggs into the hole. That done,
she scrapes the moist sand back into the hole, pressing it and patting it
from time to time with her hind feet. This process takes much longer than
digging the hole. When it is done to her satisfaction she waddles towards
the creek. You might have some trouble to find the eggs but the skunk
often gets them. Does the mother turtle watch over them till they are
hatched by the sun or is it a mere picked-up crowd of youngsters that we
sometimes see in the early fall sitting with her on a boulder in the
pond?

       *       *       *       *       *

We follow the scarlet tanager up a wide glen where wholesome smelling
brake grows almost shoulder high. Suddenly there comes from our feet a
sharp, painful cry, as of a human being in distress, and the ruffed
grouse, commonly called pheasant, leaves her brood of tiny, ginger-yellow
chicks--eight, ten, twelve--more than we can count,--little active bits
of down about the size of a golf ball, scattering here, there, and
everywhere to seek the shelter of bush, bracken, or dried leaves, while
their mother repeats that plaintive whine, again and again, as she tries
to lead us up the hillside away from them. When we look for them again
they are all safely hidden; not one can be seen. The mother desperately
repeats her whining cry to entice us away and we walk on up to the top of
the hill and away to relieve her anxiety. Anon we hear her softly
clucking as she gathers her scattered brood.

The scarlet tanager's nest is on the horizontal limb of a big white oak.
But it is not the familiar, striking, scarlet, black-winged bird, which
sits on the ragged nest. The female is dressed in sober olive-green above
and olive-yellow below, with dusky wings and tail. Probably many an
amateur has found this bird down by the river and tried to classify her
among the fly-catchers until the coming of her handsome husband caused
him to remember that in birdland it is usually only the male part of the
population which wears the handsome clothes, just as the Indian braves
wear the gaudiest paint and the showiest feathers. It is not till we get
to the higher stages of civilization that this rule is reversed.

       *       *       *       *       *

The foliage of the June woods has not the delicacy of tints which was so
exquisite in May, nor the strength of color which will be so striking in
September. But it has a beauty no less admirable. The chlorophyll in the
leaf-cells is now at its prime and the leaves very closely approach a
pure green, especially those of the sycamore, which is the nearest to a
pure green of any tree in the forest. Standing in the wood road which
runs along the top of a timbered crest we look across a broad, wooded
valley where the leaves seem to exhale a soft, yellowish green in the
bright sunlight. Beyond and above them, five miles away, and yet
apparently very near, a belt of bluish green marks the timber fringe of
the next water course. Still farther, another unseen stretch of corn land
intervening, the forest crowned ridge meets the soft sky in a line of
lavender, as if it were a strata cloud lying low on the horizon. From
this distance the lavender and purple are almost changeless every sunny
day the year around. Always the Enchanted Land and the Delectable
Mountains over across the valley. How like the alluring prospect across
the valley of years! Always the same soft lavender haze there, while the
woods here run through all the gamut of color, from the downy pinks and
whites and the tender greens of spring through the deeper greens of
summer to the crimson and scarlet of the fall, and the russets, grays,
and coffee-browns of the winter. When the foliage of the forest has
deepened into one dark shade of verdure then we know that June is far
spent, spring has gone and summer is here. The uniform green is not
monotonous. See the woods in the hour before sunset when the slanting
light gives the foliage consummate glory. See them again in the white
light of a clear noon when the glazed leaves seem to reflect a white veil
over the pure verdure; and again when the breeze ripples through the
leafy canopy, showing the silvery under-surfaces of the maple leaves, the
neat spray of the river birches, the deeply cleft leaves of the scarlet
oak and the finely pinnate leaves of the honey locust. Each has a glory
now peculiar to itself and to June.

There is much beauty of color in the woodland undergrowth. Tall torches
touched with the crimson of the sunset sky are made of the shell-bark
hickory whose inner bud scales enlarge into enormous, leathery bracts,
often crimsoning into rare brilliance. Circles of creamy white here and
there among the hazel brush mark the later blossoms of the sweet
viburnum. Sweeping curves like sculptured arms bearing thickly clustered
hemispheres of purplish white are seen on the rocky slope where the
nine-bark grows above the lingering columbines. White wands which look so
beautiful are merely the ends of the common tall blackberry, and the wild
rose sweetens the same banks. Flattish clusters of creamy white blossoms
are the loose cymes of the red osier dogwood, but it is not nearly so
beautiful now as it was last January when its blood-red stems made a
striking contrast with the snow. The bright carmine bark has faded to a
dull green and the shrub is a disappointment now, despite its blossoms.
So is the cottonwood a disappointment. Its wealth of shining green
foliage is beautiful, yet we sigh for the lost glory of the midwinter
days when the horizontal rays of the setting sun made aureoles of golden
light around its yellow, shining limbs.

       *       *       *       *       *

It is worth while on a walk in June to sit and look at the grass. How
tame and dreary would be the landscape without it! How soul starved would
have been mankind, condemned to live without the restfulness of its
unobtrusive beauty! That is why the first command, after the waters had
been gathered into one place and the dry land appeared, was, "Let the
earth bring forth grass." The grasses cover the earth like a beautiful
garment from Kerguelen land in the Antarctic regions to the extreme limit
of vegetation beyond the Polar circle. They climb the Andes, the Rockies,
and the Himalayas to the very line of eternal snow, and they creep to the
bottom of every valley where man dares set his foot. They come up fresh
and green from the melting snows of earliest spring and linger in sunny
autumn glens when all else is dead and drear. They give intense interest
to the botanist as he remembers that there are thirty-five hundred
different species, a thousand of which are in North America and a fourth
of that number in our own state. They give him delightful studies as he
patiently compares their infinite variations of culms and glumes, spikes,
racemes, and panicles. They give joy to the farmer with their wealth of
protein and fat and albuminoid, the material to do the work and make the
wealth of the world bulging from their succulent stems. And they are
fascinating most of all to the nature-lover as he sees them gently wave
in the June sunshine or flow like a swift river across the field before a
quick gust of wind. Such variety of color! Here an emerald streak and
there a soft blue shadow, yonder a matchless olive green, and still
farther a cool gray: spreading like an enamel over the hillside where the
cattle have cropped them, and waving tall and fine above the crimsoning
blossoms of the clover; glittering with countless gems in the morning
dews and musicful with the happy songs and call notes of the quail and
prairie chicken, the meadow lark, the bob-o-link, and the dickcissel
whose young are safe among the protection of the myriad stems. Tall wild
rice and wild rye grow on the flood-plain and by the streams where the
tall buttercups shine like bits of gold and the blackbirds have their
home; bushy blue stem on the prairies and in the open woods where the
golden squaw weed and the wild geranium make charming patterns of yellow
and pink and purple and some of the painted cup left over from May still
glows like spots of scarlet rain; tall grama grass on the dry prairies
and gravelly knolls, whitened by the small spurge and yellowed by the
creeping cinquefoil; nodding fescue in the sterile soils where the
robin's plantain and the sheep sorrel have succeeded the early
everlasting; satin grasses in the moist soil of the open woodlands where
the fine white flowers of the Canada anemone blow, and slough grass in
the marshy meadows where the white-crossed flowers of the sharp spring
are fading, and the woolly stem of the bitter boneset is lengthening;
reed grass and floating manna grass in the swamps where the broad arrow
leaves of the sagittaria fringe the shore and the floating leaves and
fragrant blossoms of the water lilies adorn the pond. The three days'
rain beginning with a soft drizzle and increasing into a steady storm
which drives against the face with cutting force and shakes in sheets
like waving banners across the wind-swept prairie only adds more variety
to the beauties of the grass; and when the still, sweet morning comes,
the pure green prairies make us feel that all stain of sin and shame has
been washed from the world.

Where the grasses grow the best, there Providence has provided most
abundantly for the wealth and the comfort of mankind. The rich verdure of
the meadows is the visible sign of the fruitful soil beneath the
fattening clouds above. The clover and the early hay fill the June fields
with fragrance and the grass in the parks and lawns invite toil-worn
bodies to rest and comfort. What wonder Bryant wished to die in June, the
month when the grasses tenderly creep over the mounds above tired dust
and gently soothe the grief of the loved ones left behind.

       *       *       *       *       *

The cold May seemed to detract little from the beauty and interest of the
woodlands. The warblers, the humming bird, the tanager, the bob-o-link,
the ovenbird, the vireos, the chat, the red start, the oriole, the
dickcissel, the black-billed cuckoo, all greeted their friends as
numerously as ever. So with the flowers: the columbine, the shooting
star, the painted cup, the puccoon, the beautiful though inodorous large
white trillium, the delicate little corydalis, the star grass and the
lady's slipper, all came within a week of their average time in spite of
the cold, and the showy orchis was only just over into June. May added
fifty-four new species of flowers to the April list, according to the
record of a single observer whose leisure is limited. Those who added the
forty odd May arrivals in bird land to their April lists may have no such
thrilling walks in June, but they may study their feathered friends of
the summer, which is better, and if passion for new lists is not
satiated, try the flowers instead of the birds. June should yield a list
of a hundred twenty-five different species, not including the grasses,
and a very diligent flower-lover will make it much longer.




Transcriber's Note

The following typographical errors were maintained in this version
of this book.

     Page   Error
TN-1  21    anl should read and
TN-2  23    live stock for livestock
TN-3  31    "sunburst.' has the wrong type of close quote
TN-4  47    diskcissel should read dickcissel

Inconsistent hyphenation:

bell-wort / bellwort
blood-root / bloodroot
blue-bird / blue bird
fly-catchers / flycatchers
music-full / musicful
root-stock / rootstock
whip-poor-will / whippoorwill
wood-thrush / woodthrush






End of Project Gutenberg's Some Spring Days in Iowa, by Frederick John Lazell

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SOME SPRING DAYS IN IOWA ***

***** This file should be named 18227.txt or 18227.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/8/2/2/18227/

Produced by Brian Sogard, Julia Miller, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

*** END: FULL LICENSE ***

