The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Norwegian account of Haco's expedition
against Scotland, A.D. MCCLXIII., by Sturla Þoretharson

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Norwegian account of Haco's expedition against Scotland, A.D. MCCLXIII.

Author: Sturla Þoretharson

Translator: James Johnstone

Release Date: May 2, 2006 [EBook #18299]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HACO'S EXPEDITION ***




Produced by National Library of Iceland and Cornell
University Library via www.sagnanet.is, Johannes Birgir
Jensson, Sankar Viswanathan, and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team of Distributed Proofreaders Europe at
http://dp.rastko.net









                                 THE

                          NORWEGIAN ACCOUNT

                                  OF

                          HACO'S EXPEDITION

                               AGAINST

                              SCOTLAND;


                            A.D. MCCLXIII.

           LITERALLY TRANSLATED FROM THE ORIGINAL ISLANDIC
                   OF THE FLATEYAN AND FRISIAN MSS.

                            _WITH NOTES_.



                                BY THE

                      REV. JAMES JOHNSTONE, A.M.
      CHAPLAIN TO HIS BRITANNIC MAJESTY'S ENVOY EXTRAORDINARY AT
                        THE COURT OF DENMARK.



             _Originally Printed for the Author in_ 1782.



                              EDINBURGH
                  WILLIAM BROWN, 149 PRINCES STREET.
                                 1882




       *       *       *       *       *

TO

ARCHIBALD MACDONALD, ESQ.,

MEMBER OF PARLIAMENT

FOR

NEWCASTLE UNDER LINE;

THIS FRAGMENT OF ANCIENT SCOTTISH HISTORY,
CONTAINING SEVERAL ANECDOTES
OF HIS

ANCESTORS

THE

LORDS OF THE HEBRIDES

IS

INSCRIBED.

       *       *       *       *       *




Exactly one hundred years ago this Translation of the Norwegian
Account of Haco's Invasion of Scotland first issued from the press.

Since then, amid much literature upon the subject, it has always held
a most important place in the eyes of the student of early Scottish
History.

As an authentic source of information it has been eagerly sought
after, but it has an additional attraction in the graphic pictures
which it presents of the various perils by land and sea encountered by
the hardy Norsemen.

The translator's valuable notes are given _in extenso_, and for easier
reference are transferred from the end of the work and printed on the
pages to which they belong.

       *       *       *       *       *




PREFACE.

(1782.)


The editor, from some particular advantages he enjoyed, was encouraged
to collect such inedited fragments as might elucidate antient history.
He, lately, published "Anecdotes of Olave the Black, king of Man;" and
now lays before the learned the Norwegian account of Haco's celebrated
expedition against Scotland.

It was the editor's intention to have given a succinct detail of the
descents made by the northern nations upon the British isles, but an
increase of materials induced him to reserve that subject for a future
work. At present, therefore, he thinks it sufficient to premise that
the AEbudae were, long, the cause of much dispute between various
kingdoms. They seemed naturally connected with Scotland; but the
superior navies of Lochlin rendered them liable to impressions from
that quarter.

The situation of the Kings of the Isles was peculiarly delicate; for,
though their territories were extensive, yet they were by no means a
match for the neighbouring states. On this account, allegiance was
extorted from them by different Sovereigns. The Hebridian Princes
considered this involuntary homage, as, at least, implying protection:
and, when that was not afforded, they thought themselves justified in
forming new connexions more conducive to their safety.

The Alexanders of Scotland having united Galloway, then a powerful
maritime state, to their dominions, began to think of measures for
obtaining a permanent possession of the Hebrides by expelling the
Norwegians. The preparatory steps they took were first to secure the
Somerled family, and next to gain over the insular chieftains. Haco
was no less earnest to attach every person of consequence to his
party. He gave his daughter in marriage to Harold King of Man; and, on
different occasions, entertained at his court King John, Gilchrist,
Dugall the son of Rudri, Magnus Earl of Orkney, Simon bishop of the
Sudoreys, and the abbot of Icolmkil.

All this, however, did not effectually conciliate the Somerlidian
tribe. The Norwegian Monarch, disappointed in his negotiations, had
recourse to the sword, and sailed with a fleet, which both the
Sturlunga-saga, and the Flateyan annals represent as the most
formidable that ever left the ports of Norway.

It would be improper for the editor to draw any comparison between the
Scottish and Norwegian narratives; he, therefore, leaves it to the
discernment of the reader to fix what medium he thinks reasonable.

The Flateyan and Frisian are the principal MSS. now extant, that
contain the life of Haco the aged. The first belongs to the library of
His Danish Majesty, the latter is deposited in the Magnaean collection.
Of them the editor obtained copies; and by the help of the one was
enabled, reciprocally, to supply the imperfections of the other. He
has since examined the originals themselves.

The Fr. MS. relates the following anecdote of Missel, at the
coronation of Prince Magnus A.D. 1261. During Mass Missel the Knight
stood up in the middle of the Choir, and wondered greatly at some
ceremonies, unusual at the coronation of Scottish Kings. And when King
Magnus was robed, and King Haco and the Archbishop touched him with
the sword of state, the Scottish knight said, "It was told me, that
there were no knights dubbed in this land; but I never beheld any
knight created with so much solemnity as him whom ten (f. two) noble
lords have now invested with the Sword."

The conjectures, in my note on page 42 are confirmed by the following
passage in the Fl. MS. Then came there from the western seas John the
son of Duncan, and Dugall the son of Rudra; and both of them solicited
that King Haco would give them the title of King over the northern
part of the Sudoreys. They were with the King all summer.

Antiquarians may be desirous of knowing something of the MSS. from
which this work hath been taken, therefore, it was judged not improper
to subjoin the following account of them. The Frisian MS. is a vellum
quarto of the largest size, in a beautiful hand, and the character
resembles that which prevailed in the end of the 13 century. The book
of Flatey is a very large vellum volume in folio, and appears to have
been compiled in the 14. age. It contains a collection of poems;
excerpts from Adam Bremensis; a dissertation on the first inhabitants
of Norway; the life of Eric the Traveller; of Olave Trygvason; of St
Olave; of the earls of Orkney; of Suerir; of Haco the Aged; of his son
Magnus; of Magnus the Good; of Harald the Imperious; of Einar Sockason
of Greenland; and of Oelver the Mischievous; it contains also a general
chronology down to A.D. 1394, the year in which the MS. was completed.
The work, from the life of Eric the Traveller to the end of St Olave's
history, inclusive, was written by John Thordrson the priest; the rest
by Magnus Thorvaldson also a clergyman.

The initial letters, in some places, are ornamented with historical
miniature paintings. In page 35, there is a representation of the
birth of Trygvason; and, at the bottom of the leaf, there is a unicorn
and a lion. 217. An archer shooting. 272. Orme Storolfson carrying off
a hay-cock. 295. Haldan the Black beheading the Norwegian princes; one
of them is represented on his knees, dressed in a red cap, a short
doublet, and in red trousers reaching down to the middle of his legs.
310. Three men armed with swords, and battle axes, dispatching St
Olave at Sticklestad; at the bottom of the page a man killing a boar,
and another fighting with a mermaid. 650. Haco creating Sculi a Duke.
Sculi is drawn with a garland, or coronet, and receiving a sword,
together with a book by which he is to swear. Most of the figures, in
these paintings, are depicted in armour or mail; their helmets are
sometimes conical, sometimes like a broad-brimmed hat; their
defensive armour is generally a round target, and a two-handed sword.
This venerable volume, the noblest treasure of northern literature now
existing, though wrote in a very small character, and much
abbreviated, consists of 960 columns, two to every page.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE

HISTORY

OF THE

NORWEGIAN EXPEDITION

AGAINST

SCOTLAND,

MCCLXIII.


At the time that King Haco ruled over Norway, Alexander, the son of
William King of Scotland, was then King of Scotland. He was a great
Prince, and very ambitious of this world's praise. He sent, from
Scotland in the Western sea, two Bishops to King Haco. At first they
begged to know if King Haco would give up those territories in the
Hebrides,[1] which King Magnus Bare-foot had unjustly wrested from
Malcolm, Predecessor to the Scottish King. The King said that Magnus
had settled with Malcolm, what districts the Norwegians should have
in Scotland, or in the Islands  which lay near it. He affirmed,
however, that the King of Scotland had no sovereignty in the Hebrides
at the time when King Magnus won them from King Godred,[2] and also
that King Magnus only asserted his Birthright. The commissioners then
said, that the King of Scotland was willing to purchase all the
Hebrides from King Haco, and entreated him to value them in fine
silver. The King replied, he knew no such urgent want of money as
would oblige him to sell his inheritance. With that answer the
messengers departed. From this cause some misunderstanding arose
between the Kings. The Scottish Monarch, however, frequently renewed
the negotiation, and sent many proposals; but the Scots received no
other explanation than what is here related.


MCCXLIX.

Alexander King of Scotland, wished much for possession of the
Hebrides. He had often sent to Norway to redeem them with money, and
he did so this summer. But when he could not purchase those
territories of King Haco, he took other measures in hand, which were
not princely. Collecting forces throughout all Scotland, he prepared
for a voyage to the Hebrides, and determined to subdue those islands
under his dominion. He made it manifest before his subjects, that he
would not desist till he had set his standard east on the cliffs of
Thurso,[3] and had reduced under himself all the provinces which the
Norwegian Monarch possessed to the westward of the German Ocean.[4]

King Alexander sent word to John King of the isles that he wished to
see him. But King John would not meet the Scottish King till four
Earls of Scotland had pledged their honour, that he should return in
safety, whether any agreement was made or not. When the Kings met, the
Scottish Monarch besought King John, that he would give up
Kiarnaburgh[5] into his power, and three other Castles which he held
of King Haco; as also the other lands which King Haco had conferred
upon him. The Scottish King added, that, if he would join him in good
earnest, he would reward him with many greater estates in Scotland,
together with his confidence and favour. All King John's Relations and
Friends pressed him to assent. But he behaved well, and uprightly; and
declared that he would not break his oath to King Haco. On this King
John went away, and stopped not at any place till he came quite north
to Lewes.[6]

King Alexander, then lying in Kiararey-sound,[7] dreamed a dream, and
thought three men came to him. He thought one of them was in royal
robes, but very stern, ruddy in countenance, somewhat thick, and of
middling size. Another seemed of a slender make, but active, and of
all men the most engaging, and majestic. The third again, was of very
great stature, but his features were distorted, and of all the rest he
was the most unsightly. They addressed their speech to the King, and
enquired whether he meant to invade the Hebrides. Alexander thought he
answered that he certainly proposed to subject the islands. The Genius
of the vision bade him go back; and told him no other measure would
turn out to his advantage. The King related his dream; and many
advised him to return. But the King would not; and a little after he
was seized with a disorder, and died. The Scottish army then broke up;
and they removed the King's body to Scotland. The Hebridians say that
the men whom the King saw in his sleep were St Olave King of Norway,
St Magnus Earl of Orkney, and St Columba.

The Scotch took for their King Alexander the son of King Alexander. He
afterwards married the daughter of Henry King of England, and became a
great prince.


MCCLXI.

In summer there came, from Scotland in the west, an Archdeacon, and a
knight called Missel,[8] as Envoys from Alexander King of Scotland.
They shewed more fair language than truth, as seemed to King Haco.
They set out so abruptly on their return, that none wist till they
were under sail. The King dispatched Briniolf Johnson in pursuit, and
he detained them with him. The King declared that they should remain
that winter in Norway, because they had gone away without taking
leave, contrary to what other Envoys did.


MCCLXII.

In summer there came letters from the Kings of the Hebrides in the
western seas. They complain'd much of the hostilities which the Earl
of Ross,[9] Kiarnach, the son of Mac-camal, and  other Scots
committed in the Hebrides when they went out to Sky.[10] They burned
villages, and churches, and they killed great numbers both of men and
women. They affirmed, that the Scotch had even taken the small
children and raising them on the points of their spears shook them
till they fell down to their hands, when they threw them away
lifeless on the ground.[11]

They said also, that the Scottish King purposed to subdue all the
Hebrides, if life was granted him.

When King Haco heard these tidings they gave him much uneasiness, and
he laid the case before his council. Whatever objections were made,
the resolution was then taken, that King Haco should in winter, about
Christmas,[12] issue an edict through all Norway, and order out both
what troops and provisions he thought his dominions could possibly
supply for an expedition. He commanded all his forces to meet him at
Bergen, about the beginning of spring.


MCCLXIII.

Near the middle of Lent King Haco travelled from Drontheim[13] to
Orkadal, thence east through the mountains to Bahus,[14] and so
eastwards to Elfar[15] to see Earl Birger,[16] according to an
appointment that they should meet at Liodhus in Easter week. But when
King Haco came to Liodhus[17] the Earl was already gone away, and so
the King returned north to Bahus.

King Haco arrived at Bergen on the day of the invention of the
Cross.[18] He remained there during the spring, and proceeded in his
preparations with great diligence. Prince Magnus, having given the
necessary directions through Rygiafulke[19] concerning the expedition
and the equipment of the fleet, went to join King Haco. After that a
great number of Barons, and officers, and vassals, and a vast many
soldiers flocked in daily to the Capital.

King Haco held a general council near Bergen at Backa.[20] There the
numerous host was assembled together. The King then declared,
concerning the expedition, that this whole army was intended against
Scotland in the western seas, and to revenge the inroads which the
Scotch had made into his dominions. Prince Magnus begged to command
this expedition instead of King Haco, who should remain at home. He
thanked him in many courteous words; but he observed, that he himself
was older, and had longer acquaintance with the western lands, and
that, therefore, he himself would go this voyage. He, however, gave
Prince Magnus full power to rule the nation in his absence. At this
Council he settled many regulations respecting the internal government
of the Country; and he granted to the yeomanry, that, while he was
away, no Sheriff should decide on any cause, unless such cause was of
the greatest necessity.

During this voyage King Haco had that great vessel which he had caused
to be constructed at Bergen. It was built entirely of oak, and
contained twenty-seven banks of oars.[21] It was ornamented with
heads and necks of dragons beautifully overlaid with gold. He had also
many other well-appointed ships.

In the spring King Haco sent John-Langlife-son and Henry Scot west to
the Orkneys, to procure pilots for Shetland. From thence John sailed
to the Hebrides and told King Dugal that he might expect an army from
the East. It had been rumoured that the Scots would plunder in the
islands that summer. King Dugal, therefore, spread abroad a report
that forty ships were coming from Norway. And by this means he
prevented the Scotch from making a descent.

Some time before the King himself was ready, he sent eight ships to
the westward. The Captains of these were Ronald Urka, Erling Ivarson,
Andrew Nicolson, and Halvard Red. They continued some days out in the
road, as the wind did not favour them.

When the King had prepared his ship, he removed all his army from the
capital to Eidsvags;[22] afterwards he himself returned to the city,
where he remained some nights, and then set out for Herlover.[23] Here
all the troops, both from the Northern and Southern districts,
assembled, as is described in the Ravens-ode, which Sturla[24] sung.

     1.

     From the recesses of Finland,[25] bands, keen for battle,
     sought the potent Ruler of the storm of Javelins. The
     boisterous deep, that girds this earth, bore the ships of
     the Protector of thrones west from the streams of Gotelfa.

King Haco mustered all his force at Herlover. It was a mighty and
splendid armament. The King had many large and well-appointed ships,
as is thus described.

     2.

     No terrifier of dragons,[26] guardians of the hoarded
     treasure,[27] e'er in one place beheld more numerous hosts.
     The stainer of the sea-fowl's beak,[28] resolved to scour the
     main, far distant shores connected by swift fleets.

     3.

     A glare of light blazed from the powerful, far-famed monarch
     while, carried by the sea-borne wooden coursers[29] of
     Gestils,[30] he broke to the roaring waves. The swelling
     sails, of keels that ride the surge, reflected the beams of
     the unsullied sun around the umpire of wars.

Some nights after King Haco had arrived at Herlover, Ronald and Erling
sailed out of the bay with their squadron. Ronald was separated from
the rest at sea, and made for the Orkneys with some of the ships. But,
Erling, and Andrew, and Halvard steered south before Shetland, and so
to the west of Tharey-fiord;[31] and they saw no land; except
Sulna-stapa[32] west of the Orkneys. Afterwards they sailed in to
Scotland under Dyrness.[33] They went up into the country and
destroyed a castle, but the garrison had fled. They burned more than
twenty hamlets. Next they steered for the Hebrides, and found there
Magnus King of Man.

Three nights before the Selian vigils[34] King Haco set sail for the
German sea with all his fleet. He had now been King of Norway six and
forty winters.[35] He had a favourable breeze; the weather was fair
and the armament beautiful to behold, as Sturlas relates.

     4.

     The Abyss returned the flaming gleam of war, darted from the
     bright glittering concave shields of the Goddesses of
     battle.[36] This voyage, by the bands of the Troubler of
     peace, through the sea that streams around the world, was
     unwelcome to the foe--they dreaded the exactor of rings.[37]

King Haco had a company, particularly selected for his own ship. There
were on the quarter-deck Thorlife abbot of Holm,[38] Sir Askatin,[39]
four priests chaplains to the King, Andrew of Thissisey, Aslac Guss
the King's master of the Horse, Andrew Hawardson, Guthorm Gillason and
Thorstein his brother, Eirek Scot Gautson, with many others. There
were on the main deck Aslack Dagson, Steinar Herka, Klomit Langi,
Andrew Gums, Eirek Dugalson,[40] the father of King Dugal,[41]
Einar Lang-bard, Arnbioern Suela, Sigvat Bodvarson,[42] Hoskuld
Oddson, John Hoglif, Arni Stinkar. On the fore-deck there were, Sigurd
the son of Ivar Rofu, Ivar Helgason of Lofloc, Erlend Scolbein, Dag of
Southeim, Briniolf Johnson, Gudleik Sneis, and most of the King's
Chamberlains, with Andrew Plytt the King's treasurer. There were in
the fore-castle, Eirek Skifa, Thorfin Sigvald, Kari Endridson,
Gudbrand Johnson and many of the Cup-bearers. In general, there were
four men on every half rowers' seat. With King Haco, Magnus Earl of
Orkney left Bergen; and the King gave him a good galley. These Barons
were also with the King, Briniolf Johnson, Fin Gautson, Erling Alfson,
Erlend Red, Bard of Hestby, Eilif of Naustadale, Andrew Pott, Ogmund
Krekidants, Erling Ivarson, John Drotning. Gaut of Meli, and Nicholas
of Giska were behind with Prince Magnus at Bergen, as were several
other sea officers who had not been ready. Many approved commanders
were however with King Haco, and of whom mention hath been made.

King Haco having got a gentle breeze, was two nights at sea, when he
reached that Harbour of Shetland called Breydeyiar-sound, with a great
part of his navy, as Sturlas sings.

     5.

     The Leader of his people unmoored the ploughers of the
     Ocean,[43] and raised aloft the expanded wings[44] of his
     sky-blue doves.[45] Our Sovereign, rich in the spoils of the
     sea-snakes den,[46] viewed  the retiring haven from the
     stern of his snorting steed[47] adorned with ruddy gold.

King Haco remained in Breydeyiar-sound near half a month, and from
thence sailed to the Orkneys, and continued some time at Elidarwic
which is near Kirkwall.[48] There he declared before his men, that he
would divide his forces, and send one part south to the Firth of
Forth[49] to plunder. But he himself wished to remain in the Orkneys
with the largest ships and greater part of the army. The vassals and
retainers, however, spoke against this scheme, and made it evident
that they would go nowhere unless with the King himself; so this
proposed expedition was dropt.

After St Olave's wake[50] King Haco, leaving Elidarwic, sailed south
before the Mull[51] of Ronaldsha with all his navy. At this place King
Haco was joined by Ronald from the Orkneys, with the ships that had
followed him. King Haco next led the whole armament into Ronaldsvo,
and lay there for some space. He then sent men over to Cathness[52] to
levy contribution. He, on the one hand, proposed peace if the
inhabitants would yield, but otherwise heavy punishment. The
Cathnesians submitted to the tax, and King Haco appointed collectors
to receive it, as is here intimated.

     6.

     First our wise Sovereign, the Bestower of peace, and
     Defender of the Northern Thrones, imposed tribute, the
     ransom of life, on the dwellers of the Ness.[53] All its
     tribes were terrified by the steel-clad exactor of
     rings,[54] and panic-struck at his mighty power.

While King Haco lay in Ronaldsvo a great darkness drew over the sun,
so that only a little ring was bright round the sun, and it continued
so for some hours.[55]

On the day of St Laurence's wake[56] King Haco, having ordered the
Orkney-men to follow him as soon as they were ready, sailed over
Pentland-Firth,[57] Earl Magnus, however, staid behind. He was here
informed that John Drotning,[58] and Kolbein Aslacson, with the ships
expected from the east, but which had been accidentally detained, were
arrived in the Islands. King Haco then sailed with all his forces to a
haven that is called Asleifarvic,[59] from that to Lewes, so on to
Raasa, and, from thence to that place, in Sky-sound, which is called
Callach-stane.[60]

Here he was joined by Magnus King of Man, and the relations Erling
Ivarson, Andrew Nicolson, and Halward. He next proceeded to the Sound
of Mull,[61] and then to Kiararey where King Dugal and the other
Hebridians were assembled with all their troops. King Haco had now
above an hundred vessels, for the most part large, and all of them
well provided both with men and arms.

While King Haco remained at Kiararey he divided his forces, and sent
fifty ships south to the Mull of Kintire[62] to plunder. The captains
appointed over them were King Dugal, Magnus King of Man, Bryniolf
Johnson, Ronald Urka, Andrew Pott, Ogmund Kraekidants, Vigleic
Priestson. He also ordered five ships for Bute; these were under the
command of Erlend Red, Andrew Nicolson, Simon Stutt, Ivar Ungi Eyfari,
and Gutthorm the Hebridian, each in his own ship.

King Haco sailed afterwards south to Gudey[63] before Kintire where
he anchored. There King John met him; he came in the ship with Bishop
Thorgil. King Haco desired him to follow his banner as he should do.
But King John excused himself. He said he had sworn an oath to the
Scottish King, and held of him more lands than of the Norwegian
Monarch; he therefore entreated King Haco to dispose of all those
estates which he had conferred upon him. King Haco kept him with him
some time, and endeavoured to incline his mind to fidelity. Many laid
imputations to his charge. King Haco indeed had before received bad
accounts of him from the Hebrides; for John Langlife-son came to the
King, while he was sailing west from Shetland, and told him the news
that John King of the Hebrides, breaking his faith, had turned to the
Scottish Monarch. King Haco, however, would not believe this till he
had found it so.

During King Haco's stay at Gudey an Abbot of a monastery of
Greyfriars waited on him, begging protection for their dwelling, and
Holy Church: and this the King granted them in writing.

Friar Simon had lain sick for some time. He died at Gudey. His corpse
was afterwards carried up to Kintire where the Greyfriars interred him
in their Church. They spread a fringed pall over his grave, and called
him a Saint.

About this time men came from King Dugal, and said that the Lords of
Kintire, Margad,[64] and Angus,[65] (also proprietor of Ila), were
willing to surrender the lands which they held to King Haco; and to
order their dependants to join him. The King answered, that he would
not lay waste the peninsula, if they submitted on the following day
before noon; if not he gave them to understand he would ravage it. The
messengers returned. Next morning Margad came and gave up every thing
into the King's power; a little after Angus arrived and likewise did
the same. The King then said, that, if they would enter into articles
with him, he would reconcile them with the King of Scotland. On this
they took an oath to King Haco, and delivered hostages. The King laid
a fine of a thousand head of cattle on their estates. Angus yielded up
Ila also to the King; and the King returned Ila to Angus, upon the
same terms that the other Barons in the Hebrides enjoyed their lands;
this is recorded in the Ravens-ode.

     7

     Our Sovereign, sage in Council, the imposer of tribute, and
     brandisher of the keen Falchion directed his long galleys
     thro' the Hebrides. He bestowed Ila, taken by his troops, on
     the valiant Angus the generous distributor of the beauteous
     ornaments of the hand.[66]

     8

     Our dareful King that rules the monsters of the deep,[67]
     struck excessive terror into all the regions of the western
     ocean. Princes bowed their heads in subjection to the
     cleaver of the battered helm; he often dismissed the
     suppliants in peace, and dispelled their apprehensions of
     the wasteful tribes.

South in Kintire there was a Castle held by a Knight who came to wait
on King Haco, and surrendered the fortress into his hands. The King
conferred this Castle upon Guthorm Backa-kolf.

We must next speak of that detachment of the Army, which the King had
sent towards the Mull of Kintire to pillage. The Norwegians made a
descent there. They burnt the hamlets that were before them, and took
all the effects that they could find. They killed some of the
inhabitants; the rest fled where they could. But, when they were
proceeding to the greater villages, letters arrived from King Haco
forbidding them to plunder. Afterwards they sailed for Gudey to rejoin
King Haco, as is here said.

     9.

     The openers of gushing wounds, undaunted of soul, proceeded
     in the paths[68] of the famed Getis,[69] from the south
     round Kintire. Our heroes, rousers of the thundering tempest
     of swords, glutted the swift, sable-clad birds of prey in
     Scotland.

The wind was not favourable, King Haco, however, made Andrew Pott go
before him south to Bute, with some small vessels, to join those he
had already sent thither. News was soon received that they had won a
fortress, the garrison of which had capitulated, and accepted terms of
the Norwegians. There was with the Norwegians a sea-officer, called
Rudri.[70] He considered Bute as his Birthright; and because he had
not received the Island of the Scotch he committed many ravages, and
killed many people; and for that he was outlawed by the Scottish King.
He came to King Haco, and took the oaths to him; and with two of his
brothers became his subjects. As soon as the garrison, after having
delivered up the strong-hold, were gone away from the Norwegians,
Rudri killed nine of them, because he thought that he owed them no
good will. Afterwards King Haco reduced the island, as is here said.

     10.

     The wide-extended Bute was won from the forlorn wearers[71]
     of rings by the renowned and invincible troops of the
     promoter of conquest,--they wielded the two-edged sword--the
     foes of our Ruler dropt, and the Raven from his
     fields of slaughter, winged his flight for the Hebrides.

The Norwegians who had been in Bute went to Scotland, where they
burned many houses, and several towns. Rudri, proceeding a great way,
did all the mischief that he could, as is here described.

     11.

     The habitations of men, the dwellings of the wretched,
     flamed. Fire, the devourer of halls, glowed in their
     granaries. The hapless throwers of the dart[72] fell near
     the swan-frequented plain,[73] while south from our floating
     pines[74] marched a host of warriors.

While King Haco was in the Hebrides, deputies came to him from Ireland
intimating that the Irish[75] Ostmen would submit to his power, if he
would secure them from the encroachments of the English, who
possessed all the best towns along the sea-coast. King Haco
accordingly sent Sigurd the Hebridian, with some fast-sailing vessels,
to examine on what terms the Irish invited him thither.

After this King Haco sailed south before the Mull of Kintire with all
his fleet, and anchored for some time in Arran-sound. Then, there came
often Predicant, or Barefooted friars, from the Scottish Monarch, to
King Haco, to sound him about a pacification between the two
Sovereigns. At this juncture also King Haco set King John at liberty;
and bidding him go in peace, wherever he would, gave him several rich
presents. He promised King Haco, to do everything in his power to
effectuate a peace between him and the Scottish King; and that he
would immediately return to King Haco whenever he desired him. Soon
after King Haco sent Gilbert Bishop of Hamar, Henry Bishop of Orkney,
Andrew Nicolson, Andrew Plytt, and Paul Soor as envoys to treat about
a peace with the King of Scotland. They went to the Scottish Monarch,
and laid before him their overtures. He received them honourably,
seemed inclined to a compromise, and said that such terms of
accommodation as he would consent to, would be transmitted to King
Haco. The commissioners departed; and the Scottish envoys arrived soon
after. King Haco had ordered that all the Islands to the west of
Scotland, which he called his, should be wrote down. The King of
Scotland again had named all such as he would not relinquish. These
were Bute, Arran, and the two Cumbras;[76] as to other matters there
was very little dispute between the Sovereigns; but however no
agreement took place.

The Scotch purposely declined any accommodation, because summer was
drawing to a period, and the weather was becoming bad. Finding this,
Haco sailed in, with all his forces, past the Cumbras.

Afterwards an interview in Scotland was agreed upon for a
reconciliation. King Haco sent thither a Bishop and a Baron; and to
meet them came some Knights and Monks. They spoke much about an
accommodation, but, at last, things ended the same way as formerly.
Towards the conclusion of the day a greater number of Scots convened
from the country than the Norwegians thought were to be trusted. They
therefore, retiring to the ships, waited on the King, and told him
their opinion. The generality advised him to declare that the truce
was now ended, and to give orders to plunder, as the army was very
short of provisions.

King Haco, however, sent one of his courtiers, called Kolbein Rich, to
the Scottish Monarch. He carried with him the Articles of pacification
which the Scottish King had sent to King Haco, and was commanded to
bring back the proposals which King Haco had sent to the King of
Scotland. He was besides to propose that the Sovereigns should meet
with all their forces and treat about a peace. If that, by the grace
of God, took place, it was very well; but if it should turn out
otherwise, then Haco proposed to the King of Scotland to fight, with
their whole armies, and let him conquer whom God pleased. The Scottish
Monarch seem'd not unwilling to fight, but he gave no explanation.
Kolbein, therefore, returned back to his Sovereign, who appeared but
little satisfied with his message; as is mentioned in the Ravens-ode.

     12.

     The Eastern Hero great in command, and ennobled by Victory,
     repeatedly offered the decisive conflict of Javelins to the
     enemy. The strangers, distrustful of their strength, risked
     not the combat against our magnanimous Prince, wielder of
     the gleaming blade.

The truce was now declared to be totally ended. The King accordingly
sent sixty ships in to Loch-Long.[77] They were commanded by Magnus
King of Man, King Dugal,[78] and Allan his brother, Angus, Margad,
Vigleik Priestson and Ivar Holm. When they came into the inlet they
took their boats, and drew them[79] up to a great lake which is called
Loch-Lomond. On the far side round the lake was an Earldom called
Lennox.[80] In the lake  there were a great many islands well
inhabited;[81] these islands the Norwegians wasted with fire. They
also burned all the buildings about the lake, and made great
devastation, as Sturlas relates.

     13.

     The persevering shielded warriors of the thrower of the
     whizzing spear[82] drew their boats across the broad
     isthmus. Our fearless troops, the exactors of contribution,
     with flaming brands wasted the populous islands in the
     lake, and the mansions around its winding bays.

Allan the brother of King Dugal, marched far over into Scotland, and
killed great numbers of the inhabitants. He took many hundred head of
cattle, and made vast havoc, as is here described.

     14.

     Our veterans fierce of Soul, feeders of wolves, hastened
     their wasteful course through the spacious districts of the
     mountains. Allan, the bravest of mortals, at the fell
     interview of battle, often wreaked his fatal vengeance on
     the expiring foe.

Afterwards the Norwegians retired to their fleet, and met with so
violent a storm that it dashed in pieces about ten of their ships in
Loch-Long. At this time Ivar Holm was seized with an acute disease,
which occasioned his death.

King Haco, as was before written, still lay in the Hebrides.
Michaelmas fell on a Saturday; and, on the Monday night after, there
came a great tempest with hailstones and rain. The watch on the
fore-castle of the King's ship called out, and said that a transport
vessel was driving full against their cable. The sailors immediately
sprung upon deck; but the rigging of the transport getting entangled
in the King's ship, carried away its beak. The transport then fell
aboard in such a manner, that the anchor grappled the cordage of the
King's ship, which then began to drag its anchors. The King,
therefore, ordered the cable of the transport to be cut, which was
accordingly done. It then drove out to sea, but the King's ship
remained steadfast, and continued uncovered[83] till daylight. On the
morning, the transport floated with the tide, and, together with a
galley, was cast ashore on Scotland. The wind gradually increasing,
the crew of the King's ship got more cables, and dropt a fifth
anchor. The King himself then took to his long-boat, and rowing out to
the islands, ordered mass to be sung. The fleet in the meantime was
forced up the channel; and the tempest that day was so furious that
some vessels cut away their masts, others ran aground. The King's ship
also drove into the sound, tho' seven anchors, including that taken
from the transport, had been used. They then let go an eighth, which
was the sheet anchor; the ship still drove, but the anchors at length
took fast hold. Five vessels were cast ashore. So great was this storm
that people said it was raised by the power of Magic, and the quantity
of rain was prodigious, as is thus described.

     15.

     Now our deep-enquiring Sovereign encounter'd the horrid
     powers of enchantment, and the abominations of an impious
     race. The troubled flood tore many fair gallies from their
     moorings and swept them anchorless before its waves.

     16.

     A magic-raised watery tempest blew upon our warriors,
     ambitious of conquest, and against the floating
     habitations[84] of the brave. The roaring billows and stormy
     blast threw shielded companies of our adventurous nation on
     the Scottish strand.

When the Scotch saw that the vessels had run aground, they assembled
together, and advancing against the Norwegians, attacked them with
missile weapons. They, however, defended themselves gallantly under
cover of their ships; the Scotch made several attempts, at different
times, but killed few, tho' many were wounded. King Haco, as the wind
was now somewhat abated, sent in some boats with a reinforcement, as
is here mentioned.

     17.

     The victorious breaker of gleaming weapons, attentive of
     soul, then sent his bands to the hard-fought field, where
     breast-plates rang. Our troops, by the slaughter of the
     suspicious foe, established their Monarch's fame, vilified
     by the dwellers of the vallies.[85]

Afterwards the Sovereign himself, attended by Thorlaug Bosa, set sail
in a barge belonging to the Masters of the Lights.[86] As soon as the
King's men approached the land the Scotch retired; and the Norwegians
continued ashore all night. The Scotch, however, during the darkness,
entered the transport,[87] and carried off as much of the lading as
they could. On the morning, the King with a numerous reinforcement
came on shore; and he ordered the transport to be lightened, and towed
out to the ships.

In a little time, they descried the Scottish army, and it was so
numerous that they supposed the King of Scotland was present. Ogmund
Kraekidants with his company was stationed on a hill. The Scottish van
skirmished with his men; and, their main body coming on, the
Norwegians entreated the King, as they were anxious for his safety, to
row to his fleet and to send them help. The King insisted on remaining
on shore; but they would not assent to his continuing any longer so
exposed; he, therefore, sailed out in a barge to his ships at the
Cumbras. The following Barons remained on land, Lord Andrew Nicolson,
Ogmund Kraekidants, Erling Alfson, Andrew Pott, Ronald Urka, Thorlaug
Bosi, Paul Soor. The whole number of soldiers with them was eight or
nine hundred. Two hundred men were upon the rising-ground with Ogmund;
but the rest of the troops were posted down upon the beach.

The Scottish army now advanced, and it was conjectured to consist of
near fifteen hundred knights.[88] All their horses had breast-plates;
and there were many Spanish steeds in complete armour. The Scottish
King had, besides, a numerous army of foot soldiers, well accoutred.
They generally had bows and spears.

The Norwegians on the hill, apprehensive of being surrounded, began to
retire in scattered parties towards the sea. Andrew Nicolson,
observing this, came up to the rising ground, and desired Ogmund to
draw off his men towards the beach, but not to retreat so
precipitately as if he fled. The Scotch at this time attacked them
furiously with darts and stones. Showers of weapons were poured upon
the Norwegians, who defended themselves, and retired in good order.
But when they approached the sea, each one hurrying faster than
another, those on the beach imagined they were routed. Some therefore
leaped into their boats, and pushed off from the land, others jumped
into the transport. Their companions called upon them to return, and
some returned, tho' few. Andrew Pott leaped over two boats, and into a
third, and so escaped from land. Many boats went down, and some men
were lost, and the rest of the Norwegians at last wheeled about
towards the sea.

Here Haco of Steini, one of King Haco's household, fell. The
Norwegians were then driven south from the transport, and were headed
by Andrew Nicolson, Ogmund Kraekidants, Thorlaug Bosi, and Paul Soor.
There soon began a severe contest, tho' very unequal, as ten Scots
fought against each Norwegian. Among the Scotch there was a young
knight called Ferash,[89] equally distinguished for his birth and
fortune. He wore a helmet plaited with gold, and set with precious
stones, and the rest of his armour was of a piece with it. He rode
gallantly up to the Norwegians, but no other ventured. He galloped
frequently along the Norwegian line, and then back to his own
followers. Andrew Nicolson had now reached the Scottish van. He
encountered this illustrious knight, and struck at his thigh with such
force that he cut it off,[90] through the armour, with his sword,
which penetrated to the saddle. The Norwegians stript him of his
beautiful belt.[91] The hardest conflict then commenced. Many fell on
both sides, but more of the Scotch, as Sturlas sings.

     18.

     Where cuirasses rung, our generous youths, formed in a
     circle, prostrated the illustrious givers of bracelets. The
     birds of prey were gluttonously filled with lifeless limbs.
     What great chieftain shall avenge the fate of the renowned
     wearer of the Belt?

During the battle there was so great a tempest that King Haco saw no
possibility of bringing the army ashore. Ronald, and Eilif of
Naustadale, however, with some men, rowed to land, and greatly
distinguished themselves; as did those troops who had before gone out
in their boats. Ronald, in the end, was repulsed to his ships; but
Eilif behaved most heroically. The Norwegians now began to form
themselves anew; and the Scotch took possession of the rising ground.
There were continued skirmishes with stones and missile weapons; but
towards evening the Norwegians made a desperate charge against the
Scotch on the hill, as is here recorded.

     19.

     The champions of Nordmaera's[92] Lord saluted the stout,
     harnassed Barons, with the rough music of battle. The train
     of the supporter of thrones, courageous, and clad in steel,
     marched to the din of clashing swords.

     20.

     At the conflict of corselets on the blood-red hill, the
     damasked blade hewed the mail of hostile tribes, ere the
     Scot, nimble as the hound, would leave the field to the
     followers of our all-conquering king.

The Scotch then left the eminence, and fled, where they could, away to
their mountains. The Norwegians, perceiving this, retired to their
boats, and rowing out to their ships, luckily escaped the storm. On
the morning they came back in search of the bodies of those who had
dropt. Among the dead were Haco of Steini, and Thorgisl Gloppa, both
belonging to King Haco's household. There fell also a worthy vassal
called Karlhoved, from Drontheim, and another vassal named Halkel,
from Fiorde. Besides, there died three Masters of the Lights,
Thorstein Bat, John Ballhoved, and Halward Buniard. It was impossible
for the Norwegians to tell how many were killed of the Scotch, because
those who dropt were taken up and removed to the woods. King Haco
ordered his dead to be carried to a church.

Five days after, King Haco commanded his men to weigh anchor and to
bring his ship close under the Cumbras. He was soon joined by the
squadron which had been in Loch-long. On the fast day following, the
weather was good, and the King sent some retainers ashore to burn the
vessels which had been stranded; that same day the King sailed past
Cumbra to Melansey,[93] where he lay some nights. Here he was met by
the Commissioners he had sent to Ireland, who assured him that the
Irish Ostmen would willingly engage to maintain his army till he freed
them from the dominion of the English. King Haco was extremely
desirous of sailing for Ireland, and, as the wind was not favourable,
he held a Council on the subject, but the whole army was against this
plan. He, therefore, told them that as he was short of provisions he
would steer for the Hebrides. The King then ordered the body of Ivar
Holm to be carried to Bute, where it was interred.

Afterwards King Haco sailed past Melansey and lay some nights near
Arran, then proceeded to Sandey and so to the Mull of Kintire, and at
night he arrived north at Gudey; next he sailed out to Ila-sound,
where he remained two nights. King Haco laid a contribution, rated at
three hundred head of cattle, on the island, but part was to be paid
in meal, part in cheese. Haco set sail again on the first Sunday of
winter, and met a fog and a storm so violent that few of the ships
could carry their sails. The king, therefore, made for Kiararey, and
about this time messengers passed between him and King John, but to
little purpose. Here the King was informed that his troops had made
depredations in Mull, and that some of the Mull-men, with two or three
Norwegians, had been killed.

King Haco next sailed in to the Calf of Mull,[94] where he stayed some
nights. There King Dugal and Allan his brother took leave of the King,
who gave them those estates which King John formerly possessed--Magnus
King of Man and other Hebridians had returned home before. He gave
Bute to Rudri, and Arran to Margad. To King Dugal he gave the Castle
in Kintire which Guthorm Backa-kolf had besieged and taken during the
summer. In this expedition King Haco regained all those provinces
which King Magnus Barefoot had acquired, and conquered from the Scotch
and Hebridians, as is here narrated.

     21.

     The Lord of Egda[95] soon recovered all those territories on
     the continent which had been subjected by the Scottish
     tribes. In the western regions none durst contend with the
     offspring of Ingui.[96] His army, like a gathering tempest,
     indicated desolation to the dominions of his imperious
     adversary.

King Haco, leaving the calf of Mull, sailed to Rauney. Here he
overtook Balti a vassal of Shetland, with those who had been sent to
the Orkneys, and to whom a permission had been given of returning to
Norway. King Haco from Rauney steered northwards. The wind being
unfavourable, he made for Westerford in Sky, and ordered the islanders
to supply him with provisions. Next he sailed past Cape Wrath,[97] and
arriving at Dyrness, there happened a calm, for which reason the King
ordered the fleet to be steered into Gia-ford.[98] This was done on
the feast of the two apostles, Simon and Jude,[99] which fell on a
Sunday. The King spent the night there. On this festival, after mass
had been sung, some Scots, whom the Norwegians had taken prisoners,
were presented to the King. The King detained one as a hostage, and
sent the others up the country, at liberty, on giving a promise that
they would return with cattle. On the same day it happened that nine
men belonging to Andrew Biusa's ship went ashore to procure water, and
an outcry was soon heard from the mainland. The crew, therefore,
immediately setting off from their ships, found two men swimming,
though badly wounded, and took them on board; the other seven,
unarmed, and incapable of making any defence, remained by their boat
(which was left aground by the tide) and were killed by the Scotch.
The Norwegians landing, carried away their dead; and the Scotch, in
the meantime, fled to a wood. On the Monday, King Haco sailed from
Gia-ford after having liberated the Scottish hostage, and sent him
ashore. The King in the evening reached the Orkneys, and anchored in a
certain sound, to the north of Asmundsvo,[100] from whence he, with
the greatest part of his fleet, steered for Ronaldsvo. In passing over
Pentland Firth, a terrible whirlpool appeared, and in which a ship
from Rygia-fylke, with all on board, perished. John of Hestby was
driven through the straits, and was very near being swallowed up in
the gulf; but, by the mercy of God, his ship was forced east to the
ocean, and he made for Norway.

While King Haco remained in the Orkneys the most part of his troops
sailed to Norway; some went with the King's permission, but others
took leave for themselves. King Haco, on his arrival at the islands,
had at first given out that he would return immediately to Norway;
but, as it was a long time before the wind favoured him, he determined
to winter in the Orkneys. He, therefore, named twenty ships that were
to remain with him, and dismissed the rest. All the vassals stayed
with him, except Eilif of Naustdale; he sailed home. Most of the
gentry, however, continued with their Sovereign. The King then
despatched letters to Norway, concerning the necessaries he should
want. After All Saints Day, the King steered for Medalland[101]
harbour; but spent one day at Ronaldsha.

On the Saturday before Martinmas King Haco rode to the port of
Medalland, and after mass he was taken very ill. He was aboard his
ship during the night; but, on the morning, he ordered mass to be sung
on shore. He afterwards held a council to deliberate where the vessels
should be laid up; and ordered his men to be attentive, and see after
their respective ships. Upon this each captain took the charge of his
own galley. Some were laid up in the harbour of Medalland, and others
at Skalpeid.[102]

Next King Haco proceeded to Skalpeid, and then rode to Kirkwall. He,
with such officers as dined at his table, lodged in the Bishop's
palace. Here the King and the Bishop kept separate tables in the
halls, each for his own retinue; but the King dined in the upper
story. He ordered certain districts to furnish his nobility and
household with provisions. Andrew Plytt had the inspection of the
King's table, and delivered out to the courtiers, retainers, masters
of the Lights, and other attendants their usual allowance. After the
proper arrangements were taken concerning the disposal of the fleet,
the different captains went whither their ships were laid up. The
Barons who remained at Kirkwall were Briniolf Johnston, Erling Alfson,
Ronald Urka, Erling of Birkey, John Drotning, and Erlend Red. The
other Barons repaired to their proper districts.

King Haco had spent the summer in much watchfulness and anxiety. Being
often called to deliberate with his captains, he had enjoyed little
rest, and when he arrived at Kirkwall, he was confined to his bed by
his disorder. Having lain for some nights, the illness abated, and he
was on foot for three days. On the first day he walked about in his
apartments; on the second, he attended at the Bishop's chapel to hear
mass; and on the third he went to Magnus's Church, and walked round
the shrine of St Magnus, Earl of Orkney. He then ordered a bath to be
prepared, and got himself shaved. Some nights after he relapsed, and
took again to his bed. During his sickness, he ordered the Bible and
Latin authors to be read to him. But finding his spirits were too much
fatigued by reflecting on what he had heard, he desired Norwegian
books might be read to him night and day; first the lives of Saints,
and, when they were ended, he made his attendants read the Chronicles
of our Kings from Haldan the Black, and so of all the Norwegian
Monarchs in succession, one after the other. The King still found his
disorder increasing. He, therefore, took into consideration the pay to
be given to his troops, and commanded that a mark of fine silver
should be given to each courtier, and half a mark to each of the
masters of the lights, chamberlains, and other attendants on his
person. He ordered all the ungilt plate belonging to his table to be
weighed, and to be distributed if his plain silver fell short. At
this time also letters were wrote to Prince Magnus concerning the
government of the nation, and some things which the King wanted to
have settled respecting the army. King Haco received extreme unction
on the night before the festival of St Lucia.[103] Thorgisl, Bishop of
Stavanger, Gilbert Bishop of Hamar, Henry Bishop of Orkney, Abbot
Thorleif, and many other learned men were present; and before the
unction, all present bade the King farewell with a kiss. He still
spoke distinctly; and his particular favourites asked him if he left
behind him any other son than Prince Magnus, or any other heirs that
should share in the kingdom, but he uniformly persisted that he had no
other heirs in the male or female line, than what were publicly known.

When the histories of all the Kings down to Suerer had been recited,
he ordered the life of that Prince to be read, and to be continued
night and day, whenever he found himself indisposed to sleep.

The festival of the Virgin St. Lucia happened on a Thursday, and on
the Saturday after, the King's disorder increased to such a degree
that he lost the use of his speech; and at midnight Almighty God
called King Haco out of this mortal life. This was matter of great
grief to all those who attended, and to most of those who heard of the
event. The following Barons were present at the death of the King,
Briniolf Johnson, Erling Alfson, John Drottning, Ronald Urka, and some
domestics who had been near the King's person during his illness.
Immediately on the decease of the King, Bishops, and learned men were
sent for to sing mass. Afterwards all the company went out except
Bishop Thorgisl, Briniolf Johnson and two other persons, who watched
by the body, and performed all the services due to so illustrious a
Lord and Prince as King Haco had been. On Sunday the royal corpse was
carried to the upper hall, and laid on a bier. The body was clothed in
a rich garb, with a garland on the head, and dressed out as became a
crowned monarch. The masters of the lights stood with tapers in their
hands, and the whole hall was illuminated. All the people came to see
the body, which appeared beautiful and animated, and the King's
countenance was as fair and ruddy as while he was alive. It was some
alleviation of the deep sorrow of the beholders to see the corpse of
their departed Sovereign so decorated. High mass was then sung for the
deceased. The Nobility kept watch by the body during the night. On
Monday the remains of King Haco were carried to St. Magnus's church,
where they lay in state that night. On Tuesday the royal corpse was
put into a coffin, and buried in the Choir of St. Magnus's Church,
near the steps leading to the shrine of St. Magnus Earl of Orkney. The
tomb was then closed, and a canopy was spread over it. It was also
determined that watch should be kept over the King's grave all winter.
At Christmas the Bishop and Andrew Plytt furnished entertainments, as
the King had directed, and good presents were given to all the
soldiers.

King Haco had given orders that his remains should be carried east to
Norway, and buried near his Father and relations. Towards the end of
winter, therefore, that great vessel which he had had in the west was
launched, and soon got ready. On Ash-Wednesday the corpse of King Haco
was taken out of the ground; this happened on the third of the nones
of March. The Courtiers followed the corpse to Skalpeid where the ship
lay, and which was chiefly under the direction of Bishop Thorgisl, and
Andrew Plytt. They put to sea on the first Saturday in Lent; but
meeting with hard weather, they steered for Silavog.[104] From this
place they wrote letters to Prince Magnus acquainting him with the
news, and then set sail for Bergen. They arrived at Laxavog[105]
before the festival of St. Benedict.[106] On that day Prince Magnus
rowed out to meet the corpse. The ship was brought near to the King's
palace; and the body was carried up to a summer house. Next morning
the corpse was removed to Christ-church, and was attended by Prince
Magnus, the two Queens, the Courtiers, and the town's people. The body
was then interred in the Choir of Christ-church; and Prince Magnus
addressed a long and gracious speech to those who attended the
funeral procession. All the multitude present expressed great sorrow
of mind as Sturlas says.

     22.

     Three nights did the brave warriors, the flower of chivalry,
     continue at Bergen, ere they entombed their wise and
     glorious Prince. The breakers of temper'd metals, stood
     crowding around the grave of the ruler of the nation, while
     in their swimming eyes appear'd no look of joy.--Then
     commenced those bloody feuds which till our days have
     reigned.

King Haco was buried three nights before the festival of the
annunciation of the Virgin Mary; and after the Incarnation of our Lord
Jesus Christ one thousand two hundred and sixty three years.[107]

FINIS.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 1: Sudr-eyiar, (_orig._). The Hebrides or southern division
of the Scottish islands, so called in contradistinction to the
Orkneys.]

[Footnote 2: Godred, Chrou-ban, _i.e._ the white handed, King of Man.]

[Footnote 3: _Th_ursa sker (_orig._) _i.e._ the giants' rocks,
Thurso.]

[Footnote 4: Solunder-haf, (_orig._) the Northern ocean. So called
from the Soloe islands near that promontory of Norway called Stad.
That species of sea fowl which frequent the Bass, probably received
their name from being more commonly found in the Solund isles.]

[Footnote 5: Kiarna-borg, (_orig._), _Fl. Ms._ Kianaborg, from the
Irish _carn_ a rock, and the Is. _borg_ a castle. This castle was
situated on a rocky islet near Mul. Fordun calls it Carnborg.]

[Footnote 6: Liod-hus, _i.e._ The residence of Liot. It is not
unlikely that the isle of Lewes, & the family of McLeod were so
named from Liod earl of Orkney.]

[Footnote 7: Kiarareyiar, in the Mss. Kiarbareyiar, the island
Kiararey where Alexander died, suddenly, Jul. 8th. 1249.]

[Footnote 8: Perhaps the Author means Frissel afterwards Bishop of St
Andrews; or Michael _viz._ de Weymyss, who was ambassador to Norway,
A. D. 1290.]

[Footnote 9: Jarlin af Ros ok Kiarnakr son Makamals (_orig._). The
text here is much vitiated. The author might have read in some Irish
accounts, Jarl na Ross (William) McKerchar, McCalom, _i.e._, the Earl
of Ross (William) the son of Ferchard, the son of Malcolm. This
William Mac Erchart was a young Hero, and is corruptly called
Macentagart by the Scottish historians. Or perhaps, three persons may
be alluded to, viz., the Earl of Ross, Kinneach-son (of Kintail), and
a MacCamal of Lochaw, all powerful chieftains on the west coast of
Scotland. It is, however, not impossible that Kiarnak was some ancient
chieftain from whom a branch of the Grants was called Clan-Chiarnach.
The Fl. Ms. for Makamals reads Machamals.]

[Footnote 10: I Skid (_orig._). In the Fl. Ms. istrid e. to war.]

[Footnote 11: The inhuman practice here described was common in those
times. From the Landnamaboc we learn that Olver first discouraged this
custom. We read, Olver did not permit tossing infants from spear to
spear as was usual among pirates, and was therefore surnamed
Barna-kall or the protector of Infants.]

[Footnote 12: Jol (_orig._). The great brumal festival among the
Scandinavians. Hence the Scotch word Yule, _i.e._, Christmas.]

[Footnote 13: Nid-ar-os (_orig._), _i.e._, the mouth of the river Nid,
now Drontheim.]

[Footnote 14: Vikor (_orig._), now Bahus in Sweden.]

[Footnote 15: Elfa, the river at Gottenburg.]

[Footnote 16: An Earl of Sweden and father-in-law to Haco the
younger.]

[Footnote 17: Liodhusa, a town of Sweden demolished A.D. 1268.]

[Footnote 18: May 3.]

[Footnote 19: _i.e._, the hilly country. Harald Harfager divided his
kingdom into several counties, each of which was to fit out a squadron
of ships on an emergency. The counties were again divided into
_skipreidor_, or smaller districts, each of which furnished a single
vessel properly equipped.]

[Footnote 20: _i.e._, an eminence, near Bergen.]

[Footnote 21: By banks of oars we are only to understand benches for
the rowers.]

[Footnote 22: _i.e._, Cape-bay, near Bergen.]

[Footnote 23: An island and excellent harbour near Bergen.]

[Footnote 24: A celebrated poet, uncle to Sigvat Bodvarson, who
attended Haco in this expedition, and from whom Sturla probably had
his information of facts.]

[Footnote 25: The most northerly province of Norway.]

[Footnote 26: _i.e._, no warrior.]

[Footnote 27: The Scandinavian Scalds and Mythologists often
represented treasures as guarded by monsters, dragons, sea snakes, &c.
This notion probably originated from the fabulous tales of those who
traded to the Indies. An ancient author, speaking of Scythia, says,
"nam qvum in plerisque locis auro & gemmis affluant, Gryphorum
immanitate, accessus hominum rarus est."]

[Footnote 28: _i.e._, Haco.]

[Footnote 29: _i.e._, ships.]

[Footnote 30: Gestil, a famous sea king or pirate.]

[Footnote 31: _Th_areyiar-fioerd (_orig._), perhaps a mistake for
Faroeyiar-fioerd. Torfaeus read it Barreyiarfiord.]

[Footnote 32: _i.e._, the column of pillars, perhaps the island
Staffa.]

[Footnote 33: _i.e._, the promontory of deer, now
Durnish.]

[Footnote 34: 7th of July.]

[Footnote 35: The Norwegians computed by winters: the Scotch did the
same, as we see by Winton's chronicle:

     "Thretty winters and four than
     Edan regnyd Max Gowran."
]

[Footnote 36: Val-drosar (_orig._), the Goddesses of Fate, or
Valkyriae, to whom armour was supposed sacred.]

[Footnote 37: _i.e._, Tribute--Ringa elldingom, (_orig._), bright
rings: _Ringa_ signify not only rings, or bracelets, but also money;
for before the introduction of coinage into the North, very thick
spiral gold wires were worn round the wrists of great men, who
distributed bits to those who performed any signal service; and such a
wire is still to be seen in the Royal Museum at Copenhagen. It is not
always easy to discern when by _ringa_ is understood ornaments for the
fingers, bracelets, rings of investiture, or the current money of the
times.]

[Footnote 38: _i.e._, the islet, a monastery near Bergen.]

[Footnote 39: Afterwards chancellor of Norway.]

[Footnote 40: Probably the son of Dugal, the son of Somerled.]

[Footnote 41: The father of King Dugal was Rory, I suppose. See notes
on pages 34 and 42.]

[Footnote 42: Nephew to Sturla author of the Ravens-ode. He attended
Haco in this expedition.]

[Footnote 43: _i.e._ ships.]

[Footnote 44: _i.e._ sails.]

[Footnote 45: Bla-dufor (_orig._), _i.e._ Blue pigeons. The Scalds
frequently compared ships under sail to birds, horses, and other
animals in motion.]

[Footnote 46: _i.e._ gold.]

[Footnote 47: _i.e._ ship.]

[Footnote 48: Kirkio-vog (_orig._) _i.e._ Church-bay. Kirkwall.]

[Footnote 49: Breida-fiardar (_orig._), _i.e._ Broad bay. The firth of
Forth.]

[Footnote 50: St Olave's day, July 29.]

[Footnote 51: Mula in Irish and Icelandic signifies a cape or beak.]

[Footnote 52: Kata-nes (_orig._), _i.e._ the promontory of Cadtav or
Cathness. Cathness was particularly exposed to the inroads of the
Norwegians. On this account great numbers of the inhabitants retired
into Murray and the adjacent counties, where they were afterwards
known by the name of Clan-Chattan.]

[Footnote 53: _i.e._, the promontory, or Cathness.]

[Footnote 54: Baug-gerdar (_orig._), _i.e._ imposer of rings. _Baug_
signifies anything circular, therefore, in compounded words, it is not
easy to discern when it denotes rings or shields, &c. See note on
_ringa_, p. 19.]

[Footnote 55: This eclipse happened on the 5th of August 1263.]

[Footnote 56: St Laurence's wake or vigil, 9th of Aug.]

[Footnote 57: Cathness by the ancient Britons was called Pentir,
_i.e._ the headland, whence the neighbouring firth had its name.]

[Footnote 58: _i.e._ John the Queen, perhaps the ancestor of the
McQueens.]

[Footnote 59: Asleifarvik (_orig._). Fl. MS., Hals-eyiar-vic.]

[Footnote 60: _i.e._ The old woman's rock. _Cailleach_ in Irish, and
_kerling_ in Icelandic signify an old woman.]

[Footnote 61: _i.e._ The promontory. This island was so called
because, from its propinquity to the opposite shore, it appeared like
a cape. The old Venetian edition of Pliny has "Mella xxv mill. pass.
amplior proditur;" in the other copies it is "Reliquarum nulla" &c.
Hence the true reading appears to be Reliquarum Mulla &c.]

[Footnote 62: Ken-tir, _i.e._ the promontory, a Peninsula in Scotland,
Kintire.]

[Footnote 63: _i.e._ God's-Island. I take this to be Giga, or, as
Fordon calls it, Gia, compounded of the Gaelic _Dhia_, God, and the
Islandic _ey_, an island.]

[Footnote 64: Who this Margad was does not appear from history, I
believe.]

[Footnote 65: Angus, Lord of Kintire and Ila, was grandson & heir of
Reginald king of the isles. His posterity succeeded to the county of
Ross, & John, the second Earl, A.D. 1449, gave to his Brother Hugh the
Barony of Slate &c. Lord McDonald Baron of Slate, is the direct
male representative of Reginald.]

[Footnote 66: _i.e._, rings or bracelets.]

[Footnote 67: _i.e._, ships.]

[Footnote 68: _i.e._ the sea.]

[Footnote 69: A celebrated adventurer or sea king.]

[Footnote 70: Rudri or Ruari is the Irish abbreviation of Roderic. The
person here meant is, no doubt, the second son of King Reginald, & the
same who in a donation to the abbey of Sandale, is stiled Rodericus de
Kintire filius Reginaldi. This Roderic, it seems, besides Allan &
Dougal, had another son Angus McRorie, Lord of Bute, whose daughter
and heiress Jean was married to Alexander sixth Lord High Steward,
Grand father to Robert II. King of Scotland. Robert, A.D. 1400., gave
Bute to his son John from whom the present family of Bute is lineally
descended.]

[Footnote 71: _i.e._ the Scotch.]

[Footnote 72: _i.e._ the Scotch.]

[Footnote 73: _i.e._ sea.]

[Footnote 74: _i.e._ ships.]

[Footnote 75: Irar. (_orig._), _i.e._ Irish. As the native Irish had
suffer'd so much from the Scandinavians it is improbable they would
apply for assistance to the _Siol Lochlin na beum_. We may therefore
reasonably conclude that the People here mentioned were the
descendants of those Norwegians or Ostmen, who long inhabited the
eastern coast of Ireland and founded some of its best towns. A. D.
1201 those Ostmen or Easterlings were still so considerable that, at a
recognition taken of the diocese of Limerick, the arbitrators
consisted of 12 English, 12 Irish, & 12 Ostmen. Edw. I. gave
Gilchrist, William, & John Gilmorys, with other Ostmen in the County
of Waterford, peculiar privileges; &, by the rolls of Edw. II. they
evidently subsisted, as a distinct people, during the reign of that
prince.]

[Footnote 76: Kumr-eyiar (_orig._), _i.e._ the Islands of the
Cumbrians, two small islands to the West of Scotland.]

[Footnote 77: Skipa-fioerd in Islandic, and Loch-Lhong, in Gaelic,
signifies the Bay of Ships.]

[Footnote 78: Allan & Dougal his brother were, I imagine, the sons of
Rudri (see the note on page 34.) This Allan we may suppose to be the
same who, in Rymer's Foedera, is called "Alanus filius Rotherici," &
who A. D. 1284 was one of the Barons that engaged to support Margaret
of Norway's title to the crown of Scotland. Dugal was probably the
predecessor of McDougal of Dunoly _i.e._ Olave's tower. The place
might receive this name, from having been the residence of Olave, the
youngest Son of Somerled thane of Argyle.]

[Footnote 79: To avoid long, or dangerous circumnavigations, it was
usual for the antients to draw their light canoes over isthmuses.
Among the Greeks such places were termed [Greek: _diolchoi_] _i.e._
dragging-places, and there was a very remarkable one near Corinth. By
the Scotch they were called Tarbats, from the Gaelic _tarn_ to draw,
and _baat_ a boat. There was a Tarbat between Loch-Lomond and
Loch-Long.]

[Footnote 80: Alwin McArkel, as appears from the Chartulary of
Glasgow, was created Earl of Levnach by Maol-Coluim IIII., A. D.
1153.]

[Footnote 81: No doubt the neighbouring inhabitants retired to the
isles of Loch-Lomond in times of danger.]

[Footnote 82: _i.e._ Haco.]

[Footnote 83: _i.e._ without an awning.]

[Footnote 84: _i.e._ ships.]

[Footnote 85: _i.e._, the Scotch.]

[Footnote 86: Kerti-sveina (_orig._), _i.e._ Inspectors of the Lights,
who were to see that the Norwegian palace was properly illuminated.
The office corresponded exactly to the Canhowllyd of the Welsh
Princes.]

[Footnote 87: In the Fl. Ms. the Norwegians are said to have entered
the transport.]

[Footnote 88: Fl. MS., Five hundred.]

[Footnote 89: Perus or Pherus (_orig._), probably Fergus.]

[Footnote 90: A quotation from Giraldus's account of the Irish will
both illustrate this passage & the antient method of fighting.
"Utuntur--securibus quoque amplis, fabrili diligentia optime
chalybatis, quas a Norwegiensibus & Oustmannis sunt mutuati. Una
tantum manu, & non ambabus, securi percutiunt, pollice desuper
manubrium in longum extenso ictu regente, a quo nec galea, caput, in
conum erecta, nec reliquum corpus ferrea loricae tricatura tuetur. Unde
& in nostris contigit temporibus totam militis coxam ferro utcunque
fideliter vestitam, uno securis ictu praecisam fuisse, ex una equi
parte coxa cum tibia, ex altera vero, corpore cadente moribundo.
Lapides quoque pugillares, cum alia arma defecerint, hostibus in
conflictu damnosissimos, prae alia gente promptius, & expeditius ad
manum habent."]

[Footnote 91: Knights at their creation were invested with belts
ornamented with gems. See Malmsb., book 2, chap. 6.]

[Footnote 92: A district of Norway.]

[Footnote 93: Melanzeiar (_orig._). Fl. Ms. Melas eyiar, perhaps the
island of Lamlash or Alisa.]

[Footnote 94: Mylar-Kalf (_orig._). Among the Norwegians a small
island adjoining to a greater was called its calf, as the calf of
Mull, the calf of Man, &c.]

[Footnote 95: A subdivision of Norway.]

[Footnote 96: Yngua (_orig._), one of Haco's predecessors.]

[Footnote 97: Hvarf, (_orig._), signifies an intervening ridge that
intercepts the prospect--Farohead.]

[Footnote 98: Giafioerd (_orig._) Fl. Ms. Goa-fioerd.]

[Footnote 99: October 28.]

[Footnote 100: Asmundar-vogi (_orig._), _i.e._, Asmund's Bay.]

[Footnote 101: Probably some harbour of the Mainland, one of the
Orkneys.]

[Footnote 102: A cape of Pomona.]

[Footnote 103: December 13.]

[Footnote 104: _i.e._ Herring bay.]

[Footnote 105: _i.e._ Salmon bay.]

[Footnote 106: March 21.]

[Footnote 107: Here it must be observed that the Norwegian year
commenced March 25. So that, according to our reckoning, Haco died in
March 1264.]




Recently published.


_Rob Roy and the Clan Macgregor,_ Historical Memoirs of; including the
_Story of the Abduction of_ LADY GRANGE. With an Introductory Sketch,
illustrative of the Condition of the Highlands prior to 1745. By K.
MACLEAY, M.D. I vol., crown 8vo., cloth, _with authentic
portrait of_ ROB ROY, 5s.

250 LARGE PAPER COPIES on Dutch Handmade Paper, _with portrait_, 7s. 6d.

     The previous editions of this interesting and authentic
     account of the Times, the Family, and the Exploits of the
     celebrated Rob Roy have now been out of print for many years.
     It has therefore been increasingly difficult to obtain copies
     of a work which throws much light, not only upon the romantic
     career of the outlaw, but upon the state of the Highlands
     prior to the Rebellion of 1715. The present publisher has for
     these reasons issued this third edition, which he trusts will
     meet with acceptance alike from those interested in Scottish
     history, and those who may be curious to learn more of the
     life, character, and adventures of the hero of one of Sir
     Walter Scott's greatest novels. The story of the abduction of
     Lady Grange, which is added, as in the previous editions,
     forms an appropriate sequel to the memoirs of Rob Roy, having
     all the charm of a romance, while well illustrating the utter
     lawlessness at one time prevailing within the Highland
     borders.--_Preface._

       *       *       *       *       *

     "No one doubts the interest of the book. It has, indeed, won
     the favour of a large number of readers."--_Scotsman._

     "Those who want to learn the true history of Rob Roy will
     find it graphically told in the work before us. The whole
     work is of the most engrossing interest, and reads more like
     a sensational novel than a chapter in veritable
     history."--_Perthshire Constitutional._

     "An authority upon the history of the unfortunate Clan
     Gregor."--_Dundee Advertiser._







End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Norwegian account of Haco's
expedition against Scotland, A.D. MCCLXIII., by Sturla Þoretharson

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HACO'S EXPEDITION ***

***** This file should be named 18299.txt or 18299.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/8/2/9/18299/

Produced by National Library of Iceland and Cornell
University Library via www.sagnanet.is, Johannes Birgir
Jensson, Sankar Viswanathan, and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team of Distributed Proofreaders Europe at
http://dp.rastko.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
