The Project Gutenberg EBook of Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh Debate Index, by
Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh Debate Index
       Second Edition

Author: Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh

Release Date: May 8, 2006 [EBook #18347]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CARNEGIE LIBRARY OF ***




Produced by David Starner, Christine D. and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net










CARNEGIE LIBRARY OF PITTSBURGH

DEBATE INDEX

SECOND EDITION


  PITTSBURGH
  CARNEGIE LIBRARY
  1912




Preface to the Second Edition


This index was begun as a card index to the debaters' manuals in the
Reference Department of this Library. The increasing number of such
manuals and the frequent requests for material on debates made it seem
desirable to combine in one list the indexes to all the manuals, thus
bringing references to all the material on one subject together and
saving the time required to consult the index of each book. The card
index has been so useful here that it has been printed, in the hope that
it may also be useful elsewhere. Under each subject are given the
proposition for debate, page references to the manuals, and a note
indicating the material to be found there, whether briefs, references,
specimen debates or synopses of debates.

The "Debates" of this Library, included in the list of books indexed, is
a loose-leaf book containing briefs and references copied from various
sources or supplementing lists to be found elsewhere. The Carnegie
Library "Reference lists" referred to are less complete manuscript lists
compiled in response to requests.

One hundred new references have been added in this edition. Twenty-four
of these are on new topics and seventy-six are additional references on
topics included in the first edition. New cross references have also
been included when necessary. The new books indexed are Robbins's "High
school debate book," the "Debaters' handbook series" and the new edition
of Askew's "Pros and cons," also the numbers of the "Speaker" and of the
"Bulletin" of the University of Wisconsin issued in the sixteen months
since the first edition of this index was published.

_November 1, 1912._




=Debate Index=

=Books Indexed=


=Alden,= Raymond Macdonald.                                =808.5 A35=

    *Art of debate. 1900.

    Bibliography, p. 8.

    _The same._ 1900.                                    =r 808.5 A35=

    Based largely on material originally prepared for students of
    argumentation at Harvard University and the University of
    Pennsylvania.

=Askew,= John Bertram.                                     =r 028 A83=

    Pros and cons; a newspaper reader's and debater's guide to
    the leading controversies of the day, political, social,
    religious, etc.; ed. by A.M. Hyamson. 1906.

    _The same;_ rewritten and enlarged by W.T.S. Sonnenschein.
    [1911.]                                               =r 028 A83a=

    Arranged in dictionary form, giving concisely the opposing
    arguments on each question. The edition of 1911 contains
    briefs on more than 20 new subjects, while a number of topics
    no longer of living interest have been dropped.

=Brookings,= Walter DuBois, & =Ringwalt,= R.C. _ed._         =028 B77=

    *Briefs for debate on current political, economic and social
    topics. 1906.

    "Bibliography of debating," by A.B. Hart, p. 41-47.

    _The same._ 1896.                                      =r 028 B77=

=Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh.=

    Debates. 3v.

    Type-written book of references.

=Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh.=

    Reference lists.

    Manuscript lists.

=Craig,= Asa H.                                              =028 C86=

    *Pros and cons; complete debates, important questions fully
    discussed in the affirmative and the negative, with by-laws
    and parliamentary rules for conducting debating societies,
    and with a list of interesting topics for debate. 1897.

    _The same._                                            =r 028 C86=

=Debaters'= handbook series.

    Sec.no. 1. Beman, L.T. comp. Selected articles on the compulsory
    arbitration of industrial disputes. 1911.            =r 331.3 B42=

    no. 2. Bullock, E.D. comp. Selected articles on child labor.
    1911.                                                =r 331.3 B87=

    no. 3. Bullock, E.D. comp. Selected articles on the
    employment of women. 1911.                           =r 331.4 B87=

    no. 4. Fanning, C.E. comp. Selected articles on capital
    punishment. 1909.                                    =r 343.2 F21=

    no. 5. Fanning, C.E. comp. Selected articles on direct
    primaries. 1911.                                       =r 324 F21=

    no. 6. Fanning, C.E. comp. Selected articles on the election
    of United States senators. 1909.                      =r 324 F21s=

    no. 7. Fanning, C.E. comp. Selected articles on the
    enlargement of the United States navy. 1910.          =r 359 F21a=

    no. 8. Morgan, J.E. & Bullock, E.D. comp. Selected articles
    on municipal ownership. 1911.                          =r 352 M89=

    no. 9. Phelps, E.M. comp. Selected articles on federal
    control of interstate corporations. 1911.            =r 351.8 P48=

    no. 10. Phelps, E.M. comp. Selected articles on the income
    tax. 1911.                                           =r 336.2 P48=

    no. 11. Phelps, E.M. comp. Selected articles on the
    initiative and referendum. 1911.                     =r 321.8 P48=

    no. 12. Phelps, E.M. comp. Selected articles on the parcels
    post. 1911.                                            =r 383 P48=

    no. 13. Phelps, E.M. comp. Selected articles on woman
    suffrage. 1910.                                      =r 324.3 P48=

    no. 14. Robbins, E.C. comp. Selected articles on a central
    bank of the United States. 1910.                    =r 332.11 R53=

    no. 15. Robbins, E.C. comp. Selected articles on the
    commission plan of municipal government. 1909.         =r 352 R53=

    no. 16. Robbins, E.C. comp. Selected articles on the open
    versus closed shop. 1911.                           =r 331.88 R53=

    Duplicate copies of this series may be borrowed for home use
    from the Lending Department.

=Denney,= Joseph Villiers, _and others._                   =808.5 D43=

    Argumentation and debate. 1910.

    _The same._                                          =r 808.5 D43=

    Presents briefly and clearly the theory of argumentation and
    furnishes a sufficient number of complete debates for a
    thorough course in analysis and briefing. The selections are
    taken from great debates on critical issues of American
    history, politics and law.

=Foster,= William Trufant.                                 =808.5 F81=

    *Argumentation and debating. 1908.

    _The same._ 1908.                                    =r 808.5 F81=

    One of the most satisfactory books in this field. It is not
    an academic formulation of principles, but an inside view of
    the art presented by one conversant with all its difficulties
    and delights. A copious appendix gives specimens of analysis,
    briefs, material for briefing, a forensic, and a complete
    specimen debate, a model for instruction to judges and for
    the formation of a debating league, together with 275
    debatable propositions. _Condensed from Nation, 1908._

=Gibson,= Laurence M.                                      =r 028 G37=

    *Handbook for literary and debating societies. 1898.

    _The same._ 1909.                                     =r 028 G37a=

=Matson,= Henry.                                           =r 028 M47=

    References for literary workers. 1893.

=Pattee,= George Kynett.                                   =808.5 P31=

    *Practical argumentation. 1909.

    _The same._                                          =r 808.5 P31=

    Aims to restore argumentation to its proper rank as a form of
    English composition. Includes a number of suggestions on
    debating.

=Pearson,= Paul Martin, _ed._                                =028 P35=

    *Intercollegiate debates; briefs and reports of many
    intercollegiate debates: Harvard-Yale-Princeton,
    Brown-Dartmouth-Williams, Michigan-Northwestern-Chicago,
    Indiana-Illinois-Ohio, and many others, with an introduction.
    1909.

    _The same._                                            =r 028 P35=

=Ringwalt,= Ralph Curtis.                                    =028 R47=

    Briefs on public questions, with selected lists of
    references. 1906.

    _The same._ 1905.                                      =r 028 R47=

    Series of argumentative briefs and lists of references on 25
    important public questions of the day, political,
    sociological and economic.

=Robbins= Edwin Clyde, _comp._                               =028 R53=

    High school debate book. 1911.

    _The same._ 1911.                                      =r 028 R53=

=Rowton,= Frederic.                                        =r 028 R81=

    *How to conduct a debate; a series of complete debates,
    outlines of debates and questions for discussion, with
    references to the best sources of information on each
    particular topic; revised by W. Taylor.

                                                          =808.8 S741=
=Speaker= [quarterly]. v. 1-v. 7, no. 4. (Whole no. 1-28.) 1905-12.

=Thomas,= Ralph Wilmer.                                    =808.5 T37=

    *Manual of debate. 1910.

    _The same._ 1910.                                    =r 808.5 T37=

=Wisconsin University=--Department of debating and       =r 378.1 W81=
public discussion.

    Bulletin, March 1908-Nov. 1911. 1908-11.

    Issued irregularly.

    Included in the Bulletins of the University Extension
    Division.

  * Contains list of propositions for debate.

  Sec. These numbers have been assigned arbitrarily for convenience in
    reference.




=Topics=


=Absenteeism.=

Askew, 1906, p. 1: Briefs and references.

=Addison and Montaigne.= _See_ =Montaigne and Addison.=

=Adult suffrage.= _See_ =Suffrage.=

=Adulteration of food.= _See_ =Food adulteration.=

=Advertising.=

Public control of advertising. Askew, 1906, p. 3: Briefs and
references.--Askew, 1911, p. 4: Briefs.

=Advowsons, Sale of.=

Askew, 1906, p. 4: Briefs and references.

=AEneid and Iliad.= _See_ =Iliad and AEneid.=

=Agassiz and Darwin.= _See_ =Darwin and Agassiz.=

=Age pensions.= _See_ =Old age pensions.=

=Agricultural banks.= _See_ =Banks, Agricultural.=

=Agriculture.=

Agricultural depression; should remedies be sought? Askew, 1906, p. 6:
Briefs and references.--Askew, 1911, p. 7: Briefs.

Thorough (or deep) cultivation. Askew, 1906, p. 208: Briefs.

=Alexander the Great and Caesar.=

Was the life of Alexander the Great more influential on contemporaneous
and subsequent history than the life of Julius Caesar? Matson, p. 32:
Briefs and references.

=Alexander the Great and Hannibal.=

Who was the greater general, Hannibal or Alexander? Rowton, p. 214:
References.

=Alexander the Great, Caesar, Napoleon.=

Which was the greatest hero, Alexander, Caesar or Bonaparte? Rowton, p.
225: References.

=Alfred the Great and Washington.=

Was Alfred the Great as great and good as Washington? Matson, p. 112:
Briefs and references.

=Allotments and small holdings extension.=

Askew, 1906, p. 7: Briefs and references.

=Alsace-Lorraine.=

Should Germany cede Alsace-Lorraine? Askew, 1906, p. 8: Briefs and
references.

=Ambition.=

Is ambition a vice or a virtue? Rowton, p. 210: References.

=America.= Discovery.

Has the discovery of America been beneficial to the world? Rowton, p.
212: References.

=American Protective Association.=

The principles of the American Protective Association deserve the
support of American citizens. Brookings, p. 19: Briefs and references.

=The American revolution and the Civil war.=

Was the Revolution an event of United States history more important and
influential than the Civil war? Matson, p. 81: Briefs and references.

_See also_ Lincoln and Washington.

=Amusements and the church.= _See_ =Church, The.=

=Anarchism.=

Askew, 1906, p. 11: Briefs and references.--Askew, 1911, p. 9: Briefs.

=Anger.=

Is anger a vice or a virtue? Rowton, p. 225: References.

=Anglican church.= _See_ =England, Church of.=

=Anglo-Japanese alliance.=

Askew, 1906, p. 13: Briefs and references.--Askew, 1911, p. 11: Briefs.

=Anglo-Saxon peoples.=

America and England; union of the English-speaking race. Askew, 1906, p.
9: Briefs and references.

=Animals.=

Are brutes endowed with reason? Rowton, p. 192: Briefs and references.

Have animals intelligence? Gibson, p. 19: Briefs and references.

Rights of animals. Askew, 1906, p. 195: Briefs and references.--Askew,
1911, p. 12: Briefs.

_See also_ Human mind and brute mind.

=Anti-trust law, 1890.= _See_ =Sherman anti-trust law.=

=Arbitration, Commercial.=

Askew, 1906, p. 15: Briefs.

=Arbitration, Compulsory industrial.=

Boards of arbitration with compulsory powers should be established to
settle disputes between employers and wage-earners. Ringwalt, p. 210:
Briefs and references.

Capital and labor should be compelled to settle their disputes in
legally established courts of arbitration. Debaters' handbook ser., no.
1: Briefs, references, and selected articles.

Compulsory industrial arbitration. Askew, 1906, p. 16: Briefs and
references.--Askew, 1911, p. 13: Briefs.

The government should settle all disputes between capital and labor.
Craig, p. 556: Outlines.

Ought arbitration in trade disputes to be enforced by law? Gibson, p.
24: Briefs and references.

State boards of arbitration with compulsory powers should be established
throughout the United States to settle industrial disputes between
employers and employees. Foster, p. 353: Speech (affirmative).

There should be a national board of arbitration for matters in dispute
between employers and employees on inter-state railroads, and this board
should be given compulsory powers. Brookings, p. 162: Briefs and
references.

=Arbitration, International.=

Could not arbitration be made a substitute for war? Rowton, p. 224:
References.

International arbitration; is it a substitute for war? Askew, 1906, p.
16: Briefs and references.--Askew, 1911, p. 14: Briefs.

The United States should form a treaty with Great Britain and with
France agreeing to arbitrate all disputed questions. C. L. of P.
Reference lists.

=Arctic exploration.=

Has Arctic exploration been justified in its results? Matson, p. 412:
Briefs and references.

=Aristocratic and democratic government.=

Askew, 1906, p. 17: Briefs and references.

=Aristotle and Plato.= _See_ =Plato and Aristotle.=

=Armaments.=

Danger of increased armaments. Askew, 1906, p. 114: Briefs and
references.

Reduction of national armaments. Askew, 1911, p. 15: Briefs.

_See also_ Disarmament.

=Armed intervention.=

Armed intervention for the collection of debts. Speaker, v. 2, p. 391:
Briefs and references.--C. L. of P. Debates: Briefs.

Armed intervention is not justifiable on the part of any nation to
collect in behalf of private individuals financial claims against any
American nation. Pearson, p. 223: Synopses and references.

=Armenian question.=

Armenian question and English intervention. Askew, 1906, p. 18: Briefs
and references.

=Army= (England).

Army short service. Askew, 1906, p. 20: Briefs and references.--Askew,
1911, p. 16: Briefs.

Compulsory universal service. Askew, 1911, p. 207: Briefs.

_See also_ Conscription.

=Army= (United States). Increase.

Is it good government for the United States to maintain a standing army
greater than is actually necessary to enforce the laws of the country?
Craig, p. 520: Speeches.

The United States army should be increased rather than diminished. C. L.
of P. Reference lists.

The United States army should be increased to one thousand for each
million of our population. Thomas, p. 200: Briefs.

=Art.=

Should not all national works of art be entirely free to the public?
Rowton, p. 227: References.

=Art, British.=

Is British art declining? Gibson, p. 27: Briefs and references.

=Art and morality.=

Does art, in its principles and works, imply the moral? Is art amenable
to an ethical standard? Matson, p. 365: Briefs and references.

=Art and religion.=

Is the influence of the fine arts favorable to religion? Matson, p. 366:
Briefs and references.

=Art and science.=

Are art and science antagonistic? Is the general prevalence of natural
science prejudicial to the cultivation of high art? Matson, p. 362:
Briefs and references.

=Art unions.=

Do the associations entitled "art unions" tend to promote the spread of
the fine arts? Rowton, p. 228: References.

=Asset currency.=

National banks should be permitted to issue notes based on their general
assets. Ringwalt, p. 143: Briefs and references.

National banks should be permitted to issue, subject to tax and
government supervision, notes based on their general assets. Speaker, v.
3, p. 409: Brief (affirmative).--C. L. of P. Debates: Brief
(affirmative).

A system of asset currency, under federal control, should be established
in the United States. Pearson, p. 191: Synopses of speeches, and
references.

=Astronomy and geology.=

Does the study of astronomy tend more to expand the mind than the study
of geology? Is the study of geology of more practical benefit than the
study of astronomy? Matson, p. 261: Briefs and references.

=Athanasian creed.=

Should the rubric requiring its public recitation be removed? Askew,
1911, p. 17: Briefs.

=Atheists.=

Are there tribes of atheists? Matson, p. 472: Briefs and references.

=Athletics.=

Intercollegiate athletics promote the best interests of colleges.
Thomas, p. 186: Briefs.

Intercollegiate athletics should be abolished. Speaker, v. 7, p. 295:
Brief (negative).

Interscholastic athletic contests are of more value to the participants
than literary contests. C. L. of P. Reference lists.

Should not practice in athletic games form a part of every system of
education? Rowton, p. 229: References.

_See also_ Sport.

=Atomic theory.=

Does the atomic theory find in science sufficient confirmation to
establish its validity? Matson, p. 387: Briefs and references.

=Authority= (in religion).

Authority as the basis of religious belief. Askew, 1906, p. 21: Briefs
and references.

=Authors and publishers.=

Authors and publishers; are the former inequitably treated? Askew, 1906,
p. 22: Briefs.

=Automobile license.=

Should the federal government license automobile drivers? Foster, p.
351: Analysis.


=Bachelors.=

Taxation of bachelors. Askew, 1906, p. 23; Askew, 1911, p. 20: Briefs.

=Bacon,= Francis.

Are the character and career of Lord Bacon, as a whole, indefensible?
Was the character of Bacon deserving of the approbation of posterity?
Matson, p. 94: Briefs and references.

=Bacon and Newton.=

Has the philosophy of Bacon contributed more to the progress of physical
science than the discoveries of Newton? Matson, p. 379: Briefs and
references.

=Bacon-Shakespeare question.=

Is it probable that Lord Bacon is the real author of the plays
attributed to Shakespeare? Matson, p. 300: Briefs and references.

=Bakehouse, Municipal.= _See_ =Municipal ownership.=

=Balance of power.=

Is the so called balance of power the best practicable arrangement for
promoting and preserving just and harmonious relations between the
European powers? Is the federation of European nations desirable and
practicable? Matson, p. 183: Briefs and references.

=Ballot.=

Abolition of plural voting. Askew, 1911, p. 182: Briefs.

Compulsory voting. Askew, 1906, p. 223: Briefs and references.

One man one vote. Askew, 1906, p. 162: Briefs.

Second ballots. Askew, 1906, p. 198: Briefs and references.--Askew,
1911, p. 206: Briefs.

=Balzac and Hugo.=

Is Balzac a greater novelist than Hugo? Matson, p. 339: Briefs and
references.

=Bank deposits, Guarantee of.=

The national government should guarantee the repayment of bank deposits
in national banks. C. L. of P. Debates: References.

There should be some legislation providing for the guarantee of bank
deposits. Pearson, p. 305: Report of speeches, and references.--C. L. of
P. Debates: References.

=Bank holidays.=

Bank holidays by act of Parliament. Askew, 1906, p. 24: Briefs.

=Bank-notes.=

Bank issues secured by commercial paper are preferable to those secured
by bonds. Pearson, p. 1: Speeches and references.

The government tax on state bank-notes should be repealed. Brookings, p.
93: Briefs and references.

=Bankrupt law.=

Should there be a national bankrupt law? Matson, p. 169: Briefs and
references.

=Banks, Agricultural.=

Askew, 1906, p. 5: Briefs and references.--Askew, 1911, p. 5: Briefs.

=Banks, Central.=

Congress should establish a central bank of issue. Pearson, p. 325:
Synopses of speeches, and references.--C. L. of P. Debates:
References.--C. L. of P. Reference lists.

The federal government should establish a central bank of the United
States. Debaters' handbook ser., no. 14: Briefs, references and selected
articles.--Robbins, p. 50: Briefs and references.

=Banks, National.=

National banks should be abolished. Craig, p. 358: Outlined for points
only.

=Barbarian and civilized man.=

Which is the more happy, a barbarian or a civilized man? Gibson, p. 31:
Briefs and references.--Rowton, p. 204: Briefs and references.

=Beecher and Spurgeon.=

Was Beecher a greater preacher than Spurgeon? Matson, p. 525: Briefs and
references.

=Beethoven and Mozart.=

Is Beethoven a greater composer than Mozart? Matson, p. 372: Briefs and
references.

=Betterment tax.=

Betterment. Askew, 1906, p. 24: Briefs and references.--Askew, 1911, p.
21: Briefs.

=Betting.=

Are betting and gambling immoral? Gibson, p. 155: Briefs and references.

=Bible and geology.=

Do modern geological discoveries agree with Holy writ? Rowton, p. 223:
References.

=Bible in the public schools.=

Should the Bible be read, as a religious exercise, in the public
schools? Matson, p. 239: Briefs and references.--C. L. of P. Reference
lists.

=Bicycle tax.=

Askew, 1906, p. 26; Askew, 1911, p. 23: Briefs.

=Bimetallism.=

Askew, 1906, p. 27: Briefs and references.--Askew, 1911, p. 24: Briefs.

Bimetallism and not protection is the secret of future prosperity.
Craig, p. 366: Outlined for points only.

Is the maintenance of a double standard of value in exchanges
practicable or desirable? Is the single gold valuation the true economic
policy for nations? Matson, p. 206: Briefs and references.

_See also_ Gold (currency).--Silver (currency).

=Biography and history.= _See_ =History and biography.=

=Bismarck and Gladstone.=

Is Bismarck a greater statesman than Gladstone? Matson, p. 101: Briefs
and references.

=Blasphemy laws; their abolition.=

Askew, 1906, p. 30: Briefs and references.--Askew, 1911, p. 27: Briefs.

=Bonaparte= Napoleon. _See_ =Napoleon.=

=Booth,= William.

General Booth's employment system as outlined in "Darkest England"
should be adopted in this country. Brookings, p. 160: Briefs and
references.

=Boycotting.=

Askew, 1906, p. 30; Askew, 1911, p. 28: Briefs.

=British art.= _See_ =Art, British.=

=British empire.= Communication.

Inter-imperial communication. Askew, 1906, p. 123: Briefs and
references.--Askew, 1911, p. 117: Briefs.

=British empire.= Federation.

British imperial federation. Askew, 1906, p. 108: Briefs and
references.--Askew, 1911, p. 97: Briefs.

Ought our empire to federate? Gibson, p. 96: Briefs and references.

=Brown,= John.

Was John Brown's raid into Virginia to rescue slaves unjustifiable? Was
John Brown's execution justifiable? Should John Brown be regarded as a
hero and martyr, or as a fanatic? Matson, p. 129: Briefs and references.

=Browning and Tennyson.=

Is Browning a greater poet than Tennyson? Matson, p. 317: Briefs and
references.

=Browning,= _Mrs,_ =and Eliot,= George. _See_ =Eliot,= George, =and
Browning,= _Mrs._

=Brussels sugar convention.=

Shall the Brussels sugar convention be denounced? Askew, 1906, p. 203:
Briefs and references.--Askew, 1911, p. 222: Briefs.

=Brute mind and human mind.= _See_ =Human mind and brute mind.=

=Brutus and Caesar.=

Was Brutus justified in killing Caesar? Rowton, p. 209: References.

=Bryant and Longfellow.=

Is Bryant a greater poet than Longfellow? Matson, p. 322: Briefs and
references.

=Buddhism.=

Has Buddhism, in its essential principles and spirit, more of truth and
good than of error and evil? Is Buddhism more unlike than like
Christianity? Matson, p. 473: Briefs and references.

=Bunyan and Thomas a Kempis.=

Has Bunyan's "Pilgrim's progress" exerted as much influence as Kempis's
"Imitation of Christ"? Matson, p. 514: Briefs and references.

=Burial, Premature.=

Premature burial; are preventive means necessary? Askew, 1906, p. 183;
Askew, 1911, p. 185: Briefs.

=Burns and Byron.= _See_ =Byron and Burns.=

=Byron.=

Are Lord Byron's writings moral in their tendency? Rowton, p. 215:
References.

=Byron and Burns.=

Which was the greater poet, Byron or Burns? Rowton, p. 222: References.

=Byron and Shelley.=

Was Byron a greater poet than Shelley? Matson, p. 312: Briefs and
references.

=Byron and Wordsworth.= _See_ =Wordsworth and Byron.=


=Cabinet government= (England).

Government by cabinet. Askew, 1906, p. 31: Briefs and
references.--Askew, 1911, p. 28: Briefs.

=Cabinet ministers= (United States).

Cabinet ministers ought to have seats and the right to speak in
Congress. Brookings, p. 40: Briefs and references.

Members of the president's Cabinet should have the right to be present
and speak in the House of representatives. Thomas, p. 164: Briefs and
references.

Should members of the Cabinet have seats on the floor of Congress, and a
voice in its debates? Matson, p. 157: Brief and references.

=Cabinet system and congressional system.=

Cabinet system of government is preferable to the congressional system.
Brookings, p. 37: Briefs and references.

=Caesar, Alexander the Great, Napoleon.= _See_ =Alexander the Great,
Caesar, Napoleon.=

=Caesar and Alexander the Great.= _See_ =Alexander the Great and Caesar.=

=Caesar and Brutus.= _See_ =Brutus and Caesar.=

=Calvin and Luther.= _See_ =Luther and Calvin.=

=Calvin and Servetus.=

Is Calvin's part in procuring the condemnation and death of Servetus
deserving of censure? Matson, p. 521: Briefs and references.

=Calvin and Wesley.=

Has the influence of Wesley in the promotion of religious thought and
life been greater than that of Calvin? Matson, p. 519: Briefs and
references.

=Campaign funds.=

All contributions of $100 and over to political parties should be
publicly accounted for by the officers receiving them. Thomas, p. 174:
Briefs and references.

=Canada.= Annexation to the United States.

The annexation of Canada by peaceable means would be an economic
advantage to the United States. Thomas, p. 206: Briefs.

Canada should be annexed to the United States. Brookings, p. 59: Briefs
and references.

Canada; should she join the United States? Askew, 1906, p. 32: Briefs
and references.--Askew, 1911, p. 29: Briefs.

Would the political union of Canada with the United States be a benefit
to both countries? Is the commercial union of Canada and the United
States desirable? Does it seem likely to be "the manifest destiny" of
Canada to become a sovereign and independent republic? Matson, p. 182:
Briefs and references.

=Canada.= Reciprocity with the United States. _See_ =Reciprocity.=
United States and Canada.

=Canals.= _See_ =Government ownership.= Canals.--=Nicaragua canal.=

=Canteen.=

Abolition of the canteen from the United States army posts was wise.
Thomas, p. 206: Briefs.--C. L. of P. Reference lists.

=Canvassing at parliamentary elections.=

Askew, 1906, p. 34: Briefs and references.--Askew, 1911, p. 32: Briefs.

=Capital and labor.= _See_ =Labor and laboring classes.=

=Capital punishment.=

Debaters' handbook ser., no. 4: References and selected articles.

Capital punishment; its abolition. Askew, 1906, p. 34: Briefs and
references.--Askew, 1911, p. 33: Briefs.

Capital punishment should be abolished. Brookings, p. 57: Briefs and
references.--Gibson, p. 43: Briefs and references.--Robbins, p. 44:
Briefs and references.--Thomas, p. 184: Briefs.

Is capital punishment justifiable? Rowton, p. 48: Speeches and
references.

Ought the death penalty to be retained as the punishment for wilful
murder? Ought capital punishment to be abolished? Matson, p. 160: Briefs
and references.

=Card-playing.= _See_ =Dancing and card-playing.=

=Carlyle and Emerson.=

As a thinker and writer should Carlyle outrank Emerson? Matson, p. 346:
Briefs and references.

=Cathedrals, Nationalization of.=

Askew, 1906, p. 35: Briefs and references.

=Catholic church.= _See_ =Roman Catholic church.=

=Caucus.=

Present system of caucus nomination ought to be abandoned. Brookings, p.
27: Briefs and references.

_See also_ Primaries.

=Celibacy.=

Celibacy of Roman Catholic priests. Askew, 1906, p. 36: Briefs.

=Censorship of fiction.=

Askew, 1911, p. 34: Briefs.

=Censorship of the stage.=

Askew, 1911, p. 34: Briefs.

=Central America.= Antiquities.

Are there good reasons for supposing that the ruins recently discovered
in Central America are of very great antiquity? Rowton, p. 231:
References.

=Central banks.= _See_ =Banks, Central.=

=Centralization and state rights.=

Does the successful maintenance of the United States as a nation require
that the national government grow in strength? Matson, p. 151: Briefs
and references.

The present distribution of power between the federal and state
governments is not adapted to modern conditions and calls for
re-adjustment in the direction of further centralization. Robbins, p.
79:

Briefs and references.--Speaker, v. 2, p. 385: Synopsis of speeches.--C.
L. of P. Debates: Synopsis of speeches, references.

=Channel tunnel.= _See_ =English channel tunnel.=

=Character.=

Are not the rudiments of individual character discernible in childhood?
Rowton, p. 227: References.

Has nature or education the greater influence in the formation of
character? Rowton, p. 211: References.

=Character, National.=

Does national character descend from age to age? Rowton, p. 228:
References.

Is national character formed more by physical than by moral causes? Has
climate a preponderating influence in determining the character and
history of a nation? Matson, p. 407: Briefs and references.

=Charities.=

Charitable relief. Askew, 1906, p. 38: Briefs.

Do charity organization societies do good or harm? Gibson, p. 48: Briefs
and references.

Free shelters and refuges. Askew, 1906, p. 99: Briefs.

Free soup kitchens, clothing, coals, etc. Askew, 1906, p. 100: Briefs.

_See also_ Outdoor relief.

=Charity Organization Society; methods and work.=

Askew, 1906, p. 39: Briefs and references.--Askew, 1911, p. 37: Briefs.

=Charlemagne and Hildebrand.=

Did Charlemagne have more influence on mediaeval history than Hildebrand?
Matson, p. 46: Briefs and references.

=Charles I.=

Was the execution of Charles I justifiable? Matson, p. 62: Briefs and
references.--Rowton, p. 202: Briefs and references.

=Charles II and Richard III.= _See_ =Richard III and Charles II.=

=Charter, Federal.= _See_ =Federal charter and federal control.=

=Chatterton and Cowper.=

Which was the greater poet, Chatterton or Cowper? Rowton, p. 224:
References.

=Chaucer and Spenser.=

Is Chaucer a greater poet than Spenser? Matson, p. 291: Briefs and
references.

Which was the greater poet, Chaucer or Spenser? Rowton, p. 226:
References.

=Chess.=

Is not the game of chess a good intellectual and moral exercise? Rowton,
p. 229: References.

=Chicago strike injunctions.=

The injunctions issued by the federal judges against the Chicago
strikers were unjustifiable. Brookings, p. 197: Briefs and references.

=Child labor.=

Debaters' handbook ser., no. 2: References and selected articles.

Child-labour; "half-timers." Askew, 1906, p. 40: Briefs and
references.--Askew, 1911, p. 39: Briefs.

Should the half-time system be abolished? Gibson, p. 113: Briefs and
references.

=Child marriage.=

Prohibition of child-marriages in India. Askew, 1906, p. 116: Briefs and
references.

=China-Japan war.=

The victory of Japan over China was for the interest of civilization.
Brookings, p. 192: Briefs and references.

=Chinese immigration.= _See_ =Immigration, Chinese.=

=Chinese labor.=

Chinese labour; should it be employed in the Transvaal? Askew, 1906, p.
41: Briefs and references.

=Chivalry.=

Was chivalry in its character and influence more good than evil? Matson,
p. 42: Briefs and references.

=Christian socialism.=

Askew, 1906, p. 45: Briefs and references.--Askew, 1911, p. 41: Briefs.

=Christian union.=

Is Christian union to become organized? Matson, p. 483: Briefs and
references.

Reunion of Christendom. Askew, 1906, p. 44: Briefs and
references.--Askew, 1911, p. 40: Briefs.

=Christianity.=

Christianity; is dogma a necessity? Askew, 1906, p. 45: Briefs and
references.

_See also_ Creeds.--Sects.

=Christianity and modern civilization.=

Has Christianity been the most potent factor in the production of modern
civilization? Matson, p. 50: Briefs and references.--C. L. of P.
Reference lists.

=Christians as soldiers.= _See_ =War.=

=Church, The.=

Are social problems within the sphere of the churches? Askew, 1906, p.
46: Briefs and references.

Are the churches on the down grade? Gibson, p. 51: Briefs and
references.

Is it part of the duty of a church to provide amusements? Gibson, p. 14:
Briefs and references.

Is the Christian church to blame for having incurred the alienation of
working men? Gibson, p. 58: Briefs and references.

Is the pulpit losing its power? Gibson, p. 161: Briefs and references.

Ought the church to advocate social reform? Gibson, p. 55: Briefs and
references.

=Church and state.=

Is the union of church and state a benefit to any nation? Matson, p.
168: Briefs and references.

=Church of England.= _See_ =England, Church of.=

=Church of Scotland.= _See_ =Scotland, Church of.=

=Church of Wales.= _See_ =Wales, Church of.=

=Church property.= Taxation.

Should church property which is used exclusively for public worship be
taxed? Should church buildings, with their lots and furnishings, be
exempt from taxation? Matson, p. 211: Briefs and references.

=Cicero.=

Are the character and career of Cicero deserving of more admiration than
censure? Matson, p. 90: Briefs and references.

=Cicero and Demosthenes.= _See_ =Demosthenes and Cicero.=

=Cities.=

Are great cities, considered in themselves and in their influence, a
greater evil than good? Matson, p. 531: Briefs and references.

=City and country.=

Advantages and disadvantages of the city, town and country child. C. L.
of P. Reference lists.

Is country life preferable, on the whole, to city life? Matson, p. 532:
Briefs and references.

Which is to be preferred, a town or a country life? Rowton, p. 230:
References.

=Civil service.= England.

Askew. 1906, p. 46: Briefs and references.

=Civil service.= India.

Appointment of natives. Askew, 1906, p. 47: Briefs and
references.--Askew, 1911, p. 115: Briefs.

=Civil service reform.=

The civil service act should be extended to all departments of the
government service. Brookings, p. 44: Briefs and references.

=The Civil war and the American revolution.= _See_ =The American
revolution and the Civil war.=

=Civilization.=

Civilization (European) in savage lands. Askew, 1906, p. 47: Briefs and
references.

Is modern civilization a failure? Gibson, p. 61: Briefs and references.

_See also_ Christianity and modern civilization.

=Civilized man and barbarian.= _See_ =Barbarian and civilized man.=

=Classical education.=

Classics _versus_ science as a study in schools. C. L. of P. Reference
lists.

Greek compulsory at the universities. Askew, 1906, p. 104: Briefs and
references.--Askew, 1911, p. 104: Briefs.

Is a classical education essential to an American gentleman? Rowton, p.
216: References.

Is the study of the Greek and Latin classics necessary to a liberal
education? Is the mental discipline and the knowledge gained from the
study of the classics superior to that gained from the study of the
natural sciences? Should the study of Greek and Latin be considered of
greater importance in respect to culture and utility than the study of
French and German? Does the study of Greek occupy a disproportionate
place in the ordinary college course? Should Greek be considered as
essential to a liberal education? or, Should Greek be elective in a
college course? Matson, p. 252: Briefs and references.

=Classics and mathematics.=

Which are of the greater importance in education, the classics or
mathematics? Rowton, p. 190: Briefs and references.

=Clay and Webster.= _See_ =Webster and Clay.=

=Clergy.= _See_ =Ministers of the gospel.=

=Closed shop and open shop.= _See_ =Open shop and closed shop.=

=Coal mines.= Government ownership. _See_ =Government ownership.=

Coal mines.

=Coal mines and gold mines.= _See_ =Gold mines and coal mines.=

=Co-education.=

Co-education in colleges is desirable. Brookings, p. 178: Briefs and
references.--C. L. of P. Debates: References.--C. L. of P. Reference
lists.

Co-education of the sexes. Askew, 1906, p. 78: Briefs and
references.--Askew, 1911, p. 41: Briefs.

Is the co-education of the sexes in higher institutions desirable?
Matson, p. 244: Briefs and references.

=Coleridge and Wordsworth.= _See_ =Wordsworth and Coleridge.=

=Collectivism.= _See_ =Socialism.=

=Colleges and universities.=

Are college-bred men, as a class, superior in mental attainments and
culture to self-educated men? Matson, p. 242: Briefs and references.

Are state universities superior, in their principle and operation, to
colleges? Matson, p. 246: Briefs and references.

A Catholic university for Ireland. Askew, 1906, p. 36: Briefs and
references.

The country college and the city college. C. L. of P. Reference lists.

In a college conducted under Christian auspices students should be
required to attend church on Sunday. Thomas, p. 186: Briefs.

Is a college education the best preparation for practical life? C. L. of
P. Reference lists.

Is the _in loco parentis_ system of college government better than the
_laissez faire_ system? or, Is paternal government the best for college
students? Matson, p. 249: Briefs and references.

Is the system of education pursued at our universities in accordance
with the requirements of the age? Rowton, p. 225: References.

Some system ought to be adopted by which the degree of A.B. could be
obtained from colleges in three years. Brookings, p. 181: Briefs and
references.

University reform. Askew, 1911, p. 249: Briefs.

What are the respective advantages of the large and the small college?
C. L. of P. Reference lists.

_See also_ National university.--Student government.

=Colonial preference= (England).

Gibson, p. 273: Briefs and references.

=Columbus and Livingstone.=

As discoverer and as man, was Columbus greater than Livingstone? Matson,
p. 106: Briefs and references.

=Comic supplement.=

The comic supplement of the newspapers is detrimental to children. C. L.
of P. Debates: References.

=Commerce, Minister of.=

Should a minister of commerce be established? Askew, 1906, p. 53:
Briefs.

=Commerce and manufactures.=

Has commerce contributed more to the development of modern civilization
than manufactures? Matson, p. 204: Briefs and references.

=Commercialism.=

The commercial spirit of the age is undermining the moral sense of the
nation. C. L. of P. Reference lists.

=Commission form of government.=

American cities should adopt a commission form of government. Robbins,
p. 57: Briefs and references.--C. L. of P. Debates: Briefs and
references.

The city of ---- should adopt the commission form of government.
Wisconsin University, no. 310: Plan, history, arguments, references, the
Wisconsin act.--Wisconsin University, no. 460: Third revision (without
Wisconsin act).

Commission plan of municipal government. Debaters' handbook ser., no.
15: Briefs, references and selected articles.

In the larger New England cities all the powers of the city government
should be vested in a commission of not more than nine men elected by
the voters at large without the assistance of any other representative
body. Pearson, p. 461: Synopses of speeches, and references.--Speaker,
v. 3, p. 404: Brief (affirmative).--C. L. of P. Debates: Briefs.

=Common-lands.= _See_ =Land.=

=Communion service.= Use of wine. _See_ =Wine in the communion service.=

=Competition.=

Is free competition in production and trade necessary for the best
interests of all concerned? Do the benefits of competition in business
outweigh its evils? Matson, p. 219: Briefs and references.

=Congo Free State.=

The United States government should inaugurate a movement to bring about
reforms in the Congo Free State. Foster, p. 428: Specimen debate.

=Congress.=

It would be better for the business interests of the country to elect a
Congress once in eight years. C. L. of P. Reference lists.

It would greatly improve public service if members of Congress were
elected from any district in their own state. Brookings, p. 36: Briefs
and references.

=Congressional system and cabinet system.= _See_ =Cabinet system and
congressional system.=

=Conscience.=

Is conscience a true moral guide? Can conscience be educated? Matson, p.
458: Briefs and references.

=Conscription.=

Ought we to have a conscription in Great Britain? Gibson, p. 63: Briefs
and references.

Military conscription for England. Askew, 1906, p. 55: Briefs and
references.--Askew, 1911, p. 45: Briefs.

=Conservation of natural resources.=

Forest and mineral lands now belonging to the United States should be
retained by the federal government. Speaker, v. 6, p. 313: Speeches and
references.

The power of the federal government should be paramount to that of the
states in the conservation of national resources, limited to forests,
water-power and minerals. Robbins, p. 65: Briefs and references.

_See also_ Forest preserves.

=Conservative and reformer.= _See_ =Reformer and conservative.=

=Consistency.=

Is consistency a vice or a virtue? Gibson, p. 66: Briefs and references.

=Conventionality.=

Ought we to obey Mrs Grundy? Gibson, p. 110: Briefs and references.

=Convents and monasteries.=

Has monasticism been the cause of more good than evil? Matson, p. 38:
Briefs and references.

Ought conventual and monastic institutions to be inspected? Gibson, p.
68: Briefs and references.

=Convict labor.=

Contract system of employing convict labor ought to be abolished.
Brookings, p. 165: Briefs and references.--C. L. of P. Reference lists.

Does convict labor interfere with the interests of the free workingman?
C. L. of P. Reference lists.

=Cooeperation.=

Co-operation; can it supersede capitalism? Askew, 1906, p. 57; Askew,
1911, p. 46: Briefs.

Co-operation; is it better than state socialism? Askew, 1906, p. 57:
Briefs and references.--Askew, 1911, p. 47: Briefs.

Is co-operation more adapted to promote the virtue and happiness of
mankind than competition? Rowton, p. 221: References.

Is the principle of industrial co-operation capable of general and
successful application? Do the experiments thus far in co-operation
justify, on the whole, the hope of its ultimate general adoption? Is
co-operation in business more beneficial than competition? Matson, p.
220: Briefs and references.

=Copyright.=

Alden, p. 249: Brief of Macaulay's speech on copyright.

An international copyright law is desirable. Brookings, p. 80: Briefs
and references.

=Corporal punishment.=

Corporal punishment in schools. Askew, 1906, p. 58: Briefs and
references.--Askew, 1911, p. 47: Briefs.

Is corporal punishment justifiable? Rowton, p. 209: References.

=Councilmen.=

Should councilman of American cities be compensated? C. L. of P.
Reference lists.

=Country and city.= _See_ =City and country.=

=Country schools.=

Consolidation of rural schools. Wisconsin University, no. 387: Arguments
and references.

=Court of final appeal.=

Ought we to establish a court of final appeal in capital cases? Gibson,
p. 22: Briefs and references.

=Cowper and Chatterton.= _See_ =Chatterton and Cowper.=

=Creeds.=

Are church creeds promotive of the interests of Christianity? Should
public assent to a creed be made a condition of church membership?
Matson, p. 506: Briefs and references.

_See also_ Athanasian creed.

=Cremation.=

Askew, 1906, p. 58: Briefs and references.--Askew, 1911, p. 48: Briefs.

Should cremation be substituted for earth burial? Matson, p. 541: Briefs
and references.

=Crime.=

Is ignorance productive of crime? Matson, p. 236: Briefs and references.

Is poverty more an occasion and provocation of crime than wealth?
Matson, p. 530: Briefs and references.

Which does the most to produce crime--poverty, wealth, or ignorance?
Rowton, p. 217: References.--C. L. of P. Reference lists.

=Criminal appeal.=

Askew, 1906, p. 59: Briefs and references.

=Cromwell,= Oliver.

Is the character of Oliver Cromwell worthy of our admiration? Rowton, p.
118: Speeches and references.

Was the protectorate of Cromwell an unjustifiable usurpation and
tyranny? Matson, p. 64: Briefs and references.

=Cromwell and Napoleon.= _See_ =Napoleon and Cromwell.=

=Crusades.=

Did the crusades result in greater good than evil? Matson, p. 40: Briefs
and references.

Have the crusades been beneficial to mankind? Rowton, p. 102: Speeches
and references.

=Cuba.= Annexation to the United States.

Granting the willingness of Cuba, the annexation of Cuba to the United
States would be for the best interests of the United States. Foster, p.
359: Brief.

Should Cuba be annexed to the United States? Craig, p. 61: Speeches.--C.
L. of P. Reference lists.

The United States should annex Cuba. Pearson, p. 391: Report of debate,
and references.--Thomas, p. 202: Briefs.

The United States should annex Cuba, granting the willingness of Cuba.
Wisconsin University, no. 462: Arguments and references.

=Culture and money.= _See_ =Money and culture.=

=Currency.= _See_ =Asset currency.--Gold.--Silver.=


=Dancing and card-playing.=

Are such popular amusements as dancing and card-playing harmful in their
influence? Matson, p. 462: Briefs and references.

=Dante and Milton.=

Is the "Divine comedy" a greater poem than "Paradise lost"? Matson, p.
273: Briefs and references.

=Dark races and white races.=

Are the intellectual faculties of the dark races of mankind essentially
inferior to those of the white? Rowton, p. 217: References.

=Darwin and Agassiz.=

Was Darwin a greater scientist than Agassiz? Matson, p. 383: Briefs and
references.

=Darwin and Newton.=

Did Darwin contribute as much to the advancement of science as Newton?
Matson, p. 383: Briefs and references.

=David and Moses.= _See_ =Moses and David.=

=Daylight saving bill.=

Askew, 1911, p. 49: Briefs.

=Death penalty.= _See_ =Capital punishment.=

=Debate.=

Should not greater freedom of expression be encouraged in debate?
Rowton, p. 226: References.

=Deceased wife's sister.=

Askew, 1906, p. 61: Briefs and references.

Marriage with a deceased wife's sister; ought it to be legalized in
England? Gibson, p. 35: Briefs and references.

=Deception.=

Can any circumstances justify a departure from truth? Rowton, p. 212:
References.

Is it ever right to deceive? Is falsehood never justifiable? Matson, p.
460: Briefs and references.

_See also_ Hypocrite and liar.

=Decimal system.=

Askew, 1906, p. 61: Briefs and references.--Askew, 1911, p. 53: Briefs.

=Declaration of London.=

Askew, 1911, p. 54: Briefs.

=Degeneration.=

Askew, 1906, p. 62: Briefs and references.--Askew, 1911, p. 64: Briefs.

=Democratic and aristocratic government.= _See_ =Aristocratic and
democratic government.=

=Democracy.=

Is representative democracy, in its principles, institutions and
operation, the best form of government? Matson, p. 134: Briefs and
references.

_See also_ Monarchy and republicanism.

=Demosthenes and Cicero.=

Was Demosthenes a greater orator than Cicero? Matson, p. 282: Briefs and
references.

Which was the greater orator, Demosthenes or Cicero? Rowton, p. 208:
References.

=Department stores.=

Are our large department stores an injury to the country? Craig, p. 219:
Speeches.

=Descartes.=

Has the philosophy of Descartes, in its general spirit and main
features, entered as a permanent element into modern philosophy? Has
Descartes contributed more to theology than to science? Is Descartes's
proof of the existence of God valid? Is Descartes's inference of being
from thought legitimate? Matson, p. 434: Briefs and references.

_See also_ Kant.

=Dickens and Thackeray.= _See_ =Thackeray and Dickens.=

=Direct legislation.=

Direct legislation by the people would improve political conditions in
the United States. Thomas, p. 166: Briefs and references.

The system of direct legislation by the people should be more generally
adopted in the United States. Ringwalt, p. 50: Briefs and
references.--C. L. of P. Debates: References.

=Direct primaries.= _See_ =Primaries.=

=Disarmament.=

Disarmament of nations. C. L. of P. Debates: References.

International disarmament. Askew, 1906, p. 63: Briefs and
references.--Askew, 1911, p. 66: Briefs.

=Divine comedy and Paradise lost.= _See_ =Dante and Milton.=

=Division of labor.= _See_ =Labor, Division of.=

=Divorce.=

Askew, 1906, p. 71; Askew, 1911, p. 76: Briefs.

A constitutional amendment should be adopted giving Congress exclusive
power to regulate marriage and divorce in the United States. Ringwalt,
p. 194: Briefs and references.--C. L. of P. Debates: References.

A constitutional amendment should be secured giving to the federal
government exclusive control over divorces. Brookings, p. 142: Briefs
and references.

Divorce for women; should the "cruelty" condition be eliminated? Askew,
1906, p. 72: Briefs and references.--Askew, 1911, p. 79: Briefs.

Easier divorce. Askew, 1911, p. 78: Briefs.

Should divorce laws be strict or liberal? Should there be a national
divorce law instead of state laws? Matson, p. 171: Briefs and
references.

_See also_ Marriage laws.

=Docks, London.= _See_ =Municipal ownership.=

=Dogma.=

Christianity; is dogma a necessity? Askew, 1906, p. 45: Briefs and
references.

=Drama.=

Should the drama discuss social questions? Askew, 1906, p. 73: Briefs
and references.

=Dress.=

Does modern dress need reform? Gibson, p. 78: Briefs and references.

Fashion in dress; is it an evil? Askew, 1906, p. 93: Briefs.

=Drink and opium.=

Is drunkenness a greater evil than the excessive use of opium? Matson,
p. 540: Briefs and references.

=Dryden and Pope.=

Was Dryden a greater poet than Pope? Matson, p. 306: Briefs and
references.

Which was the greater poet, Dryden or Pope? Rowton, p. 214: References.

=Dueling.=

Askew, 1906, p. 74: Briefs.

Is dueling justifiable? Rowton, p. 195: Briefs.


=Early closing of shops.=

Ought the early closing of shops to be enforced by law? Gibson, p. 84:
Briefs and references.

=Edison.=

Is Edison the greatest living American inventor? Matson, p. 130: Briefs
and references.

=Education.=

Education as it is now thrust upon the youth of America is dangerous to
health and good government. Craig, p. 351: Outline (affirmative).

Should emulation be employed as a motive in education? Matson, p. 241:
Briefs and references.

Should emulation be encouraged in education? Rowton, p. 209: References.

_See also_ Co-education.--Colleges and universities.--Schools.--Women.
Education.

=Education.= National aid.

Is national aid to education necessary and desirable? Matson, p. 238:
Briefs and references.

=Education.= State control.

It is the right and duty of the state to supervise and control primary
and secondary education. Brookings, p. 139: Briefs and references.

=Education, Classical.= _See_ =Classical education.=

=Education, Compulsory.=

Should education in the public schools be compulsory? Matson, p. 237:
Briefs and references.

=Education, Legal.= _See_ =Legal education.=

=Education, National.=

Is it not the duty of a government to establish a system of national
education? Rowton, p. 217: References.

_See also_ National university.

=Education, Religious.= _See_ =Religious education.=

=Education acts= (English).

Should the education acts be amended? Askew, 1906, p. 74: Briefs and
references.--Askew, 1911, p. 80: Briefs.

=Egypt.=

England should permanently retain control of Egypt. Pattee, p. 93: Brief
(negative).

=Eight-hour day.=

An eight-hour working day should be adopted within the United States by
law. Brookings, p. 156: Briefs and references.

In the United States a working day should be eight hours only in length.
Thomas, p. 200: Briefs.

A legal eight hours' day. Askew, 1906, p. 80: Briefs and
references.--Askew, 1911, p. 87: Briefs.

Should Parliament enact an eight hours working day? Gibson, p. 86:
Briefs and references.

=Election, Presidential.= _See_ =President.= Election.

=Elections.=

Congress ought to pass an act establishing federal control over national
elections. Brookings, p. 1: Briefs and references.

The English system for the prevention of bribery and corruption at
elections ought to be adopted in the United States. Brookings, p. 47:
Briefs and references.

Simultaneous elections. Askew, 1906, p. 83; Askew, 1911, p. 90: Briefs.

_See also_ Canvassing at parliamentary elections.

=Elective system in education.=

Elective system of studies should be adopted in secondary schools.
Thomas, p. 204: Briefs.

Should the elective system be adopted in the public high schools of the
United States? Foster, p. 396: Article (affirmative).

=Eliot,= George, =and Browning,= _Mrs._

Does George Eliot as a woman of genius surpass Mrs Browning? Matson, p.
335: Briefs and references.

=Elizabeth, Queen.=

Is the character of Queen Elizabeth, considered as a whole, deserving of
admiration? Matson, p. 93: Briefs and references.

Is the character of Queen Elizabeth deserving of our admiration? Rowton,
p. 211: References.

=Elizabethan literature.=

Is the Shakspearian the Augustan age of English literature? Rowton, p.
219: References.

=Elizabethan literature and Victorian literature.=

Is the Elizabethan literature superior to the Victorian? Matson, p. 289:
Briefs and references.

=Eloquence.=

Is eloquence a gift of nature, or may it be acquired? Rowton, p. 218:
References.

=Emerson and Carlyle.= _See_ =Carlyle and Emerson.=

=Emigration.=

Is it not to emigration that England must mainly look for the relief of
her population? Rowton, p. 228: References.

_See also_ Immigration.

=Emigration= _v._ =home colonization.=

Askew, 1906, p. 84: Briefs and references.

=Employers' liability.=

Laws should be enacted providing that in case of personal injury to a
workman arising out of and in the course of employment, his employer
shall be liable for adequate compensation and shall not set up
contributory negligence or the negligence of a fellow servant as a
defense. Speaker, v. 3, p. 272: Synopsis of speeches (affirmative) and
brief (negative).--C. L. of P. Debates: Synopsis of speeches
(affirmative) and brief (negative).

=Emulation in education.= _See_ =Education.=

=End and means.=

Does the end justify the means? Gibson, p. 90: Briefs and references.

=England.=

England; why is she unpopular as a nation? Askew, 1906, p. 85: Briefs
and references.

Federal government in Great Britain and Ireland. Askew, 1906, p. 94:
Briefs and references.--Askew, 1911, p. 95: Briefs.

Is England rising or falling as a nation? Rowton, p. 211: References.

Is it likely that England will sink into the decay which befell the
nations of antiquity? Rowton, p. 215: References.

Is it not to emigration that England must mainly look for the relief of
her population? Rowton, p. 228: References.

=England.= Constitution.

Written constitution for England. Askew, 1906, p. 56: Briefs and
references.

=England.= Food-supply.

Food supply in time of war; is there a danger of famine? Askew, 1906, p.
96: Briefs and references.--Askew, 1911, p. 99: Briefs.

=England.= House of lords. _See_ =House of lords.=

=England.= Imperialism. _See_ =Imperialism= (England).

=England.= Parliament. _See_ =Parliament.=

=England.= Political parties. _See_ =Independent Labour party.--National
party.=

=England.= Tariff. _See_ =Colonial preference.--Protection and free
trade.=

=England, Church of.=

Anglican orders. Askew, 1906, p. 12: Briefs and references.--Askew,
1911, p. 10: Briefs.

Disendowment of the Church of England. Askew, 1906, p. 64; Askew, 1911,
p. 66: Briefs.

Disestablishment of the Church of England. Askew, 1906, p. 65; Askew,
1911, p. 69: Briefs.

Is the modern Anglican church a branch of the Catholic church? Askew,
1906, p. 12; Askew, 1911, p. 10: Briefs.

Parochial boards. Askew, 1906, p. 169: Briefs and references.

Shall we disestablish and disendow the Church of England? Gibson, p. 73:
Briefs and references.

Should the broad-church party leave the church? Askew, 1906, p. 31:
Briefs.

=England, Invasion of.=

Possibility of invasion. Askew, 1911, p. 118: Briefs.

=England and Rome.=

Has England been as great a power in modern times as Rome was in ancient
times? Matson, p. 29: Briefs and references.

=English aristocracy.=

Has the aristocracy of England been on the whole a benefit to that
country? Matson, p. 188: Briefs and references.

=English channel tunnel.=

Askew, 1906, p. 37: Briefs and references.--Askew, 1911, p. 35: Briefs.

=English dramatists and Greek dramatists.= _See_ =Greek dramatists and
English dramatists.=

=English government and United States government.=

Is the English government superior, in form and operation, to the
government of the United States? Matson, p. 138: Briefs and references.

=English literature.= _See_ =Elizabethan literature.--Greek dramatists
and English dramatists.=

=English rule in India.= _See_ =India.= English rule.

=Engraving and photography.= _See_ =Photography and engraving.=

=Entail.=

Abolition of the law of entail. Askew, 1906, p. 85: Briefs and
references.--Askew, 1911, p. 91: Briefs.

=Equality, Social.= _See_ =Social equality.=

=Ethical movement.=

Askew, 1906, p. 88: Briefs and references.

=Evolution.=

Has the organic world been developed from primordial germs by natural
forces? Is the evidence sufficient to prove the origin of species by
natural evolution? Is the theory of evolution an established truth of
science? Matson, p. 390: Briefs and references.

Is man descended, by process of evolution, from some lower animal?
Matson, p. 394: Briefs and references.

=Examinations.=

Are examinations a true test of scholarship and a necessary means of
promoting education? Matson, p. 251: Briefs and references.

=Examinations, Competitive.=

Askew, 1906, p. 88: Briefs and references.--Askew, 1911, p. 92: Briefs.

Ought competitive examinations to be abolished? Gibson, p. 92. Briefs
and references.

=Expansion= (United States). _See_ =Imperialism= (United States).


=Fagging at schools.=

Askew, 1906, p. 89; Askew, 1911, p. 93: Briefs.

=Faith.=

Does faith precede and give rise to knowledge? Is faith founded on and
commensurate with reason? Matson, p. 487: Briefs and references.

=Falsehood.= _See_ =Deception.=

=Farm colonies for the unemployed.=

Askew, 1906, p. 92: Briefs and references.--Askew, 1911, p. 94: Briefs.

=Fashion in dress; is it an evil?=

Askew, 1906, p. 93: Briefs.

=Fasting.=

Is fasting any use? Gibson, p. 94: Briefs and references.

=Federal charter and federal control.=

All corporations carrying on interstate commerce [should] be required to
take out a federal charter. Pearson, p. 39: Report of debate, and
references.

All corporations engaged in interstate commerce should be required to
take out a federal charter on such terms as Congress may by law
prescribe, granted that such legislation would be constitutional.
Speaker, v. 3, p. 400: Briefs.--C. L. of P. Debates: Briefs and
references.

All corporations engaging in interstate commerce should be required to
take out a federal charter, granting such legislation would be
constitutional. Debaters' handbook ser., no. 9: Briefs, references and
selected articles.

All organizations engaged in interstate commerce should be licensed and
supervised by the federal government. Thomas, p. 182: Briefs.

All railroads engaged in interstate commerce should be operated by
companies incorporated by the federal government. Pearson, p. 147:
Report of debate, and references.

Corporations doing an interstate business should be required to take out
a federal charter. Foster, p. 291: Speech (affirmative).

The federal government should have exclusive control of all corporations
doing interstate business, constitutionality granted. C. L. of P.
Debates: Briefs and references.

The government should accept the principle of monopoly control of
industry and regulate the prices in all cases brought about by the
operation of economic law. Speaker, v. 7, p. 312: Synopses of speeches,
and references.

It is desirable that the regulating power of Congress should be extended
to all corporations whose capitalization exceeds $1,000,000. Foster, p.
297: Speech (negative).

_See also_ Water-power.

=Federal government and state government.= _See_ =Centralization and
state rights.=

=Feudalism.=

Has the feudal system been productive of more good than evil? Matson, p.
37: Briefs and references.

=Fiction.=

Has novel-reading a moral tendency? Rowton, p. 210: References

Has the prevalence of fiction in modern literature been on the whole a
good rather than an evil? Matson, p. 326: Briefs and references.

Novel reading is detrimental. C. L. of P. Reference lists.

Sex in fiction. Askew, 1906, p. 199: Briefs and references.

_See also_ Censorship of fiction.--Poetry and prose fiction.

=Fifteenth amendment.= _See_ =Negro suffrage.=

=Fine arts.= _See_ =Art.--Art unions.=

=Food adulteration.=

Adulteration acts. Askew, 1906, p. 3: Briefs and references.

=Foot-ball.=

Intercollegiate foot-ball promotes the best interests of colleges.
Brookings, p. 184: Brief and references.

=Forest preserves.=

The federal government is justified in entering upon a general policy of
establishing forest preserves. Thomas, p. 196: Briefs.

=Franchise.= _See_ =Negro suffrage.--Suffrage.--Woman suffrage.=

=Franklin.=

Should Franklin be regarded as the greatest American? Matson, p. 117:
Briefs and references.

=Franklin and Washington.=

Which was the greater man, Franklin or Washington? Rowton, p. 226:
References.

=Fraternities.= _See_ =Secret societies.=

=Frederick the Great and Peter the Great.=

Was Frederick the Great a greater man and sovereign than Peter the
Great? Matson, p. 97: Briefs and references.

=Free institutions.=

Free institutions in the United States are now in danger. Brookings, p.
52: Briefs and references.

=Free meals at elementary schools.=

Askew, 1906, p. 99: Briefs and references.

=Free ships.=

Foreign-built ships should be admitted to American registry free of
duty. Brookings, p. 104: Briefs and references.

=Free text-books.= _See_ =Text-books.=

=Free trade and protection.= _See_ =Protection and free trade.=

=Free trade and reciprocity.= _See_ =Reciprocity and free trade.=

=Free will.=

Is the human will free? Is the power of contrary choice a necessary
element in the freedom of the will? Does Edwards's "Inquiry respecting
the freedom of the will" lead to conclusions false and untenable?
Matson, p. 453: Briefs and references.

=French revolution.=

Did circumstances justify the first French revolution? Rowton, p. 223:
References.

Was there in the French revolution more of good than evil? Matson, p.
68: Briefs and references.

Which did the most to produce the French revolution, the tyranny of the
government, the excesses of the higher orders, or the writings of
Voltaire, Montesquieu, and Rousseau? Rowton, p. 222: References.


=Galileo.=

Is Galileo deserving of strong condemnation for abjuring what he knew to
be truth? Matson, p. 92: Briefs and references.

=Gambling.=

Are betting and gambling immoral? Gibson, p. 155: Briefs and references.

Legal suppression of gambling. Askew, 1906, p. 101: Briefs and
references.--Askew, 1911, p. 102: Briefs.

Morality of gambling. Askew, 1906, p. 102: Briefs and
references.--Askew, 1911, p. 102: Briefs.

=Gambling in commerce, Suppression of.=

Askew, 1906, p. 101: Briefs and references.--Askew, 1911, p. 101:
Briefs.

=Game laws= (England).

Abolition of game laws. Askew, 1906, p. 102: Briefs and
references.--Askew, 1911, p. 103: Briefs.

=Garrison, W.L.=

Has Garrison's part in the antislavery movement been overrated? Matson,
p. 127: Briefs and references.

=Gas supply.= Municipal ownership. _See_ =Municipal ownership.=

=Genius.=

Is genius an innate capacity? Rowton, p. 218: References.

Is genius hereditary? Matson, p. 406: Briefs and references.

=Geology and astronomy.= _See_ =Astronomy and geology.=

=Geology and the Bible.= _See_ =Bible and geology.=

=George, Henry.= _See_ =Single tax.=

=Ghosts.=

Are ghosts real or imaginary? Gibson, p. 104: Briefs and references.

=Gladstone and Bismarck.= _See_ =Bismarck and Gladstone.=

=Goethe and Milton.=

Is Goethe's Mephistopheles a better conception of the Prince of Darkness
than Milton's Satan? Matson, p. 304: Briefs and references.

=Goethe and Schiller.=

Was Goethe a greater poet than Schiller? Matson, p. 302: Briefs and
references.

=Goethe and Shakespeare.= _See_ =Shakespeare and Goethe.=

=Gold= (currency).

All nations should unite in adopting the same monetary system and that
system should be gold. Brookings, p. 88: Briefs and references.

The single gold standard is for the best interests of the country.
Craig, p. 28: Speeches.

_See also_ Bimetallism.

=Gold and iron.=

Which is the more valuable metal, gold or iron? Rowton, p. 211:
References.

=Gold mines and coal mines.=

Have the gold mines of Spain or the coal mines of England been more
beneficial to the world? Rowton, p. 213: References.

=Gothenburg system.=

The Gothenburg system of eliminating private profits offers the best
solution of the liquor question. Brookings, p. 176: Briefs and
references.

Should England adopt the Gothenburg system? Askew, 1906, p. 103: Briefs
and references.--Askew, 1911, p. 103: Briefs.

=Government by commission.= _See_ =Commission form of government.=

=Government ownership.=

Ought the state to own all railways, mines, canals, etc.? Gibson, p.
191: Briefs and references.

The state ought to organize and conduct manufactories and commerce.
Brookings, p. 129: Briefs and references.

_See also_ Municipal ownership.

=Government ownership.= Canals.

Nationalization of canals. Askew, 1906, p. 103: Briefs and
references.--Askew, 1911, p. 31: Briefs.

=Government ownership.= Coal mines.

It is for the best interests of all the people for the government to own
and control coal mines. Craig, p. 318: Outline.

The United States ought to own and control the coal mines of the
country. Pearson, p. 435: Synopses of speeches, and references.

=Government ownership.= Railroads.

The federal government should own and operate the railroads in the
United States. Thomas, p. 180: Briefs.

The railroads in the United States should be owned and operated by the
federal government. Brookings, p. 123: Briefs and references.

Railway nationalization. Askew, 1906, p. 189: Briefs and
references.--Askew, 1911, p. 195: Briefs.

The railways of the United States should be owned and operated by the
government. Ringwalt, p. 163: Briefs and references.--C. L. of P.
Debates: References.

Should the government of the United States own and control the
railroads? Craig, p. 106: Speeches.

Should the government own and operate the railroads? Matson, p. 176:
Briefs and references.--Robbins, p. 88: Briefs and references.

=Government ownership.= Telegraphs, telephones.

All telegraph lines in the United States should be owned and controlled
by the government. Brookings, p. 126: Briefs and references.

The government of the United States should own and control the telephone
and telegraph systems. Craig, p. 185: Speeches.

=Greece and Rome.=

Has Greece contributed more to the civilization of the world than Rome?
Has Rome been really a greater power in the world than Greece? Matson,
p. 25: Briefs and references.

=Greek, Study of.= _See_ =Classical education.=

=Greek art and renaissance art.=

Is Greek art surpassed by renaissance art? Matson, p. 359: Briefs and
references.

=Greek dramatists and English dramatists.=

Are the Greek dramatic writers superior to the English? Matson, p. 277:
Briefs and references.

=Greek letter fraternities.= _See_ =Secret societies.=

=Greenbacks.=

Should greenbacks be retired and the government go out of its present
system of banking? Craig, p. 232: Speeches.

=Gregory VII and Charlemagne.= _See_ =Charlemagne and Hildebrand.=

=Guarantee of bank deposits.= _See_ =Bank deposits, Guarantee of.=

=Gunpowder.=

Has the invention of gunpowder been of benefit to mankind? Rowton, p.
207: References.


=Hamilton and Jefferson.=

Was Hamilton a greater statesman than Jefferson? Matson, p. 120: Briefs
and references.

=Hamlet.=

Was the apparent madness of Hamlet altogether feigned? Matson, p. 299:
Briefs and references.--C. L. of P. Reference lists.

=Hannibal and Alexander the Great.= _See_ =Alexander the Great and
Hannibal.=

=Hannibal and Napoleon.= _See_ =Napoleon and Hannibal.=

=Happiness and misery.=

Does happiness or misery preponderate in life? Rowton, p. 222:
References.

=Hastings,= Warren.

Was Warren Hastings, in view of his career as a whole, deserving of
impeachment? Matson, p. 96: Briefs and references.

=Hawaii.= Annexation to the United States.

Hawaii should be speedily annexed to the United States. Brookings, p.
62: Briefs and references.

Ought the United States to have annexed Hawaii? Craig, p. 122: Briefs.

=Hawthorne and Irving.=

Should Hawthorne be ranked higher among American authors than Irving?
Matson, p. 350: Briefs and references.

=Hemans,= _Mrs,_ and =Howitt,= _Mrs._

Which is the greater poet, Mrs Howitt or Mrs Hemans? Rowton, p. 227:
References.

=Heredity and environment.=

Is heredity more influential in the development of man, intellectually
and morally, than his environment? Matson, p. 404: Briefs and
references.--C. L. of P. Reference lists.

=High schools.=

High schools should not be supported by taxation. Thomas, p. 202:
Briefs.

=Hildebrand and Charlemagne.= _See_ =Charlemagne and Hildebrand.=

=History.=

Can history be reduced to a science? Matson, p. 407: Briefs and
references.

Should not the study of history be more encouraged than it is? Rowton,
p. 232: References.

=History and biography.=

Is the reading of history more beneficial to the individual mind than
the reading of biography? Matson, p. 263: Briefs and references.

=Home labor.=

Prohibition of home work. Askew, 1911, p. 105: Briefs.

=Home rule.= India. _See_ =India.= Home rule.

=Home rule.= Ireland. _See_ =Ireland.= Home rule.

=Homer.= _See_ =Iliad and AEneid.--Iliad and Odyssey.=

=Homer and Milton.= _See_ =Milton and Homer.=

=Honor system in colleges.=

The honor system should be adopted in all colleges and universities. C.
L. of P. Reference lists.

=Hope and memory.=

Which produce the greater happiness, the pleasures of hope or of memory?
Rowton, p. 220: References.

=Hospitals.=

Nationalization of hospitals. Askew, 1906, p. 105: Briefs and
references.--Askew, 1911, p. 105: Briefs.

Should hospitals be maintained and managed by the state? Gibson, p. 115:
Briefs and references.

=Hours of labor.= _See_ =Early closing of shops.--Eight-hour day.=

=House of lords.=

Abolition of House of lords; single-chamber government. Askew, 1911, p.
150: Briefs.

Exclusion of bishops from House of lords. Askew, 1906, p. 29: Briefs and
references.--Askew, 1911, p. 27: Briefs.

Limitation of the veto of the House of lords. Askew, 1911, p. 151:
Briefs.

Reform of House of lords. Askew, 1906, p. 146: Briefs and
references.--Askew, 1911, p. 155: Briefs.

Should the English House of lords be abolished? Should the English House
of lords be reformed? Matson, p. 189: Briefs and references.

=Housing problem.=

The housing of the poor should be improved by municipalities. Brookings,
p. 170: Briefs and references.

Municipal dwellings for the poor. Askew, 1906, p. 156: Briefs and
references.--Askew, 1911, p. 160: Briefs.

=Howard and Wilberforce.=

Was Howard a greater philanthropist than Wilberforce? Matson, p. 104:
Briefs and references.

=Howard, Napoleon, Watt.= _See_ =Napoleon, Howard, Watt.=

=Howitt,= _Mrs,_ and =Hemans,= _Mrs._ _See_ =Hemans,= _Mrs,_ =and
Howitt,= _Mrs._

=Hugo and Balzac.= _See_ =Balzac and Hugo.=

=Human mind and brute mind.=

Is the human mind different from the brute mind in kind and not merely
in degree? Matson, p. 396: Briefs and references.

=Human race.= _See_ =Man.=

=Humor.=

Has not the faculty of humor been of essential service to civilization?
Rowton, p. 228: References.

=Husband and wife as witnesses.=

Askew, 1906, p. 106: Briefs.

=Hypocrite and liar.=

The hypocrite is a more despicable character than the liar. Craig, p.
179: Speeches.

Which is the more despicable character, the hypocrite or the liar?
Rowton, p. 208: References.


=Ignorance and crime.= _See_ =Crime.=

=Iliad and AEneid.=

Is the Iliad a greater epic than the AEneid? Matson, p. 270: Briefs and
references.

=Iliad and Odyssey.=

Does the Iliad afford conclusive evidence of various authorship? Is the
authorship of the Iliad and of the Odyssey identical? Matson, p. 269:
Briefs and references.

=Illiteracy and pauperism.= _See_ =Pauperism and illiteracy.=

=Imagination.=

Is a rude or a refined age the more favorable to the production of works
of imagination? Rowton, p. 219: References.

=Imagination and reason.=

Is the imagination more potent in its influence than the reason? Are men
in general as much influenced by reason as by imagination? Matson, p.
449: Briefs and references.

=Immigration.=

Do the benefits of foreign immigration outweigh its evils? Should
foreign immigration to this country be restricted? Matson, p. 173:
Briefs and references.

Foreign immigration to the United States should be further restricted by
the imposition of an educational test. Pearson, p. 165: Synopses of
speeches, and references.

A high tax should be laid on all immigrants to the United States.
Brookings, p. 70: Briefs and references.

Immigration should be further restricted by an illiteracy test.
Ringwalt, p. 31: Briefs and references.--C. L. of P. Debates:
References.

Immigration should be further restricted by law. Brookings, p. 68:
Briefs and references.--Robbins, p. 100: Briefs and references.

Immigration to the United States should be further restricted by an
educational test. Pattee, p. 183: Brief (affirmative).

Is immigration detrimental to the United States? Craig, p. 206:
Speeches.

Our present immigration laws should be amended so as to debar all
immigrants over sixteen years of age and unable to read and write;
provided that this amendment shall not debar dependents upon qualified
immigrants or residents of the United States. Wisconsin University, no.
316: Arguments and references.

Restriction of immigration of aliens. Askew, 1906, p. 107: Briefs and
references.

Should immigration be restricted? Pattee, p. 316: Brief, and speech for
negative by S.G. Croswell, from North American review, May 1897.

Strengthening of laws regulating the immigration of aliens. Askew, 1911,
p. 8: Briefs.

The United States should further restrict immigration by an illiteracy
test. Thomas, p. 198: Briefs.

The United States should still further restrict immigration. Thomas, p.
196: Briefs.

_See also_ Emigration.

=Immigration, Chinese.=

Exclusion of Chinese (United States and Australia). Askew, 1906, p. 41:
Briefs and references.--Askew, 1911, p. 39: Briefs.

Has Chinese immigration thus far been on the whole rather a benefit than
an injury to the country? Should it be the policy of the national
government to impose stringent restrictions on Chinese immigration?
Matson, p. 175: Briefs and references.

The policy excluding Chinese laborers from the United States should be
maintained and rigorously enforced. Brookings, p. 73: Briefs and
references.

The policy of the United States with respect to Chinese immigration
should be continued. Ringwalt, p. 42: Briefs and references.

Should Chinese immigration be restricted? C. L. of P. Reference lists.

The time has come when the United States should modify its present
policy of excluding Chinese immigration. Thomas, p. 176: Briefs.

=Immigration, German.=

The Germans are the most desirable present day immigrants. C. L. of P.
Reference lists.

=Immorality.=

Should immorality be a bar to public life? Askew, 1906, p. 108: Briefs
and references.

_See also_ Morality.

=Immortality.=

Can the immortality of the human soul be established from the light of
nature? Matson, p. 492: Briefs and references.

Immortality of the individual; its value. Askew, 1906, p. 108: Briefs.

=Imperialism.=

Are colonies advantageous to the mother country? Rowton, p. 216:
References.

=Imperialism= (England).

Askew, 1906, p. 110: Briefs and references.--Askew, 1911, p. 106:
Briefs.

=Imperialism= (United States).

American imperialism. Speaker, v. 4, p. 114: References.

Imperialistic policy of the United States. C. L. of P. Reference lists.

The interests of the United States are opposed to the permanent
acquisition of territory in the eastern hemisphere except so much as may
be needed for naval stations. Alden, p. 221: Speech (affirmative).

_See also_ Cuba. Annexation to the United States.--Hawaii. Annexation to
the United States.--Philippine islands.

=In camera proceedings.=

Askew, 1906, p. 113; Askew, 1911, p. 110: Briefs.

=Income tax.=

Denney, p. 369: Speeches.

Can an income tax be framed which shall be equitable in principle and
efficient in administration? Is a graduated income tax just or
expedient? Matson, p. 209: Briefs and references.

The constitution should be so amended as to vest in Congress the power
to impose a general income tax in the United States. Speaker, v. 3, p.
296: Briefs and references.--C. L. of P. Debates: Briefs and references.

The federal government should adopt a graduated income tax,
constitutionality granted. Robbins, p. 109: Briefs and references.

The federal government should have the power to impose an income tax,
not apportioned among the states according to population. Speaker, v. 5,
p. 376: Speeches and references.

Federal income tax. Pearson, p. 93: Summing up of arguments, and
references.

A graduated income tax is a desirable feature of a taxation system.
Wisconsin University, no. 329: Arguments and references.

In the United States an income tax is practicable and desirable. Thomas,
p. 180: Briefs.--C. L. of P. Reference lists.

An income tax is a desirable part of a scheme of taxation. Brookings, p.
117: Briefs and references.

Income tax, with special reference to graduation and exemption.
Debaters' handbook ser., no. 10: References and selected articles.

Progressive income tax. Askew, 1906, p. 113: Briefs and
references.--Askew, 1911, p. 110: Briefs.

=Independent Labour party and Liberal party.=

Askew, 1906, p. 115: Briefs and references.--Askew, 1911, p. 112:
Briefs.

=Indeterminate sentence.=

Indeterminate sentences for the professional criminal. Askew, 1911, p.
113: Briefs.

=India.= Civil service. _See_ =Civil service.= India.

=India.= English rule.

Indian defence--a forward policy. Askew, 1906, p. 118: Briefs and
references.

Is English rule in India, considered as to its character and results,
capable of vindication? Has English rule been a benefit to India?
Matson, p. 191: Briefs and references.

Ought we to govern India solely for its natives? Gibson, p. 117: Briefs
and references.

=India.= Home rule.

India; home rule. Askew, 1906, p. 117: Briefs and references.--Askew,
1911, p. 114: Briefs.

=Indians of North America.=

Should the government make the education of the Indian compulsory? C. L.
of P. Reference lists.

=Individual and state.= _See_ =State and individual.=

=Individualism.=

Askew, 1906, p. 119: Briefs and references.--Askew, 1911, p. 115:
Briefs.

=Inductive reasoning.=

Is inductive reasoning the best method of arriving at truth? Has the
relative importance of inductive reasoning as a method of arriving at
truth been overrated in modern times? Matson, p. 441: Briefs and
references.

=Inheritance tax.=

Death duties (English), Graduated. Askew, 1906, p. 59: Briefs and
references.--Askew, 1911, p. 51: Briefs.

A progressive inheritance tax should be levied by the federal
government, constitutionality conceded. Pearson, p. 141: Briefs and
references.--Speaker, v. 2, p. 389: Briefs.--Wisconsin University, no.
385: Arguments and references.--C. L. of P. Debates: References.

=Initiative and referendum.= _See_ =Referendum.=

=Injunctions.=

The attitude of the federal courts toward the use of the writ of
injunction, as indicated by the Bucks Stove & Range Company decision,
is conducive to the best interests of the people of the United States
(all question of constitutionality eliminated). Pearson, p. 129:
Synopses of speeches, and references.

Federal courts should be prohibited from issuing injunctions in
controversies between labor and capital. Thomas, p. 188: Briefs.

Issuing of injunctions by federal courts in labor disputes should be
forbidden by Congress. Ringwalt, p. 219: Briefs and references.--Speaker,
v. 4, p. 108: Briefs and references.--C. L. of P. Debates: References.

_See also_ Chicago strike injunctions.

=Insane asylums.=

Ought private asylums to be permitted? Askew, 1906, p. 20: Briefs and
references.

=Insanity and responsibility.=

Does insanity always preclude all moral responsibility? Is insanity ever
consistent with amenability to punishment? Matson, p. 461: Briefs and
references.

=Insurance.=

Resolved that all insurance should be made a federal monopoly. C. L. of
P. Reference lists.

=Insurance, Life.=

Insurance of children. Askew, 1906, p. 122: Briefs and
references.--Askew, 1911, p. 117: Briefs.

Is life assurance at present conducted on safe and equitable principles?
Rowton, p. 231: References.

=Intelligence and morality.=

Does the diffusion of intelligence promote general morality? Is
ignorance productive of crime? Matson, p. 236: Briefs and references.

=Intemperance.= _See_ =Drink and opium.--Liquor question.=

=Intemperance and slavery.= _See_ =Slavery and intemperance.=

=International copyright.= _See_ =Copyright.=

=Internationalism.=

Askew, 1906, p. 123: Briefs and references.--Askew, 1911, p. 118:
Briefs.

=Intestacy.=

Abolition of the law of intestacy. Askew, 1906, p. 124: Briefs and
references.

=Invasion of England.= _See_ =England, Invasion of.=

=Ireland.=

Abolition of the lord lieutenancy of Ireland. Askew, 1906, p. 124:
Briefs and references.--Askew, 1911, p. 122: Briefs.

Federal government in Great Britain and Ireland. Askew, 1906, p. 94:
Briefs and references.--Askew, 1911, p. 95: Briefs.

Ireland; is she overtaxed? Askew, 1906, p. 131: Briefs and
references.--Askew, 1911, p. 131: Briefs.

Irish members; their exclusion from imperial parliament in the event of
the grant of home rule. Askew, 1906, p. 132; Briefs and
references.--Askew, 1911, p. 132: Briefs.

Is devolution in Irish affairs desirable? Askew, 1906, p. 125: Briefs
and references.--Askew, 1911, p. 122: Briefs.

Is Ireland's want of prosperity to be attributed chiefly to English
misrule? Matson, p. 193: Briefs and references.

=Ireland.= Home rule.

Home rule should be granted to Ireland. Brookings, p. 187: Briefs and
references.--C. L. of P. Reference lists.

Ireland; home rule. Askew, 1906, p. 126: Briefs and references.--Askew,
1911, p. 124: Briefs.

Ought England to concede the Irish demand for home rule? Matson, p. 194:
Briefs and references.

=Ireland.= Universities. _See_ =Colleges and universities.=

=Iron and gold.= _See_ =Gold and iron.=

=Irrigation works.=

The government ought to construct an extensive system of irrigation
works. Brookings, p. 144: Briefs and references.

=Irving and Hawthorne.= _See_ =Hawthorne and Irving.=


=Japan.= Anglo-Japanese alliance. _See_ =Anglo-Japanese alliance.=

=Japan-China war.= _See_ =China-Japan war.=

=Japanese as American citizens.=

Should the Japanese be eligible to American citizenship? C. L. of P.
Reference lists.

=Jefferson and Hamilton.= _See_ =Hamilton and Jefferson.=

=Jesuits.=

Has Jesuitism been a greater evil than good? Matson, p. 480: Briefs and
references.

=Jews.=

Anti-Semitism in Russia. Askew, 1906, p. 14: Briefs and references.

Is the creation of a Jewish state desirable and practicable? Askew,
1906, p. 132: Briefs and references.--Askew, 1911, p. 133: Briefs.

=John and Paul.= _See_ =Paul and John.=

=Journalism.=

Journalism; are signed articles desirable? Askew, 1906, p. 135: Briefs
and references.--Askew, 1911, p. 135: Briefs.

=Judges.=

The judges of the superior courts and the judges of the courts of
appellate jurisdiction of the states should gain office by appointment
of the state executive. Pearson, p. 345: Synopses of speeches, and
references.

=Judges, Recall of.= _See_ =Recall of judges.=

=Jury system.=

Askew, 1906, p. 135: Briefs and references.--Askew, 1911, p. 135:
Briefs.

Do the advantages of the jury system outweigh its evils? Is the jury
system worthy of being retained? Should a three-fourths majority be
sufficient for a decision by the jury? Matson, p. 158: Briefs and
references.

In the state of (New York) a unanimous verdict should no longer be
required in jury trials. Thomas, p. 194: Briefs.

Is the unanimity required from juries conducive to the attainment of the
ends of justice? Rowton, p. 217: References.

Jury system should be abolished. Brookings, p. 55: Briefs and
references.

Less than the whole number of the jury should be competent to render a
verdict. C. L. of P. Reference lists.

Should we abolish trial by jury? Gibson, p. 215: Briefs and references.

Trial by jury. C. L. of P. Reference lists.

=Juvenile court.=

C. L. of P. Reference lists (affirmative).

Children's courts. Askew, 1906, p. 40: Briefs and references.


=Kant.=

Does Kant's "Critique of pure reason" give a true account of the origin
and limitations of knowledge in the human mind? Do Kant's writings,
taken together, afford a self-consistent and positive philosophical
system? Was Kant a greater philosopher than Descartes? Matson, p. 438:
Briefs and references.

=Kempis, Thomas a, and Bunyan.= _See_ =Bunyan and Thomas a Kempis.=

=Kindergarten system.=

Askew, 1906, p. 136: Briefs and references.


=Labor, Division of.=

Does the division of labor, as it now exists, tend rather to hinder than
to help individual development? Matson, p. 229: Briefs and references.

Is the division of labour now carried to hurtful excess? Gibson, p. 119:
Briefs and references.

=Labor and laboring classes.=

Labor is more to blame for hard times than capitalists are. C. L. of P.
Reference lists.

_See also_ Child labor.--Chinese labor.--Home labor.--Machinery.

=Labor party.=

The best interests of the laboring classes would be advanced by the
formation of a separate labor party. Brookings, p. 154: Briefs and
references.

Organized labor should form a political party and actively enter
politics. Thomas, p. 202: Briefs.

=Labor unions.= _See_ =Trade unions.=

=Laissez faire and state intervention.=

Is the laissez faire, or let alone theory of government, the true one?
Is the paternal theory of government the true one? Should state
intervention be extended? Matson, p. 136: Briefs and references.

=Land.=

Enclosure of common-lands. Askew, 1906, p. 54: Briefs and
references.--Askew, 1911, p. 43: Briefs.

Peasant proprietorship. Askew, 1906, p. 174: Briefs and
references.--Askew, 1911, p. 180: Briefs.

Vacant land; its rating. Askew, 1906, p. 216: Briefs and references.

=Land nationalization.=

Askew, 1906, p. 136: Briefs and references.--Askew, 1911, p. 136:
Briefs.

=Land values.= _See_ =Single tax.=

=Landed gentry.=

Are the landed gentry worth preserving? Gibson, p. 101: Briefs and
references.

=Language.=

Is language of merely human origin? Matson, p. 542: Briefs and
references.

=Language, Universal.=

Askew, 1906, p. 215: Briefs and references.

=Language and thought.= _See_ =Thought and language.=

=Latin, Study of.= _See_ =Classical education.=

=Law.=

Codification of the law [English]. Askew, 1906, p. 48: Briefs and
references.--Askew, 1911, p. 40: Briefs.

_See also_ Legal education.--Legal ethics.

=Leasehold enfranchisement.=

Askew, 1906, p. 139: Briefs and references.--Askew, 1911, p. 143:
Briefs.

=Legal education.=

Reform of legal education. Askew, 1906, p. 142: Briefs.

=Legal ethics.=

Is a counsel justified in defending a prisoner of whose guilt he is
cognizant? Gibson, p. 70: Briefs and references.

Is an advocate justified in defending a man whom he knows to be guilty
of the crime with which he is charged? Rowton, p. 214: References.

A lawyer is justified in pleading for the acquittal of a man whom he
knows to be guilty. C. L. of P. Reference lists.

=Legal tender.=

Congress should take immediate steps towards the retirement of all the
legal-tender notes. Alden, p. 230, 253: Speech and brief (negative).

=Legislation, Direct.= _See_ =Direct legislation.=

=Liar and hypocrite.= _See_ =Hypocrite and liar.=

=Liberal party and Independent Labour party.= _See_ =Independent Labour
party and Liberal party.=

=Liberty of the press.=

Should the liberty of the press be left by the government unrestricted?
Matson, p. 167: Briefs and references.

Should the press be totally free? Rowton, p. 223: References.

=Libraries.=

Free libraries. Askew, 1906, p. 98: Briefs and references.

=License.= _See_ =Liquor question.=

=Life.=

Is life worth living? Askew, 1906, p. 143: Briefs and references.

Is the average duration of human life increasing or diminishing? Rowton,
p. 230: References.

=Life insurance.= _See_ =Insurance, Life.=

=Lincoln and Washington.=

Can Lincoln justly be called as great a benefactor to his country as
Washington? Matson, p. 116: Briefs and references.

=Liquor question.=

Abolition of tied houses. Askew, 1906, p. 209; Askew, 1911, p. 242:
Briefs.

As society is constituted at present the liquor saloon performs
desirable social functions. Robbins, p. 177: Briefs and references.

Compensation to publicans. Askew, 1906, p. 55: Briefs and
references.--Askew, 1911, p. 44: Briefs.

Free trade in drink. Askew, 1906, p. 73: Briefs and references.--Askew,
1911, p. 80: Briefs.

High license is the best means of checking intemperance. Craig, p. 94:
Speeches.

Is not intemperance the chief source of crime? Rowton, p. 231:
References.

Is the legal prohibition of the manufacture and sale of spirituous
liquors as a beverage right in principle and efficient in practice?
Matson, p. 179: Briefs and references.

Should the drink traffic be nationalized? Gibson, p. 81: Briefs and
references.

Should the licensing act (1904) be amended? Askew, 1906, p. 142: Briefs
and references.--Askew, 1911, p. 146: Briefs.

State prohibition is preferable to high license as a method of dealing
with intemperance. Brookings, p. 172: Briefs and references.

Sunday closing of public houses. Askew, 1906, p. 205: Briefs and
references.--Askew, 1911, p. 224: Briefs.

Total abstinence. Askew, 1906, p. 1: Briefs and references.--Askew,
1911, p. 1: Briefs.

_See also_ Gothenburg system.--Local option.

=Literary contests and athletics.= _See_ =Athletics.=

=Literature.=

Is the cheap literature of the age, on the whole, beneficial to general
morality? Rowton, p. 229: References.

=Literature and science.=

Which has done more for the world, literature or science? C. L. of P.
Reference lists.

=Liturgies.=

Should nonconformists adopt liturgies? Gibson, p. 121: Briefs and
references.

=Livingstone and Columbus.= _See_ =Columbus and Livingstone.=

=Local option.=

Askew, 1906, p. 145; Askew, 1911, p. 149: Briefs.--C. L. of P. Reference
lists.

Local option is the most satisfactory method of dealing with the liquor
problem. Thomas, p. 184: Briefs.

Local veto. Askew, 1906, p. 146: Briefs and references.--Askew, 1911, p.
149: Briefs.--Gibson, p. 248: Briefs and references.

=Locke.=

Has the influence of Locke's philosophy been greater than its intrinsic
worth? Does the practical merit of Locke's philosophy atone for its want
of breadth and comprehension? Matson, p. 436: Briefs and references.

=London livery companies.=

Livery companies (London); their abolition. Askew, 1906, p. 144: Briefs
and references.

=Longfellow and Bryant.= _See_ =Bryant and Longfellow.=

=Lords, House of.= _See_ =House of lords.=

=Louis XIV.=

Was Louis XIV a great man? Rowton, p. 227: References.

=Louis XVI.=

Was the deposition of Louis XVI justifiable? Rowton, p. 216: References.

=Loyola and Luther.= _See_ =Luther and Loyola.=

=Luther and Calvin.=

Did Luther contribute more to the promotion of the reformation than
Calvin? Matson, p. 516: Briefs and references.

=Luther and Loyola.=

Which character is the more to be admired, that of Loyola or Luther?
Rowton, p. 224: References.

=Luxury.=

The expensive social entertainments of the wealthy are of more benefit
than injury to the country. Craig, p. 172: Speeches.

Should Parliament restrain excessive luxury? Gibson, p. 124: Briefs and
references.

=Lying.= _See_ =Deception.--Hypocrite and liar.=


=Macedonia.=

Should Europe interfere in Macedonia? Askew, 1906, p. 148: Briefs and
references.

=Machinery.=

Has the introduction of machinery been generally beneficial to mankind?
Rowton, p. 220: References.

Has the introduction of machinery done more harm than good? Gibson, p.
127: Briefs and references.

Has the use of machinery been, on the whole, beneficial to the laboring
class? Matson, p. 228: Briefs and references.

=Magistrates, Stipendiary.=

Askew, 1906, p. 149; Askew, 1911, p. 157: Briefs.

=Man.=

Have the races of men a specific unity and a common origin? Are the
races of men of diverse origin? Matson, p. 401: Briefs and references.

Is the evidence sufficient to prove the great antiquity of the human
race? Matson, p. 399: Briefs and references.

Is the savage state the primitive and natural condition of man? Is
savagism a degenerate condition of human nature? Matson, p. 402: Briefs
and references.

Is there any ground for believing in the ultimate perfection and
universal happiness of the human race? Rowton, p. 220: References.

=Man and animals.= _See_ =Human mind and brute mind.=

=Man's intellect and woman's.= _See_ =Woman's intellect and man's.=

=Manufactures and commerce.= _See_ =Commerce and manufactures.=

=Marathon and Waterloo.=

Was the battle of Marathon more important in its results than the battle
of Waterloo? Matson, p. 30: Briefs and references.

=Markets= (London). Municipal ownership. _See_ =Municipal ownership.=

=Marriage laws.=

A constitutional amendment should be adopted giving Congress exclusive
power to regulate marriage and divorce in the United States. Ringwalt,
p. 194: Briefs and references.--C. L. of P. Debates: References.

Reform of marriage laws. Askew, 1906, p. 152; Askew, 1911, p. 158:
Briefs.

_See also_ Deceased wife's sister.

=Mary,= _queen of Scots._

Do the facts show the complicity of Mary, queen of Scots, in Darnley's
assassination? Matson, p. 58: Briefs and references.

Was the execution of Mary, queen of Scots, justifiable? Matson, p. 59:
Briefs and references.--Rowton, p. 207: References.

=Mathematics and philosophy.= _See_ =Philosophy and mathematics.=

=Mathematics and the classics.= _See_ =Classics and mathematics.=

=Maurice and Newman.= _See_ =Newman and Maurice.=

=Mayors.=

All executive duties in American cities should be concentrated in the
hands of the mayor and his appointments should not require confirmation.
Brookings, p. 49: Briefs and references.

=Mechanic and poet.= _See_ =Poet and mechanic.=

=Mechanics.=

Do the mechanicians of modern equal those of ancient times? Rowton, p.
215: References.

=Mechanics' institutions.=

Have mechanics' institutions answered the expectations of their
founders? Rowton, p. 229: References.

=Medical education for women.=

Askew, 1906, p. 226: Briefs.

=Memory and hope.= _See_ =Hope and memory.=

=Men.=

American men of the present day are lacking in chivalrous respect for
women. C. L. of P. Reference lists.

=Mexico.= Annexation to the United States.

Should Mexico be annexed to the United States? C. L. of P. Reference
lists.

=Michael Angelo and Raphael.=

Is Michael Angelo a greater artist than Raphael? Matson, p. 370: Briefs
and references.

=Microscope and telescope.= _See_ =Telescope and microscope.=

=Middle ages.=

Are there good grounds for applying the term "dark" to the middle ages?
Rowton, p. 224: References.

=Middleman, Elimination of.=

Askew, 1906, p. 152: Briefs.

=Military renown.=

Is military renown a fit object of ambition? Rowton, p. 210: References.

=Military service.= _See_ =Army.=

=Milton and Dante.= _See_ =Dante and Milton.=

=Milton and Goethe.= _See_ =Goethe and Milton.=

=Milton and Homer.=

Which was the greater poet, Milton or Homer? Rowton, p. 210: References.

=Milton and Shakespeare.= _See_ =Shakespeare and Milton.=

=Mind force and physical force.=

Is all the force manifested in the material universe to be attributed to
the immediate volition of God? Is mind the only real force and the first
cause of all motion? Matson, p. 445: Briefs and references.

=Ministers= (of state).

Should ministers hold directorships? Askew, 1906, p. 153; Askew, 1911,
p. 158: Briefs.

=Ministers of the gospel.=

May a Christian minister do as much good in pastoral work as by
preaching? Matson, p. 499: Briefs and references.

Should clergymen be politicians? Matson, p. 502: Briefs and references.

=Minorities, Rights of.=

Askew, 1906, p. 153: Briefs and references.--Askew, 1911, p. 159:
Briefs.

=Miser and spendthrift.=

Which does the greater injury to society, the miser or the spendthrift?
Rowton, p. 185: Briefs and references.

=Misery and happiness.= _See_ =Happiness and misery.=

=Missions.=

Are modern Christian missions a failure? Gibson, p. 130: Briefs and
references.

=Mohammedanism.=

Has the influence of Mohammedanism been more evil than good? Matson, p.
476: Briefs and references.

=Monarchy.=

Is a limited monarchy, like that of England, the best form of
government? Rowton, p. 218: References.

=Monarchy and republicanism.=

Askew, 1906, p. 154: Briefs and references.--C. L. of P. Reference
lists.

=Monasteries.= _See_ =Convents and monasteries.=

=Money.=

International money. Askew, 1906, p. 123: Briefs and references.

_See also_ Bimetallism.--Gold.--Silver.--Tainted money.

=Money and culture.=

Do birth, breeding and culture count in society to-day when weighed
against the power of money? C. L. of P. Reference lists.

=Mongolian race.= _See_ =Yellow peril.=

=Monopolies.= _See_ =Federal charter and federal control.--Trusts.=

=Monroe doctrine.=

Askew, 1906, p. 155: Briefs and references.--Askew, 1911, p. 159:
Briefs.

The Monroe doctrine has been and will continue to be beneficial to the
western hemisphere. C. L. of P. Reference lists.

The Monroe doctrine should be continued as a part of the permanent
foreign policy of the United States. Ringwalt, p. 84: Briefs and
references.--Thomas, p. 198: Briefs.

The United States should resist by force if need be the colonization of
South America by any European nation. Thomas, p. 192: Briefs.

=Montaigne and Addison.=

Is Montaigne a better essayist than Addison? Matson, p. 342: Briefs and
references.

=Morality.=

Does morality increase with civilization? Rowton, p. 68: Speeches and
references.

Is not private virtue essentially requisite to greatness of public
character? Rowton, p. 47: Reference.

_See also_ Immorality.

=Morality and art.= _See_ =Art and morality.=

=Morality and intelligence.= _See_ =Intelligence and morality.=

=Moses and David.=

Was Moses greater than David? Matson, p. 507: Briefs and references.

=Mozart and Beethoven.= _See_ =Beethoven and Mozart.=

=Mrs Grundy.=

Ought we to obey Mrs Grundy? Gibson, p. 110: Briefs and references.

=Municipal dwellings for the poor.= _See_ =Housing problem.=

=Municipal ownership.=

Cities of the United States should own their street railways. Speaker,
v. 2, p. 400: Briefs and references.--C. L. of P. Debates: Briefs and
references.

Cities should own and control all the public franchises now conferred
upon corporations. Craig, p. 337: Outlines.

Municipal gas supply. Gibson, p. 137: Briefs and references.

Municipal trading; shall it be restrained? Askew, 1906, p. 156: Briefs
and references.--Askew, 1911, p. 161: Briefs.

Municipal tramways. Gibson, p. 139: Briefs and references.

Municipalities in the United States should own and operate plants for
supplying light, water, and surface transportation. Brookings, p. 132:
Briefs and references.--Robbins, p. 134: Briefs and references.

Municipalities in the United States should own and operate plants for
supplying light, water and transportation. Debaters' handbook ser., no.
8: Briefs, references and selected articles.

Municipalization of bakehouses. Askew, 1906, p. 23: Briefs and
references.

Municipalization of docks (London). Askew, 1906, p. 72: Briefs and
references.

Municipalization of gas supply. Askew, 1906, p. 103: Briefs and
references.

Municipalization of London markets. Askew, 1906, p. 151: Briefs and
references.

Street railways should be owned and operated by municipalities.
Ringwalt, p. 184: Briefs and references.--C. L. of P. Debates:
References.

=Music in streets.= _See_ =Street music.=

=Mysticism.=

Has mysticism a rightful place in philosophic and religious thought? Has
Christian mysticism exerted, on the whole, a favorable influence in the
promotion of true piety? Matson, p. 490: Briefs and references.


=Napoleon.=

Did the career of Napoleon Bonaparte make for human progress? C. L. of
P. Reference lists.

Is the career of Napoleon indefensible? Matson, p. 71: Briefs and
references.

Is the character of Napoleon Bonaparte to be admired? Rowton, p. 199:
Briefs and references.

Was the banishment of Napoleon to St. Helena justifiable? Matson, p. 74:
Briefs and references.--Rowton, p. 221: References.

=Napoleon and Cromwell.=

Which was the greater man, Oliver Cromwell or Napoleon Bonaparte?
Rowton, p. 207: References.

=Napoleon and Hannibal.=

Did Napoleon exhibit as great military genius as Hannibal? Matson, p.
75: Briefs and references.

=Napoleon, Caesar, Alexander the Great.= _See_ =Alexander the Great,
Caesar, Napoleon.=

=Napoleon, Howard, Watt.=

Which was the greatest man, Bonaparte, Watt, or Howard? Rowton, p. 189:
Briefs and references.

=National banks.= _See_ =Banks, National.=

=National character.= _See_ =Character, National.=

=National education.= _See_ =Education, National.=

=National party in politics.=

Askew, 1906, p. 158: Briefs and references.

=National theatre.= _See_ =Theatre, National.=

=National university.=

Is the establishment of a national university by the general government
desirable? Matson, p. 248: Briefs and references.

=Naturalization.=

Naturalization laws of the United States should be made more stringent.
Ringwalt, p. 1: Briefs and references.

Statute requirements for naturalization in the United States should be
increased. Thomas, p. 188: Briefs.

=Naval adviser.=

Is a naval adviser necessary? Askew, 1906, p. 159: Briefs.

=Navigation and railroads.=

The world owes more to navigation than to railroads. Craig, p. 135:
Speeches.

=Navy= (United States). Increase.

The American navy should be substantially enlarged. Wisconsin
University, no. 386: Arguments and references.

Congress should immediately provide for the further strengthening of the
navy. Pearson, p. 293: Report of speeches, and references.

Congress should provide for a large increase in the strength of the
navy. C. L. of P. Reference lists.

Enlargement of the United States navy. Debaters' handbook ser., no. 7:
Selected articles.

It is for the best interest of the United States to build and maintain a
large navy. Brookings, p. 78: Briefs and references.

United States should maintain a large navy. Thomas, p. 176: Briefs.

=Nebular hypothesis.=

Does the nebular hypothesis furnish the best natural solution of the
origin of the planetary and stellar worlds? Is the nebular hypothesis
likely to win an established place in science? Matson, p. 388: Briefs
and references.

=Negro suffrage.=

C. L. of P. Debates: References.

Fifteenth amendment. Speaker, v. 4, p. 115: References.

Fifteenth amendment to the constitution should be repealed. Ringwalt, p.
17: Briefs and references.--Robbins, p. 168: Briefs and references.

The methods by which the negroes in the Southern states are excluded
from the franchise are justifiable. Thomas, p. 168: Briefs and
references.

Ought the negro to have been enfranchised? Matson, p. 147: Briefs and
references.

The suffrage should be taken from the negroes in the Southern states.
Brookings, p. 6: Briefs and references.

United States government ought to interfere to protect the Southern
negro in the exercise of the suffrage. Brookings, p. 3: Briefs and
references.

=Newman and Maurice.=

Was J.H. Newman superior in ability, character and influence to F.D.
Maurice? Matson, p. 522: Briefs and references.

=Newspapers.= Comic supplement. _See_ =Comic supplement.=

=Newton and Bacon.= _See_ =Bacon and Newton.=

=Newton and Darwin.= _See_ =Darwin and Newton.=

=Nicaragua canal.=

United States ought to construct and operate the Nicaragua canal.
Brookings, p. 65: Briefs and references.

United States should build and control the Nicaragua canal. Craig, p.
148: Speeches.

=Nihilism.=

The efforts of the Russian nihilists are entitled to the sympathy of a
free people. Brookings, p. 195: Briefs and references.

Is Russian nihilism, considered as a political movement, justifiable?
Matson, p. 186: Briefs and references.

=Novels and novel-reading.= _See_ =Fiction.=


=Oaths.=

Is the administering of the oath a necessary and efficient means of
securing the truth from witnesses or the faithful discharge of official
duty? Should all civil and judicial oaths be abolished? Is the oath as
required by human law in accordance with Scripture? Matson, p. 165:
Briefs and references.

Is the use of oaths for civil purposes expedient? Rowton, p. 216:
References.

=Observation and reading.= _See_ =Reading and observation.=

=Odyssey.= _See_ =Iliad and Odyssey.=

=Old age pensions.=

Askew, 1906, p. 159: Briefs and references.--Askew, 1911, p. 163:
Briefs.

Old age pensions would benefit society. C. L. of P. Debates: References.

State old-age pensions. Gibson, p. 141: Briefs and references.

A system of old age pensions should be adopted by the United States
government. Robbins, p. 33: Briefs and references.--Thomas, p. 192:
Briefs.

=Oleomargarine.=

Each state has the right to prohibit the sale of oleomargarine within
its limits. Brookings, p. 149: Briefs and references.

=Open shop and closed shop.=

Employers of labor are justified in insisting on the "open" shop.
Thomas, p. 194: Briefs.

The general welfare of the American people demands the open shop
principle in our industries. Speaker, v. 2, p. 398: Report of
speeches.--C. L. of P. Debates: References.

In labor disputes workmen are justified in demanding as a condition of
settlement that their employers agree to employ only members of trade
unions. Pearson, p. 261: Speeches and references.

The movement of organized labor for the closed shop should receive the
support of public opinion. Debaters' handbook ser., no. 16: Briefs,
references and selected articles.--Wisconsin University, no. 395:
Arguments and references.

=Opium habit.= _See_ =Drink and opium.=

=Opium trade.=

Suppression of the opium trade in the East. Askew, 1906, p. 163: Briefs
and references.--Askew, 1911, p. 166: Briefs.

=Opportunities for success.= _See_ =Success.=

=Optimism and pessimism.=

Is the world growing better? Gibson, p. 242: Briefs and references.

Is there more ground for the philosophy of optimism than for the
philosophy of pessimism? Matson, p. 443: Briefs and references.

=Oratory.=

Is ancient oratory superior to modern? Matson, p. 280: Briefs and
references.

Is modern equal to ancient oratory? Rowton, p. 196: Briefs and
references.

Which does the most to make the orator, knowledge, nature or art?
Rowton, p. 169: Speeches and references.

=Osborne judgment.=

Osborne judgment; should the law be altered? Askew, 1911, p. 168:
Briefs.

=Outdoor relief.=

Should outdoor relief be encouraged? Askew, 1906, p. 165: Briefs and
references.--Askew, 1911, p. 170: Briefs.

Should we abolish outdoor relief? Gibson, p. 144: Briefs and references.


=Painting, Schools of.=

Impressionism in art _versus_ the preraphaelite school. C. L. of P.
Reference lists.

=Papacy.= _See_ =Roman Catholic church.= Papacy.

=Paradise lost and Divine comedy.= _See_ =Dante and Milton.=

=Parcels post.=

The federal government should establish a parcels post. Debaters' handbook
ser., no. 12: Briefs, references and selected articles.--Thomas, p. 192:
Briefs.

The parcels post system advocated by Postmaster General George von L.
Meyer should be established. Wisconsin University, no. 204:

References.--Wisconsin University, no. 458: Rev. ed. History, arguments,
references.

The United States should establish a parcels post. C. L. of P. Debates:
References.

=Parliament.=

Ought official parliamentary expenses to be a local charge? Askew, 1906,
p. 159; Askew, 1911, p. 163: Briefs.

Payment of members' and returning officers' expenses. Askew, 1906, p.
173: Briefs and references.--Askew, 1911, p. 178: Briefs.

Redistribution. Askew, 1906, p. 191: Briefs and references.--Askew,
1911, p. 198: Briefs.

Shorter Parliaments. Askew, 1906, p. 168: Briefs and references.--Askew,
1911, p. 172: Briefs.

Should members of Parliament be delegates instead of representatives?
Askew, 1906, p. 167: Briefs and references.--Askew, 1911, p. 172:
Briefs.

_See also_ House of lords.

=Parliamentary system and presidential system.= _See_ =Presidential
system and parliamentary system.=

=Parnell.=

The memory of Charles Stewart Parnell deserves the gratitude of the
Irish people. Brookings, p. 190: Briefs and references.

=Parties, Political.= _See_ =Political parties.=

=Party allegiance.=

Every citizen should give allegiance to some organized political party.
Thomas, p. 172: Briefs and references.

It is for the interests of good government that the citizen acts with
his party in municipal elections. Brookings, p. 24: Briefs and
references.

Party allegiance is preferable to independent action in politics.
Brookings, p. 22: Briefs and references.

=Party government.= _See_ =Political parties.=

=Passive resistance.=

Askew, 1906, p. 171: Briefs and references.--Askew, 1911, p. 176:
Briefs.

Is passive resistance justifiable? Gibson, p. 256: Briefs and
references.

=Patents.=

Should all patents be abolished? Gibson, p. 146: Briefs and references.

=Paul and John.=

Has Paul been more influential, by his labors and writings, in the
development and promotion of Christianity than John? Matson, p. 510:
Briefs and references.

=Pauper children.=

Boarding out of pauper children. Askew, 1906, p. 171: Briefs and
references.--Askew, 1911, p. 176: Briefs.

Ought we to board out our pauper children? Gibson, p. 40: Briefs and
references.

=Pauperism and illiteracy.=

Is pauperism as great an evil to society as illiteracy? Matson, p. 528:
Briefs and references.

=Peace.=

Is universal peace probable? Rowton, p. 187: Briefs and references.

=Peasant proprietorship.= _See_ =Land.=

=The pen and the sword.=

The pen is mightier than the sword. C. L. of P. Reference lists.

_See also_ Warrior and statesman.

=Penny postage.= _See_ =Postal rates.=

=Pensions.=

Is it the duty of a government to make ampler provision for the literary
writers of the nation? Rowton, p. 227: References.

The pension policy of the Republican party has been wise. Brookings, p.
75: Briefs and references.

=Pensions, Old age.= _See_ =Old age pensions.=

=Periodicals.=

Have we too many periodicals? Gibson, p. 148: Briefs and references.

=Pessimism and optimism.= _See_ =Optimism and pessimism.=

=Peter the Great and Frederick the Great.= _See_ =Frederick the Great
and Peter the Great.=

=Philippine islands.=

Denney, p. 299: Beveridge-Hoar debate on the Philippine question.

The United States should permanently retain the Philippine islands.
Ringwalt, p. 75: Briefs and references.--Robbins, p. 146: Briefs and
references.

The United States should pledge to grant independence to the Philippine
islands on or before 1940. Wisconsin University, no. 462: References.

Would it be advisable for our government to grant absolute independence
to the people of the Philippine islands? Craig, p. 463: Speeches.

=Philosophy and mathematics.=

Does the study of philosophy afford a better mental discipline than the
study of mathematics? Has mathematics a greater utility than philosophy?
Matson, p. 259: Briefs and references.

=Philosophy and poetry.=

Which has done the greater service to truth, philosophy or poetry?
Rowton, p. 214: References.

=Photography and engraving.=

Has photography done more to popularize art than engraving? Is
photography of greater importance than engraving? Matson, p. 368: Briefs
and references.

=Physical force and mind force.= _See_ =Mind force and physical force.=

=Planets.=

Is it probable that the planets or other heavenly bodies are inhabited?
Matson, p. 410: Briefs and references.

=Plato and Aristotle.=

Is Plato a greater philosopher than Aristotle? Is the philosophy of
Plato, on the whole, superior to that of Aristotle? Matson, p. 425:
Briefs and references.

=Plato and Socrates.=

Is philosophy as much indebted to Socrates as to Plato? Should Socrates
be held in as high estimation as Plato? Matson, p. 423: Briefs and
references.

=Plural voting.= _See_ =Ballot.=

=Plurality of worlds.=

Is there a plurality of worlds? Matson, p. 410: Briefs and references.

=Poet and mechanic.=

Which is the more valuable member of society, a great mechanician or a
great poet? Rowton, p. 208: References.

=Poet and statesman.= _See_ =Statesman and poet.=

=Poet, statesman, warrior.= _See_ =Warrior, statesman, poet.=

=Poetry.=

Is the present a poetical age? Rowton, p. 227: References.

=Poetry and philosophy.= _See_ =Philosophy and poetry.=

=Poetry and prose fiction.=

Poetry is a more important element in literature than prose fiction.
Wisconsin University, no. 254: Briefs.

=Poetry and science.=

Does the prevalence of natural science tend to check the poetic spirit?
Matson, p. 363: Briefs and references.

=Police.=

Police; metropolitan and popular control. Askew, 1906, p. 176: Briefs
and references.

=Political parties.=

Are the benefits of party government greater than its evils? Is the
existence of parties necessary in a free government? Is party spirit
productive of more evil than good? Matson, p. 143: Briefs and
references.

Is the existence of parties in a state favorable to the public welfare?
Rowton, p. 220: References.

Party government. Askew, 1906, p. 170: Briefs and references.--Askew,
1911, p. 174: Briefs.

Party government; is it a useful or mischievous system? Gibson, p. 108:
Briefs and references.

_See also_ Independent Labour party.--Labor party.--National
party.--Party allegiance.--Populist party.--Republican party.

=Pooling.=

The interstate commerce act should be so amended as to allow pooling.
Brookings, p. 137: Briefs and references.

The United States should continue its present policy of opposing the
combination of railroads. Speaker, v. 3, p. 93: Briefs and
references.--C. L. of P. Debates: Briefs.

=Poor, Housing of the.= _See_ =Housing problem.=

=Pope.=

Ought Pope to rank in the first class of poets? Rowton, p. 220:
References.

=Pope and Dryden.= _See_ =Dryden and Pope.=

=Pope= (Roman Catholic church). _See_ =Roman Catholic church.= Papacy.

=Population.=

The growth of population is advancing more rapidly than the resources
for its comfortable maintenance permit. C. L. of P. Reference lists.

Limited population. Askew, 1906, p. 176: Briefs and references.--Askew,
1911, p. 183: Briefs.

=Populist party.=

Supporters of the Populist party have substantial grievances which their
movement is likely to relieve. Brookings, p. 16: Briefs and references.

=Postal rates.=

United States should adopt penny postage. Craig, p. 86: Speeches.

=Postal savings banks.=

The federal government should establish a system of postal savings
banks. Thomas, p. 190: Briefs.

It is not good policy for the government of the United States to
establish a system of postal savings. Craig, p. 286: Speeches.

The postal savings bank scheme as advocated by Postmaster General Meyer
should be put into operation in the United States. Pearson, p. 481:
Report of debate, and references.

A system of postal savings banks should be established in the United
States. Ringwalt, p. 151: Briefs and references.--Wisconsin University,
no. 215: References.--C. L. of P. Debates: References.

=Postal telegraph.=

The government should maintain and operate a telegraph system in
connection with the post-office. Ringwalt, p. 174: Briefs and
references.

Should our national government establish postal telegraphy? Matson, p.
178: Briefs and references.

=Poverty and wealth.=

It is better to be born to poverty than to wealth. C. L. of P. Reference
lists.

_See also_ Crime.

=Preaching.=

Should all preaching be extempore? Should the written sermon be
permitted to hold the place it has gained in general preaching? Matson,
p. 501: Briefs and references.

Should political subjects be introduced into the pulpit? Matson, p. 502:
Briefs and references.

Would not pulpit oratory become more effective if the clergy were to
preach extemporaneously? Rowton, p. 231: References.

_See also_ Pulpit and press.

=Premature burial.= _See_ =Burial, Premature.=

=President.= Election.

The president of the United States should be elected by direct popular
vote. Pattee, p. 96: Brief (affirmative).

Presidential electors should be chosen by districts instead of on a
general ticket. Brookings, p. 30: Briefs and references.

Should the present method of electing the president be superseded by
some other method? Should electors for president and vice-president be
elected by the vote of the congressional districts, with two at large
for each state, instead of upon general ticket? Should the president be
elected by a direct popular vote, counted by federal numbers? or should
the president be elected by a majority of the nation's voters, voting
directly? Matson, p. 155: Briefs and references.

Should the president and the Senate of the United States be elected by a
direct vote of the people? Craig, p. 258: Speeches.

=President.= Term of office.

The presidential term should consist of six years without subsequent
re-election, instead of the present term of four years. C. L. of P.
Debates: References.

=Presidential system and parliamentary system.=

For the United States the presidential system is a better form of
government than the parliamentary system. Pearson, p. 367: Report of
debate, and references.--Speaker, v. 4, p. 248: Briefs and references.

=Press, Liberty of.= _See_ =Liberty of the press.=

=Press and pulpit.= _See_ =Pulpit and press.=

=Primaries.=

Nomination of officers by caucuses, or primaries, should be abandoned.
Thomas, p. 164: Briefs.

State, county and city officers should be nominated by conventions
rather than by direct primaries. Speaker, v. 6, p. 82: Briefs and
references.

State, district, county and city officers should be nominated by direct
primaries held under state regulation rather than by delegate
convention. Robbins, p. 158: Briefs and references.

The system of direct primary nominations is preferable to that of
nomination by caucus and convention. Debaters' handbook ser., no. 5:
Briefs, references and selected articles.

=Primitive man.= _See_ =Man.=

=Primitive religion.= _See_ =Religion.=

=Primogeniture.=

Abolition of the law of primogeniture. Askew, 1911, p. 186: Briefs.

=Printing-press and steam-engine.=

Which has done the greater service to mankind, the printing press or the
steam engine? Rowton, p. 153: Speeches and references.

=Prison labor.= _See_ =Convict labor.=

=Prisons.=

Prison reform. Askew, 1906, p. 184: Briefs and references.--Askew, 1911,
p. 186: Briefs.

Should our prisons be reformed? Gibson, p. 150: Briefs and references.

Should the chief purpose of a prison be to punish or to reform? Matson,
p. 162: Briefs and references.

_See also_ Indeterminate sentence.--Punishment.

=Private property at sea.=

Private property at sea; should it be exempt from capture? Askew, 1911,
p. 187: Briefs.

=Probation after death.=

Is the hypothesis of a probation after death rational and probable? Does
human probation terminate at death? Matson, p. 494: Briefs and
references.

=Professionalism in foot-ball and in cricket.=

Askew, 1906, p. 185: Briefs.

=Profit-sharing.=

Askew, 1906, p. 186: Briefs and references.--Askew, 1911, p. 191:
Briefs.

Is profit-sharing the cure for labour-troubles? Gibson, p. 153: Briefs
and references.

=Prohibition.= _See_ =Liquor question.=

=Proportional representation.=

Askew, 1906, p. 186: Briefs and references.--Askew, 1911, p. 192:
Briefs.

Legislative bodies should be chosen by a system of proportional
representation. Ringwalt, p. 59: Briefs and references.

Members of the legislature of the state of Wisconsin should be chosen by
a system of proportional representation. Wisconsin University, no. 225:
References.

State legislatures should be elected by a system of proportional
representation. Thomas, p. 168: Briefs and references.

=Protection and free trade.=

A high protective tariff raises wages. Brookings, p. 99: Briefs and
references.

Imperial preferential tariffs. Askew, 1906, p. 177: Briefs and
references.

Our legislation should be shaped toward the abandonment of the
protective tariff. Pearson, p. 111: Synopsis of debate, and references.

Protection is preferable to free trade as a commercial policy for the
United States. Ringwalt, p. 95: Briefs and references.

A protective tariff is a commercial and economic advantage to the United
States. Thomas, p. 172: Briefs and references.

Shall we go back to protection? Gibson, p. 261: Briefs and references.

Tariff for revenue only is of greater benefit to the people of the
United States than a protective tariff. Craig, p. 160: Speeches.

Tariff reform. Askew, 1911, p. 225: Briefs.

The tariff should be for revenue only. Foster, p. 380: Speech of F.H.
Hurd (affirmative).

The time has now come when the policy of protection should be abandoned
by the United States. Brookings, p. 96: Briefs and references.

Which is the true economic policy for nations, protection or free trade?
Is protection or free trade the wiser policy for the United States?
Should a tariff be levied exclusively for revenue? Does protection
protect? Matson, p. 198: Briefs and references.

_See also_ Steel.--Sugar.--Wool.

=Psychical research.=

Askew, 1906, p. 188: Briefs and references.

=Public trustees.=

Askew, 1911, p. 193: Briefs.

=Publishers and authors.= _See_ =Authors and publishers.=

=Pulpit and press.=

Is the pulpit more influential than the press? Matson, p. 504: Briefs
and references.

Which exerts the greater influence, the pulpit or the press? Gibson, p.
165: Briefs and references.

=Pulpit oratory.= _See_ =Preaching.=

=Punishment.= Should not all punishment be reformatory? Rowton, p. 218:
References.

=Punishment, Capital.= _See_ =Capital punishment.=

=Punishment, Corporal.= _See_ =Corporal punishment.=

=Punishment and reward.=

The fear of punishment has a greater influence on human conduct than the
hope of reward. Craig, p. 77: Speeches.

Has the fear of punishment, or the hope of reward, the greater influence
on human conduct? Rowton, p. 209: References.

=Puritan revolution.=

Was the Puritan revolution justifiable? Matson, p. 61: Briefs and
references.

=Puritans.=

Have the New England Puritans been censured too severely for their
treatment of the Quakers and the so called witches? Matson, p. 78:
Briefs and references.


=Quarantine.=

A national quarantine act is desirable. Brookings, p. 146: Briefs and
references.

=Quorum.=

The principle of a present quorum as laid down in Reed's Rules is sound.
Brookings, p. 85: Briefs and references.

=Railroad pooling.= _See_ =Pooling.=

=Railroad rates.=

The cost of the service rendered by a railroad company should be made
the basis for the regulation of its rates. C. L. of P. Reference lists.

=Railroads.= Government ownership. _See_ =Government ownership.=
Railroads.

=Railroads and navigation.= _See_ =Navigation and railroads.=

=Raphael and Michael Angelo.= _See_ =Michael Angelo and Raphael.=

=Reading and observation.=

From which does the mind gain the more knowledge, reading or
observation? Rowton, p. 213: References.

=Reading and travel.= _See_ =Travel and reading.=

=Reason and imagination.= _See_ =Imagination and reason.=

=Reasoning, Inductive.= _See_ =Inductive reasoning.=

=Recall.=

The recall should be adopted in the United States as a measure of
control by the people. C. L. of P. Debates: References.

The system of recall in use in Los Angeles, California, would be
beneficial to the city of ----. Wisconsin University, no. 262:
References.

=Recall of judges.=

All judges other than federal should be subject to the popular recall.
Speaker, v. 7, p. 301: Briefs and references.

The recall of judges is constitutional and will further the best
interests of the people of the United States. C. L. of P. Debates:
References.

=Reciprocity.=

The policy of concluding reciprocal commercial treaties with other
nations is a wise one. Ringwalt, p. 105: Briefs and references.--C. L.
of P. Reference lists.

=Reciprocity.= United States and Canada.

Commercial reciprocity between the United States and Canada is
desirable. Thomas, p. 178: Briefs.

It would be advantageous to the United States to admit Canadian coal and
lumber free of duty. Speaker, v. 3, p. 95: Briefs and references.--C. L.
of P. Debates: Briefs.

It would be to the advantage of the United States to establish complete
commercial reciprocity between the United States and Canada. Brookings,
p. 102: Briefs and references.

A reciprocal commercial treaty should be concluded between the United
States and Canada. Ringwalt, p. 113: Briefs and references.

_See also_ Retaliation.

=Reciprocity and free trade.=

Fair trade (reciprocity) _v._ free trade. Askew, 1906, p. 90: Briefs and
references.

=Referendum.=

Askew, 1906, p. 192: Briefs and references.--Askew, 1911, p. 199:
Briefs.

For and against the initiative and referendum for New York state.
Speaker, v. 6, p. 431: Speeches and references.

Initiative and referendum. Debaters' handbook ser., no. 11: References
and selected articles.

Initiative and referendum should be made a part of the legislative
system of Ohio. Pearson, p. 67: Synopses of speeches, and references.

Initiative and referendum systems of enacting legislation should be
adopted by Pennsylvania. Speaker, v. 3, p. 281: Briefs and
references.--C. L. of P. Debates: Briefs.

Is the adoption of the initiative and referendum practicable in this
country? Craig, p. 487: Speeches.

Optional initiative and optional referendum should be adopted in state
legislation. Robbins, p. 121: Briefs and references.

Should the referendum be introduced into English politics? Gibson, p.
169: Briefs and references.

The system of direct legislation by the people should be more generally
adopted in the United States. Wisconsin University, no. 224:
References.

=Reformation and renaissance.=

Has the reformation exerted more influence on modern civilization than
the renaissance? Matson, p. 54: Briefs and references.

=Reformer and conservative.=

Is the reformer of greater importance to society than the conservative?
Matson, p. 527: Briefs and references.

=Registration of title to land.=

Askew, 1906, p. 194: Briefs and references.

=Relief, Outdoor.= _See_ =Outdoor relief.=

=Religion.=

Should theological difficulties be freely discussed? Gibson, p. 208:
Briefs and references.

Was monotheism the primitive religion? Was polytheism the primitive
religion? Was fetichism the primitive religion? Matson, p. 470: Briefs
and references.

_See also_ Authority (in religion).

=Religion and art.= _See_ =Art and religion.=

=Religion in the public schools.=

Secular education. Askew, 1911, p. 86: Briefs.

_See also_ Bible in the public schools.

=Religious disability.=

A man's religion should not affect his eligibility for public office. C.
L. of P. Debates: References.

Ought persons to be excluded from the civil offices on account of their
religious opinions? Rowton, p. 221: References.

=Religious education.=

Must religious education be dogmatic? Askew, 1906, p. 80: Briefs and
references.--Askew, 1911, p. 84: Briefs.

=Religious equality.=

Askew, 1906, p. 86: Briefs and references.

=Renaissance and reformation.= _See_ =Reformation and renaissance.=

=Renaissance art and Greek art.= _See_ =Greek art and renaissance art.=

=Rent.=

Abolition of law of distress for rent. Askew, 1906, p. 70: Briefs and
references.--Askew, 1911, p. 75: Briefs.

=Representation, Proportional.= _See_ =Proportional representation.=

=Republican party.=

The Republican party is entitled to popular support. Thomas, p. 170:
Briefs and references.

The Republican party is entitled to the suffrages of intelligent
citizens. Brookings, p. 13: Briefs and references.

=Republicanism and monarchy.= _See_ =Monarchy and republicanism.=

=Research, Scientific.= _See_ =Scientific research.=

=Responsibility and insanity.= _See_ =Insanity and responsibility.=

=Retaliation.=

Gibson, p. 268: Briefs and references.

=Reversionists, Rating of.=

Askew, 1906, p. 195; Askew, 1911, p. 203: Briefs.

=Revivals.=

Are the growth and prosperity of the Christian church best promoted by
revivals of religion? Matson, p. 496: Briefs and references.

=Reward and punishment.= _See_ =Punishment and reward.=

=Richard III.=

Is there reasonable ground for believing that the character of Richard
the Third was not so atrocious as is generally supposed? Rowton, p. 222:
References.

Shakespeare's Richard III is not the true one. C. L. of P. Reference
lists.

=Richard III and Charles II.=

Which was the worse monarch, Richard the Third or Charles the Second?
Rowton, p. 226: References.

=Richelieu.=

Were the results of Richelieu's policy beneficial to France? Matson, p.
66: Briefs and references.

=Right to work bill.=

Askew, 1911, p. 203: Briefs.

=Ritualism, Suppression of.=

Askew, 1906, p. 196: Briefs and references.--Askew, 1911, p. 205:
Briefs.

=Roads.=

Should the United States government build good roads? Craig, p. 503:
Speeches.

=Roman Catholic church.=

Has the Roman Catholic church been, on the whole, a blessing to the
world? Matson, p. 478: Briefs and references.

=Roman Catholic church.= Papacy.

Papal infallibility. Askew, 1906, p. 120: Briefs and references.

Was the papacy during the middle ages a beneficent power in European
affairs? Matson, p. 44: Briefs and references.

=Rome and England.= _See_ =England and Rome.=

=Rome and Greece.= _See_ =Greece and Rome.=

=Rousseau.=

Has Rousseau's influence on modern thought been, on the whole,
beneficial? Matson, p. 356: Briefs and references.

=Rural schools.= _See_ =Country schools.=


=Saloons.= _See_ =Liquor question.=

=Salvation Army.=

Is the Salvation Army calculated by its organization and methods to
promote true Christianity among the lower classes? Is the Salvation Army
entitled to the approval, encouragement and support of the Christian
church? Matson, p. 498: Briefs and references.

=San Domingo treaty.=

The policy embodied in the pending treaty with Santo Domingo is a
desirable departure in American diplomacy. Speaker, v. 2, p. 393: Briefs
and references.

=Satire.=

Is not satire highly useful as a moral agent? Rowton, p. 228:
References.

=Scepticism.= _See_ =Skepticism.=

=Schiller and Goethe.= _See_ =Goethe and Schiller.=

=School curriculum.=

Should the curriculum of the public schools be changed? C. L. of P.
Reference lists.

=Schools.=

Are public or private schools to be preferred? Rowton, p. 225:
References.

Popular control of state-supported schools. Gibson, p. 251: Briefs and
references.

_See also_ Bible in the public schools.--Country schools.--Religion in
the public schools.

=Science and art.= _See_ =Art and science.=

=Science and literature.= _See_ =Literature and science.=

=Science and poetry.= _See_ =Poetry and science.=

=Science and the classics.= _See_ =Classical education.=

=Scientific research.=

State endowment of scientific research. Askew, 1906, p. 197: Briefs.

=Scotland, Church of.=

Disestablishment of the Church of Scotland. Askew, 1906, p. 68; Askew,
1911, p. 73: Briefs.

=Scott,= _Sir_ Walter.

Is the enduring fame of Scott dependent more on his novels than on his
poems? Matson, p. 329: Briefs and references.

=Secession.=

The Southern states were justified in seceding. C. L. of P. Debates:
References.

=Second ballot.= _See_ =Ballot.=

=Secret societies.=

Fraternities should be abolished in the high school. C. L. of P.
Reference lists.

Greek letter fraternities as existing at present in undergraduate
colleges are detrimental to the best interests of the academic world.
Speaker, v. 7, p. 316: Briefs and references.

Secret societies should not be permitted in secondary schools. Thomas,
p. 206: Briefs.

=Sects.=

Does sectarianism spoil Christianity? Gibson, p. 178: Briefs and
references.

Has the division of Protestant Christians into sects been, on the whole,
injurious to the interests of true religion? Matson, p. 483: Briefs and
references.

=Senate rules.=

The rules of the Senate ought to be so amended that general debate may
be limited. Brookings, p. 83: Briefs and references.

=Senators.= Election.

A constitutional amendment should be adopted providing that United
States senators be elected by direct vote of the people. Ringwalt, p.
67: Briefs and references.

A constitutional amendment should be secured by which senators shall be
elected by direct vote of the people. Brookings, p. 32: Briefs and
references.

Election of United States senators. Debaters' handbook ser., no. 6:
References and selected articles.

Popular election of senators. C. L. of P. Debates: References.

Should the president and the Senate of the United States be elected by a
direct vote of the people? Craig, p. 258: Speeches.

United States senators should be elected by direct popular vote.
Pearson, p. 377: Synopses of speeches, and references.

United States senators should be elected by direct vote of the people.
Thomas, p. 162: Briefs and references.

=Servetus and Calvin.= _See_ =Calvin and Servetus.=

=Shakespeare.=

Is it possible that the world will ever again possess a writer as great
as Shakspeare? Rowton, p. 229: References.

_See also_ Hamlet.--Richard III.--Taming of the shrew.

=Shakespeare and Bacon.= _See_ =Bacon-Shakespeare question.=

=Shakespeare and Goethe.=

Was Shakespeare a greater genius than Goethe? Matson, p. 294: Briefs and
references.

=Shakespeare and Milton.=

Which was the greater poet, Shakespeare or Milton? Rowton, p. 136:
Speeches and references.

=Shelley and Byron.= _See_ =Byron and Shelley.=

=Sherman anti-trust law.=

Sherman anti-trust law is hostile to the economic interests of the
United States. Thomas, p. 208: Briefs.

=Ship subsidies.=

The federal government should grant financial aid to ships engaged in
our foreign trade and owned by citizens of the United States. Pearson,
p. 405: Synopses of speeches, and references.

The United States government should extend its system of ship subsidies.
Thomas, p. 178: Briefs.

The United States should establish a more extensive system of shipping
subsidies. Ringwalt, p. 121: Briefs and references.--Wisconsin
University, no. 386: Arguments and references.

The United States should establish a system of shipping subsidies.
Brookings, p. 107: Briefs and references.--Robbins, p. 189: Briefs and
references.

=Ships, Free.= _See_ =Free ships.=

=Silver= (currency).

Any further coinage of silver by the United States is undesirable.
Brookings, p. 90: Briefs and references.

_See also_ Bimetallism.

=Simplified spelling.= _See_ =Spelling reform.=

=Single tax.=

Is the economic system of Henry George sound in its general principles
and conclusions? Does poverty increase with progress? Is the private
ownership of land wrong and productive of evil? Should there be a single
tax levied on land values? Matson, p. 212: Briefs and references.

A single tax on land values is desirable. Ringwalt, p. 202: Briefs and
references.--C. L. of P. Debates: References.

A single tax on land would be better than the present system of
taxation. Brookings, p. 120: Briefs and references.

Taxation of ground values. Askew, 1906, p. 104: Briefs and references.

Taxation of land values. Askew, 1911, p. 140: Briefs.

Taxation of land values only forms the proper basis of taxation for the
purpose of local government in the United States and Canada. Speaker, v.
7, p. 439: Synopsis of speeches, and references.

=Skepticism and progress.=

Has scepticism aided more than it has retarded the progress of truth?
Matson, p. 488: Briefs and references.

=Skepticism and superstition.=

Which is the more baneful, skepticism or superstition? Rowton, p. 230:
References.

=Slavery.=

Is the decline of slavery in Europe attributable to moral or to
economical influences? Rowton, p. 225: References.

Was the overthrow of slavery in the United States effected more by the
influence of moral than of political forces? Matson, p. 85: Briefs and
references.

=Slavery and intemperance.=

Has slavery been a greater curse to mankind than intemperance? Matson,
p. 538: Briefs and references.

=Small holdings.= _See_ =Allotments and small holdings extension.=

=Social equality.=

Askew, 1906, p. 87: Briefs and references.

=Social reform and the church.= _See_ =Church, The.=

=Socialism.=

Askew, 1906, p. 49: Briefs and references.--Askew, 1911, p. 212:
Briefs.--Gibson, p. 180: Briefs and references.

_See also_ Cooeperation.

=Societies, Secret.= _See_ =Secret societies.=

=Society and solitude.= _See_ =Solitude and society.=

=Socrates.=

Ought Socrates to have saved his life by a different defence or by
escaping from prison? Matson, p. 89: Briefs and references.

=Socrates and Plato.= _See_ =Plato and Socrates.=

=Solitude and society.=

Is solitude more favorable to mental and moral improvement than society?
Matson, p. 534: Briefs and references.

=Sophists.=

Have the Greek sophists been unduly depreciated? Are the opinions and
practices of the Greek sophists incapable of vindication? Matson, p.
421: Briefs and references.

=South Africa.=

Should natives be compelled to work? Askew, 1906, p. 199: Briefs and
references.

=Southern states.= _See_ =Secession.=

=Spelling reform.=

English spelling reform. Askew, 1906, p. 201: Briefs and references.

Is the radical change of English orthography to phonetic spelling
desirable or practicable? Matson, p. 264: Briefs and references.

The simplified forms in the "Three hundred simplified spelling list"
printed by the Simplified Spelling Board should be adopted by the people
of the United States. Wisconsin University, no. 280: References.--C. L.
of P. Debates: References.

=Spendthrift and miser.= _See_ =Miser and spendthrift.=

=Spenser and Chaucer.= _See_ =Chaucer and Spenser.=

=Sport.=

Askew, 1906, p. 202: Briefs and references.--Askew, 1911, p. 220:
Briefs.

Are we too fond of sport? Gibson, p. 188: Briefs and references.

Is sporting justifiable? Rowton, p. 212: References.

_See also_ Athletics.--Foot-ball.

=Spurgeon and Beecher.= _See_ =Beecher and Spurgeon.=

=Stage.= _See_ =Theatre.=

=State and church.= _See_ =Church and state.=

=State and individual.=

The less the state meddles with the individual the better. Gibson, p.
175: Briefs and references.

=State intervention and laissez faire.= _See_ =Laissez faire and state
intervention.=

=State ownership.= _See_ =Government ownership.=

=State rights.= _See_ =Centralization and state rights.=

=Statesman and poet.=

Which is the greater civilizer, the statesman or the poet? Rowton, p.
215: References.

=Statesman, warrior, poet.= _See_ =Warrior, statesman, poet.=

=Steam-engine and printing-press.= _See_ =Printing-press and
steam-engine.=

=Steel.=

Present tariff on trust-made steel articles should be abolished.
Wisconsin University, no. 279: References.

=Stoicism.=

Has the influence of stoicism been on the whole beneficial? Did stoicism
as modified by its Roman teachers show a real approximation to
Christianity? Matson, p. 431: Briefs and references.

=Street music, Legislation against.=

Askew, 1906, p. 202: Briefs.

=Street railways.= Municipal ownership. _See_ =Municipal ownership.=

=Strikes.=

Are strikes right? Are strikes a benefit, on the whole, to the laboring
class? Matson, p. 225: Briefs and references.

_See also_ Chicago strike injunctions.

=Student government.=

Is a system of self-government by students in colleges desirable?
Matson, p. 250: Briefs and references.--C. L. of P. Reference lists.

=Success.=

The average young man of to-day has greater opportunities to make life a
success financially than his forefathers. Craig, p. 199: Speeches.

Is success in life attained more by will than by good fortune? Matson,
p. 535: Briefs and references.

=Suffrage.=

Adult suffrage. Askew, 1911, p. 2: Briefs.

Disfranchisement of illiterate voters. Askew, 1906, p. 222: Briefs.

If it were possible, a reasonable property qualification for the
exercise of the municipal franchise in the United States would be
desirable. Brookings, p. 11: Briefs and references.

If it were possible, would a property qualification for the exercise of
the municipal franchise be desirable? Foster, p. 220: Brief and speech
(negative).

Is universal manhood suffrage true in theory and best in practice for a
representative government? Should an educational qualification be made a
condition of enjoying the right of suffrage? Should a property
qualification be made a condition of enjoying the right of suffrage? Is
suffrage a natural right or a political privilege? Matson, p. 145:
Briefs and references.

Manhood suffrage. Askew, 1906, p. 150: Briefs.--Gibson, p. 158: Briefs.

Suffrage in the United States should be restricted by an educational
qualification. Thomas, p. 200: Briefs.

Suffrage should be restricted by an educational qualification. Ringwalt,
p. 25: Briefs and references.

Tennessee should adopt an amendment to her constitution requiring an
educational qualification for suffrage. Pearson, p. 243: Report of
speeches, and references.

There should be a property qualification for the franchise in cities.
Thomas, p. 204: Briefs.

=Suffrage, Negro.= _See_ =Negro suffrage.=

=Suffrage, Woman.= _See_ =Woman suffrage.=

=Sugar.=

Is it good policy for the government of the United States to place a
tariff on sugar? Gibson, p. 266: Speeches.

Sugar should be admitted free of duty. Brookings, p. 110: Briefs and
references.

A system of sugar bounties is contrary to good public policy. Brookings,
p. 112: Briefs and references.

_See also_ Brussels sugar convention.

=Suicide.=

Is suicide ever justifiable? Gibson, p. 197: Briefs and references.

Is suicide immoral? Askew, 1906, p. 204: Briefs and references.--Askew,
1911, p. 223: Briefs.

Should there be legal enactments for the prevention of suicide? Matson,
p. 164: Briefs and references.

=Sunday.=

Is our Sunday being spoiled? Gibson, p. 200: Briefs and references.

=Sunday closing of public houses.= _See_ =Liquor question.=

=Sunday opening of museums.=

Askew, 1906, p. 206: Briefs and references.

=Sunday-schools.=

Are the results of Sunday schools satisfactory? Gibson, p. 203: Briefs
and references.

=Superstition and skepticism.= _See_ =Skepticism and superstition.=

=The sword and the pen.= _See_ =The pen and the sword.=


=Tacitus and Thucydides.= _See_ =Thucydides and Tacitus.=

=Tainted money.=

Money acquired by doubtful means should not be used for philanthropic
purposes. C. L. of P. Reference lists.

=Taming of the shrew.=

Did Petruchio adopt the best method of taming a shrew? C. L. of P.
Reference lists.

=Tariff.= _See_ =Protection and free trade.=

=Taste= (aesthetics).

Is there any standard of taste? Rowton, p. 219: References.

=Taxation.=

Abolition of indirect taxation. Askew, 1906, p. 206: Briefs and
references.--Askew, 1911, p. 241: Briefs.

Our present system of taxation is the best that can be devised. Craig,
p. 250: Speeches.

Rates; their division between owner and occupier. Askew, 1906, p. 191:
Briefs and references.--Askew, 1911, p. 198: Briefs.

Special assessment of land and buildings values. Askew, 1906, p. 201:
Briefs and references.--Askew, 1911, p. 17: Briefs.

Undeveloped land tax. Askew, 1911, p. 245: Briefs.

Voluntary taxation. Askew, 1906, p. 207: Briefs and references.

_See also_ Bachelors.--Church property. Taxation.--Income
tax.--Inheritance tax.--Single tax.

=Telegraph.= Government ownership. _See_ =Government ownership.=
Telegraphs, telephones.

=Telegraph and telephone.=

Is the telegraph more useful than the telephone? Matson, p. 415: Briefs
and references.

=Telephone.= Government ownership. _See_ =Government ownership.=
Telegraphs, telephones.

=Telephone and telegraph.= _See_ =Telegraph and telephone.=

=Telescope and microscope.=

Are the revelations of the telescope more wonderful than the revelations
of the microscope? Matson, p. 414: Briefs and references.

=Temperance.= _See_ =Drink and opium.--Liquor question.=

=Tennyson and Browning.= _See_ =Browning and Tennyson.=

=Territorial expansion= (United States). _See_ =Imperialism= (United
States).

=Text-books.=

The city should furnish free text-books to high-school students. C. L.
of P. Reference lists.

The free text-book system should be adopted. Wisconsin University, no.
387: Arguments and references.

=Thackeray and Dickens.=

Is Thackeray a greater novelist than Dickens? Matson, p. 331: Briefs and
references.--C. L. of P. Reference lists.

=Theatre.=

Has the stage a moral tendency? Rowton, p. 85: Speeches and references.

Is the theatre in its character and influence, as shown in the past and
the present, more evil than good? Can the theatre be reformed? Should
Christians never attend the theatre? Matson, p. 464: Briefs and
references.

Ought Christians to attend the theatre? Gibson, p. 206: Briefs and
references.

_See also_ Censorship of the stage.--Drama.

=Theatre, National.=

Askew, 1906, p. 207: Briefs and references.--Askew, 1911, p. 242:
Briefs.

=Thomas a Kempis and Bunyan.= _See_ =Bunyan and Thomas a Kempis.=

=Thought and language.=

Is thought possible without language? Is language identical with
thought? Matson, p. 447: Briefs and references.

=Thucydides and Tacitus.=

Was Thucydides a greater historian than Tacitus? Matson, p. 285: Briefs
and references.

=Titles of honor.=

Do titles operate beneficially in a community? Rowton, p. 231:
References.

=Total abstinence.= _See_ =Liquor question.=

=Trade unions.=

Are trade unions a benefit to the laboring class? Matson, p. 223: Briefs
and references.

Are trades unions, on the whole, mischievous or beneficial? Gibson, p.
211: Briefs and references.

Labor organizations promote the best interests of workingmen. Brookings,
p. 151: Briefs and references.--C. L. of P. Debates: References.

Labor unions. C. L. of P. Reference lists.

Labor unions are advantageous to workingmen. Thomas, p. 208: Briefs.

Labor unions are beneficial to this country. C. L. of P. Reference
lists.

Labor unions as they now exist are, on the whole, beneficial to society
in the United States. Pearson, p. 201: Report of debate, and references.

Reform of trade union law. Askew, 1906, p. 212: Briefs and references.

Trade unionism. Askew, 1906, p. 210: Briefs and references.--Askew,
1911, p. 244: Briefs.

_See also_ Open shop and closed shop.--Osborne judgment.

=Travel and reading.=

Which is the better means of culture, travel or reading? C. L. of P.
Reference lists.

=Trial by jury.= _See_ =Jury system.=

=Trusts.=

All trusts and combinations intended to monopolize industries should be
prohibited. Brookings, p. 134: Briefs and references.

The anti-trust laws should be amended to permit fair and reasonable
combinations and monopolies. C. L. of P. Reference lists.

Are monopolies, on the whole, more a good than an evil to the public? Is
the present general tendency to minimize competition by the formation of
monopolies an evil? Matson, p. 215: Briefs and references.

Are private monopolies public evils? Gibson, p. 134: Briefs and
references.

Are the so called trusts, in their working and influence, a benefit to
the public? Do trusts threaten our institutions so as to warrant adverse
legislation? Are trusts, in their tendency, subversive of industrial
liberty? Matson, p. 217: Briefs and references.

The formation of trusts should be opposed by legislation. Alden, p. 257:
Brief (negative).

Further federal legislation in respect to trusts and industrial
combinations is desirable. Ringwalt, p. 131: Briefs and references.

Is a well-managed trust beneficial to the general public? Craig, p. 538:
Speeches.

Present tariff on trust-made steel articles should be abolished.
Wisconsin University, no. 279: References.

Trusts and monopolies are a positive injury to the people financially.
Craig, p. 327: Outlines.

_See also_ Federal charter and federal control.--Sherman anti-trust law.

=Turkey.=

Would the subversion of the Turkish empire be a gain to its subjects and
to Europe as a whole? Matson, p. 185: Briefs and references.


=Unemployed.=

Cities should employ labor when the private demand for it is largely
inadequate. Thomas, p. 182: Briefs.

General Booth's employment system as outlined in "Darkest England"
should be adopted in this country. Brookings, p. 160: Briefs and
references.

In times of depression municipalities should give work to the
unemployed. Brookings, p. 168: Briefs and references.

State intervention for the unemployed. Askew, 1906, p. 213: Briefs and
references.--Askew, 1911, p. 246: Briefs.

_See also_ Farm colonies.

=Unions.= _See_ =Trade unions.=

=Unitarianism.=

Has the influence of American Unitarianism been favorable to
Christianity? Matson, p. 484: Briefs and references.

=United States.=

Are the conservative forces in our nation sufficient to insure its
perpetuity? Matson, p. 153: Briefs and references.

Is it probable that America will hereafter become the greatest of
nations? Rowton, p. 226: References.

=United States.= Army. Increase. _See_ =Army= (United States). Increase.

=United States.= Imperialism. _See_ =Imperialism= (United States).

=United States.= Navy. Increase. _See_ =Navy= (United States). Increase.

=United States.= Territorial expansion. _See_ =Imperialism= (United
States).

=United States government and English government.= _See_ =English
government and United States government.=

=Universities.= _See_ =Colleges and universities.=

=University, National.= _See_ =National university.=

=University extension.=

Askew, 1906, p. 215: Briefs and references.

=Usury.=

Should usury laws be repealed? Matson, p. 231: Briefs and references.

=Utility.=

Is the principle of utility a safe moral guide? Rowton, p. 216:
References.


=Vaccination.=

Askew, 1906, p. 216: Briefs and references.--Askew, 1911, p. 250:
Briefs.

Should vaccination be enforced by law? Gibson, p. 218: Briefs and
references.

=Vegetarianism.=

Askew, 1906, p. 219: Briefs and references.--Askew, 1911, p. 252:
Briefs.

=Venezuela.=

Resolved that we endorse President Cleveland's message relating to the
Venezuelan boundary. Alden, p. 236: Speech (affirmative).

=Vice and virtue.=

Does not virtue necessarily produce happiness and does not vice
necessarily produce misery in this life? Rowton, p. 213: References.

=Victorian literature and Elizabethan literature.= _See_ =Elizabethan
literature and Victorian literature.=

=Virgil.= _See_ =Iliad and AEneid.=

=Virtue and vice.= _See_ =Vice and virtue.=

=Vivisection.=

Askew, 1906, p. 220: Briefs and references.--Askew, 1911, p. 254:
Briefs.

Is the practice of vivisection for scientific purposes justifiable? Is
vivisection cruel and unnecessary? Matson, p. 409: Briefs and
references.

Should we prohibit vivisection? Gibson, p. 222: Briefs and references.

=Voltaire.=

Has the influence of Voltaire, through his writings, been on the whole
beneficent? Matson, p. 354: Briefs and references.

=Voting.= _See_ =Ballot.=


=Wages.=

Fair wages clause in public contracts. Askew, 1906, p. 92: Briefs and
references.--Askew, 1911, p. 94: Briefs.

For work the same in kind, quantity and quality, should woman receive
the same wages as man? Should woman receive the same wages as man for
work or service of equal value? Matson, p. 232: Briefs and references.

Wages boards. Askew, 1911, p. 257: Briefs.

=Wagner.=

Has Wagner made an important improvement in musical theory and practice?
Is Wagner's musical drama likely to be the music of the future? Should
Wagner be ranked with the great masters in music? Matson, p. 374: Briefs
and references.

=Wales, Church of.=

Disestablishment of the church in Wales. Askew, 1906, p. 69: Briefs and
references.--Askew, 1911, p. 74: Briefs.

=War.=

Have the necessary evils of war, in the history of the world, outweighed
the good results it has produced? Matson, p. 536: Briefs and references.

Is war in any case justifiable? Rowton, p. 212: References.

Ought Christians to be soldiers? Gibson, p. 226: Briefs and references.

_See also_ Arbitration, International.--Armaments.--Disarmament.

=Warrior and statesman.=

The warrior does more good for his country than the statesman. C. L. of
P. Reference lists.

_See also_ The pen and the sword.

=Warrior, statesman, poet.=

Which is of the greatest benefit to his country, the warrior, the
statesman or the poet? Rowton, p. 17: Speeches and references.

=Washington and Alfred the Great.= _See_ =Alfred the Great and
Washington.=

=Washington and Franklin.= _See_ =Franklin and Washington.=

=Washington and Lincoln.= _See_ =Lincoln and Washington.=

=Water-power.=

Congress should provide for the regulation of all water power,
constitutionality conceded. C. L. of P. Debates: References.

=Waterloo and Marathon.= _See_ =Marathon and Waterloo.=

=Watt, Howard, Napoleon.= _See_ =Napoleon, Howard, Watt.=

=Wealth.=

Can a man get rich honestly? Gibson, p. 172: Briefs and references.

The state should limit by law the amount of wealth to be accumulated by
any one person. C. L. of P. Reference lists.

_See also_ Luxury.

=Wealth and poverty.= _See_ =Poverty and wealth.=

=Webster and Clay.=

Were the public services of Webster more valuable to the country than
the public services of Clay? Matson, p. 124: Briefs and references.

=Wesley and Calvin.= _See_ =Calvin and Wesley.=

=White races and dark races.= _See_ =Dark races and white races.=

=Wilberforce and Howard.= _See_ =Howard and Wilberforce.=

=Will, Freedom of.= _See_ =Free will.=

=Williams, Roger.=

Was the banishment of Roger Williams justifiable? Matson, p. 80: Briefs
and references.

=Wine in the communion service.=

Should unfermented wine be used at the communion table? Gibson, p. 231:
Briefs and references.

=Witches.=

Have the New England Puritans been censured too severely for their
treatment of the Quakers and the so called witches? Matson, p. 78:
Briefs and references.

=Woman suffrage.=

Debaters' handbook ser., no. 13: References and selected articles.

In the United States the right of suffrage should be granted to women.
Robbins, p. 196: Briefs and references.--Thomas, p. 190: Briefs.

Should the suffrage be extended to woman? Matson, p. 148: Briefs and
references.

Should women have the parliamentary franchise? Gibson, p. 238: Briefs
and references.

Suffrage should be given to women. Ringwalt, p. 8: Briefs and
references.--Wisconsin University, no. 214: References.--C. L. of P.
Debates: References.

Woman suffrage is desirable. Brookings, p. 8: Briefs and references.

Woman suffrage should be adopted by an amendment to the constitution of
the United States. Craig, p. 127: Speeches.

Women suffrage. Askew, 1906, p. 227: Briefs and references.--Askew,
1911, p. 262: Briefs.

=Woman's intellect and man's.=

Are the mental capacities of the sexes equal? Rowton, p. 34: Speeches
and references.

Is the intellect of woman essentially inferior to that of man? Matson,
p. 543: Briefs and references.

Which exercises the greater influence on the civilization and happiness
of the human race, the male or the female mind? Rowton, p. 221:
References.

=Woman's wages.= _See_ =Wages.=

=Women.=

American men of the present day are lacking in chivalrous respect for
women. C. L. of P. Reference lists.

=Women.= Education.

Does the education of girls tend toward a better home life? C. L. of P.
Reference lists.

Higher education of women. Askew, 1906, p. 224: Briefs and
references.--Askew, 1911, p. 260: Briefs.

Women and university degrees. Askew, 1906, p. 223: Briefs and
references.--Askew, 1911, p. 259: Briefs.

_See also_ Medical education for women.

=Women.= Employment.

Employment of women. Debaters' handbook ser., no. 3: References and
selected articles.

Married women as workers. Askew, 1906, p. 225: Briefs and
references.--Askew, 1911, p. 261: Briefs.

Ought we to let women work for their own living? Gibson, p. 234: Briefs
and references.

=Wool.=

A system of duties on wool and woollens is undesirable. Brookings, p.
115: Briefs and references.

=Wordsworth and Byron.=

Which was the greater poet, Wordsworth or Byron? Rowton, p. 230:
References.

=Wordsworth and Coleridge.=

Was Wordsworth a greater poet than Coleridge? Matson, p. 309: Briefs and
references.

=Workingmen and the church.= _See_ =Church, The.=

=World growing better?= _See_ =Optimism and pessimism.=


=Yellow peril.=

The rapid awakening of the Mongolian race is perilous to the Caucasian
supremacy of the world. Robbins, p. 204: Briefs and references.




=Publications of the Library Now in Print=

_In the following list wherever two prices are given the first is that
for which the publication is sold at the Library only. All prices are
strictly net except for individual publications ordered in lots of
twenty or more. Remittances should be made payable to the order of
Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh._

_Publications marked Sec. may be had free at the Library. Publications
marked * either have not been issued separately or are out of print as
separates. Copies of the Monthly Bulletin in which they appeared will be
sent postpaid for 5 cents each._


=Classified Catalogue of the Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh.=

FIRST SERIES, 1895-1902. 1907. 3 vol. 3,890 pp. $12.00.

SECOND SERIES, 1902-1906. 1908. 2 vol. 2,020 pp. $5.00.

Bound in English buckram with gilt tops. Include full author and subject
indexes.

The two series are arranged on the same general plan and comprise in
five volumes a complete catalogue of all the books in the Library from
1895 to 1906 inclusive.

_The same_ [in pamphlet form].

The parts of this edition were issued at low prices primarily for use in
the city which supports the Library. Little demand was expected from any
other source. Each part contains an author index; all except parts 1-3
of the first series have individual title-pages, and each except part 1
of the first series has both a synopsis of classification and a
prefatory explanation.

FIRST SERIES, 1895-1902. 10 parts. 1903-07.

  Part 1. General Works. 1907. 67 pp. 10 cents, postpaid.
  Part 2. Philosophy and Religion. 1903. 223 pp. Out of print.
  Part 3. Sociology and Philology. 1904. 340 pp. 15 cents; postpaid, 25
  cents.
  Part 4. Natural Science and Useful Arts. 1904. 598 pp. 35 cents;
  postpaid, 50 cents.
  Part 5. Fine Arts. 1905. 351 pp. 15 cents; postpaid, 25 cents.
  Part 6. Literature. 1905. 308 pp. 15 cents; postpaid, 25 cents.
  Part 7. Fiction. 1906. 446 pp. 25 cents; postpaid, 40 cents.
  Part 8. History and Travel. 1907. 691 pp. 50 cents; postpaid, 65 cents.
  Part 9. Biography. 1907. 381 pp. 20 cents; postpaid, 30 cents.
  Part 10. Indexes, Title-pages, Contents, Preface and Synopsis of
  Classification. 1907. 842 pp. $1.00; postpaid, $1.20.

SECOND SERIES, 1902-1906. 5 parts. 1907-08.

  Part 1. General Works, Philosophy, Religion, Sociology and Philology.
  1907. 425 pp. Out of print.
  Part 2. Natural Science, Useful Arts and Fine Arts. 1907. 477 pp. 45
  cents; postpaid, 60 cents.
  Part 3. Literature, English Fiction and Fiction in Foreign Languages.
  1908. 342 pp. 40 cents; postpaid, 50 cents.
  Part 4. History and Travel, Collected Biography and Individual Biography.
  1908. 465 pp. 45 cents; postpaid, 60 cents.
  Part 5. Indexes, Title-pages, Contents, Preface and Synopsis of
  Classification. 1908. 460 pp. 80 cents; postpaid, 95 cents.

  THIRD SERIES, 1907-1911. Part 1. 1912.
  Part 1. General Works, Philosophy, Religion. 372 pp. 40 cents; postpaid,
  50 cents.

Sec.=Monthly Bulletin.= (Not published in August and September.) 25 cents a
year, postpaid.

Sec.=Annual Reports= 1st-16th. 1897-1912. Sent free upon request. Except
the 3d and 6th, which are out of print.

Sec.=Circular of Information Concerning the Training School for Childrens
Librarians= 5th-12th Year. 1905-1912. Sent free upon request. No
circular was issued for the 8th year, 1908-1909.

Sec.=Periodicals and Other Serials Currently Received by the Carnegie
Library of Pittsburgh.= Fifth edition. 1908. 33 pp. 5 cents, postpaid.

=Debate Index.= Second edition. 1912. 84 pp. 15 cents; postpaid, 20
cents.

Sec.=Books in the Library of the American Philatelic Society.= 1910. 20 pp.
5 cents, postpaid.

Sec.=Lives and Letters=; a Selected and Annotated List. 1910. 36 pp. 10
cents, postpaid.

Reprinted from the _Monthly Bulletin,_ March 1910.

Sec.=Gift of the German Emperor= [List of Books, Maps and Photographs].
1908. 17 pp.

Reprinted from the _Monthly Bulletin,_ April 1908.

Sec.*=Letters of General Forbes=; Reprint of 35 Letters Relating to the
Expedition against Fort Duquesne. 63 pp. 20 cents, postpaid.

In the _Monthly Bulletin,_ February, March, April, May, 1909.

Sec.=Index to Subject Catalogue of the Technology Department.= 1909. 50 pp.
10 cents, postpaid.

=Index to Proceedings of the Engineers' Society of Western
Pennsylvania,= Volumes 1 to 20, 1880-1904. Compiled by Harrison W.
Craver. 1906. 144 pp. $1.00, postpaid.

=Catalogue of Books in the Childrens Department of the Carnegie Library
of Pittsburgh.= 1909. 604 pp. 75 cents; postpaid, $1.00.

=Catalogue of Books, Annotated and Arranged, and Provided by the
Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh for the Use of the First Eight Grades in
the Pittsburgh Schools.= 1907. 331 pp. 35 cents; postpaid, 50 cents.

An enlargement and thorough revision of the lists prepared for the first
eight school grades, originally published in the "Graded and Annotated
Catalogue of Books ... for the Use of the City Schools," now out of
print. The other lists contained in that catalogue are undergoing
revision.

=Annotated Catalogue of Books Used in the Home Libraries and Reading
Clubs.= 1905. 110 pp. 20 cents; postpaid, 25 cents.

Sec.*=Gifts for Children's Book Shelves=; a List for Mothers. 1908. 26 pp.
5 cents, postpaid.

In the _Monthly Bulletin,_ November 1908.

=Reference Lists=

_These lists have been compiled to render easily accessible the material
in this Library on the various subjects._

Sec.=Housing.= 1912. 45 pp. 5 cents, postpaid.

Reprinted from the _Monthly Bulletin,_ December 1911.

Sec.*=Expeditions of Colonel Bouquet to the Ohio Country, 1763 and 1764.=
11 pp. 5 cents, postpaid.

In the _Monthly Bulletin,_ December 1909.

Sec.=Expedition of General Forbes against Fort Duquesne.= 1908. 20 pp. 5
cents, postpaid.

Reprinted from the _Monthly Bulletin,_ June 1908.

Sec.*=Washington's Visits to Pittsburgh and the Ohio Country.= 15 pp. 5
cents, postpaid.

In the _Monthly Bulletin,_ February 1908.

Sec.*=Braddock's Expedition.= 11 pp. 5 cents, postpaid.

In the _Monthly Bulletin,_ November 1906.

Sec.*=The Whiskey Insurrection.= 9 pp. 5 cents, postpaid.

In the _Monthly Bulletin,_ July 1906.

=Contemporary Biography.= 1903. 171 pp. 20 cents; postpaid, 25 cents.

References on 350 contemporary writers, painters, sculptors, musicians,
actors, clergymen, scientists, statesmen, sovereigns, social reformers,
etc.

Sec.=Famous Royal Women=; a Reading List for Girls. 1908. 11 pp. 5 cents,
postpaid.

Reprinted from the _Monthly Bulletin,_ January 1908.

Sec.=Short Plays and Monologues=; a List for Amateurs. 1908. 6 pp. 5 cents,
postpaid.

Reprinted from the _Monthly Bulletin,_ January 1908.

Sec.=Brick Manufacture and Bricklaying.= 1912. 33 pp. 5 cents, postpaid.

Reprinted from the _Monthly Bulletin,_ January 1912.

Sec.=Sewage Disposal and Treatment.= 1910. 96 pp. 15 cents, postpaid.

Reprinted from the _Monthly Bulletin,_ November 1910.

Sec.=Industrial Accidents=; a Select List of Books. 1910. 12 pp. 5 cents,
postpaid.

Sec.=One Hundred Recent Books on Agriculture.= 1910. 19 pp. 5 cents,
postpaid.

Sec.=List of Technical Indexes and Bibliographies Appearing Serially.=
1910. 17 pp. 5 cents, postpaid.

Reprinted from the _Monthly Bulletin,_ June 1910.

Sec.=Electric Heating and Cooking.= 1910. 16 pp. 5 cents, postpaid.

Reprinted from the _Monthly Bulletin,_ January 1910.

Sec.=Metal Corrosion and Protection.= Second edition, revised and enlarged.
1909. 64 pp. 10 cents, postpaid.

Reprinted from the _Monthly Bulletin,_ July 1909.

Sec.=Refuse and Garbage Disposal.= 1909. 39 pp. 5 cents, postpaid.

Reprinted from the _Monthly Bulletin,_ January 1909.

Sec.=Mica.= 1908. 18 pp. 5 cents, postpaid.

Reprinted from the _Monthly Bulletin,_ October 1908.

Sec.*=Floods and Flood Protection.= 1908. 48 pp. 5 cents, postpaid.

In the _Monthly Bulletin,_ July 1908.

Sec.=Floods and Flood Protection (Supplement).= 1911. 19 pp. 5 cents,
postpaid.

Reprinted from the _Monthly Bulletin,_ October 1911.

Sec.=Sodium Nitrate Industry of Chile.= 1908. 12 pp. 5 cents, postpaid.

Reprinted from the _Monthly Bulletin,_ March 1908.

Enlarged from the brief list which appeared under the same title in the
_Monthly Bulletin,_ November 1903.

Sec.*=Electric Driving in Rolling-mills and Foundries.= 11 pp. 5 cents,
postpaid.

In the _Monthly Bulletin,_ November 1907.

Sec.*=Smoke Prevention.= 18 pp. 5 cents, postpaid.

In the _Monthly Bulletin,_ May 1907.

Sec.*=Steam Turbines.= 21 pp. 5 cents, postpaid.

In the _Monthly Bulletin,_ November 1904.

Sec.*=Water Softening.= 8 pp. 5 cents, postpaid.

In the _Monthly Bulletin,_ June 1904.

Sec.=Patriots=; a Reading List for Boys and Girls. 1912. 17 pp. 5 cents,
postpaid.

Reprinted from the _Monthly Bulletin,_ July 1912.

Sec."=Foreign Lands Where Wonders Are;=" a Reading List for Children and
Young People. 1911. 14 pp. 5 cents, postpaid.

Reprinted from the _Monthly Bulletin,_ November 1911.

=Pennsylvania=; a Reading List for the Use of Schools, with Special
Reference to Indian Warfare and the Local History of Pittsburgh. 1911.
83 pp. 20 cents; postpaid, 25 cents.

Sec.=Story Hour Courses for Children from Greek Myths, The Iliad and The
Odyssey.= 1906. 32 pp. 5 cents, postpaid.

Sec.*=List of Good Games,= with References to Books Telling How to Play
Them. 12 pp. 5 cents, postpaid.

In the _Monthly Bulletin,_ April 1906.


Transcriber's notes:

Sec. Replaces dagger symbol in text version.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh Debate
Index, by Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CARNEGIE LIBRARY OF ***

***** This file should be named 18347.txt or 18347.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/8/3/4/18347/

Produced by David Starner, Christine D. and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

*** END: FULL LICENSE ***

