The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Great Round World and What Is Going On
In It, Vol. 2, No. 24, June 16, 1898, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Great Round World and What Is Going On In It, Vol. 2, No. 24, June 16, 1898
       A Weekly Magazine for Boys and Girls

Author: Various

Editor: Julia Truitt Bishop

Release Date: July 3, 2006 [EBook #18746]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GREAT ROUND WORLD ***




Produced by Emmy, Juliet Sutherland and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net








  _FIVE CENTS._

  THE GREAT ROUND WORLD
  AND WHAT IS GOING ON IN IT

    Vol. 2--No. 24,              June 16, 1898.           Whole No. 84.
  [Entered at Post Office, New York City, as second class matter]

  [Illustration: A
  WEEKLY
  NEWSPAPER
  FOR
  BOYS AND
  GIRLS]

  Subscription
  $1.50 per year
    .75 6 months


      THE GREAT ROUND WORLD PUBL. CO.
      NO. 3 AND 5 WEST 18TH ST. NEW YORK CITY

  =Copyright, 1898, by THE GREAT ROUND WORLD Publishing Company.=

       *       *       *       *       *

The Great Round World

Published Every Thursday Throughout the Year

=Single Numbers, 5c. Each=

       *       *       *       *       *

SUBSCRIPTION RATES:

          One year, - 52 numbers   $1.50
          Six months, 26  "          .75
          Foreign subscriptions     2.25

Numbers are bound up into four parts each year. Charge for binding, 35
cents a part.

Remittances should be by registered letter, or by check, express-order,
or postal-order, payable to THE GREAT ROUND WORLD PUBLISHING CO.

No receipts are sent for remittances unless requested. The number on the
address label represents the number of the paper with which subscription
will expire.

Ten days' notice should be given of any change of address.

          ADVERTISING RATES ON APPLICATION

          =ADDRESS:=

          Great Round World Publishing Co.
          =3 and 5 West 18th Street, New York City=

       *       *       *       *       *

At any of the following stores copies and bound volumes of THE GREAT
ROUND WORLD will be found on sale, and subscribers may exchange their
numbers for bound volumes:

          JOHN WANAMAKER, Philadelphia, Pa.
          W. B. CLARKE & CO., Boston, Mass.
          J. & R. SIMMS, 123 22d St., Chicago, Ill.
          WOODWARD & LOTHROP, Washington, D. C.
          PETER PAUL BOOK CO., Buffalo, N. Y.
          BURROWS BROS. CO., Cleveland, Ohio.
          PRESTON & ROUNDS CO., Providence, R. I.
          H. H. CARTER & CO., Boston, Mass.
          WHITAKER & RAY CO., San Francisco, Cal.
          THE ROBERT CLARKE CO., Cincinnati, O.
          THE MARTIN & HOYT CO., Atlanta, Ga.
          ST. PAUL BOOK & STATIONERY CO., St. Paul, Minn.

       *       *       *       *       *

_=TALK IS CHEAP=_

=DON'T PAY $100 FOR A=

          =TALKING
          MACHINE=

when you can buy one which for amusement will make the children happy
and cause the old folks to smile. Complicated machines get out of order.

=$3.50=

[Illustration]

=The United States Talking Machine=

is simple, durable; no parts to break or get out of order. Any child can
operate it. It is neatly encased in a hard wood box, well finished, size
8-1/2x11-1/2x3-1/2 inches, with brass hinges and catch; has hearing
tubes for two persons, one (Berliner's Gramophone) record and
twenty-five needle points. Price, complete with one Record, (express
charges prepaid) =$3.50=. Weight 4 lbs. Remit by Bank Draft, Express, or
Post Office money order. =Agents wanted.=

For terms and particulars address

            =UNITED STATES TALKING MACHINE CO.=
          =(DEPT. B) 57 E. 9th ST., NEW YORK CITY=

       *       *       *       *       *

          =Mention...=

          Great
          Round
          World

          =When
          Writing
          Advertisers...=


[Illustration: DO YOU BIKE AT NIGHT?]

       *       *       *       *       *

          _Send for Our...._
                  =Premium Catalogue=
                            _Sent for 2-cent Stamp_

       *       *       *       *       *

WILLIAM BEVERLEY HARISON, 3 and 5 West 18th Street, N. Y.

       *       *       *       *       *

"ONE PIECE"

Adjustable Book Covers.


These covers fit perfectly all sizes of books. They are all ready for
use--properly gummed--and do not have to be cut. They are made of a
special paper, manufactured exclusively for these covers, which is
admitted to be the best for wear, and also for cleanliness, as it is
glazed and cannot readily be soiled. They are not easily torn, for when
adjusted to a book all exposed edges are of double thickness.

=SIZES.=

=No. A1--Per dozen, *20 cents. Per 100, $1.50. Per 1,000, $12.50.=

This size fits the smallest book, and also small 12mos.


=No. 1--Same price.=

Especially adapted to school and library books. It will fit 16mo. to
small 8 vo. sizes, and is suitable for 90 per cent. of the school books
in use.


=No. 2--Per dozen, *40 cents. Per 100, $2.50 Per 1,000, $17.50.=

For small geographies, encyclopaedias, law books, &c.


=No. 3--Per dozen, *60 cents. Per 100, $3.50. Per 1,000, $25.00.=

For large geographies.

*PRICES INCLUDE POSTAGE TO ANY ADDRESS.


          =CAN THE BOOK COVERS YOU USE BE REMOVED
          WITHOUT DAMAGING THE BOOKS?=

=Do you not have to buy three sizes to cover Histories, Readers,
Arithmetics, &c.?=

=Look at the book covers you are using and see how they stick to covers;
they must injure the books.=

="ONE PIECE" Covers will not stick to or injure the covers of the
books.=

=One size will fit Arithmetics, Histories, &c., and the new paper is
acknowledged to be heavier, tougher, and better than any other cover
paper used.=

=Send for samples and test them for yourself. Sample dozen, postpaid, 25
cents.=

       *       *       *       *       *

FIRST EDITION EXHAUSTED

       *       *       *       *       *

A Short History of.... SPAIN

          BY
          MARY PLATT PARMELE
          (Author of the famous Evolution of Empire Series of Histories)

          =10 Cents Each      _POSTPAID_      $1.00 per Dozen=

       *       *       *       *       *

WE QUOTE FROM LETTERS RECEIVED:

" . . . Wonderfully condensed . . ." "It reads like a romance." "Can be
finished in less than an hour, yet gives a full bird's-eye view of a
country and people. The author's style is charming." "Accidentally
running across your cute little History of Spain, I was so taken with it
as an epitome of the sort that I have long believed there was room for,
that I would like to see what else you have. So please mail me a couple
of sample copies of your weekly, as I have not seen _that_ yet."

"Every school should have a course in Spanish History at this time."

          =Second Edition Now in Press=

       *       *       *       *       *

          =The Great Round World Publishing Company=
              =5 West 18th Street, New York City=

       *       *       *       *       *

'TIS THE SMALL THINGS OF LIFE THAT GIVE PLEASURE

          That's why the
            "=DUBLEOOK=" Bicycle
                              Hanger
                           is PERFECT

          =50c.=

          =FULL NICKELED
          COMPLETE=

          =EASY= for Cleaning and Storing
          =SAVES= Tires and Enamel
          All Running Gear Free

          Of all dealers or postpaid of

          =THE G.W.E. CO., Room 1103, 26 Cortlandt Street, New York=

       *       *       *       *       *

=BINDING CASE=

To hold loose numbers of the current part of THE GREAT ROUND
WORLD--preventing them from being lost, getting soiled, or scattered.
May be had in green, red, or blue cloth. =Price, 35 Cents.=

                     ADDRESS
          =Great Round World Publishing Co.=
           =5 WEST 18TH STREET, NEW YORK.=

       *       *       *       *       *

THE LIVING METHOD FOR LEARNING


=How to Think in French=

The most successful means yet devised for learning and teaching how to
SPEAK FRENCH.....

=Sent, postpaid, on receipt of $1.00=

"I am sure the book will accomplish precisely what is set to be its
purpose."--=Prof. James W. Bright=, Johns Hopkins University.

"You have done a great and beautiful work in the publication of your
manuals."--=Bishop John H. Vincent=, Chancellor of Chautauqua.


=How to Think in German=

=Sent, postpaid, on receipt of $1.50=

"As a practical book to aid in quickly acquiring the power of correct
and fluent speaking of the German language this work has no
equal."--=Scientific American=, Nov. 11, 1893, p. 316.


=How to Think in Spanish=

=Sent, postpaid, on receipt of $1.50=

"The learner is not obliged to think of rules or of English words when
he wishes to speak Spanish."--=N. Y. School Journal=, July 14, 1894.

       *       *       *       *       *

            =Prof. CH. F. KROEH, Author and Publisher=
          Stevens Institute of Technology         HOBOKEN, N. J.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Great Round World

And What Is Going On In It

       *       *       *       *       *

Vol. II., No. 24.   JUNE 16, 1898    Whole No. 84

       *       *       *       *       *

CONTENTS.

  With the Editor                         745
  New Books                               746
  Lieutenant Hobson's Brave Deed          749
  News from Havana                        753
  Landing Effected in Cuba                755
  Origin of the Red Cross Society         756
  The "Plimsoll Mark"                     758
  The International Date Line             758
  News from the Philippines               760
  Lieutenant Carranza's Missing Letter    761
  Life in Skaguay, Alaska                 763
  Interview with Senor Moret              766
  Removal of Political Disabilities       767
  Story of the Sierra Leone Massacre      767
  The Hawaiian Flag                       770
  Bombardment of Santiago Forts           771
  LATEST NEWS                             774

       *       *       *       *       *

[Sidenote: =With the Editor=]

We have received a number of inquiries from our young subscribers in
reference to what they may do for the soldiers and sailors. The
following circular letter which has just been received will, we feel
sure, interest all of our subscribers. The work outlined is certainly to
be commended, and we hope to hear of branches of this society being
started in other parts of the country.


FIRST NEW YORK AMBULANCE RED CROSS EQUIPMENT SOCIETY.

(Auxiliary to American Red Cross Relief Committee.)

Honorary President,      Treasurer,
Bishop Potter.           Robert Bacon
                         (J. P. Morgan & Co.).

          "Orange, N. J., May 31, 1898.

          "The First Dearborn-Morgan School Auxiliary of the
          New York Ambulance Red Cross Equipment Society has
          been organized for the purpose of interesting boys
          and girls in the present relief work of the Red
          Cross. The Red Cross is an international society
          which was formed to give help to the wounded in
          war-time, irrespective of friend or foe.

          "The purpose of the New York Ambulance Red Cross
          Equipment Society is to assist the Red Cross
          during this war between America and Spain by
          providing ambulances and ambulance launches for
          moving sick or wounded soldiers to field hospitals
          or hospital ships.

          "All contributions to the First Dearborn-Morgan
          School Auxiliary may be sent either to the
          President or to the Treasurer.

          "It is earnestly hoped that all boys and girls
          will assist in this national work."

       *       *       *       *       *

=New Books=

"The General's Double," by Captain King, and "Trooper Ross and Signal
Butte," by the same author, come to us from the press of J. B.
Lippincott Company. The former is a capital story of the Civil War, the
plot being based upon the remarkable likeness existing between two men
in the Union army. It has all of the charm of the works of this favorite
author.

The second book contains two stories, the heroes of both being boys. The
first, "Trooper Ross," describes the adventures of an officer's son, his
exciting experiences with Indians on the plains as a little chap, taking
his part at boarding-school later; then, failing to obtain his admission
to West Point, he works his way through the ranks to his commission.
"Signal Butte" covers a series of exciting adventures in Arizona, in
which two boys are the central figures. This book will prove a great
favorite with the boys especially.

          EDITOR OF THE GREAT ROUND WORLD:

          "I take the liberty of recommending as an
          excellent book for the young, 'Cuore, An Italian
          Schoolboy's Journal; A Book for Boys,' by Edmondo
          de Amicis.

          "It is a very admirable and spirited work, as good
          for old as for young people, and ought to be in
          every home.

          "From one of your subscribers at Great Neck,
          Long Island."

This book is published by Crowell & Co., Boston, and is indeed well
worth reading. There are two editions--one illustrated, price $1.50; the
other without illustrations, price 60 cents.

[Illustration: HON. WILLIAM EWART GLADSTONE,

Born December 29, 1809; died May 19, 1898.]

       *       *       *       *       *

Current History

       *       *       *       *       *

In our last number we mentioned in the "Latest News" the sinking of the
_Merrimac_ at the entrance of the harbor of Santiago; since then a
number of accounts have come, which we are sure you will be interested
to hear. The brave fellows who were with Lieutenant Hobson were Daniel
Montague, George Charette, Osborn Diegnan, George F. Phillips, Francis
Kelly, J. C. Murphy, and Randolph Clausen.

[Illustration]

Before submitting his plans to Admiral Sampson, Lieutenant Hobson had
worked them out to the smallest detail. Shortly before starting he told
his plans to one of his companions. He said: "I am quite sure that we
can reach to within three or four hundred yards past Estrella battery
behind Morro Castle. I do not think that they can sink me before I can
get there. When I reach this, the narrowest part of the channel, I shall
swing the vessel around, stop the engines, open the sea valves, touch
off the torpedoes, and leave the vessel lying across the channel, which
is not as broad as the Merrimac is long. There are to be ten torpedoes
below the water-line placed against the bulkheads and connected with
each other by a wire under the ship. These torpedoes connect with the
bridge, and they should do their work very quickly. I shall have four of
the men on the deck with me, and in the engine-room two others. We will
all be in our underclothing, with our revolvers and ammunition, in
water-tight cases, strapped to our waists. Near the anchor forward I
shall have one of the men placed, with an axe, and around his waist a
light line which will be attached to the bridge where I stand. The
minute that I order the engines stopped I shall jerk this cord; this
will be a signal to him to cut the lashing and let go the forward
anchor. He will then jump overboard and swim to the boat at the stern.
The men in the engine-room, after stopping the engines, will open the
sea connections, and then join the rest and throw themselves overboard.
I shall fire the torpedoes the last thing, and this will insure the
rapid sinking of the vessel." When Hobson was asked if he expected to
escape alive, he said: "Well, I suppose the batteries on shore will make
it pretty hot for us; but they will not be able to see very clearly, and
I think we have a fair chance of getting away. We certainly shall not
allow ourselves to be taken prisoners without fighting for it." All
Wednesday night the crew were at work on the _Merrimac_ to get her
stripped for her final resting-place. Early Thursday morning a start was
made, but the vessel was ordered back, as the delays in getting her
ready had made it impossible to take advantage of the darkness. Very
early Friday morning the second start was made, and this time she
succeeded in getting well in shore before the first glimmer of
daylight; but soon the crews on the ships, who were anxiously waiting,
saw the flash of the first gun on shore, and then a brisk firing began
from both batteries and fort, which was kept up for some time. Of the
_Merrimac_, nothing more was seen until broad daylight, when the top of
her mast was discovered protruding from the water in just the position
that Hobson had planned to place her.

[Illustration: ENTRANCE TO SANTIAGO HARBOR.]

Admiral Cervera sent a boat out with the news that the men had been
captured, and to make arrangements for their exchange. Lieutenant
Hobson's exploit has received universal praise from all parts of the
world; he will unquestionably be promoted and receive special
distinction from the Government.

One of the young officers on the _New York_, Cadet Powell, also
displayed great bravery. He was detailed to command the _New York's_
steam launch, which accompanied the _Merrimac_ to pick up Hobson and his
men if they succeeded in escaping from the harbor; he was the last man
to see them. Speaking of the start, he said: "Hobson was as cool as a
cucumber; when I shook hands with him, he said: 'Powell, watch the
boat's crew when we pull out of the harbor. We will be cracks, rowing
thirty strokes to the minute.' We followed about three-quarters of a
mile astern of the _Merrimac_. When about two hundred yards from the
harbor the first gun was fired from the eastern bluff; we were then
about a half mile from shore. The firing increased very rapidly, and we
lost sight of the _Merrimac_ in the smoke which the wind carried off
shore. The western battery finally was used and began firing. They shot
wildly, and we did not see where the shots struck. We then ran in
closer to the shore. Then we heard the explosion of the torpedoes on the
_Merrimac_. Until daylight we waited, just outside the breakers, about
half a mile from Morro Castle, keeping a sharp lookout for a boat or
swimmers. Hobson had arranged to meet us off that point; but thinking
that some might have drifted out, we crossed in front of Morro. About
five o'clock we crossed the harbor again, and in passing saw one spar of
the _Merrimac_ sticking out of the water; we hugged the shore just
outside the breakers; the batteries saw us and opened fire; it was then
broad daylight; and finding nothing, we finally made for the _New York_;
the men behaved splendidly." Great admiration is expressed at the Navy
Department in Washington at the coolness and pluck shown by Cadet
Powell; he is likely to profit by his great courage. Young Powell is one
of the cadets from the Naval Academy whom Lieutenant Hobson secured
permission to take with him; they were in the class which Hobson
instructed, and he wished them to accompany him in order that they might
have practical experience in the effect of explosives on ships. At
Annapolis young Powell was considered one of the brightest cadets; he
graduated at the head of his class.

Spanish accounts of the blowing up of the _Merrimac_ are exceedingly
amusing. The official announcement is made that an American vessel,
trying to enter the harbor of Santiago, "was sunk by the batteries"; the
affair is described as a brilliant Spanish victory; it is also added
that Admiral Cervera personally saved an American officer from drowning,
as his ship was in close proximity to the cruiser during the engagement.
The official report goes on to say that the mines guarding the harbor
were exploded simultaneously with the opening of the fire from the
ships, forts, and batteries; congratulations were sent to Admiral
Cervera.

[Footnote: Authority for pronunciation of proper names: Century
Dictionary.]

       *       *       *       *       *

Each day is taken advantage of by the Spaniards at Havana to add to
their defences. Earthworks are being rapidly thrown up in the
neighborhood of the city; a signal service has been established to
enable them to guard the coast at all the points, and they feel
confident that a successful invasion cannot take place in that part of
the island, as it is so well guarded with modern rapid-fire guns in the
batteries, and quite a large force is concentrated there for the defence
of the city.

Little, if any, news comes from the blockading squadron off the north
coast of Cuba; there are, from time to time, reports of engagements and
the landing of troops; but official news has not yet been given out,
and for this we must wait until the Government deems it advisable to
publish it. Several regiments have been embarked at Mobile, and by this
time are supposed to be off the coast of Cuba; they started in high
spirits, and there was a great deal of enthusiasm on the part of the
people who saw them start. They have probably gone by way of Tampa, and
been joined there by the other transports.

A great quantity of ammunition and supplies will be sent with the
troops, so that they may not suffer from lack of material to make the
invasion successful.

One of our New York papers publishes a letter, written by a young girl
in Havana to a friend in New York; it gives an excellent idea as to the
true state of affairs in Cuba. Among other things, she says:

"Our fisherman brought in some papers from New York, and what a lot of
lies they contain! My father and all the other officials say that we
have food here for five months--flour, codfish, beans, and
groceries--all brought down from New York, and salted meat from
Montevideo. . . .

"Pa says that if you Americans had attacked Havana when you declared war
it would have surrendered in five hours, but that it is now fortified so
that it is strong as Gibraltar. You know, they built a great big
railroad upon sticks, in front of the forts, and took cars of sand and
dumped them down, so that they have a mound in front of all the forts
about thirty feet wide and ten feet high. I went over the fortifications
yesterday, and I saw fifteen of those immense 12-inch guns. They say
they can shoot twelve miles. We have got 50,000 troops here in Havana,
and 60,000 in the provinces, and some 40,000 volunteers. These are all
veterans, and all the generals say that it would take an army of 200,000
to beat us. The coast is all supplied with telephone and telegraph
wires, so that any time your boats attempt to land we can have a big
force there in a couple of hours to drive them off. Part of Cervera's
fleet is in Santiago. There is so much mystery about this! Whether the
admiral is there or not, no one seems to know. The rest of the fleet,
some fifteen vessels, is somewhere down in the Antilles, and
Captain-General Blanco says they are going to attack your coast in about
three weeks.

"The _Alfonso XII._ has been turned into a hospital ship, and all her
guns have been taken out of her. You know she is the boat that was
anchored opposite the _Maine_ and had in her the pneumatic torpedoes.
They say a man named Arjona had something to do with the blowing up of
the _Maine_, but I guess it was Weyler's orders. . . .

"The whole city is divided up into sections on what they call the
'Humanity Committee's plan.' They find out who are in sympathy with the
Cubans or with the United States; and in case Havana is bombarded all
these people are going to be thrown into Cabanas or shot. The people are
such fools they think nothing is known about what they are doing."

       *       *       *       *       *

We told you in a recent number about the unsuccessful result of the
attempt to land an expedition in Cuba; this result was largely due, no
doubt, to the fact that the Spaniards were advised in advance, through
Spanish spies in this country, of the intended departure of the
expedition. On May 31st, the steamer _Florida_ returned to Key West,
after having successfully landed an important expedition on the island.
This time they succeeded in taking their departure without it being
known to any one. The expedition, consisting of about four hundred men,
with a pack-train and a large quantity of arms and ammunition, sailed
for Guantanamo on the night of May 21st. The expedition was under
command of Colonel Lacret, with whom was Captain J. A. Dorst, of the
United States army. The men were equipped with canvas uniforms furnished
by the Government, and had rations sufficient for fifteen days after
landing; the pack-train consisted of seventy-five mules and twenty-five
horses; the expedition landed on the coast of Cuba, Thursday morning,
May 26th. The _Florida_, escorted by the gunboat _Osceola_, drew up
close to the shore, and first landed scouts to ascertain if all was
clear; these scouts were met by a band of 1,500 insurgents, under
Captains Vereira and Rojas. There was absolutely no interruption to the
unloading of the _Florida_, as no sign of a Spaniard was seen. This is
the largest expedition which has ever been landed in Cuba in aid of the
insurgents.

       *       *       *       *       *

There is a very interesting account of the origin of the Red Cross
Society in _The Churchman_. About forty years ago, M. Henry Dimont, a
native of Switzerland, having witnessed the unnecessary suffering of the
wounded, from lack of care, at the battle of Solferino, was so much
impressed that he published a book, pointing out the necessity of
forming a corporation of nurses to work in the cause of humanity in time
of war, regardless of nationality of the injured, and who should be
permitted to aid the wounded on the battle-field, under the protection
of a flag which should be recognized as neutral.

So much interest was taken in the idea that the outcome was a convention
held at Geneva in 1864, which was attended by representatives from
sixteen of the great nations of the world, who signed an agreement that
they would protect members of the association when caring for the
wounded on the field of battle. The society adopted for its colors the
Swiss cross, as a compliment to its birthplace; they, however, reversed
the colors, and the flag is therefore a red cross on a white field, and
is the only military hospital flag of civilized warfare; it protects
persons from molestation who work under the emblem performing services
in aid of the wounded. Great care is used in granting permission to
persons to wear this emblem; and in order that it shall not be taken
advantage of to spy in the enemies' camp, private marks are added to
prevent imitation. The headquarters of the International Committee is at
Geneva; the president of the society is M. Gustav Moynier.

In 1882, Miss Clara Barton was delegated by the President of the United
States to represent this country at the Congress of the Red Cross
Committee, and was made a member of the International Board of Managers
when the United States signed the international treaty.

It was decided that the work of the Red Cross Society should not be
confined to times of war, but that in case of disasters and calamities,
which were always to be apprehended, the organization was to provide
aid. During the past seventeen years the American Red Cross Society has
served in fifteen disasters and famines, and Russians, Armenians, and
Cubans have received aid from this society.

       *       *       *       *       *

Friday, June 3d, Samuel Plimsoll, known as the "sailors' friend," died
in England. Plimsoll was the originator of the famous "Plimsoll mark,"
and this is what caused him to be called the sailors' friend. Many
years ago it was the custom of unprincipled ship-owners to send their
vessels to sea very much overloaded; this was done to save the expense
of a double voyage, for in those days there were few steam merchantmen,
and sailing-vessels oftentimes took months for their voyages. The
Plimsoll mark is painted on the vessel to indicate how much cargo she
should carry. When a vessel has her full cargo the Plimsoll mark is at
the water-line; laws were passed making it illegal to load vessels so
deeply as to sink this mark below the surface of the water, and in
consequence sailors' lives are not risked in overloaded vessels.

       *       *       *       *       *

Some very interesting questions have arisen in reference to the
difference of time between Manila and New York. The difference between
Manila and New York is about eleven hours; when it is five in the
morning in Manila, it is four in the afternoon with us. In order to
change Manila time to our time we must deduct about eleven hours. This
is all very simple so far as hours are concerned; but when we try to
find out what day it is we run against a more complicated matter, for
there is a certain place, or rather a certain mysterious line, which the
great nations have agreed upon as the international date line. This date
line is supposed to be the 180th meridian longitude reckoning from
Greenwich; but this meridian is not actually followed, for in the case
of the Philippine Islands it takes a long sweep, and passes to the west
of them, and, in consequence, there is a difference of nearly a whole
day between Manila and Hong-Kong, although the actual difference of time
is but about half an hour. This difference causes all kinds of
complications there, in that Hong-Kong and Manila are so near each
other. A telegram dated at Hong-Kong, say, the 1st of May at one
o'clock, will reach us April 30th; if sent direct to Manila it would
reach there apparently nearly twenty-four hours before it was sent, for
when it is Monday in Manila it is Tuesday in Hong-Kong. This will
account for the receipt of the despatch in reference to Commodore
Dewey's victory dated Hong-Kong, May 2d, stating that the bombardment
was then taking place, whereas it was really Sunday, May 1st, in Manila.
The necessity for having an international date line can best be
understood if you will imagine yourself travelling around the world in
some sort of a conveyance which enables you to keep pace with the sun;
say, for instance, your start is on a Monday, with the sun directly over
your head. If it were not for the international date line it would
always be Monday to you; instead of this, each time that you cross the
180th meridian the day changes.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: A NATIVE OF THE PHILIPPINES.]

A report has been received from Hong-Kong that the insurgent chief
Aguinaldo, at the Philippines, has issued a proclamation that would seem
to show that he hopes to make himself leader or dictator over the
island. The report goes on to say that he has issued orders that the
lives and property of Europeans and all Spanish non-combatants are to be
protected. It is said that his treatment of the captives has been very
fair, and that he is conducting the campaign against Spain in a very
able manner. Since he has taken charge of affairs the Spanish soldiers
have lost battle after battle, and it is said that there are now in
Aguinaldo's hands over two thousand prisoners, including many officers.
Aguinaldo reports that the Governor of Cavite (cae-v[=e]-t[=a]) has
surrendered to him. One of the American captains has written to
Hong-Kong, stating that it is his opinion "that the rebels have
undergone a radical change since the arrival of Aguinaldo; the Spaniards
have lost every engagement, and if our people do not hurry, there will
be no Spanish army left."

The American vessels have taken no part in the fight between Spain and
the insurgents; Admiral Dewey has contented himself with superintending
and insisting upon proper conduct of affairs. The news he sends is
exceedingly cheerful, and he seems to be quite confident that he can
hold out until reinforcements arrive; he anticipates no trouble in
capturing the city of Manila.

       *       *       *       *       *

Lieutenant Carranza's missing letter has been found. You will remember
we told in our last number of the arrest of a Montreal detective who had
been arrested and accused of stealing it. It was not taken by the
Montreal detective, but by a secret service officer of our Government.
It seems that the Spanish officials at Montreal have been very carefully
watched for some time, for it was known that they were spying upon our
Government. The detectives had followed Minister Polo and his staff ever
since they left Washington, and had secured absolute proof that Du Bosc
and Carranza were collecting information and forwarding it to the
Spanish Government. On the pretext of purchasing the house, they were
shown all over it, and succeeded in securing a number of important
letters, cablegrams, maps, etc., which were forwarded to the Government.
The letter which Carranza has made so much fuss about was stolen in a
very clever way. The detective took a sheet of fly paper, and in a
careless way dropped it over the letter; then took up the fly paper and
the letter attached to it, and passed it to another detective, who at
once forwarded it to Washington. Part of the letter has been published.
It is addressed to his Excellency Don Jose Gomez Imay. In it Carranza
expresses his regret that Imay was not appointed to command the Cadiz
fleet; he speaks disparagingly of Camara and highly of Cervera; most of
this part of the letter is in reference to his personal employment by
the Government, and he expresses great anxiety to be away to the front
and in active service on the fleet.

Speaking of his spy system, he says: "We have had bad luck because they
have captured our two best spies. The Americans are showing the most
extraordinary vigilance. I shall be extremely gratified to have a ship
or a torpedo-boat to run the blockade, or anything rather than playing
second fiddle." These quotations go to show that Carranza was not
over-pleased with the work of conducting the spy department in Canada.
He takes the trouble to criticize Cervera's actions, and he alludes to
him as "Don Pasquale," and says that he cannot believe that the Admiral
would do such a stupid thing as to get caught in Santiago, his purpose
being to attack the American fleet and delay the invasion of Cuba. This
letter demonstrates very clearly the wisdom of the Government in keeping
carefully guarded all knowledge of the movements of our army and navy,
for Carranza has taken advantage of the statements published and
information easily obtained heretofore, and has kept his Government
informed, and has also personally been advising Admiral Cervera whenever
opportunity offered: he speaks of having cabled to Cervera on 20th of
May. Our Government has made application to the English Government for
the expulsion of the Spanish spies from British territory.

Kellert, the Montreal detective, has caused the arrest of both Du Bosc
and Carranza, in a civil suit for damages for false imprisonment; so the
Spaniards are in hotter water than ever, especially as all of their
money in the Bank of Montreal has been seized as security.

       *       *       *       *       *

A very interesting account of life in Skaguay, Alaska, has recently been
received. The account is written by a Wisconsin woman who, with her
husband, went to Alaska to open a restaurant and hotel in Skaguay. She
writes: "I never felt so lonesome in my life; I never worked so hard,
but have never been so happy; money comes in so fast that we do not know
what to do with it. At first, when there was no bank, we were obliged to
hide the money in all parts of the house, and we were in constant
terror. We had paper money, silver money, gold money, gold dust, and
every form of currency that can be imagined hidden all over the house;
and as the town was full of people who were without money, and who would
not hesitate to cut one's throat for a dollar, we did not have a single
moment free from anxiety. Early in the winter we did succeed in sending
a number of thousands of dollars to Seattle, and were very much relieved
when we received a receipt from the bank.

"The transportation companies are swindlers. They are persuading
thousands of people to come to this awful country who will never be able
to go back, and all for the sake of making the profit on
transportation.

[Illustration]

"Flour that we had shipped from Seattle, and which cost over $5 per
barrel, cost as much more for freight to this place. But as we sold it
for over $40 a barrel before it left the dock, we had nothing to
complain of; and it was very poor flour at that, not fit for bread, and
hardly suitable for the plainest kind of cooking.

"As for our restaurant, we started it with the idea of giving people
good home cooking, and we can hardly serve the people, they come so
fast. The restaurant is open day and night, and the tables always full.
At first we got a good price for our meals, that is, from $1.50 to $2.50
for a dinner. But there is more competition now, and prices have gone
down.

"The town is still filled with gamblers, and is a mining town in every
sense of the word, although the troops keep the rough element in fairly
good order. The town is particularly lonely for refined women, as there
are very few here, and very little in the way of amusement for them.

"It is not so very cold. I have seen as severe weather in the States;
and the thermometer rarely goes below 15 degrees below zero, and that is
not so bad. But there is very little sun, and this we miss the most. We
work by lamplight day and night.

"Whatever people may say about the Klondike, there is still plenty of
gold there; and although we are making a barrelful of money here at this
business, we will very probably 'up stakes' and go to the diggings.
Every boat that arrives is loaded with gold-hunters, and Skaguay is
crowded. Hundreds of people are camped between here and Chilkoot Pass,
and are scattered all along the trail. This year will bring many
improvements in the line of travelling, and, in consequence, there will
be less hardship."

       *       *       *       *       *

Much interest has been awakened by the report of an interview with Senor
Moret, ex-Secretary of the Colonies of Spain. He is reported to have
said that "the Government does not know where it is going. There is no
person in Spain who can tell the outcome of the present situation. The
Government is not a fixed one, and allows matters to run in their own
course heedless of the effect; in other words, matters are allowed to
drift their own way. It is useless to conceal the fact that the Cabinet
is not solid. Its members are working at cross purposes, the ministers
lack energy, and, in fact, are absolutely incompetent, and simply trust
to chance to get out of their present troubles.

"A campaign in favor of peace has been begun, and is progressing among
the people. I am convinced that if the people were allowed to state
their wishes, even the soldiers would advocate peace.

"It is difficult to say whether the regency will be overthrown, nor can
I say what will happen to a country that is without guidance and with a
foreign war on its hands. If the regency is overthrown it will be an
immense misfortune to Spain. The affairs of Spain are in complete
disorder."

This report comes by way of London, and would seem to confirm reports
previously published as to the condition of matters in Spain.

       *       *       *       *       *

A bill for the removal of all political disabilities arising from the
Civil War, recently presented in Congress, has passed and is now a law,
as President McKinley has formally approved it. This bill refers to
Section 3 of the Fourteenth Amendment to the Constitution.

This amendment made it impossible for any person to hold a political
position in the United States who had taken up arms against the
Government, if he had previously held a political position and had
declared his allegiance to the United States. The law that has just been
passed declares that "disabilities imposed by Section 3, Amendment 14,
of the Constitution, heretofore incurred, are hereby removed."

       *       *       *       *       *

Some of the survivors of the terrible massacre at Sierra Leone reached
New York during the past week. The story of their escape is a very
thrilling one. It seems that among the natives in that part of Africa
there is a secret society. When the natives feel that they have any
grievance against a particular tribe or people, they send word to all
members of the society that "pura" is declared against the offenders;
this means that they are condemned to death.

As a result of the hut tax, which we told you about in a recent number,
"pura" was declared against all English people in Africa. News soon
reached the different missionary stations that this had been done; but
the attack on the Rotufunk mission came almost without warning. Mr.
Ward, who is the only one of these missionaries left alive, went in the
latter part of April to Freetown for supplies, and at that time there
was not any sign of danger. Through natives the story of the massacre
has been obtained. It seems that early on the morning of May 3d native
women came running to the mission house and cried that an armed force
was coming to capture the place. The missionaries had no means of
defence; their only hope of safety was in flight; but, unfortunately,
they were too late. When the tribesmen arrived and found that the whites
had left, they started through the bush, and soon captured all of the
unfortunate missionaries. The tortures to which they put these poor men
and women are too terrible to repeat. Death put a welcome end to their
sufferings.

[Illustration: GOVERNMENT HOUSE AT BONTHE ON SHERBO ISLAND, SIERRA
LEONE]

In the mean time, the colony of Americans at Shengeh received news that
the natives had rebelled. A friendly native visited the mission and told
Dr. Burtner that the tribes had declared "pura" against this mission,
and that he had better fly. Immediately the work of getting boats in
readiness was begun, and the missionaries, together with the friendly
natives, finally succeeded in reaching Freetown.

Miss Mullins, whose station was at Momliga, where she was the only white
person, had a very narrow escape. April 29th, a band of natives came
there shouting and singing. Miss Mullins ran to the river in the hope of
finding a boat in which she could escape. The boats had all been taken
by the natives, who had either fled or gone to join the war tribes.
Knowing that there was no chance of her hiding in the bush, the brave
girl decided that if she was to die she would die at her post.

She turned back from the river into the clearing, where the
superstitious natives stood aside to let her pass. One of them seized
her as she was passing, and asked her what she was going to do. She
said: "I am going inside; I cannot escape you, you are too many for me.
Leave me to myself for a short time." The man brandished a spear in her
face, and said: "See, that is the blood of your friends; yours will soon
cover it." But she did not falter, and the savages probably left her
untouched for this reason. They are very superstitious, and must have
thought that there was something supernatural about her. Shortly after
this she heard the tramp of feet outside, and an English voice calling
to ask if there was anybody inside; running out, she found that the
British commissioner and a large force had arrived. And with them she
made her escape.

When the Americans arrived at Freetown, a large force of volunteers had
been concentrated, and it is hoped that the uprising will soon be at an
end.

       *       *       *       *       *

          In our previous number we mentioned the name of
          one of the missionaries killed at the massacre as
          "Kane"; it should have been "Cain."

       *       *       *       *       *

One of our subscribers has asked why the flag of Hawaii has eight
stripes and three crosses. There is a very interesting story told in
reference to this peculiar flag. It seems that about twenty-five years
ago, when the country was still a monarchy, it was quite frequently
visited by war-ships of different nations. It is said that one morning
the King discovered a French war-ship anchored safely in the harbor of
Honolulu, and fearing that the French were there for purpose of seizing
the island, sent for his Prime Minister, who advised him to raise a
flag, and in this way advise the visitors that the islands belonged to
some one. But the island did not possess a flag of its own; the only one
the King could find at first was an old British flag. This he had run up
to the top of the highest flag-pole. The flag had hardly been raised,
when one of his chief advisers came running to him, and told him he must
take the flag down immediately, for a British man-of-war was expected,
and would be sure to claim ownership of the islands if the British flag
was seen flying over the palace. So the King started on another flag
hunt. This time he found an American flag, and, with great ingenuity,
took the two flags, cut them up, and made a combination. Therefore the
first Hawaiian flag had thirteen red and white stripes, and the English
jack in the corner. Later, it was decided that eight stripes, to
represent the eight islands of the nation, would be more appropriate;
therefore the extra stripes were cut off, and now the flag has eight
stripes, four red and four white, and still carries the St. George's,
St. Andrew's, and St. Patrick's crosses, the same as the English flag.

The superstitious natives believe that the ascendency of the white
people over the colored is due to the fact that the white stripe was
left uppermost on the flag. They have frequently tried to have the flag
changed for this reason, for they believe that, if the red is given
prominence, the natives will again have the ascendency.

       *       *       *       *       *

On the morning of June 8th, the first definite confirmation of the news
of an engagement off Santiago was published. The vessels which are
reported to have taken part in the engagement were the _Brooklyn_,
_Marblehead_, _Texas_, and _Massachusetts_ forming the first division;
the _New York_, _New Orleans_, _Yankee_, _Iowa_, and _Oregon_ the second
division. Very early on the morning of the 6th, they steamed in toward
the entrance of the harbor in double column, the first division to the
left, the second to the right, the vessels being in the order named
above. When about three thousand yards off shore the first division
turned toward the west and the second division toward the east; the
little vessels _Vixen_ and _Swanee_ remaining far out on the left of the
first division to watch the riflemen on shore, and the _Dolphin_ and
_Porter_ occupying similar positions on the right for the same purpose.
The fight was started by a 12-inch shell from the _Iowa_, which struck
the base of the Estrella battery and tore up the works. This was a
signal for all of the vessels to begin firing, and from that time until
the firing ceased the bombardment was terrific. The vessels had run up
in the beginning at the point where the range of the forts and batteries
was known, and, in consequence, although the smoke hung so thickly
about the ships that the forts could not be seen, the shots were very
effective. The vessels of the first division had been instructed to
concentrate their fire at the fortifications at the left or west side of
the entrance to the harbor; those of the second division attacking Morro
Castle and fortifications to the right, and the Spanish vessels in the
harbor which were within range. The Spanish gunners on shore replied
promptly, but their marksmanship was of no better quality than in
previous engagements, and it is reported that practically no damage was
done to our fleet. It is reported that one Spanish shell struck the
military mast of the _Massachusetts_, but nobody was hurt. One man on
the _Swanee_ was slightly wounded, and it is said that he is the only
one who was hurt on our side. As the bombardment proceeded, Commodore
Schley's ships moved nearer to the shore, and the effect of their fire
at such short range was tremendous: earthworks were simply blown to
pieces, and the Spanish gunners soon forced to stop firing. The Estrella
fortification, which was probably the strongest one there, was given
particular attention by Schley's column. The fort offered great
resistance, but when the vessels had moved to closer range the heavy
guns of the _Texas_ and _Marblehead_ were turned upon it. The Spanish
guns were soon silenced and the fortification set on fire. The Cayo
battery was silenced by the _New York_ and _New Orleans_ after a
terrific fire of about half an hour. Many of the American shells were
wasted for the reason that the fortified points on the shore could not
be accurately located in the thick weather. There was a heavy rain and
fog at the time, and this made marksmanship much less accurate. Shortly
after nine o'clock the firing from shore ceased, and a signal was
hoisted by Admiral Sampson to cease firing. It was then seen that the
earthworks and the Estrella and Catalina fortifications were so damaged
that it is doubtful whether the Spaniards will be able to use them
again.

[Illustration: CHART OF SANTIAGO HARBOR.]

Reports of the engagement make particular mention of the good showing
made by the naval militia on the _Yankee_. They worked like old
blue-jackets, pouring a savage fire into the enemy, and it was accurate
too. They kept close in shore and paid particular attention to the
batteries near the beach. This was their first experience under fire,
and they showed the stuff they are made of. Indeed, they proved
themselves so fond of that sort of thing, that when orders were given to
stop the engagement, there was a great deal of amusement on board the
larger vessels when it was seen that they hammered away with their stern
guns as long as they were within range; even after the order had been
signalled to cease firing, they turned slowly and reluctantly away, as
if they were sorry to leave.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Sidenote: =Latest News=]

June 10th, "Old Glory" was raised on Cuban soil, and the welcome sight
was Deceived with rousing cheers by the marines, who had landed.

On Thursday, the 9th, orders were given to a number of the vessels to go
to Guantanamo Bay and assist in a landing there.

On Friday, under cover of the guns of the _Oregon_, _Marblehead_,
_Yankee_, _Yosemite_, _Porter_, _Dolphin_, and _Vixen_, six hundred
marines of the first battalion landed with small boats near Caimanera in
Guantanamo Bay. This place had been shelled several days before, in
order that the Spaniards should have no fortifications to aid them in
preventing this landing.

No Spaniards appeared, however, and our men had soon landed tents and
the necessary implements with which to make an encampment. The site
chosen was the hill where the blockhouse had been, as this high spot was
considered the most healthful position.

Orders were given to destroy the few houses and huts, to prevent all
possibility of catching yellow fever from any germs which might have
been lingering there. These hovels made a fine bonfire, as they were
built of light materials with thatched roofs.

The men were glad enough to get ashore, for they have been cooped on the
transports most of the time since April 22d, knocking about on the
ocean. In that hot climate it is not over-agreeable to be on ship-board,
even with ample room to move about in; but when crowded as the men on
transports are, there is no end of discomfort.

All Friday afternoon and evening the men worked away at their camp, and
were tired enough when they were ordered to turn in for the night.

Every precaution was taken to guard against a surprise, although no
attack was expected. Saturday the men continued their work, which was
getting along finely and almost completed, when late in the afternoon,
while a large number of men were hauling water up the hill, and others,
who had been working hard all day, were taking a swim in the bay, there
was suddenly heard the sharp crack of Mauser rifles, and the men knew
that the Spaniards were there.

As a matter of course, the attack came from the thick underwood
surrounding the rear of the camp, and soon the air was filled with
bullets whistling around the heads of our men.

As soon as the shots were heard the men came running to aid their
comrades. Many of them who had been swimming grabbed up their rifles and
cartridge-belts, and began firing, without waiting to dress.

With great coolness the men were formed and soon repulsed the Spanish
force. Firing was kept up until midnight. In the darkness the Spaniards
became bolder and attacked the camp, the white tents making a good mark.
If their marksmanship had been better, our losses must have been
serious. As it was, however, but four men were killed--Assistant Surgeon
J. B. Gibbs, Sergeant C. H. Smith, and two privates, William Dunphy and
James McColgan. During the night the vessels off shore kept their
powerful searchlights turned upon the heights, and this greatly
interfered with the Spaniards, who could not leave the woods without
exposing themselves to the fire of our men.

The first news of this, our first land encounter with the Spanish, was
published on Monday of this week.

News of the fall of Manila, received Monday, the 13th, came by way of
London from our ambassador there. But particulars were not given, and we
do not know whether the city was surrendered to the rebels or to Admiral
Dewey.

       *       *       *       *       *

SELECTED LIST OF NEW BOOKS

       *       *       *       *       *

=FRENCH= =WITHOUT A MASTER.
          ENTIRELY NEW=

          =Pitman's Practical French Grammar=

=and Conversation for Self-Instruction.= The latest and most successful
method for learning and teaching HOW TO SPEAK FRENCH, with IMITATED
PRONUNCIATION and copious VOCABULARIES. =Price, paper boards, 40 cents;
cloth, 50 cents, postpaid.=

          "A book of great value to those who would master
          French without a teacher."--Prof. J. H. GROVE,
          A.M., Pres. Howard Payne College, Brownwood, Tex.
          ADDRESS

=ISAAC PITMAN & SONS, THE PHONOGRAPHIC DEPOT, 33 UNION SQUARE, NEW YORK=

  _Take Lessons at Metropolitan Shorthand School, 170 Fifth Avenue._

       *       *       *       *       *

The Educational Courier

          W. I. THAMES, Editor

         Is the oldest School Journal published in
         Mississippi. Devoted to the general cause of
         education. Keeps in close touch with educational
         matters in MISSISSIPPI. Publishes STATE BOARD
         QUESTIONS and educational news from everywhere. A
         splendid ADVERTISING MEDIUM. Subscription Fifty
         Cents per Annum. Advertising rate card sent on
         application. . . . . . THE EDUCATIONAL COURIER
                                Poplarville, Miss.

       *       *       *       *       *

=The Great Round World REFERENCE ATLAS=

New maps by W. & A. K. JOHNSTON, Edinburgh, Scotland. Specially adapted
for ready reference, and invaluable in tracing geographically the
current of events. Sent postpaid upon receipt of 25 cts. Address

   =THE GREAT ROUND WORLD PUB. CO., 5 West 18th Street, New York City=

       *       *       *       *       *

  BOUND
  VOLUMES

  =THE GREAT ROUND WORLD=
         is bound four parts to the year. Part V.,
         containing January 1 to March 31 (13 numbers) is
         now ready :: ::

Numbers in good condition may be exchanged for bound parts on payment of
35 cents for binding and 10 cents for return carriage.

=Price of Bound Part, $1.00.= May be had in Red, Blue, or Green Binding.

_=THE GREAT ROUND WORLD PUB. CO., 5 West 18th St., New York City.=_

       *       *       *       *       *

=Patriotic Songs=

          =Words and Music=
          =10 Cents a Copy=

JUST READY


_ADDRESS:_

          THE GREAT ROUND WORLD PUBLISHING COMPANY
               5 West 18th Street, New York

       *       *       *       *       *

.CLUB RATES.

"The Great Round World"

       *       *       *       *       *

          _Subscription
          Price..
          52 numbers.._

          $1.50

          _per year_

          _Address_

          _The Great
          Round World
          Publishing Co._

          _3 and 5 West
          18th Street

          New York City_

                                     PRICE            WITH
                                   SEPARATELY      "G. R. W."
          Atlantic                   $4.00            $5.00
          Book Buyer                  1.00             2.25
          Bookman                     2.00             3.25
          Chap-Book                   2.00             3.00
          Century Magazine            4.00             5.00
          Cosmopolitan                1.00             2.25
          Critic                      3.00             4.25
          Current Literature          3.00             4.00
          Forum                       3.00             4.00
          Harper's Bazaar             4.00             4.75
          Harper's Monthly            4.00             4.75
          Harper's Weekly             4.00             4.75
          Illustrated American        4.00             4.75
          Independent                 3.00             4.00
          Judge                       5.00             6.00
          Leisure Hour                1.00             2.25
          Life                        5.00             6.00
          Lippincott's                3.00             3.75
          Literary Digest             3.00             4.25
          McClure's                   1.00             2.25
          Munsey's                    1.00             2.25
          New England Magazine        3.00             4.00
          North American Review       5.00             5.75
          Our Little Ones and Nursery 1.00             2.25
          Outing                      3.00             3.75
          Outlook                     3.00             4.25
          Puck                        5.00             6.00
          Review of Reviews           2.50             3.50
          Saint Nicholas              3.00             4.00
          Scientific American         3.00             4.25
          Scribner's                  3.00             4.00
          Short Stories               2.50             3.75
          Truth (New York)            2.50             3.50


          ="The Great Round World"=
                will make club rates on any magazines

          "The Great Round World"
                       will make club rates on any magazines

       *       *       *       *       *

..TESTIMONIALS..


_From Miss Mabel J. Penfield, Bellville, Kan.:_

          "I feel that I can not get along without your
          paper the coming year. I am a teacher in the city
          schools in Bellville."

       *       *       *       *       *

_From Miss M. M. Hughes, 202 West 83d Street:_

          "My pupils are very much interested in your little
          weekly paper."

       *       *       *       *       *

_From S. W. Probert, School No. 13, Paterson, N. J.:_

          "Kindly continue our subscription for the paper.
          We would not be without it for five times the
          amount."

       *       *       *       *       *

_From W. D. Lewis, Executive Committee New York State Council of Grammar
School Principals:_

          "I consider THE GREAT ROUND WORLD one of the most
          valuable factors in my school work. It takes the
          children out of the beaten paths and gives them an
          active interest in current history. Not only is it
          valuable for the children, but it furnishes an
          incentive to thought work so useful to many
          teachers."

       *       *       *       *       *

_From Roland L. Beale, Kansas State Normal School, Emporia:_

          "I have been taking THE GREAT ROUND WORLD for six
          weeks, and it is the best little paper I ever saw.
          I cannot speak too highly of it."

       *       *       *       *       *

_From Mrs. Ella F. Switzer, Denver, Col.:_

          "I am a teacher in this city, and a subscriber to
          THE GREAT ROUND WORLD. My pupils read it, in
          consequence of which they have more definite ideas
          on subjects relating to current events than many
          older people. Many of the parents of my pupils
          have spoken in praise of it. The other members of
          my family as well as myself read it instead of
          _wasting_ time over the daily papers."

       *       *       *       *       *

_From Mr. A. F. Otis, Houghton Gram. School, Augusta, Ga.:_

          "I am delighted with the paper."

       *       *       *       *       *

_From Miss A. W. Shortridge, 257 Benefit St., Providence, R. I.:_

          "Enclosed please find check for seventy-five cents
          for renewal of subscription of your publication
          for six months. I should like to tell you that
          having had classes in current events for both old
          and young people, I have never seen any other
          publication which so fully carries out my ideas of
          the subjects to be presented in such classes as
          your little magazine does. I have had classes
          every day in the week. I find moreover in your
          publication a most excellent resume, especially
          for the younger classes. I have moreover
          recommended the magazine to many of my older
          people. I am writing this because I think it may
          be pleasant for you to hear that your work is
          appreciated."

=The Great Round World=

       *       *       *       *       *

Transcriber's Notes:

Notation for macron characters is denoted by [=e] and [=a].

Obvious punctuations errors repaired.

Page 758, "sailors's" changed to "sailors'". (the sailors' friend.)

Page 758, "orginator" changed to "originator." (originator of)

Page 762, "expreses" changed to "expresses." (expresses great)

Under Club Rates, "Bazar" changed to "Bazaar." (Harper's Bazaar)

Remainder of archaic spelling retained.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Great Round World and What Is
Going On In It, Vol. 2, No. 24, June 16, 1898, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GREAT ROUND WORLD ***

***** This file should be named 18746.txt or 18746.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/8/7/4/18746/

Produced by Emmy, Juliet Sutherland and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
