The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Great Round World and What Is Going On
In It, Vol. 2, No. 23, June 9, 1898, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Great Round World and What Is Going On In It, Vol. 2, No. 23, June 9, 1898
       A Weekly Magazine for Boys and Girls

Author: Various

Editor: Julia Truitt Bishop

Release Date: July 3, 2006 [EBook #18745]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GREAT ROUND WORLD ***




Produced by Emmy, Juliet Sutherland and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net






  _FIVE CENTS._

  THE GREAT ROUND WORLD
  AND WHAT IS GOING ON IN IT

    Vol. 2--No. 23,              June 9, 1898.             No. 83.
  [Entered at Post Office, New York City, as second class matter]

  [Illustration: A
  WEEKLY
  NEWSPAPER
  FOR
  BOYS AND
  GIRLS]

  Subscription
  $1.50 per year
    .75 6 months


      THE GREAT ROUND WORLD PUBL. CO.
      NO. 3 AND 5 WEST 18TH ST. NEW YORK CITY

  =Copyright, 1898, by THE GREAT ROUND WORLD Publishing Company.=

       *       *       *       *       *

The Great Round World

Published Every Thursday Throughout the Year

=Single Numbers, 5c. Each=

       *       *       *       *       *

SUBSCRIPTION RATES:

          One year, - 52 numbers   $1.50
          Six months, 26  "          .75
          Foreign subscriptions     2.25

Numbers are bound up into four parts each year. Charge for binding, 35
cents a part.

Remittances should be by registered letter, or by check, express-order,
or postal-order, payable to THE GREAT ROUND WORLD PUBLISHING CO.

No receipts are sent for remittances unless requested. The number on the
address label represents the number of the paper with which subscription
will expire.

Ten days' notice should be given of any change of address.

          ADVERTISING RATES ON APPLICATION

          =ADDRESS:=

          Great Round World Publishing Co.
          =3 and 5 West 18th Street, New York City=

       *       *       *       *       *

At any of the following stores copies and bound volumes of THE GREAT
ROUND WORLD will be found on sale, and subscribers may exchange their
numbers for bound volumes:

          JOHN WANAMAKER, Philadelphia, Pa.
          W. B. CLARKE & CO., Boston, Mass.
          J. & R. SIMMS, 123 22d St., Chicago, Ill.
          WOODWARD & LOTHROP, Washington, D. C.
          PETER PAUL BOOK CO., Buffalo, N. Y.
          BURROWS BROS. CO., Cleveland, Ohio.
          PRESTON & ROUNDS CO., Providence, R. I.
          H. H. CARTER & CO., Boston, Mass.
          WHITAKER & RAY CO., San Francisco, Cal.
          THE ROBERT CLARKE CO., Cincinnati, O.
          THE MARTIN & HOYT CO., Atlanta, Ga.
          ST. PAUL BOOK & STATIONERY CO., St. Paul, Minn.

       *       *       *       *       *

_=TALK IS CHEAP=_

=DON'T PAY $100 FOR A=

          =TALKING
          MACHINE=

when you can buy one which for amusement will make the children happy
and cause the old folks to smile. Complicated machines get out of order.

=$3.50=

[Illustration]

=The United States Talking Machine=

is simple, durable; no parts to break or get out of order. Any child can
operate it. It is neatly encased in a hard wood box, well finished, size
8-1/2x11-1/2x3-1/2 inches, with brass hinges and catch; has hearing
tubes for two persons, one (Berliner's Gramophone) record and
twenty-five needle points. Price, complete with one Record, (express
charges prepaid) =$3.50=. Weight 4 lbs. Remit by Bank Draft, Express, or
Post Office money order. =Agents wanted.=

For terms and particulars address

            =UNITED STATES TALKING MACHINE CO.=
          =(DEPT. B) 57 E. 9th ST., NEW YORK CITY=

       *       *       *       *       *

          =Mention...=

          Great
          Round
          World

          =When
          Writing
          Advertisers...=


[Illustration: DO YOU BIKE AT NIGHT?]

       *       *       *       *       *

          _Send for Our...._
                  =Premium Catalogue=
                            _Sent for 2-cent Stamp_

       *       *       *       *       *

=Patriotic Songs=

          =Words and Music=
          =10 Cents a Copy=

JUST READY


_ADDRESS:_

          THE GREAT ROUND WORLD PUBLISHING COMPANY
               5 West 18th Street, New York

       *       *       *       *       *

A Song of Life

          _By MARGARET W. MORLEY. With illustrations
          of flowers, fishes, frogs, birds, etc., set in the text.
          12mo, $1.25._

"It describes with artistic delicacy the transmission of that wonderful
thing called life in both the plant and animal existence. The difficult
subject is treated with such intelligence and charm of manner that
children may read it with interest, and parents need have no fear of its
influence."--_The Chicago Times._

"Something of flower life, something of fish life, of frogs, and of
birds, and a chapter on human life, form the subjects of this book,--all
told in the graceful manner of a womanly woman, whose love for nature
has given her a keener insight into nature's secrets, and a greater
ability to impart those secrets to others with the ease of face-to-face
talks than is vouchsafed to many people."--_The Boston Times._

          =SPECIAL--25 copies of this exquisite book at 75 cents each.=

          WILLIAM BEVERLEY HARISON, 5 West 18th Street.
                          New York

       *       *       *       *       *

          FOUR TRUE STORIES OF LIFE AND ADVENTURE. By Jessie
          R. Smith. New York: William Beverley Harison.
          Price 36 cents, postpaid.

"Four True Stories of Life and Adventure," by Jessie R. Smith. This is a
book to be read by children, not to them. A child during the years of
seven and nine is usually hungering for true stories, and some mothers
and teachers try to meet the demand by reading and telling "true"
stories to them. This is well and good, but it is clear that if this
inborn craving could be met by books framed in language of such limited
vocabulary and construction that so young a child would constantly be
invited to the story, how valuable it would be. This book is designated
to meet this end. Less than 750 different words are used in the entire
series, and these, excepting the necessary geographical names, are all
in the commonest use among children. The stories are of Columbus,
Captain John Smith, Miles Standish, Benjamin Franklin. Mothers and
teachers with children of from seven to nine years of age will give this
book a hearty welcome--the teachers because the market supply is so
painfully deficient in this line, and the mothers because it will so
admirably solve the oft-repeated query of "Mother, what can I do next?"
It is so well gotten out and still so cheap that it should have a large
sale.--_Mother's Journal, March, 1898._


       *       *       *       *       *

'TIS THE SMALL THINGS OF LIFE THAT GIVE PLEASURE

          That's why the
            "=DUBLEOOK=" Bicycle
                              Hanger
                           is PERFECT

          =50c.=

          =FULL NICKELED
          COMPLETE=

          =EASY= for Cleaning and Storing
          =SAVES= Tires and Enamel
          All Running Gear Free

          Of all dealers or postpaid of

          =THE G.W.E. CO., Room 1103, 26 Cortlandt Street, New York=

       *       *       *       *       *

=BINDING CASE=

To hold loose numbers of the current part of THE GREAT ROUND
WORLD--preventing them from being lost, getting soiled, or scattered.
May be had in green, red, or blue cloth. =Price, 35 Cents.=

                     ADDRESS
          =Great Round World Publishing Co.=
           =5 WEST 18TH STREET, NEW YORK.=

       *       *       *       *       *

THE LIVING METHOD FOR LEARNING


=How to Think in French=

The most successful means yet devised for learning and teaching how to
SPEAK FRENCH.....

=Sent, postpaid, on receipt of $1.00=

"I am sure the book will accomplish precisely what is set to be its
purpose."--=Prof. James W. Bright=, Johns Hopkins University.

"You have done a great and beautiful work in the publication of your
manuals."--=Bishop John H. Vincent=, Chancellor of Chautauqua.


=How to Think in German=

=Sent, postpaid, on receipt of $1.50=

"As a practical book to aid in quickly acquiring the power of correct
and fluent speaking of the German language this work has no
equal."--=Scientific American=, Nov. 11, 1893, p. 316.


=How to Think in Spanish=

=Sent, postpaid, on receipt of $1.50=

"The learner is not obliged to think of rules or of English words when
he wishes to speak Spanish."--=N. Y. School Journal=, July 14, 1894.

       *       *       *       *       *

            =Prof. CH. F. KROEH, Author and Publisher=
          Stevens Institute of Technology         HOBOKEN, N. J.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Great Round World

And What Is Going On In It

       *       *       *       *       *

Vol. II., No. 23.   JUNE 9, 1898    Whole No. 83

       *       *       *       *       *

CONTENTS.
  LATEST NEWS                             774
  With the Editor                         713
  Letters                                 714
  New Books                               715
  American and Spanish Losses             717
  Declarations of Neutrality              718
  Second Call for Volunteers              719
  Damage to the _Columbia_                719
  Balloons for War Purposes               720
  Taking Photographs of Battles           720
  Use of Kites in War-time                721
  New Armor-plate Contracts               722
  Privateers for Spain                    723
  Hawaii                                  724
  News from Spain                         724
  Lieutenant Carranza in Trouble          725
  News from the Philippines               727
  Postal Service in War-time              730
  European Powers and the Philippines     731
  Cable-Cutting and International Law     732
  Riots in Italy                          733
  The Leiter Wheat Deal                   734
  News from West Africa                   735
  War News                                736
  LATEST NEWS                             738
  The Flag                                742

       *       *       *       *       *

[Sidenote: =With the Editor=]

We wish to call our subscribers' attention to our new binders for THE
GREAT ROUND WORLD. During the past year we have received many requests
for missing numbers, also suggestions that some sort of cover or holder
should be supplied, in order that numbers might be kept together,
constant reference being made to back numbers, the loss of one causing
much inconvenience. After giving the matter careful study, we have at
last succeeded in making a handy case, in which the numbers as issued
may be inserted. This case is strongly bound in cloth, with a handsome
design on back and sides; the copies of THE GREAT ROUND WORLD can be
inserted without mutilating them in any way, and be kept clean and in
condition for binding.

       *       *       *       *       *

Letters

          EDITOR OF THE GREAT ROUND WORLD.

          I am very much interested in the war, and would
          like to do something for my country. Could you
          suggest something that a little girl could do?

          Respectfully yours,
                      ALMA D.

Other boys and girls are gathering illustrated papers, periodicals, and
books to be forwarded to the soldiers and sailors. You can help in this
way.

          EDITOR OF THE GREAT ROUND WORLD.

          In your issue of April 21st, you speak of the
          Russian officer Milutine having said that no
          Christian had ever succeeded in entering and
          leaving Mecca before his doing so. Sir Richard
          Burton distinctly states that he was the first man
          ever to accomplish this feat, as you will see by
          his book. Who is correct?

          Very truly yours,
                  J. T.

If you read the account again, you will see that Milutine is quoted as
having said that he had heard that no Christian had previously gone to
Mecca and returned safely. It is true that Burton did precede Milutine.
EDITOR.

       *       *       *       *       *

New Books

"Manipulation of the Microscope," Edward Bausch (Rochester: Bausch &
Lomb Optical Co.). At this season of the year, when so many of our
readers are interested in the study of botany and other nature work, the
use of the microscope enters largely into their work--and yet how few
people really understand this most useful instrument. The writer of this
admirable little book very sensibly assumes that his readers are anxious
to learn the subject from its simplest form to the more complex details,
and he has therefore made a thoroughly useful book. Few people realize
the delight of using a microscope intelligently, nor do they grasp the
true value of even the simple pocket forms of this invaluable little
instrument. If they did properly appreciate the microscope, every boy
would carry a two or three loop lens, and find it as useful almost as
the indispensable jackknife. The wonders of field, forest, and seashore
are not thoroughly appreciated unless the microscope is
used--_intelligently_.

[Illustration: SPANISH TORPEDO-BOAT DESTROYER, "FUROR."]


       *       *       *       *       *

Current History

       *       *       *       *       *

In our last number we give a review of the first month of the war. In
glancing over the news, it is extremely interesting to contrast the
losses of Spain with those of the United States. In the campaign off
Cuba, we have had less than thirty men killed and wounded, whereas the
Spaniards have lost several hundreds; they have had many of their
fortifications destroyed, and have suffered great damage in other
ways--by the capture of vessels, etc. In the far East, Spain's fleet was
destroyed, and many men killed and wounded; against this was a loss on
our part of one man killed and six wounded, and approximately no damage
to our vessels.

The escape of the _Oregon_ is considered another victory for us, as
during that trip of about fifteen thousand miles she might easily have
been intercepted and destroyed had she not been splendidly handled. Her
run of four thousand miles between San Francisco and Callao (cal-ye-ae-o)
is the longest ever made by a battle-ship without stop, and in the
latter part of her trip, on one long stretch, she averaged over fifteen
knots, a wonderful speed at the end of a trip of over ten thousand
miles--for a vessel's bottom becomes very foul with barnacles, seaweed,
etc., which greatly retard its passage through the water.

It is reported that, while coaling at Rio, a number of dynamite-bombs
were smuggled into the coal, but fortunately they were discovered by the
sailors.

[Footnote: Authority for pronunciation of proper names: Century
Dictionary.]

       *       *       *       *       *

Action in reference to neutrality has been taken by Russia, Greece,
Venezuela, the Netherlands, and Canada. The declaration of neutrality by
Venezuela is of special importance, as Spain's fleet would have found
Venezuelean ports of inestimable value as places of refuge and for the
purpose of coaling. Venezuela expresses her position in the one
sentence: "The Republic will observe the strictest neutrality during the
contest." No statement is made, however, as to what will be considered
contraband.

The Dutch proclamation of neutrality, in addition to the usual forms,
especially cautions the citizens of the Netherlands against becoming
connected in any way with privateering; and the Dutch vessels are also
required to respect the blockade; in reference to coal, the Dutch
regulation is that only enough shall be sold to permit Spanish or
American vessels to reach the nearest port of their country.

The Russian proclamation contains a statement to the effect that the
Imperial Government, in concert with the other powers, had endeavored to
find a means which would prevent an armed conflict between the two
countries; that such friendly measures were without result, and that the
Imperial Government "witnesses with regret the armed conflict between
two states to which she is united by old friendship and deep sympathy;
it is firmly resolved in regard to the two belligerents that a perfect
and impartial neutrality will be observed."

Greece has simply declared that the strictest neutrality will be
maintained.

       *       *       *       *       *

On the 25th of May, President McKinley issued a call for 75,000
additional volunteers; of the previous volunteers called for, about
112,000 have been mustered into the army; with the addition that is now
called for, the army will number about 250,000; and it is expected that
active operations will be begun at once, and that Porto Rico as well as
Cuba will be seized at the earliest possible moment; it is expected that
part of our fleet will proceed at once to San Juan, Porto Rico, and
destroy the fortifications there, so that our army can without serious
opposition land on the island.

       *       *       *       *       *

The cruiser _Columbia_, which was disabled in a collision off Long
Island, is being rapidly repaired in the Brooklyn Navy-Yard. If she had
not been very strong there is little doubt but that the _Foscolia_ would
have cut her in two; the frames of the vessel, however, are so well
constructed that these, with the protective deck, prevented more serious
damage. Naval officers are very much pleased to find how well the vessel
withstood the collision; they say that if the _Columbia_ had been a ship
like the large ocean liners, nothing would have prevented her sinking
with the ship that struck her. When the officer on the _Columbia_ saw
that a collision was inevitable, he gave the order "Full speed ahead";
it is very fortunate that he did so, as otherwise the _Foscolia_ would
have hit her amidships; and the damage must then have been very serious,
as the water compartments in that part of the vessel are large, and when
filled might have caused her to capsize. The damage proves to be much
less severe than was at first thought; after two or three weeks it is
thought she will be on duty again.

This is not the first time that the _Columbia_ has been in trouble of
this kind; two years ago she collided with the _Wyanoke_, a coasting
steamer; in spite of the trying circumstances at that time, not a man
was lost on the sinking coaster, so perfect was the discipline on the
_Columbia_.

       *       *       *       *       *

It is reported that the balloons recently received from Paris will be
sent forward with the first expedition to Cuba; arrangements for
equipping the balloon train are under charge of Lieut. Joseph E.
Maxfield of the Signal Service. It is reported that one of the French
balloons will be first given a careful test from the deck of one of the
war-ships off Cuba. The necessary plant for generating the gas is
already in Tampa; the gas will be forwarded in steel tubes, which will
hold a large volume when the gas is compressed.

       *       *       *       *       *

It is now proposed to take the necessary apparatus to Cuba, and have
pictures of the bombardment of Havana and of other engagements made for
reproduction with the cinematograph. Dr. D. S. Elmendorf is now at
Tampa, Fla., making elaborate preparations for taking these pictures.
The cinematograph is a wonderful invention. By a clever arrangement
hundreds of photographs are taken, one after the other, with marvellous
rapidity; these pictures are printed on a long strip, and made to pass
through the magic lantern as rapidly as when the photographs were taken;
the result is a composite picture which, when thrown upon a screen,
reproduces every motion.

Edison was the one who invented this system of taking in succession very
rapidly a great number of pictures of moving objects. We hope that Dr.
Elmendorf will be successful, for we will then be able to see these
interesting scenes; and if by a clever use of the phonograph or
graphophone he can record the sound of the guns, we may not only see,
but hear, the battles.

       *       *       *       *       *

In THE GREAT ROUND WORLD last year we described experiments that were
being made with kites by Mr. W. E. Eddy, of Bayonne, N. J., who has been
largely instrumental in promoting interest in scientific kite-flying.
Kites have been made of such power as to carry a heavy cable from one
point to another over some obstruction, or to lift a man some distance
from the ground for the purpose of observation. It is now planned to
make use of the kites for offensive and defensive purposes in connection
with the invasion of Cuba. These kites can be raised to an enormous
height and photographs taken of the country, or, if necessary, by a
clever device which slides on the string of the kite, dynamite can be
carried to a point over the enemies' camp or fortifications and dropped
into them.

It is also believed that the kite will be of great value for signalling
purposes, especially at night, as it will be possible to hoist electric
incandescent lamps to a great height above the earth and signal by
turning the light on or off in accordance with a settled code. Mr. Eddy
estimates that it will be possible to drop fifty pounds of dynamite at a
time from a distance a mile away; the plan is to send up these kites
from within the lines of the attacking force and drop the dynamite into
the fortifications of Havana. The men who fly the kites can remain out
of sight of the forts; and the kite will be such a small mark and so
high up in the air as to be very difficult to hit with a rifle-ball.

       *       *       *       *       *

After a great deal of discussion in Congress, and many delays in
finishing our war-ships because of the price asked for armor by the
large armor companies, it was decided that the maximum rate--that is,
the highest price--that the Government would pay should be $400 per ton;
until this change was made neither of the great armor-plate
manufacturers would bid, and, as a result, armor was not obtainable. May
24th, bids were opened for supplying the three battle-ships, _Illinois_,
_Alabama_, and _Wisconsin_, now being constructed by the Union Iron
Works, Newport News. About a year ago the Government advertised for bids
for supplying this armor, but no bids were received because Congress had
made the limit of price too low. Bids opened on the 24th were from two
companies, the Bethlehem Iron Works and Carnegie & Co. It is evident
that an arrangement had been entered into between the two, as one
company bid to supply the armor for the _Alabama_, and the other for the
_Wisconsin_, the bids in each case being the same--that is, at the
maximum price of $400 per ton.

The armor for the _Alabama_ will cost $1,022,504; that for the
_Wisconsin_, $1,023,504; the first of this armor will be delivered in
about seven months, and thereafter about 300 tons will be delivered
monthly. At this rate it will be about fifteen months before the last of
the armor is ready.

       *       *       *       *       *

It is reported that Spain is about to sanction the commission or fitting
out of privateers to prey upon our commerce. In the Spanish newspapers
appear almost daily criticisms of our _cowardly_ methods of carrying on
the war. At one time it is stated that our vessels have been seen flying
the Spanish flag in order that they may surprise some ship of theirs; at
another time our _cowardly_ attack upon some fort in Cuba is mentioned,
when we sneak up under cover of darkness only to beat a hasty retreat
when the first gun is fired.

In the face of such conduct, it is claimed by the Spaniards that we are
entitled to no consideration, and it is believed both here and abroad
that all of this kind of absurd talk means that Spain contemplates a
resort to privateers to get even with us.

Privateers, in former years, when fitted out by Spain have acted so much
like pirates that they have been considered and treated as such by
England and by other nations, and the whole system has been so seriously
condemned that it is believed that, should either Spain or this country
fit out privateers, other nations would immediately interfere and put a
stop to it.

       *       *       *       *       *

There has been considerable discussion in reference to Hawaii; the
question of annexation is favored almost universally by our people and
in Congress; in fact, the annexation of the island is now considered not
merely advisable, but absolutely necessary. In sending troops from this
country to the Philippine Islands we must stop on the way for supplies,
and should Hawaii be captured by the Spaniards or annexed by another
power, it would prove a very serious matter to us; it is to be hoped
that the question of annexation will be settled at once.

       *       *       *       *       *

Very little news of interest is received from Spain. In the list of the
new Spanish ministry, published week before last, we included the name
of Senor Leon y Castillo as Minister of Foreign Affairs; Senor Castillo
did not accept the office, which was then offered to Duke Almodovar de
Rio, who has accepted.

The duke said that he did not wish the office, but accepted it on
patriotic grounds, "as every Spaniard is bound to devote all his powers
to the defence of his country." The duke is well and favorably known in
England, where he was educated, and it is considered that the choice for
this office is a good one.

The Spanish Minister of Finance, in discussing Spain's financial
condition, recently said that he considered it satisfactory, and that
the payment of all expenses of the war is assured; as a means of raising
additional funds he proposes to convert the floating debt, now amounting
to about 500,000,000 pesetas, into treasury bonds of small denomination,
and to extend the Bank of Spain note issues. Spain may by this issue of
additional paper money find herself in as unfortunate a position as did
Cuba when Weyler endeavored to force paper money upon the people there.
With an increase of twenty per cent. on taxes of all kinds, and with a
paper money of doubtful value, Spain will indeed be in a sorry
predicament.

Later reports from Spain would indicate that a crisis is approaching;
business is at a standstill, and a famine imminent, as provisions are so
high as to place them beyond the reach of the poorer people. It is
thought that if an encounter with our fleet ends in disaster to Admiral
Cervera, a revolution is inevitable. It is said that Emperor Francis
Joseph of Austria has advised the Queen to leave the country, but that
she has expressed her determination to remain and face the result.

       *       *       *       *       *

Lieutenant Carranza, to whom we are indebted for the admirable
explanation of why Spain should not be held responsible for the _Maine_
disaster, published in THE GREAT ROUND WORLD some weeks ago, is having
an unpleasant time in Canada. Together with several other Spanish
officials he has been carrying on an "information bureau" for the
Spanish Government; by information bureau we mean a system of receiving
and forwarding reports to the Spanish Government in reference to our
fortifications, etc. The present trouble has arisen from the fact that a
letter containing important information has been mislaid; he accuses
Joseph Kellert, a Montreal detective, and two other persons of entering
his room and stealing this letter. They are making such a fuss over the
matter that the letter must have been an exceedingly important one.

[Illustration: NEGRO TYPE--PHILIPPINE ISLANDS]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: MALAY TYPE--PHILIPPINE ISLANDS.]

A despatch has been received from Admiral Dewey, dated May 20th,
addressed to the Secretary of the Navy; he cables as follows:

"Situation is unchanged. Blockade is continued. There is a great
scarcity of provisions in Manila. The foreign subjects fear an outbreak
of Spanish soldiers; arrangements have been made for the transfer of
these foreign subjects to Cavite if necessary. The rebel
commander-in-chief, Aguinaldo, who was brought here by the _McCulloch_,
is reorganizing a force, and may render assistance that will be
valuable."

[Illustration: THE CASINO ESPANOL, FACING PLAZA, SANTIAGO DE CUBA.]

The first shipment of troops to the Philippine Islands started May 25th
on the three transports, _City of Pekin_, _Australia_, and _City of
Sydney_. When these vessels left San Francisco, late in the afternoon,
the shores were lined with people, and there was great enthusiasm. These
three transports carry about twenty-five hundred men; the expedition is
under command of Brigadier-General Anderson, and consists of four
companies of regulars under Major Robe; the First Regiment California
Volunteers, Colonel Smith; the First Regiment Oregon Volunteers, Colonel
Summers; and a battalion of fifty heavy artillery, Major Gary; and in
addition to these a number of sailors, naval officers, a large amount of
ammunition and naval stores for Admiral Dewey's fleet, and supplies
sufficient to last a year. It was expected that the fleet would arrive
at the Sandwich Islands by Tuesday, May 31st; it will proceed from this
port in company with the _Charleston_, and should arrive at Manila about
June 20th. A detachment of the United States Engineers was ordered from
Willets Point, N. Y., to the Philippines, under command of Captain
Langfitt; Captain Langfitt is an expert in the matter of torpedoes and
harbor defences of this kind, and it is thought that his mission at the
Philippines will be to fortify the different harbors by planting mines,
torpedoes, etc.

Now that the reinforcements are well on their way, there is no reason to
feel any anxiety in reference to any expedition which might be sent from
Spain. The shortest route from Cadiz is, of course, by way of the Suez
Canal; the distance by this route is over 8,000 miles; from San
Francisco to Manila, by way of the Sandwich Islands, is but 7,000 miles;
therefore we have at least a week the start of any expedition which
might leave Spain. The troops sent on the three transports which sailed
May 25th will be sufficient to garrison Corregidor Island; with strong
fortifications on this island at the entrance of Manila Bay, it is
believed that we can prevent the entrance of any fleet. The only fleet
which it is possible for Spain to send at this time is Admiral Camara's;
in this there are but two armorclads, the _Pelayo_ and _Emperadar Carlos
V_. Admiral Dewey would not consider them sufficiently formidable to
give him any anxiety.

Unless we meet with misfortune or great reverses in dealing with the
Spanish forces now at the Philippines, there is little doubt but that
they are ours by this time.

       *       *       *       *       *

Now that the Philippine Islands are to be kept by us, the previous
regulations in reference to mails have been changed. When war was
declared the Post-Office Department shut off communication with the
Philippine Islands, as well as with other Spanish countries. A new order
has been issued, and mail may now be sent to the Philippine Islands by
way of San Francisco. In times of war this country permits soldiers to
mail letters to their homes without prepaying postage; this is a great
advantage to them, as we can readily understand that while on a campaign
post-offices cannot be reached and postage stamps are not easy to get.
The officers or men have simply to write on the letters, "Soldier's
letter," "Sailor's letter," "Marine's letter," and they will be carried
by post to their destination and postage collected there without extra
charge. Under ordinary circumstances letters will not be carried unless
partly prepaid; and if foreign postage is not fully prepaid a penalty in
the shape of extra postage is added to the regular rate, and collected
upon delivery.

       *       *       *       *       *

European powers are watching with great interest our movements in the
East. Admiral Dewey's victory, it is considered, has put an end to
Spanish sovereignty in the East. European governments evidently expect
the United States to keep the Philippines, and it is difficult to see
any other solution, as it will certainly not be advisable to return the
islands to Spain, nor would this be consistent with the "war for
humanity's sake." Spain's cruelties in the Philippines have been even
more excessive than in Cuba, and we certainly should not again place the
islands in the hands of that cruel taskmaster, Spain. It has been
suggested that we cede them to some European power; the question is, Can
we do this? These powers are so jealous of each other that they will not
stand quietly by and see any one of their number favored by a gift of
such importance; on the other hand, the presence of an American colony
in Eastern Asia will be a thorn in the side of the great powers; we
have, therefore, to choose which horn of the dilemma we shall accept.
The final settlement of the matter will, no doubt, cause many new
complications and material changes in the traditional policy of our
Government.

       *       *       *       *       *

The mysterious sailing of the steamship _Adria_ from Key West, a week
ago, has attracted a good deal of comment; it is said that she had on
board many miles of submarine cable, together with the necessary
appliances for grappling, splicing, and laying, and telegraphic
instruments for use on shore. It is believed that the purpose is to cut
the cable off shore, splice a piece to it, and carry it to some
unfrequented spot and there establish a cable station; this would enable
our authorities to communicate quickly with Washington--when the
invasion of Cuba takes place, or to keep the insurgents advised as to
our movements.

       *       *       *       *       *

A very interesting question of international law has been brought up by
the cutting of the cables by Admiral Dewey; it is claimed that by doing
this he has established an international precedent, for his cutting of
the cable connecting a country at war with another country is a forcible
interference with communication which has not been practised in any
previous war.

The question of cable-cutting has never come up before as a means of
offensive warfare, as it is only in recent years that there has been any
extensive laying of cables. Dewey's example has been followed by the
blockading fleet off Cuba; this fact establishes beyond all peradventure
the position that this Government has assumed. The British Government
evidently believes that in the time of war the right to cut cables
connecting the opposing nation with other countries is one which may be
assumed without violation of international law. In a speech on this
matter, Mr. Balfour, First Lord of the Treasury, quoting in Parliament a
few days ago an agreement made in Paris in 1884, in reference to the
protection of cables by different nations, said: "By Article XV. of this
convention, in time of war a belligerent signatory to the convention
(that is, a county signing this agreement) is as free to act with
respect to submarine cables as if the convention did not exist. I am not
prepared, therefore, to say that a belligerent, on the ground of
military exigency, would under no circumstances be justified in
interfering with cables between the territory of the opposing power and
any other part of the world."

Our State Department considers that this statement on the part of Great
Britain commits that country to the policy regarding cables which we
have recently put into practice; her approval of our action virtually
establishes this right as a principle of international law.

       *       *       *       *       *

Very serious trouble is anticipated in Italy because of the hopeless
poverty of much of the peasantry, and the apparent inefficiency of the
present system of government. The Italian peasant barely succeeds under
the most advantageous circumstances in obtaining food enough for himself
and family; consequently every change in the price of bread is a
serious matter to him; under the present Government the taxes have
become heavier, and this is sure at no distant date to bring about a
crisis; that this crisis is near is shown by the recent bread riots. The
only hope of averting trouble is a change in the policy of the Italian
Government.


Many people in Europe are asking why the price of wheat continues to
advance, as there is apparently no reason, for the Spanish-American war
has created no increased demand, nor has it seriously interfered with
the shipment of grain. The increase in price is accounted for, by those
who are familiar with these subjects, on the ground that there seems to
be a general conspiracy to hold back supplies from Europe in the hope of
obtaining higher prices, and in consequence scarcity is created in
certain markets, thus causing the rise in price both there and
elsewhere, and with each rise in price comes additional reason for the
holding back of supplies on the part of the speculators who are
manipulating the market.

       *       *       *       *       *

It is rather interesting to turn from the account of the riots in Italy
to a brief history of Joseph Leiter's famous wheat deal. This wheat
deal, which has just been closed, is the most remarkable that has ever
been known in the history of the grain markets. Leiter has not only made
himself rich, but has added to the wealth of the farmers in the West
enormously. Every effort on the part of other speculators to force
Leiter to the wall has been unsuccessful. Last fall when he was buying,
they turned over enormous quantities of wheat, but he seemed to have
untold millions at his command, for he met every offer with cash, and
demonstrated that he had more money if they could furnish more wheat:
the result was that wheat went up, up, up, until it reached nearly $2 a
bushel, and Leiter has made, it is estimated, over $4,000,000, or nearly
$500 _an hour_ since April of last year.

The account of the troubles in Italy, and the great prosperity resulting
from Leiter's success here, simply demonstrate what has been called
attention to before--that what affects one part of the world has its
influence upon the rest. A contribution from the prospered wheat farmers
(and Leiter) to the suffering poor in Italy would not be amiss under the
circumstances.

       *       *       *       *       *

In our recent numbers we mentioned the trouble in the Sierra Leone
Protectorate. This trouble has been ascribed to the hut tax; this tax is
practically the only tax levied upon the natives, and it is for the
purpose of raising sufficient revenue to prevent slave-trading. The
trouble in this colony has arisen indirectly, not directly, as a result
of this tax, as the slave-traders have used it as a pretext for stirring
up the rebellion among the natives. England for many years has been
doing her best to suppress slave-trading, and the slave-traders make use
of any grievance, imaginary or otherwise, in their attempts to overthrow
the power of the white men, in order that their barbarous man-hunting
may not be interfered with. Several men-of-war have been sent by England
to Sierra Leone, and are to be reinforced by others; troops have also
been sent to the assistance of the missionaries and others whose lives
are endangered by the uprising of the natives.

Day by day news from this district becomes more alarming; all of this
part of Africa is at the present time in a state of great excitement,
and it is expected that great difficulty will be experienced in
suppressing the revolt. Early in May, the rebels attacked the American
mission at Rotufunk and killed five of the American missionaries--Mr.
and Mrs. Kane, Miss Archer, Miss Hatfield, and Miss Schenck. Their
bodies have been recovered.

The hut tax, which has been made a pretext for all this trouble, amounts
to about one shilling a year for each member of the population, or, in
case of families, five shillings for each family. The insurrection was
started by a native chief who has given the colonial government much
trouble heretofore.

[Illustration]

During the latter part of May there were first rumors, then reports, and
then confirmed reports that the Spanish fleet was at Santiago, Cuba, and
that it was caught as in a trap by our war-vessels.

The harbor of Santiago is a deep one, with a very narrow mouth, as
stated in a recent issue of THE GREAT ROUND WORLD. The Navy Department
feels extremely happy over the locating of the Spanish fleet and the
fact that it may be kept where it is for the present; this will make
possible the invasion of Cuba and the carrying out of the general plans
of the campaign without fear of having them interrupted by attack from
the Spanish vessels. Santiago is not very well supplied with provisions,
and it will be but a question of time when the Spanish fleet must either
force their way out of the harbor or else surrender. It is to be hoped
that the capture of this fleet will be accomplished without battle, for
battle will mean a large loss on both sides, and it can have but one
ultimate outcome. The inevitable may be deferred, but the United States
is pretty sure to win in the long run.

One or two of our battle-ships or monitors stationed at the entrance of
the harbor will be sufficient to prevent the exit of the Spaniards, even
if we do not succeed in so blocking the channel with obstructions as to
make exit impossible; this will leave the rest of our fleet free to
operate elsewhere. Great vigilance will be exercised to prevent the
Spanish torpedo-boats from running out and attacking our vessels under
cover of darkness. The entrance to the harbor is so narrow that a patrol
of small boats can be established, making such an attack almost
impossible.

Cables connecting Cuba with the world outside are being rapidly located
and cut, and by the time this paper goes to press Cuba will no doubt be
cut off entirely, and we will cease to see reports from Madrid of what
is going on in Havana and elsewhere in Cuba.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Sidenote: =Latest News=]

May 31st Commodore Schley made an attack upon the forts at the entrance
to the harbor of Santiago, with the intention of ascertaining the
position and strength of the fortifications. At one o'clock in the
afternoon of that day the signal to form column was hoisted on the
_Massachusetts_; the _New Orleans_, _Iowa_, and _Vixen_ followed her as
she steamed slowly toward the harbor entrance. When between three and
four miles from shore two of her 13-inch guns were fired; it is reported
that one of the shells struck the partly dismantled Spanish war-ship
_Reina Mercedes_, crashing through her bow and killing a number of men;
two shots followed quite near the same vessel; the two guns in the
forward turret sent their projectiles so close to the Spanish flagship
that the spray was thrown all over her. The shore batteries at this time
began a rapid fire on the _Massachusetts_, but she was soon beyond their
range. The fire was then turned on the _New Orleans_; the shells from
this vessel struck the large battery on the hill above Morro Castle, and
a great cloud of dust and debris rose in the air as the shells burst.
They must have done considerable damage; the shells which followed sent
portions of the wall of Morro Castle tumbling down, a mass of ruins.
Almost every shot found a mark in either the batteries or vessels. It
was the _Iowa's_ turn next; her shells made things lively for the
Spanish fleet in the harbor, although it is believed she was not
successful in hitting any of the Spanish vessels. The little _Vixen_
swept along after her predecessors, and banged away with her one
6-pounder with as great an air of importance as if it had been a
13-inch rifle; then she steamed away in a triumphant manner, as much as
to say: "I have done my share." The commodore promptly ordered her to
keep out of danger. The ironclads turned, and a second time bore down on
the harbor, and when within five miles the shells began again to fall
thick and fast around the Spanish vessels, although accurate firing was
almost out of the question, as the vessels were behind the hill out in
sight, and range could not be ascertained. The Spaniards kept up a brisk
cannonade long after our vessels had stopped firing; a tremendous amount
of damage was done--to the Caribbean Sea; their shells did not come
within a mile of our vessels.

June 3d the auxiliary cruiser _St. Paul_ returned to New York, after a
two weeks' cruise in West Indian waters; she had been detailed for guard
and scout duty, and was one of the first to discover the Spanish fleet
in Santiago Bay. She left Key West May 18th, and arrived off Santiago
about the 20th. The St. Louis had been detailed for similar service, and
had been watching Santiago harbor with the expectation that the Spanish
vessels would attempt to enter there; she, however, left on the 19th. It
is supposed that Admiral Cervera must have entered the harbor in the
twenty-four hours between this date and that of the arrival of the _St.
Paul_.

As it was advisable that her whereabouts should not be discovered to the
Spaniards, the _St. Paul_ cruised backward and forward about twenty
miles out; she kept this distance off shore in order that the Spanish
torpedo-boats might not make a dash out of the harbor in the darkness
and torpedo her. It was not until the 23d that anything was seen of the
Spaniards. Captain Sigsbee is quite confident that on this date he
identified the _Vizcaya_, the _Christopher Colon_, and several
torpedo-boat destroyers within the harbor; they were evidently making
preparations for departure, but were too late, as our fleet under
Commodore Schley reached the harbor before they could get away.

The only excitement that the _St. Paul_ had was the capture of the
collier _Restormel_. The vessel was sighted very early one morning about
five miles from the harbor entrance, running with all speed to obtain
the protection of the batteries on shore. The _St. Paul_ was too quick
for her; crowding on all steam, the collier was soon overtaken and
stopped by a solid shot fired across her bows. A prize crew was put on
board and the vessel sent to Key West.

The _St. Paul_ is off again; her destination is, however, a secret.

Another "great victory" was reported by the Spaniards on June 4th. In
the despatch from Madrid it was stated that one of our most powerful
vessels attempted to enter the harbor of Santiago de Cuba and had been
blown up by a torpedo and sunk, her crew of six men and one officer
being captured. There was something very inconsistent about the
statement "most powerful vessel" with a crew of six men and one officer,
but apparently the Spaniards overlooked this. The fact of the matter is
that Admiral Sampson decided to close the harbor effectually, and in
order to do this sent the collier _Merrimac_ to the entrance of the
channel and had her sunk there.

This brilliant exploit was planned by a young officer, Lieut. Richmond
Pearson Hobson, who with seven volunteers carried it out in a most
gallant way.

At this distance and without experience of the fearful effect of modern
gunnery, we cannot appreciate what a dangerous errand these brave men
undertook. To sail close under the guns of many batteries and forts,
through a narrow channel known to be mined, was to face death, and
almost sure death--an act which will make their names famous. Yet when
volunteers were called for, every man stepped forward and begged to be
taken.

At three o'clock Friday morning the _Merrimac_ started. In the darkness
she succeeded in getting well in shore before she was discovered; then
shot and shell made the water white with spray all around her. But the
brave fellows never flinched, and on they sailed until the narrowest
part of the channel was reached. Down went the anchor, and soon a dull
report in her hold told of the successful explosion of the torpedo which
was to blow her bottom out and make her sinking certain.

The crew left and succeeded in clearing the vessel before she went down.
But two are reported to have been wounded, and these but slightly. All
were captured and taken to Morro Castle.

The great bravery of the gallant fellows was recognized by Admiral
Cervera and he sent a boat with a flag of truce to advise Admiral
Sampson that the men were safe and would be exchanged. This act of the
Spanish admiral has won for him a feeling of great admiration in this
country. It was the act of a noble man.

The Spanish fleet is not only bottled up now, but the cork is in the
bottle.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE FLAG.

Many questions have reached us from subscribers and friends concerning
the meaning and reason for the stars and stripes on the United States
flag, and how the United States came to choose the colors and design of
the flag.

Early in Revolutionary times, each colony had its own flag, and they
were very varied in design, and some had strange designs. The colony of
Massachusetts had a pine-tree on its flag. South Carolina had a
rattlesnake on a yellow flag, and underneath the snake the motto: "Don't
tread on me." New York had a white flag with a beaver on it; and Rhode
Island a white flag with a blue anchor.

Many variations of the "stars and stripes" are found in the flags used
during the first years of the Revolution. Some have red and white
stripes, with the field (where the stars are in the flag we all know)
like the field of the British flag--red, white, and blue lines crossing
one another. This design in the corner of a flag is called its "jack,"
and is often used alone.

In 1777, Congress declared that the flag should have thirteen horizontal
stripes and thirteen white stars on a blue field, each representing one
of the thirteen States. The idea of the adoption of the grouping of
stars and stripes was doubtless taken from the arms of the Washington
family, which consisted of a white shield with two horizontal red bars,
and above these three red stars.

It was the original intention to add a stripe and a star for each state
admitted to the Union, and the grouping of the equal stripes was
supposed to represent the unity of the Federation. In 1792 the stars and
the stripes were both increased to fifteen on account of the admission
to the Union of the States of Vermont and Kentucky, and, after this,
others were added. In 1818, Congress decided to return to the original
thirteen stripes, and to add a star for each new State, which plan has
been followed since. The three colors, red, white, and blue, symbolize
valor, purity, and truth.

The United States has but one national flag, which is flown alike on
buildings, men-of-war, and merchant vessels, and to us Americans its
purity and beauty appeal strongly.

A number of the foreign nations have different flags, known as the royal
standard, the war flag, and the merchant flag. For instance, Spain has
the three. The colors of Spain are red and yellow. The navy flag
consists of three horizontal stripes--yellow in the middle, and a
narrower red band at top and bottom. On the yellow band near the staff
is a coat of arms surmounted by a crown. The merchant flag is made up of
five horizontal stripes--a yellow in middle, a narrow red, then a narrow
yellow, and then a broad red above and below. The colors, red and
yellow, were the colors of the royal house of Aragon, whose fortunes
were closely allied with the Spanish crown. The royal standard of Spain
is an elaborate affair, divided into four parts, containing the heraldic
arms of leading families of Spain, and many devices indicating the
control of Spain over countries which it once held sway over, but which
have long since been lost to her, as Holland, Portugal, etc.

France uses the "tricolor," a flag of three vertical equal stripes, red,
white, and blue, the blue being nearest the staff. France has undergone
many political changes, and this, the flag of the Republic, was adopted
in 1789.

Germany's national flag has a white ground, divided into four parts by
black lines--one broad black line and a narrow one on each side. At the
centre is a circle containing the Prussian crowned eagle. The upper
quarter, by the staff, is divided into three equal horizontal stripes,
black, white, and red, and on these is a Maltese cross--the iron cross
of Germany.

The German merchant flag has red, white, and black horizontal stripes.

Flags have grown by custom and international law to represent
nationality. If they are insulted the insult is to the nation. In war
they are protected by lives, and in peace they pass around the world, or
float from their staffs on land--marks of their nation's strength and
supremacy.

       *       *       *       *       *

SELECTED LIST OF NEW BOOKS

       *       *       *       *       *

=FRENCH= =WITHOUT A MASTER.
          ENTIRELY NEW=

          =Pitman's Practical French Grammar=

=and Conversation for Self-Instruction.= The latest and most successful
method for learning and teaching HOW TO SPEAK FRENCH, with IMITATED
PRONUNCIATION and copious VOCABULARIES. =Price, paper boards, 40 cents;
cloth, 50 cents, postpaid.=

          "A book of great value to those who would master
          French without a teacher."--Prof. J. H. GROVE,
          A.M., Pres. Howard Payne College, Brownwood, Tex.
          ADDRESS

=ISAAC PITMAN & SONS, THE PHONOGRAPHIC DEPOT, 33 UNION SQUARE, NEW YORK=

  _Take Lessons at Metropolitan Shorthand School, 170 Fifth Avenue._

       *       *       *       *       *

The Educational Courier

          W. I. THAMES, Editor

         Is the oldest School Journal published in
         Mississippi. Devoted to the general cause of
         education. Keeps in close touch with educational
         matters in MISSISSIPPI. Publishes STATE BOARD
         QUESTIONS and educational news from everywhere. A
         splendid ADVERTISING MEDIUM. Subscription Fifty
         Cents per Annum. Advertising rate card sent on
         application...... THE EDUCATIONAL COURIER
                           Poplarville, Miss.

       *       *       *       *       *

=The Great Round World REFERENCE ATLAS=

New maps by W. & A. K. JOHNSTON, Edinburgh, Scotland. Specially adapted
for ready reference, and invaluable in tracing geographically the
current of events. Sent postpaid upon receipt of 25 cts. Address

   =THE GREAT ROUND WORLD PUB. CO., 5 West 18th Street, New York City=

       *       *       *       *       *

  BOUND
  VOLUMES

  =THE GREAT ROUND WORLD=
         is bound four parts to the year. Part V.,
         containing January 1 to March 31 (13 numbers) is
         now ready :: ::

Numbers in good condition may be exchanged for bound parts on payment of
35 cents for binding and 10 cents for return carriage.

=Price of Bound Part, $1.00.= May be had in Red, Blue, or Green Binding.

_=THE GREAT ROUND WORLD PUB. CO., 5 West 18th St., New York City.=_

       *       *       *       *       *

          The.....
          Educational Gazette
          Teachers' Bureau

          The Modern Teacher does not spend time and money
          in running over the State hunting a position.
          Instead, he or she selects the most reputable
          Teachers' Agency and registers, leaving the
          chances in the hands of experts. We never ask
          recompense except where actual service has been
          rendered. Thousands of teachers can testify to
          this. We do not desire your money until we have
          earned it. :: :: :: ::

       *       *       *       *       *

          =Educational
          Gazette Co.=

          PUBLISHERS AND
          DEALERS IN

          EDUCATIONAL GAMES
          AND SCHOOL SUPPLIES
          OF ALL KINDS

=Rochester, N. Y.=

       *       *       *       *       *

          OUR BUREAU
          IS....

          =Open to
          All Teachers=

          WHO ARE SUBSCRIBERS, PAID
          ONE YEAR IN ADVANCE

          =$1.00=

Pays for the BEST Educational Paper in existence, and for registration
fee one year.


       *       *       *       *       *

WILLIAM BEVERLEY HARISON, 3 and 5 West 18th Street, N. Y.

       *       *       *       *       *

"ONE PIECE"

Adjustable Book Covers.


These covers fit perfectly all sizes of books. They are all ready for
use--properly gummed--and do not have to be cut. They are made of a
special paper, manufactured exclusively for these covers, which is
admitted to be the best for wear, and also for cleanliness, as it is
glazed and cannot readily be soiled. They are not easily torn, for when
adjusted to a book all exposed edges are of double thickness.

=SIZES.=

=No. A1--Per dozen, *20 cents. Per 100, $1.50. Per 1,000, $12.50.=

This size fits the smallest book, and also small 12mos.


=No. 1--Same price.=

Especially adapted to school and library books. It will fit 16mo. to
small 8 vo. sizes, and is suitable for 90 per cent. of the school books
in use.


=No. 2--Per dozen, *40 cents. Per 100, $2.50 Per 1,000, $17.50.=

For small geographies, encyclopaedias, law books, &c.


=No. 3--Per dozen, *60 cents. Per 100, $3.50. Per 1,000, $25.00.=

For large geographies.

*PRICES INCLUDE POSTAGE TO ANY ADDRESS.


          =CAN THE BOOK COVERS YOU USE BE REMOVED
          WITHOUT DAMAGING THE BOOKS?=

=Do you not have to buy three sizes to cover Histories, Readers,
Arithmetics, &c.?=

=Look at the book covers you are using and see how they stick to covers;
they must injure the books.=

="ONE PIECE" Covers will not stick to or injure the covers of the
books.=

=One size will fit Arithmetics, Histories, &c., and the new paper is
acknowledged to be heavier, tougher, and better than any other cover
paper used.=

=Send for samples and test them for yourself. Sample dozen, postpaid, 25
cents.=

       *       *       *       *       *

FIRST EDITION EXHAUSTED

       *       *       *       *       *

A Short History of.... SPAIN

          BY
          MARY PLATT PARMELE
          (Author of the famous Evolution of Empire Series of Histories)

          =10 Cents Each      _POSTPAID_      $1.00 per Dozen=

       *       *       *       *       *

WE QUOTE FROM LETTERS RECEIVED:

" . . . Wonderfully condensed . . ." "It reads like a romance." "Can be
finished in less than an hour, yet gives a full bird's-eye view of a
country and people. The author's style is charming." "Accidentally
running across your cute little History of Spain, I was so taken with it
as an epitome of the sort that I have long believed there was room for,
that I would like to see what else you have. So please mail me a couple
of sample copies of your weekly, as I have not seen _that_ yet."

"Every school should have a course in Spanish History at this time."

          =Second Edition Now in Press=

       *       *       *       *       *

          =The Great Round World Publishing Company=
              =5 West 18th Street, New York City=



       *       *       *       *       *

.CLUB RATES.

"The Great Round World"

       *       *       *       *       *

          _Subscription
          Price..
          52 numbers.._

          $1.50

          _per year_

          _Address_

          _The Great
          Round World
          Publishing Co._

          _3 and 5 West
          18th Street

          New York City_

                                     PRICE            WITH
                                   SEPARATELY      "G. R. W."
          Atlantic                   $4.00            $5.00
          Book Buyer                  1.00             2.25
          Bookman                     2.00             3.25
          Chap-Book                   2.00             3.00
          Century Magazine            4.00             5.00
          Cosmopolitan                1.00             2.25
          Critic                      3.00             4.25
          Current Literature          3.00             4.00
          Forum                       3.00             4.00
          Harper's Bazaar             4.00             4.75
          Harper's Monthly            4.00             4.75
          Harper's Weekly             4.00             4.75
          Illustrated American        4.00             4.75
          Independent                 3.00             4.00
          Judge                       5.00             6.00
          Leisure Hour                1.00             2.25
          Life                        5.00             6.00
          Lippincott's                3.00             3.75
          Literary Digest             3.00             4.25
          McClure's                   1.00             2.25
          Munsey's                    1.00             2.25
          New England Magazine        3.00             4.00
          North American Review       5.00             5.75
          Our Little Ones and Nursery 1.00             2.25
          Outing                      3.00             3.75
          Outlook                     3.00             4.25
          Puck                        5.00             6.00
          Review of Reviews           2.50             3.50
          Saint Nicholas              3.00             4.00
          Scientific American         3.00             4.25
          Scribner's                  3.00             4.00
          Short Stories               2.50             3.75
          Truth (New York)            2.50             3.50


          ="The Great Round World"=
                will make club rates on any magazines

          "The Great Round World"
                       will make club rates on any magazines

       *       *       *       *       *

..TESTIMONIALS..


_From Miss Mabel J. Penfield, Bellville, Kan.:_

          "I feel that I can not get along without your
          paper the coming year. I am a teacher in the city
          schools in Bellville."

       *       *       *       *       *

_From Miss M. M. Hughes, 202 West 83d Street:_

          "My pupils are very much interested in your little
          weekly paper."

       *       *       *       *       *

_From S. W. Probert, School No. 13, Paterson, N. J.:_

          "Kindly continue our subscription for the paper.
          We would not be without it for five times the
          amount."

       *       *       *       *       *

_From W. D. Lewis, Executive Committee New York State Council of Grammar
School Principals:_

          "I consider THE GREAT ROUND WORLD one of the most
          valuable factors in my school work. It takes the
          children out of the beaten paths and gives them an
          active interest in current history. Not only is it
          valuable for the children, but it furnishes an
          incentive to thought work so useful to many
          teachers."

       *       *       *       *       *

_From Roland L. Beale, Kansas State Normal School, Emporia:_

          "I have been taking THE GREAT ROUND WORLD for six
          weeks, and it is the best little paper I ever saw.
          I cannot speak too highly of it."

       *       *       *       *       *

_From Mrs. Ella F. Switzer, Denver, Col.:_

          "I am a teacher in this city, and a subscriber to
          THE GREAT ROUND WORLD. My pupils read it, in
          consequence of which they have more definite ideas
          on subjects relating to current events than many
          older people. Many of the parents of my pupils
          have spoken in praise of it. The other members of
          my family as well as myself read it instead of
          _wasting_ time over the daily papers."

       *       *       *       *       *

_From Mr. A. F. Otis, Houghton Gram. School, Augusta, Ga.:_

          "I am delighted with the paper."

       *       *       *       *       *

_From Miss A. W. Shortridge, 257 Benefit St., Providence, R. I.:_

          "Enclosed please find check for seventy-five cents
          for renewal of subscription of your publication
          for six months. I should like to tell you that
          having had classes in current events for both old
          and young people, I have never seen any other
          publication which so fully carries out my ideas of
          the subjects to be presented in such classes as
          your little magazine does. I have had classes
          every day in the week. I find moreover in your
          publication a most excellent resume, especially
          for the younger classes. I have moreover
          recommended the magazine to many of my older
          people. I am writing this because I think it may
          be pleasant for you to hear that your work is
          appreciated."

=The Great Round World=

       *       *       *       *       *

Transcriber's Notes:

Obvious punctuations errors repaired.

Page 714, "incovenience" changed to "inconvenience." (much
inconvenience)

Page 735, "Sierre" changed to "Sierra." (England to Sierra Leone)

Under Club Rates, "Bazar" changed to "Bazaar." (Harper's Bazaar)





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Great Round World and What Is
Going On In It, Vol. 2, No. 23, June 9, 1898, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GREAT ROUND WORLD ***

***** This file should be named 18745.txt or 18745.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/8/7/4/18745/

Produced by Emmy, Juliet Sutherland and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
