The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Field of Clover, by Laurence Housman

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Field of Clover

Author: Laurence Housman

Illustrator: Clemence Housman

Release Date: July 19, 2006 [EBook #18872]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE FIELD OF CLOVER ***




Produced by Brad Norton, Suzanne Shell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net





[Illustration: MERCURY GOD OF MERCHANDISE LOOK ON WITH FAVOURABLE
EYES]

[Illustration:

THE FIELD OF CLOVER

By Laurence Housman

DOVER PUBLICATIONS, INC., NEW YORK

ENGRAVED BY CLEMENCE HOUSMAN

BE KINDLY TO THE WEARY DROVER & PIPE THE SHEEP INTO THE CLOVER]


This Dover edition, first published in 1968, is an unabridged and
unaltered republication of the work originally published by Kegan
Paul, Trench, Truebner & Co. in 1898.

_Library of Congress Catalog Card Number: 68-30802_

Manufactured in the United States of America
Dover Publications, Inc.
180 Varick Street
New York, N. Y. 10014




Contents


  THE BOUND PRINCESS (_in six parts_) PAGE
      I THE FIRE-EATERS                  3
     II THE GALLOPING PLOUGH            13
    III THE THIRSTY WELL                23
     IV THE PRINCESS MELILOT            33
      V THE BURNING ROSE                45
     VI THE CAMPHOR WORM                57
  THE CROWN'S WARRANTY                  69
  THE WISHING-POT                       81
  THE FEEDING OF THE EMIGRANTS         111
  THE PASSIONATE PUPPETS               119




TO MY DEAR WOOD-ENGRAVER




THE BOUND PRINCESS

[Illustration]

THE BOUND PRINCESS




I

THE FIRE-EATERS


A long time ago there lived a man who had the biggest head in the
world. Into it he had crammed all the knowledge that might be gathered
from the four corners of the earth. Every one said he was the wisest
man living. "If I could only find a wife," said the sage, "as wise for
a woman as I am for a man, what a race of head-pieces we could bring
into the world!"

He waited many years before any such mate could be found for him:
yet, at last, found she was--one into whose head was bestowed all the
wisdom that might be gathered from the four quarters of heaven.

They were both old, but kings came from all sides to their wedding,
and offered themselves as god-parents to the first-born of the new
race that was to be. But, to the grief of his parents, the child, when
he arrived, proved to be a simpleton; and no second child ever came to
repair the mistake of the first.

That he was a simpleton was evident; his head was small and his
limbs were large, and he could run long before he could talk or do
arithmetic. In the bitterness of their hearts his father and mother
named him Noodle, without the aid of any royal god-parents; and from
that moment, for any care they took in his bringing-up, they washed
their wise hands of him.

Noodle grew and prospered, and enjoyed life in his own foolish way.
When his father and mother died within a short time of each other,
they left him alone without any friend in the world.

For a good while Noodle lived on just what he could find in the house,
in a hand-to-mouth sort of way, till at last only the furniture and
the four bare walls were left to him.

One cold winter's night he sat brooding over the fire, wondering where
he should get food for the morrow, when he heard feet coming up to the
door, and a knock striking low down upon the panel. Outside there was
a faint chirping and crackling sound, and a whispering as of fire
licking against the woodwork without.

He opened the door and peered forth into the night. There, just before
him, stood seven little men huddled up together; three feet high they
were, with bright yellow faces all shrivelled and sharp, and eyes
whose light leaped and sank like candle flame before a gust.

When they saw him, they shut their eyes and opened famished mouths at
him, pointing inwards with flickering finger-tips, and shivering from
head to foot with cold, although it seemed to the youth as if the
warmth of a slow fire came from them. 'Alas!' said Noodle, in reply to
these signs of hunger, 'I have not left even a crust of bread in the
house to give you! But at least come in and make yourselves warm!' He
touched the foremost, making signs for them all to enter. 'Ah,' he
cried, 'what is this, and what are you, that the mere touch of you
burns my finger?'

Without answer they huddled tremblingly across the threshold; but
so soon as they saw the fire burning on the hearth, they yelped all
together like a pack of hounds, and, throwing themselves face forwards
into the hot embers, began ravenously to lap up the flames. They
lapped and lapped, and the more they lapped the more the fire sank
away and died. Then with their flickering finger-tips they stirred
the hot logs and coals, burrowing after the thin tapes and swirls of
vanishing flame, and fetching them out like small blue eels still
wriggling for escape.

After each blue wisp had been gulped down, they sipped and sucked at
their fingers for any least tricklet of flavour that might be left;
and at the last seemed more famished than when they began.

'More, more, O wise Noodle, give us more!' they cried; and Noodle
threw the last of his fuel on the embers.

They breathed round it, fanning it into a great blaze that leaped and
danced up to the rafters; then they fell on, till not a fleck or a
flake of it was left. Noodle, seeing them still famished, broke up
a stool and threw that on the hearth. And again they flared it with
their breath and gobbled off the flame. When the stool was finished he
threw in the table, then the dresser, and after that the oak-chest and
the window-seat.

Still they feasted and were not fed. Noodle fetched an axe, and broke
down the door; then he wrenched up the boards from the floor, and
pulled the beams and rafters out of the ceiling; yet, even so, his
guests were not to be satisfied.

'I have nothing left,' he said, 'but the house itself; but since you
are still hungry you shall be welcome to it!'

He scattered the fire that remained upon the hearth, and threw it out
and about the room; and as he ran forth to escape, up against all
the walls and right through the roof rose a great crackling sheaf of
flame. In the midst of the fire, Noodle could see his seven guests
lying along on their bellies, slopping their hands in the heat, and
lapping up the flames with their tongues. 'Surely,' he thought, 'I
have given them enough to eat at last!'

After a while all the fire was eaten away, and only the black and
smouldering ruins were left. Day came coldly to light, and there sat
Noodle, without a home in the world, watching with considerate eye his
seven guests finishing their inordinate repast.

They all rose to their feet together, and came towards him bowing; as
they approached he felt the heat of their bodies as it had been seven
furnaces.

'Enough, O wise Noodle!' said they, 'we have had enough!' 'That,'
answered Noodle, 'is the least thing left me to wonder at. Go your
ways in peace; but first tell me, who are you?' They replied, 'We are
the Fire-eaters: far from our own land, and strangers, you have done
us this service; what, now, can we do to serve you?' 'Put me in the
way of a living,' said Noodle, 'and you will do me the greatest
service of all.'

Then the one of them who seemed to be chief took from his finger a
ring having for its centre a great firestone, and threw it into the
snow, saying, 'Wait for three hours till the ring shall have had time
to cool, then take it, and wear it; and whatever fortune you deserve
it shall bring you. For this ring is the sweetener of everything that
it touches: bread it turns into rich meats, water into strong wine,
grief into virtue, and labour into strength. Also, if you ever need
our help, you have but to brandish the ring, and the gleam of it will
reach us, and we will be with you wherever you may be.'

With that they bowed their top-knots to the ground and departed,
inverting themselves swiftly till only the shining print of seven
pairs of feet remained, red-hot, over the place where they had been
standing.

Noodle waited for three hours; then he took up the firestone ring, and
putting it on his finger set out into the world.

At the first door he came to, he begged a crust of bread, and touching
it with the ring found it tasted like rich meats, well cooked and
delicately flavoured. Also, the water which he drew in the hollow of
his hand from a brook by the roadside tasted to him like strong wine.




[Illustration]

II

THE GALLOPING PLOUGH


Noodle went on many miles till he came near to a rich man's farm.
Though it was the middle of winter, all the fields showed crops of
corn in progress; here it was in thin blade, and here green, but in
full ear; and here it was ripe and ready for harvest. 'How is this,'
he said to the first man he met, 'that you have corn here in the
middle of winter?' 'Ah!' said the man, 'you have not heard of the
Galloping Plough; you too have to fall under bondage to my master.'
'What is your master?' inquired Noodle, 'and in what bondage does he
bind man?'

'My master, and your master that shall soon be,' answered the old man,
'is the owner of all this land and the farmer of it. He is rich and
sleek and fat like his own furrows, for he has the Galloping Plough as
his possession. Ah, that! 't is a very miracle, a wonder, a thing to
catch at the heartstrings of all beholders; it shines like a moonbeam,
and is better than an Arab mare for swiftness; it warms the very
ground that it enters, so that seeds take root and spring, though it
be the middle of winter. No man sees it but what he loses his heart to
it, and sells his freedom for the possession of it. All here are men
like myself who have become slaves because of that desire. You also,
when you see it, will become slave to it.'

Noodle went on through the summer and the spring corn, till he came
to bare fields. Ahead of him on a hill-top he saw the farmer himself,
sleek and rosy, and of full paunch, lolling like a lord at his ease;
yet with a working eye in the midst of his leisure.

To and fro, up to him and back, shot a silver gleam over the purple
brown of the fields; and Noodle's heart gave a thump at the sight, for
the spell of the Galloping Plough was on him.

Now and then he heard a clear sound that startled him with its note.
It was like the sweet whistling cry of a bird many times multiplied.
Ever when the silver gleam of the Plough had run its farthest from the
farmer, the cry sounded; and at the sound the gleam wavered and stayed
and flew back dartingly to the farmer's side. So Noodle understood how
this was the farmer's signal for the Plough to return; and the Plough
knew it as a horse its master's voice, and came so fast that the wind
whistled against its silver side.

As he watched, Noodle's heart went down into the valley and up the
hillside, following in the track of the Galloping Plough. 'I can never
be happy again,' thought he; 'either I must possess it, or must die.'

He came to the farmer where he sat calling his Plough to him and
letting it go; and the farmer smiled, the wide indulgent smile of a
man who knows that a bargain is about to fall his way.

'What is the price,' asked Noodle, 'of yonder Galloping Plough, that
runs like an Arab mare, and returns to you at your call?'

Said the farmer, 'A year's service; and if the Plough will follow you,
it is yours; if not, then you must be my bondman until you die!'

Noodle looked once the way of the Galloping Plough, and his heart
flapped at his side like a sail which the wind drops and lets go; and
he had no thought or will left in him but to be where the Galloping
Plough was. So he closed hands on the bargain, to be the farmer's
servant either for a year, or for his whole life.

For a year he worked upon the farm, and all the while plotted how he
might win the Galloping Plough to himself. The farmer kept no watch
upon it, nor put it under lock and key, for the Plough recognised no
voice but his own, nor went nor came save at his bidding. In the night
Noodle would go down to the shed or field where it lay, and whistle to
it, trying to put forth notes of the same magical power as those which
came through the farmer's lips.

But no sound that came from his lips ever stroked life into its silver
sides. The year was nearly run out, and Noodle was in despair.

Then he remembered the firestone ring, the Sweetener. 'May be,' said
he, 'since it changes to sweetness whatever I eat and drink, it will
sweeten my voice also, so that the Plough will obey.' So he put the
ring between his lips and whistled; and at the sound his heart turned
a somersault for joy, for he felt that out of his mouth the farmer's
magic had been over-topped and conquered.

The Galloping Plough stirred faintly from the furrow where it lay,
breaking the ground and marring its smooth course. Then it shook its
head slowly, and returned impassively to rest.

In the morning the farmer came and saw the broken earth close under
the Plough's nose. Noodle, hiding among the corn hard by, heard him
say, 'What hast thou heard in the night, O my moonbeam, my miracle,
that thy lily-foot has trodden up the ground? Hast thou forgotten
whose hand feeds thee, whose corn it is thou lovest, whose heart's
care also cherishes thee?'

The farmer went away, and presently came back bearing a bowl of corn;
and Noodle saw the Plough lift its head to its master's palm, and feed
like a horse on the grain.

Then Noodle, gay of heart, waited till it was night, and surely his
time was short, for on the morrow his wages were to be paid, and the
Plough was to be his, or else he was to be the farmer's bondservant
for the rest of his life. He took with him three handfuls of corn, and
went down to where the Plough stood waiting by the furrow. Shaping his
lips to the ring, he whistled gently like a lover, and immediately the
Plough stirred, and lifted up its head as if to look at him.

'O my moonbeam, my miracle,' whispered Noodle, 'wilt thou not come to
the one that feeds thee?' and he held out a handful of corn. But the
Plough gave no regard to him or his grain: slowly it moved away from
him back into the furrow.

Then Noodle laughed softly and dropped his ring, the Sweetener, into
the hand that held the grain; and barely had he offered the corn
before he felt the silver Plough nozzling at his palm, and eating as a
horse eats from the hand of its master.

Then he whistled again, placing the Sweetener back between his lips;
and the Galloping Plough sprang after him, and followed at his heels
like a dog.

So, finding himself its master, he bid it stay for the night; and in
the morning he said to the farmer, 'Give me my wages, and let me go!'
And the farmer laughed, saying, 'Take your wages, and go!'

Then Noodle took off his ring, the Sweetener, and laid it between his
lips and blew through it; and up like a moonbeam, and like an Arab
mare, sprang the Galloping Plough at his call. So he leaped upon its
back, crying, 'Carry me away out of this land, O thou moonbeam, and
miracle of beauty, and never slacken nor stay except I bid thee!'

Vainly the farmer, borne down on a torrent of rage and amazement,
whistled his best, and threw corn and rice from the rear; for the
whistling of Noodle was sweeter to the ear, and his corn sweeter to
the taste, and he nearer to the heart of the Galloping Plough than was
the old master whom it left behind.




[Illustration]

III

THE THIRSTY WELL


So they escaped, slitting the swift hours with ungovernable speed. The
furrow they two made in the world that day, as they went shooting over
the round of it, was called in after times the Equator, and men still
know it by the heat of it, though it has since been covered over by
the dust of ages.

To Noodle, as he went careering round it, the whole world's circuit
ran in a line across his brain, entering his vision and passing
through it as a thread through the needle's eye. Nor would he of his
own will ever have stopped his galloping, but that at the completion
of the first round a mighty thirst took hold of him. 'O my moonbeam,'
he said, choking behind parched lips, and sick at heart, 'check me,
or I faint!' And the Galloping Plough stopped at once, and set him to
earth in a green space under the shadow of overhanging boughs.

He found himself in a richly grown garden, a cool paradise for a
traveller to rest in. Close at hand and inviting to the eye was a well
with a bucket slung ready to be let down. Noodle had little thought of
seeking for the owner of the garden to beg for a drink, since water is
an equal gift to all and the right of any man; but as he drew near he
found the means to it withheld from him, the lid being fast locked. He
went on in search of the owner, till at length he came upon the same
lying half asleep under a thorn-bush with the key in her hand. She was
an old woman, so withered and dry, she looked as if no water could
have ever passed her lips.

When Noodle asked for a drink from the well, she looked at him bright
and sharp, and said: 'Before any man drinks of my water he must make a
bargain with me.' 'What is the bargain?' asked Noodle; and she led him
down to the well.

Then she unlocked the lid and bade him look in; and at the sight
Noodle knew for a second time that his heart had been stolen from him,
and that to be happy he must taste that water or die.

Again he asked, with his eyes intent upon the blue wrimpling of the
water in the well's depth, 'What is the bargain?' And the old woman
answered, 'If you fail to draw water out of the well you must fling
yourself into it.' For answer Noodle swung down the bucket, lowering
it as fast as it would go; then he set both hands to the windlass and
wound.

He heard the water splashing off the sides of the bucket all the way
up, as the shortening rope brought it near; but when he drew it over
the well's brink wonder and grief held him fast, for the bucket was as
empty as vanity. From behind him came a noise of laughter, and there
was the old witch running round and round in a circle; and everywhere
a hedge of thorns came shooting up to enclose him and keep him fast
for her.

'What a trap I am in!' thought Noodle; but once more he lowered the
bucket, and once more it returned to him empty.

The old woman climbed up into the thorn-hedge, and sat on its top,
singing:

  'Overground, underground, round-about spell;
  The Thirsty has come to the Thirsty Well!'

Again Noodle let down the bucket; and this time as he drew it up he
looked over into the well's heart, and saw all the way up the side a
hundred blue arms reaching out crystal scallops and drawing water
out of the bucket as hard as they could go. He saw thick lips like
sea-anemones thrust out between the crevices of the wall, sucking the
crystals dry as fast as they were filled. 'Truly,' he said to himself,
'this is a thirsty well, but myself am thirstier!'

When he had drawn up the bucket empty for the third time, he stood
considering; and at last he fastened to it the firestone ring, the
Sweetener, and lowered it once more. Then he laughed to himself as he
drew up, and felt the bucket lightening at every turn till it touched
the surface of things.

Empty he found it, with only his firestone hanging by the rim, and
once again he let it down to be refilled. But this time as he wound
up, nothing could keep him from letting a curious eye go over the
brink, to see how the Well-folk fared over their wine; and in what he
beheld there was already comfort for his soul.

The blue arms went like oars out of unison; like carpet-beaters
stricken in the eyes and throat with dust, they beat foolishly against
the sides and bottom of the bucket, shattering and letting fall their
goblets in each unruly attempt. And because Noodle wound leniently at
the rope, willing that they should have their fill, at the last gasp
they were able to send the bucket empty to the top. It was the last
staving off of destiny that lay in their power to make; thereafter
wine conquered them.

Quickly Noodle drew out the ring, and sent the bucket flying on its
last errand. It smacked the water, heeled over, and dipped under a
full draught. Then Noodle spun the windlass with the full pinch of his
energies, calling on the bucket to ascend. He heard the water spilling
from its sides, and knew that the blue arms were there, battling to
arrest it as it flew, and to pay him back once more with emptiness and
mockery. Yet in spite of them the bucket hasted and lightened not, but
was drawn up to the well's head brimming largely, and winking a blue
eye joyously to the light of day.

Over head and ears Noodle plunged for the quenching of his thirst, nor
stayed nor drew back till his head had smitten upon the bottom of the
bucket in his pursuit of the draught. Then it was apparent that only
a third of the water remained, the rest having obeyed the imperative
suction of his throat, and that the thirsty well had at last found a
master under the eye of heaven.

In the depth of the bucket the water flashed like a burning sapphire
and swung circling, curling and coiling, tossing this way and that,
as if struggling to get out. At last with a laugh it threw down the
bucket, and tore back into the well with a crash like thunder.

Up from the well rose a chant of voices:

  'Under Heaven, over Hell,
  You have broken the spell,
  You are lord of the Well.'

Noodle stepped over the brink of his new realm, calling the Well-folk
to reach hands for him and bear him down. All round, the blue arms
started out, catching him and handing him on from one to another
ladderwise, down, and down, and down. As he went, anemone lips came
out of the crannies in the wall, and kissed his feet and hands in
token of allegiance. 'You are lord of the well!' they said, as they
passed him each one to the next.

He came to the bottom of the well; under his feet, wherever he stepped
upon its waters, hands came up and sustained him. The knowledge of
everything that was there had become his. 'Give me,' he said, 'the
crystal cup that is for him who holds kingship over you; so shall I be
lord of you in all places wherever I go.'

A blue arm reached down and drew up from the water a small crystal,
that burned through the darkness with a blue fire, and gave it to
Noodle. 'Now I am your king, however far from you!' said Noodle. And
they answered, chanting:

  'Under Heaven, over Hell,
  You have broken the spell,
  You are lord of the Well.'

'Lift me up!' said he; and the blue arms caught him and lifted him up;
from one to another they passed him in ascending circles, till he came
to the mouth of the well.

There overhead was the old witch, crouching and looking in to know
what had become of him; and her hair hung far down over her eyes into
the well. He caught her to him by it over the brink. 'Old witch,' he
said, 'you must change places with me now!' and he tossed her down to
the bottom of the well.

She went like a falling shuttlecock, shrieking as she fell; and as she
struck the water, the drowned bodies of the men she had sent there
came to the surface, and caught her by the feet and hair, and drew her
down, making an end of her, as she also had made of them.




[Illustration]

IV

THE PRINCESS MELILOT


When Noodle, carrying the crystal with him, set foot once more upon
dry land, straightway he was again upon the back of the Galloping
Plough, with the world flying away under him. But now weariness came
over him, and his head weighed this way and that, so that earth and
sky mixed themselves before his gaze, and he was so drugged with
sleep that he had no wits to bid the Plough slacken from its speed.
Therefore it happened that as they passed a wood, a hanging bough
caught him, and brushed him like a feather from his place, landing him
on a green bosom of grass, where he slept the sleep of the weary, nor
ever lifted his head to see the Plough fast disappearing over hill and
valley and plain, out of sound of his voice or sight of his eye.

When Noodle awoke and found that the Plough was gone, he was bitter
against himself for his folly. 'So poor a use to make of so noble
a steed!' he cried; 'no wonder it has gone from me to seek for a
worthier master! If by good fortune I find it again, needs must I do
great things by its aid to be worthy of its service.' So he set out,
following the furrow of its course, determined, however far he must
seek, to journey on till he found it.

For a whole year he travelled, till at length he came, footsore and
weary, to a deserted palace standing in the midst of an overgrown
garden. The great gates, which lay wide open, were overrun with
creepers, and the paths were green with weeds. That morning he had
thought that he saw far away on the hills the gleam of his silver
Plough, and now hope rose high, for he could see by its track that
the Plough had passed before him into the garden of the palace. 'O my
moonbeam,' he thought, 'is it here I shall find you at last?'

Within the garden there was a sound of cross questions and crooked
answers, of many talking with loud voices, and of one weeping apart
from the rest. When he got quite close, he was struck still with awe,
and joy, and wonder. For first there lay the Galloping Plough in the
middle of a green lawn, and round it a score of serving-men, tugging
at it and trying to make it move on. Near by stood an old woman,
wringing her hands and begging them to leave it alone: 'For,' cried
she, 'if the Plough touches but the feet of the Princess, she will be
uprooted, and will presently wither away and die. Of what use is it to
break one, if the other enchantments cannot be broken?'

In the centre of the lawn grew a bower of roses, and beneath the bower
stood the loveliest princess that ever eye beheld; but she stood there
motionless, and without sign of life. She seemed neither to hear, nor
see, nor breathe; her feet were rooted to the ground; though they
seemed only to rest lightly under her weight upon the grass, no man,
nor a hundred men, could stir her from where she stood. And, as the
spell that held her fast bound to the spot, even so was the spell that
sealed her senses,--no man might lift it from her. When Noodle set
eyes upon her he knew that for the third time his heart had been
stolen from him, and that to be happy he must possess her, or die.

He ran quickly to the old woman, who, unregarded by the serving-men,
stood weeping and wringing her hands. 'Tell me, said Noodle, 'who is
this sleeper who stands enchanted and rooted like a flower to earth?
And who are you, and these others who work and cry at cross purposes?'

The old woman cried from a wide mouth: 'It is my mistress, the
honey-jewel of my heart, whom you see here so grievously enchanted.
All the gifts of the fairies at her christening did not prevent what
was foretold of her at her birth. In her seventeenth year, as you see
her now, so it was told of her that she should be.'

'Does she live?' asked Noodle; 'is she asleep? She is not dead; when
will she wake? Tell me, old woman, her history, and how this fate has
come upon her.'

'She was the daughter of the king of this country by his first wife,'
said the old woman, 'and heir to the throne after his death; but when
her mother died the king married again, and the three daughters he had
by his second wife were jealous of the beauty, and charm, and goodness
which raised their sister so high above them in the estimation of all
men. So they asked their mother to teach them a spell that should rob
Melilot of her charms, and make them useless in the eyes of men. And
their mother, who was wise in such arts, taught to each of them a
spell, so that together they might work their will.

'One day they came running to Melilot, and said, "Come and play with
us a new game that our mother has taught us!" Then they began turning
themselves into flowers. "I will be a hollyhock!" said one. "And I
will be a columbine!" said another; and saying the spell over each
other they became each the flower they had named.

'Then they unloosed the spells, and became themselves again. "Oh, it
is so nice to be a flower!" they cried, laughing and clapping their
hands. But Melilot knew no spell.

'At last, seeing how her sisters turned into flowers, and came back
safe again, "I will be a rose!" she cried; "turn me into a rose and
out again!"

'Then her three sisters joined their tongues together, and finished the
spell over her. And so soon as she had become a rose-tree, the three
sisters turned into three moles, and went down under the earth and
gnawed at the roots.

'Then they came up, and took their own forms again, and sang,--

  '"Sister, sister, here you are now,
  Till the ploughman come with the Galloping Plough!"

'Then they turned into bees, and sucked out the honey from the roses,
and coming to themselves again they sang,--

  '"Sister, here you must doze and doze,
  Till they bring you a flower of the Burning Rose!"

'Then they shook the dewdrops out of her eyes, crying,--

  "Sister, your brain lies under our spell,
  Till water be brought from the Thirsty Well!"

'Then they took the top blossom of all, and broke it to pieces, and
threw the petals away as they cried,--

  "Sister, your life goes down for a term,
  Till they bring you breath from the Camphor-Worm!"

'And when they had done all this, they turned her back into her true
shape, and left her standing even as you see her now, without warmth,
or sight, or memory, or motion, dead saving for her beauty, that never
changes or dies. And here she must stand till the spells which have
been fastened upon her have been unloosed. No long time after,
the wickedness of the three sisters and of their cruel mother was
discovered to the king, and they were all put to death for the crime.
Yet the ill they had done remained; and the king's grief became so
great to see his loved daughter standing dead before him that he
removed with his court to another place, and left this palace to the
care of only a few serving-men, and myself to keep watch and guard
over the Princess.

'So now four-fold is the spell that holds her, and to break the
lightest of them the water of the Thirsty Well is needed; with two of
its drops laid upon her eyes memory will come back to her, and her
mind will remember of the things of the past. And for the breaking
of the second spell is needed a blossom of the Burning Rose, and the
plucking of that no man's hand can achieve; but when the Rose is laid
upon her breast, her heart will belong to the world once more, and
will beat again under her bosom. And for the breaking of the third
spell one must bring the breath of the Camphor-Worm that has lain for
a whole year inside its body, and breathe it between her lips; then
she will breathe again, and all her five senses will return to her.
And for the last spell only the Galloping Plough can uproot her back
to life, and free her feet for the ways of earth. Now, here we have
the Galloping Plough with no man who can guide it, and what aid can it
be? If these fools should be able to make it so much as but touch the
feet of my dear mistress, she will be mown down like grass, and die
presently for lack of earth; for only the three other charms I have
told you of can put whole life back into her.'

'As for the mastery of the Plough,' said Noodle, 'I will fetch that
from them in a breath. See, in a moment, how marvellous will be the
uplifting of their eyes!' He put to his lips the firestone ring--the
Sweetener--and blew but one note through it. Then in a moment the
crowd divided hither and thither, with cries of wonder and alarm, for
the Plough turned and bounded back to its master quickly, as an Arab
mare at the call of her owner.

The old woman, weeping for gladness, cried: 'Thou art master of the
Plough! Art thou master of all the other things as well?'

He said: 'Of one thing only. Tell me of the Burning Rose and the
Camphor-Worm; what and where are they? For I am the master of the ends
of the earth by reason of the speed with which this carries me; and I
am lord of the Thirsty Well, and have the Fire-eaters for my friends.'

The old woman clapped her hands, and blessed him for his youth, and
his wisdom, and his courage. 'First,' she said, 'restore to the
Princess her memory by means of the water of the Thirsty Well; then I
will show you the way to the Burning Rose, for the easier thing must
be done first.'

Then Noodle drew out the crystal and breathed in it, calling on the
Well-folk for the two drops of water to lay on Princess Melilot's
eyes. Immediately in the bottom of the cup appeared two blue drops
of water, that came climbing up the sides of the glass and stood
trembling together on the brim. And Noodle, touching them with the
firestone ring to make the memory of things sweet to her, bent back
the Princess's face, and let them fall under her closed lids.

'Look!' cried the faithful nurse, 'light trembles within those eyes of
hers! In there she begins to remember things; but as yet she sees and
hears nothing. Now it is for you to be swift and fetch her the blossom
of the Burning Rose. Be wise, and you shall not fail!'




[Illustration]

V

THE BURNING ROSE


She told him how he was to go, across the desert southward, till he
found a giant, longer in length than a day's journey, lying asleep
upon the sand. Over his head, it was told, hung a cloud, covering him
from the heat and resting itself against his brows; within the cloud
was a dream, and within the dream grew the garden of the Burning
Rose. Than this she knew no more, nor by what means Noodle might gain
entrance and become possessor of the Rose.

Noodle waited for no more; he mounted upon the Galloping Plough, and
pressed away over the desert to the south. For three days he travelled
through parched places, refreshing himself by the way with the water
of the Thirsty Well, calling on the Well-folk for the replenishment of
his crystal, and turning the draught to wine by the sweetness of his
magic ring.

At length he saw a cloud rising to him from a distance; like a great
opal it hung motionless between earth and heaven. Coming nearer he saw
the giant himself stretched out for a day's journey across the sand.
His head lay under the colours of the dawn, and his feet were covered
with the dusk of evening, and over his middle shone the noonday sun.

Under the giant's shadow Noodle stopped, and gazed up into the cloud;
through the outer covering of its mists he saw what seemed to be balls
of fire, and knew that within lay the dream and the garden of the
Burning Rose.

The giant laughed and muttered in his sleep, for the dream was sweet
to him. 'O Rose,' he said, 'O sweet Rose, what end is there of
thy sweetness? How innumerable is the dance of the Roses of my
Rose-garden!'

Noodle caught hold of the ropes of the giant's hair, and climbed till
he sat within the hollow of his right ear. Then he put to his lips the
ring, the Sweetener, and sang till the giant heard him in his sleep;
and the sweet singing mixed itself with the sweetness of the Rose in
the giant's brain, and he muttered to himself, saying: 'O bee, O sweet
bee, O bee in my brain, what honey wilt thou fetch for me out of the
Roses of my Rose-garden?'

So, more and more, Noodle sweetened himself to the giant, till the
giant passed him into his brain, and into the heart of the dream, even
into the garden of the Burning Rose.

Far down below the folds of the cloud, Noodle remembered that the
Galloping Plough lay waiting a call from him. 'When I have stolen the
Rose,' thought he, 'I may need swift heels for my flight.' And he put
the Sweetener to his lips and whistled the Plough up to him.

It came, cleaving the encirclement of clouds like a silver gleam of
moonlight, and for a moment, where they parted, Noodle saw a rift of
blue sky, and the light of the outer world clear through their midst.

The giant turned uneasily in his sleep, and the garden of the Burning
Rose rocked to its foundations as the edge of things real pierced into
it.

'While I stay here there is danger,' thought Noodle. 'Surely I must
make haste to possess myself of the Rose and to escape!'

All round him was a garden set thick with rose-trees in myriads of
blossom, rose behind rose as far as the eye could reach, and the
fragrance of them lay like a heavy curtain of sleep upon the senses.
Noodle, beginning to feel drowsy, stretched out his hand in haste to
the nearest flower, lest in a little while he should be no more than a
part of the giant's dream. 'O beloved Heart of Melilot!' he cried, and
crushed his fingers upon the stem.

The whole bough crackled and sprang away at his touch; the Rose turned
upon him, screaming and spouting fire; a noise like thunder filled all
the air. Every rose in the garden turned and spat flame at where he
stood. His face and his hands became blistered with the heat.

Leaping upon the back of his Plough, he cried, 'Carry me to the
borders of the garden where there are open spaces! The price of the
Princess is upon my head!'

The Plough bounded this way and that, searching for some outlet by
which to escape. It flew in spirals and circles, it leaped like a
flea, it burrowed like a mole, it ploughed up the rose-trees by the
roots. But so soon as it had passed they stood up unharmed again, and
to whatever point of refuge the Plough fled, that way they all turned
their heads and darted out vomitings of fire.

In vain did Noodle summon the Well-folk to his aid; his crystal shot
forth fountains of water that turned into steam as they rose, and fell
back again, scalding him.

Then with two deaths threatening to devour him, he brandished the
ring, calling upon the Fire-eaters for their aid.

They laughed as they came. 'Here is food for you!' he cried. 'Multiply
your appetites about me, or I shall be consumed in these flames!'

'Brandish again!' cried they--the same seven whom he had fed. 'We are
not enough; this fire is not quenchable.'

Noodle brandished till the whole garden swarmed with their kind. One
fastened himself upon every rose, a gulf opposing itself to a torrent.
All sight of the conflagration disappeared; but within there went a
roaring sound, and the bodies of the Fire-eaters crackled, growing
large and luminous the while.

'Do your will quickly and begone!' cried the Fire-eaters. 'Even now we
swell to bursting with the pumping in of these fires!'

Noodle seized on a rose to which one hung, sucking out its heats. He
tugged, but the strong fibres held. Then he locked himself to the back
of the Plough, crying to it and caressing its speed with all names
under heaven, and beseeching it in the name of Melilot to break free.
And the Plough giving but one plunge, the Rose came away into Noodle's
hand, panting and a prisoner. All blushing it grew and radiant, with a
soft inner glow, and an odour of incomparable sweetness. He seemed to
see the heart of Melilot beating before him.

But now there came a blast of fire behind him, for the Fire-eaters had
disappeared, and all was whirling and shaken before his eyes; and the
Plough sped desperately over earthquake and space. For the plucking
of the Rose had awakened the giant from his sleep; and the dream
shrivelled and spun away in a whirl of flame-coloured vapours. Leaping
into clear day out of the unravelment of its mists, Noodle found
himself and his Plough launching over an edge of precipice for a
downward dive into space. The giant's hair, standing upright from his
head in the wrath and horror of his awakening, made a forest ending in
his forehead that bowered them to right and to left. Quitting it they
slid ungovernably over the bulge of his brow, and went at full spurt
for the abyss.

Dexterously the Plough steered its descent, catching on the bridge and
furrowing the ridge of the nose; nine leagues were the duration of a
second.

The giant, thinking some venomous parasite was injuring his flesh,
aimed, and a moment too late had thumped his fist upon the place. But
already the Plough skirting the amazed opening of his mouth was lost
in the trammels of his beard. Thence, as it escaped the rummaging
of his fingers, it flew scouring his breast, and inflicted a flying
scratch over the regions of his abdomen. Then, still believing it to
be the triumphal procession of a flea, he pursued it to his thigh, and
mistaking the shadow for the substance allowed it yet again to escape.
At his knee-cap there was but a hair's-breadth between Noodle and the
weight of his thumb; but thereafter the Plough out-distanced his every
effort, and, with Noodle preserved whole and alive, sped fast and far,
bearing the Burning Rose to the heart of the beloved Melilot.

The crone was aware of his coming before she heard him, or saw the
gleam of his Plough running beam-like over the land. From her seat by
the Princess's bower she clapped her hands, and springing to his neck
ere he alighted: 'A long way off, and a long time off,' she cried, 'I
knew what fortune was with you; for when you plucked off the Rose,
and bore it out of the heart of the dream, the scent of it filled the
world; and I felt the sweetness of youth once more in my blood.'

Then she led him to the Princess, and bade him lay the Rose in her
breast, that her heart might be won back into the world. Looking at
her face again, Noodle saw how memory had made it more beautiful than
ever, and how between her lips had grown the tender parting of a
smile. Then he laid the Rose where the movement of the heart should
be; and presently under the white breast rose the music of its
beating.

'Ah!' cried the old nurse, weeping for happiness, 'now her heart that
loved me is come back, and I can listen all day to the sound of it!
You have brought memory to her, you have brought love; now bring
breath, and the awakening of her five senses. Surely the light of her
eyes will be your reward!'




[Illustration]

VI

THE CAMPHOR-WORM


'Tell me quickly of the Camphor-Worm,' cried the youth as he feasted
his eyes on the Princess's loveliness, made more unendurable by the
awakening within of love. 'Where and what is it?' 'It is not so far as
was the way to the Burning Rose,' answered the crone; 'an hour on the
back of the Plough shall bring it near to you; but the danger
and difficulty of this quest is more, not less. For to reach the
Camphor-Worm you need to be a diver in deep waters, whose weight
crushes a man; and to touch its lips you must master the loathing of
your nature; and to carry away its breath you must have strength of
will and endurance beyond what is mortal.' 'You trouble me with things
I need not know,' cried Noodle. 'Tell me,' he said, 'how I may reach
the Camphor-Worm; and of it and its ways.'

'By this path, and by that,' said the old woman, pointing him, 'go on
till you come to the thick waters of the Bitter Lake; they are blacker
than night, and their weight is heavier than lead, and in the depths
dwells the Camphor-Worm. Once a year, when the air is sweetest with
the scents of summer, she rises to breathe, lifting her black snout
through the surface of the waters. Then she draws fresh air into her
lungs, flavoured with leaves and flowers, and after she has breathed
it in she lets go the last bubble of the breath she drew from the
summer of the year before; and it is this bubble of breath alone that
will give back life to the five senses of Princess Melilot. But the
Worm's time for rising is far; and how you shall bear the weight in
the depths of those waters, or make the Worm give up the bubble before
her time, or at last bear back the bubble to lay it on the lips of the
Princess so that she may wake,--these are things I know not the way
of, for to my eyes they seem dark with difficulty and peril.'

Then Noodle, opening the petals of the Burning Rose as it lay upon the
heart of Melilot, drew out honey from its centre, filling his hand
with the golden crumblings of fragrance; and he leapt upon the
Galloping Plough, urging it in the way the Princess's nurse had
pointed out to him. As they went he caressed it with all the names
under heaven, stroking it with his hand and praising it for the
delicacy of its steering: saying, 'O my moonbeam, if thou wouldst save
the life of thy master, or restore the five senses of the Princess
Melilot, thou must surpass thyself to-day. Listen, thou heaven-sent
limb, thou miracle of quicksilver, and have a long mind to my words;
for in a short while I shall have no speech left in me till the
thing be done, and the deliverance, from head to feet, of my Beloved
accomplished.'

Even while he spoke they came to the edge of the Bitter Lake--a small
pool, but its waters were blacker than night, and heavier than lead to
the eye. Then Noodle leapt down from the Plough, and caressed it for
the last time, saying: 'Set thy face for the garden where the Princess
Melilot is; and when I am come back to thee speechless out of the Lake
and am striding thee once more, then wait not for a word but carry me
to her with more speed than thou hast ever mustered to my aid till
now; go faster than wind or lightning or than the eye of man can see!
So, by good fortune, I may live till I reach her lips; but if thou
tarry at all I am a dead man. And when thou art come to Melilot set
thy share beneath the roots of her feet, and take her up to me out of
the ground. Do this tenderly, but abate not speed till it be done!'

Then the youth put into his mouth the honey of the Burning Rose, and
into his lips the Sweetener, and stripped himself as a bather to the
pool. And the Plough, remembering its master's word, turned and set
its face to where lay the garden with Melilot waiting to be relieved
of her enchantment. Whereat Noodle, bowing his head, and blessing it
with lips of farewell, turned shortly and slid down into the blackness
of the lake.

The weight of that water was like a vice upon his limbs, and around
his throat, as he swam out into the centre of the pool. As he went he
breathed upon the water, and the scent of the honey of the Burning
Rose passing through the Sweetener made an incomparable fragrance,
gentle, and subtle, and wooing to the senses.

When he came to the middle of the lake he stayed breathing full
breaths, till the air deepened with fragrance around him. Presently
underneath him he felt the movement of a great thing coming up from
the bottom of the pool. It touched his feet and came grazing along his
side; and all at once shuddering and horror took hold upon him, for
his whole nature was filled with loathing of its touch.

Out of the pool's surface before him rose a great black snout, that
opened, showing a round hole. Then he thought of Melilot and her
beauty laid fast under a charm, and drawing a full breath he laid his
lips containing the ring, the Sweetener, to the lips of the Worm.

The Worm began to breathe. As the Worm drank the air out of him, he
drew in more through his nostrils, and more and more, till the great
gills were filled and satisfied.

Then the Worm let go the last bubble of air which remained from the
year before, and had lain ever since in its body, by which alone life
could be given back to the five senses of Melilot. Then drawing in
its head it lowered itself once more to the bottom of the pool; and
Noodle, feeling in his mouth the precious globule of air, fastened his
lips upon it and shot out for shore.

Against the weight of those leaden waters a longing to gasp possessed
him; but he knew that with the least breath the bubble would be lost,
and all his labour undone. Not too soon his feet caught hold of the
bank, and drew him free to land. He cast himself speechless across the
back of the Galloping Plough and clung.

The Plough gathered itself together and sprang away through space.
Remembering its master's word it showed itself a miracle of speed;
like lightning became its flight.

The eye of Noodle grew blind to the passing of things; he could take
no count of the collapsing leagues. More and more grew the amazingness
of the Plough's leaps, things only to be measured by miles, and
counted as joltings on the way; while fast to the back of it clung
Noodle, and endured, praying that shortness of breath might not
overmaster him, or the check of his lungs give way and burst him to
the emptiness of a drum. His senses rocked and swayed; he felt the
gates of his resolve slackening and forcing themselves apart; and
still the Galloping Plough plunged him blindly along through space.

But now the shrill crying of the crone struck in upon his ears, and
he stretched open his arms for the accomplishment of the deliverance.
Even in that nick of time was the end of the thing brought about; for
the Plough, guiding itself as a thread to the needle's eye, gave the
uprooting stroke to the white feet of Melilot; and Noodle, swooning
for the last gasp, saw all at once her beauty swaying level to his
gaze and her body bending down upon his.

Then he fastened his lips upon hers, and loosed the bubble from his
mouth; and panting and sobbing themselves back to life they hung in
each other's arms. She warmed and ripened in his embrace, opening upon
him the light of her eyes; and the greatness and beauty of the reward
abashed him and bore him down to earth.

He heard the old crone clucking and crowing, like a hen over its egg,
of the happiness that had come to her old years; till recognising the
youth's state she covered him over with a cloak amid exclamations of
astonishment.

The Princess saw nothing but her lover's face and the happy feasting
of his eyes. She bent her head nearer and nearer to his, and the story
of what he had done became a dream that she remembered, and that
waking made true. 'O you Noodle,' she said, laughing, 'you wise, wise
Noodle!' And then everything was finished, for she had kissed him!

So Noodle and the Princess were married, and came to the throne
together and reigned over a happy land. The Fire-eaters were their
friends, and the gifts of fortune were theirs. The Galloping Plough
made all the waste places fertile; and the water of the Thirsty Well
rose and ran in rivers through the land; and over the walls of their
palace, where they had planted it, grew the flower of the Burning
Rose.




THE CROWN'S WARRANTY

[Illustration]

THE CROWN'S WARRANTY


Five hundred years ago or more a king died, leaving two sons: one
was the child of his first wife, and the other of his second, who
surviving him became his widow. When the king was dying he took off
the royal crown which he wore, and set it upon the head of the elder
born, the son of his first wife, and said to him: 'God is the lord of
the air, and of the water, and of the dry land: this gift cometh to
thee from God. Be merciful, over whatsoever thou holdest power, as God
is!' And saying these words he laid his hands upon the heads of his
two sons and died.

Now this crown was no ordinary crown, for it was made of the gold
brought by the Wise men of the East when they came to worship at
Bethlehem. Every king that had worn it since then had reigned well and
uprightly and had been loved by all his people: but only to himself
was it known what virtue lay in his crown; and every king at dying
gave it to his son with the same words of blessing.

So, now, the king's eldest son wore the crown; and his step-mother
knew that her own son could not wear it while he lived, therefore she
looked on and said nothing. Now he was known to all the people of his
country, because of his right to the throne, as the king's son; and
his brother, the child of the second wife, was called the queen's son.
But as yet they were both young, and cared little enough for crowns.

After the king's death the queen was made regent till the king's son
should be come to a full age; but already the little king wore the
royal crown his father had left him, and the queen looked on and said
nothing.

More than three years went by, and everybody said how good the queen
was to the little king who was not her own son; and the king's son,
for his part, was good to her and to his step-brother, loving them
both; and all by himself he kept thinking, having his thoughts guarded
and circled by his golden crown, 'How shall I learn to be a wise king,
and to be merciful when I have power, as God is?'

So to everything that came his way, to his playthings and his pets, to
his ministers and his servants, he played the king as though already
his word made life and death. People watching him said, 'Everything
that has touch with the king's son loves him.' They told strange tales
of him: only in fairy books could they be believed, because they were
so beautiful; and all the time the queen, getting a good name for
herself, looked on and said nothing.

One night the king's son was lying half-asleep upon his bed, with wise
dreams coming and going under the circle of his gold crown, when a
mouse ran out of the wainscot and came and jumped up upon the couch.
The poor mouse had turned quite white with fear and horror, and was
trembling in every limb as it cried its news into the king's ear. 'O
king's son,' it said, 'get up and run for your life! I was behind the
wainscot in the queen's closet, and this is what I heard: if you stay
here, when you wake up to-morrow you will be dead!'

The king's son got up, and all alone in the dark night stole out of
the palace, seeking safety for his dear life. He sighed to himself,
'There was a pain in my crown ever since I wore it. Alas, mother, I
thought you were too kind a step-mother to do this!'

Outside it was still winter: there was no warmth in the world, and not
a leaf upon the trees. He wandered away and away, wondering where he
should hide.

The queen, when her villains came and told her the king's son was not
to be found, went and looked in her magic crystal to find trace of
him. As soon as it grew light, for in the darkness the crystal could
show her nothing, she saw many miles away the king's son running to
hide himself in the forest. So she sent out her villains to search
until they should find him.

As they went the sun grew hot in the sky, and birds began singing. 'It
is spring!' cried the messengers. 'How suddenly it has come!' They
rode on till they came to the forest.

The king's son, stumbling along through the forest under the bare
boughs, thought, 'Even here where shall I hide? Nowhere is there a
leaf to cover me.' But when the sun grew warm he looked up; and there
were all the trees breaking into bud and leaf, making a green heaven
above his head. So when he was too weary to go farther, he climbed
into the largest tree he could find; and the leaves covered him.

The queen's messengers searched through all the forest but could not
find him; so they went back to her empty handed, not having either the
king's crown or his heart to show. 'Fools!' she cried, looking in her
magic crystal, 'he was in the big sycamore under which you stopped to
give your horses provender!'

The sycamore said to the king's son, 'The queen's eye is on you; get
down and run for your life till you get to the hollow tarn-stones
among the hills! But if you stay here, when you wake to-morrow you
will be dead.'

When the queen's messengers came once more to the forest they found
it all wintry again, and without leaf; only the sycamore was in full
green, clapping its hands for joy in the keen and bitter air.

The messengers searched, and beat down the leaves, but the king's son
was not there. They went back to the queen. She looked long in her
magic crystal, but little could she see; for the king's son had hidden
himself in a small cave beside the tarn-stones, and into the darkness
the crystal could not pry.

Presently she saw a flight of birds crossing the blue, and every bird
carried a few crumbs of bread in its beak. Then she ran and called to
her villains, 'Follow the birds, and they will take you to where the
little wizard is; for they are carrying bread to feed him, and they
are all heading for the tarn-stones up on the hills.'

The birds said to the king's son, 'Now you are rested; we have fed
you, and you are not hungry. The queen's eye is on you. Up, and run
for your life! If you stay here, when you wake up to-morrow you will
be dead.'

'Where shall I go?' said the king's son. 'Go,' answered the birds,
'and hide in the rushes on the island of the pool of sweet waters!'

When the queen's messengers came to the tarn-stones, it was as though
five thousand people had been feeding: they found crumbs enough to
fill twelve baskets full, lying in the cave; but no king's son could
they lay their hands on.

The king's son was lying hidden among the rushes on the island of the
great pool of sweet waters; and thick and fast came silver-scaled
fishes, feeding him.

It took the queen three days of hard gazing in her crystal, before
she found how the fishes all swam to a point among the rushes of the
island in the pool of sweet waters, and away again. Then she knew: and
running to her messengers she cried: 'He is among the rushes on the
island in the pool of sweet waters; and all the fishes are feeding
him!'

The fishes said to the king's son: 'The queen's eye is on you; up, and
swim to shore, and away for your life! For if they come and find you
here, when you wake to-morrow you will certainly be dead.'

'Where shall I go?' asked the king's son. 'Wherever I go, she finds
me.' 'Go to the old fox who gets his poultry from the palace, and ask
him to hide you in his burrow!'

When the queen's messengers came to the pool they found the fishes
playing at _alibis_ all about in the water; but nothing of the king's
son could they see.

The king's son came to the fox, and the fox hid him in his burrow, and
brought him butter and eggs from the royal dairy. This was better fare
than the king's son had had since the beginning of his wanderings, and
he thanked the fox warmly for his friendship. 'On the contrary,' said
the fox, 'I am under an obligation to you; for ever since you came to
be my guest I have felt like an honest man.' 'If I live to be king,'
said the king's son, 'you shall always have butter and eggs from the
royal dairy, and be as honest as you like.'

The queen hugged her magic crystal for a whole week, but could make
nothing out of it: for her crystal showed her nothing of the king's
son's hiding-place, nor of the fox at his nightly thefts of butter and
eggs from the royal dairy. But it so happened that this same fox was
a sort of half-brother of the queen's; and so guilty did he feel with
his brand-new good conscience that he quite left off going to see her.
So in a little while the queen, with her suspicions and her magic
crystal, had nosed out the young king's hiding-place.

The fox said to the king's son: 'The queen's eye is on you! Get out
and run for your life, for if you stay here till to-morrow, you will
wake up and find yourself a dead goose!'

'But where else can I go to?' asked the king's son. 'Is there any
place left for me?' The fox laughed, and winked, and whispered a word;
and all at once the king's son got up and went.

The queen had said to her messengers, 'Go and look in the fox's hole;
and you shall find him!' But the messengers came and dug up the
burrow, and found butter and eggs from the royal dairy, but of the
king's son never a sign.

The king's son came to the palace, and as he crept through the gardens
he found there his little brother alone at play,--playing sadly
because now he was all alone. Then the king's son stopped and said,
'Little brother, do you so much wish to be king?' And taking off the
crown, he put it upon his brother's head. Then he went on through
underground ways and corridors, till he came to the palace dungeons.

Now a dungeon is a hard thing to get out of, but it is easy enough to
get into. He came to the deepest and darkest dungeon of all, and there
he opened the door, and went in and hid himself.

The queen's son came running to his mother, wearing the king's crown.
'Oh, mother,' he said, 'I am frightened! while I was playing, my
brother came looking all dead and white, and put this crown on my
head. Take it off for me, it hurts!'

When the queen saw the crown on her son's head, she was horribly
afraid; for that it should have so come there was the most unlikely
thing of all. She fetched her crystal ball, and looked in, asking
where the king's son might be, and, for answer, the crystal became
black as night.

Then said the queen to herself, 'He is dead at last!'

But, now that the king's crown was on the wrong head, the air, and the
water, and the dry land, over which God is lord, heard of it. And the
trees said, 'Until the king's son returns, we will not put forth bud
or leaf!'

And the birds said, 'We will not sing in the land, or breed or build
nests until the king's son returns!'

And the fishes said, 'We will not stay in the ponds or rivers to get
caught, unless the king's son, to whom we belong, returns!'

And the foxes said, 'Unless the king's son returns, we will increase
and multiply exceedingly and be like locusts in the land!'

So all through that land the trees, though it was spring, stayed as if
it were mid-winter; and all the fishes swam down to the sea; and all
the birds flew over the sea, away into other countries; and all the
foxes increased and multiplied, and became like locusts in the land.

Now when the trees, and the birds, and the beasts, and the fishes led
the way the good folk of the country discovered that the queen was a
criminal. So, after the way of the flesh, they took the queen and
her little son, and bound them, and threw them into the deepest and
darkest dungeon they could find; and said they: 'Until you tell us
where the king's son is, there you stay and starve!'

The king's son was playing all alone in his dungeon with the mice who
brought him food from the palace larder, when the queen and her son
were thrown down to him fast bound, as though he were as dangerous as
a den of lions. At first he was terribly afraid when he found himself
pursued into his last hiding-place; but presently he gathered from the
queen's remarks that she was quite powerless to do him harm.

'Oh, what a wicked woman I am!' she moaned; and began crying
lamentably, as if she hoped to melt the stone walls which formed her
prison.

Presently her little son cried, 'Mother, take off my brother's crown;
it pricks me!' And the king's son sat in his corner, and cried to
himself with grief over the harm that his step-mother's wickedness had
brought about.

'Mother,' cried the queen's son again, 'night and day since I have
worn it, it pricks me; I cannot sleep!'

But the queen's heart was still hard; not if she could help, would she
yet take off from her son the crown.

Hours went by, and the queen and her son grew hungry. 'We shall be
starved to death!' she cried. 'Now I see what a wicked woman I am!'

'Mother,' cried the queen's son, 'some one is putting food into my
mouth!' 'No one,' said the queen, 'is putting any into mine. Now I
know what a wicked woman I am!'

Presently the king's son came to the queen also, and began feeding
her. 'Someone is putting food into _my_ mouth, now!' cried the queen.
'If it is poisoned I shall die in agony! I wish,' she said, 'I wish I
knew your brother were not dead; if I have killed him what a wicked
woman I am!'

'Dear step-mother,' said the king's son 'I am not dead, I am here.'

'Here?' cried the queen, shaking with fright. 'Here? not dead! How
long have you been here?'

'Days, and days, and days,' said the king's son, sadly.

'Ah! if I had only known _that_!' cried the queen. '_Now_ I know what
a wicked woman I am!'

Just then, the trap-door in the roof of the dungeon opened, and a
voice called down, 'Tell us where is the king's son! If you do not
tell us, you shall stay here and starve.'

'The king's son is here!' cried the queen.

'A likely story!' answered the gaolers. 'Do you think we are going to
believe that?' And they shut-to the trap.

The queen's son cried, 'Dear brother, come and take back your crown,
it pricks so!' But the king's son only undid the queen's bonds and his
brother's. 'Now,' said he, 'you are free: you can kill me now.'

'Oh!' cried the queen, 'what a wicked woman I must be! Do you think I
could do it now?' Then she cried, 'O little son, bring your poor head
to me, and I will take off the crown!' and she took off the crown and
gave it back to the king's son. 'When I am dead,' she said, 'remember,
and be kind to him!'

The king's son put the crown upon his own head.

Suddenly, outside the palace, all the land broke into leaf; there was
a rushing sound in the river of fishes swimming up from the sea, and
all the air was loud and dark with flights of returning birds. Almost
at the same moment the foxes began to disappear and diminish, and
cease to be like locusts in the land.

People came running to open the door of the deepest and darkest
dungeon in the palace: 'For either,' they cried, 'the queen is dead,
or the king's son has been found!'

'Where is the king's son, then?' they called out, as they threw wide
the door. 'He is here!' cried the king; and out he came, to the
astonishment of all, wearing his crown, and leading his step-mother
and half-brother by the hand.

He looked at his step-mother, and she was quite white; as white as the
mouse that had jumped upon the king's bed at midnight bidding him fly
for his life. Not only her face, but her hair, her lips, and her very
eyes were white and colourless, for she had gone blind from gazing too
hard into her crystal ball, and hunting the king's son to death.

So she remained blind to the end of her days; but the king was more
good to her than gold, and as for his brother, never did half-brothers
love each other better than these. Therefore they all lived very
happily together, and after a long time, the queen learned to forget
what a wicked woman she had been.




THE WISHING-POT

[Illustration]

THE WISHING-POT


Tulip was the son of a poor but prudent mother; from the moment of his
birth she had trained him to count ten before ever he wanted or asked
for anything. An otherwise reckless youth, he acquired an intrinsic
value through the practice of this habit. Only once, just as he was
reaching, but had not quite reached, years of discretion, did his
habit of precaution fail him; and this same failure became in the end
the opening of his fortunes.

Bathing one day in the river, to whose banks the woods ran down in
steep terraces, he heard a voice come singing along one of the upper
slopes; and looking up under the boughs of cedar and sycamore, he saw
a pair of green feet go dancing by, up and down like grasshoppers on
the prance.

There was such rhythm in them, and such sweetness in the voice, that
his heart was out of him before he could harness it to the number ten,
and he came out of the water the most natural and forlorn of lovers.

Before he was dressed the green feet and the voice were gone, and
before he got home his health and his appetite seemed to have gone
also. He pined industriously from day to day, and spent all his hours
in searching among the woods by the river side for his lady of the
dear green feet. He did not know so much as the size or colour of her
face; the sound of her voice alone, and the running up and down of her
feet, had, as he told his mother, 'decimated his affections.'

In his trouble he could think of only one possible remedy, and that he
counted well over, knowing its risk. Away in the loneliest part of the
forest there lived a wise woman, to whom, now and then, folk went for
help when everything else had failed them. So he had heard tell of a
certain Wishing-Pot that was hers in which people might see the thing
they desired most, and into which for a fee she allowed lovers and
other poor fools of fortune to look. One thing, however, was told
against the virtues of this Wishing-Pot, that though many had had a
sight of it, and their wishes revealed to them therein, others had
gone and had never again returned to their homes, but had vanished
altogether from men's sight, nor had any news ever been heard of them
after. There were some wise folk who held that they had only gone
elsewhere to seek the fortune that the Wishing-Pot had shown to them.
Nevertheless, for the most part the wise woman and her Wishing-Pot had
an ill name in that neighbourhood.

To a lover's heart risk gives value; so one fine morning Tulip kissed
his mother, counted ten, and set out for the woods.

Towards evening he came to the house of the witch and knocked at the
door. 'Good mother,' said he, when she opened to him, 'I have brought
you the fee to buy myself a wish over the Wishing-Pot.' 'Ay, surely,'
answered the crone, and drew him in.

In one corner of the room stood a great crystal bowl. Nearly round it
was, and had a small opening at the top, to which a man might place
his eye and look in. To Tulip, as he looked at it, it seemed all
coloured fires and falling stars, and a soft crackling sound came
from it, as though heat burned in its veins. It threw long shapes and
lustres upon the walls, and within innumerable things writhed, and
ran, and whiffed in the floating of its vapours.

'You may have two wishes,' said the old witch, 'a one and a two.' And
she said the spell that undid the secret of the Pot to the wisher.

Then Tulip bent down his head and looked in, counting softly to
himself, and at ten, he let the wish go to his lady of the dear green
feet.

The colours changed and sprang, as though stirred and fed with fresh
fuel; and down in the depths of the Wishing-Pot he saw the feet of his
Beloved go by in twinkling green slippers.

As soon as he saw that he began counting ten in great haste for the
second wish. 'O to be inside the Wishing-Pot with her!' was his
thought now. He had got to nine, and the wish was almost on his
tongue, when he caught sight of the old woman's eye looking at him.
And the eye had become like a large green spider, with great long
limbs that kept clutching up and out again!

His heart queegled to a jelly at the sight; but the green feet lured
him so, that he still thought how to get to them and yet be safe.
Surely, to be in the Wishing-Pot and out by the sound of the next
Angelus became the shape of his wish. He shut his eyes, cried ten upon
the venture, and was in the Wishing-Pot!

The little green feet were trebling over the glass with a sound like
running water; and he himself began running at full speed, shot off
into the Wishing-Pot like a pellet from a pop-gun. Nothing could he
see of his dear but her wee green feet. But above them as they ran he
heard showery laughter, and he knew that his lady was there before
him, though invisible to the eye.

The Pot, now he was in it, seemed bigger than the biggest dome in the
world; to run all round it took him two or three minutes. Away in the
centre of its base stood a great opal knob, like the axle to a wheel
round which he and the green feet kept circling.

However much he wished and wished, the green feet still kept their
distance, for now he was _in_ the Wishing-Pot wishes availed him
nothing. The green feet flew faster than his; the light laugh rang
further and further away; right across to the other side of the hall
his lady had passed from him now.

The magic fires of the crystal leapt and crackled under his tread;
now it seemed as if his feet ran on a green lawn, out of which broke
crocuses and daffodils, and now roses reddened in the track, and now
the purple of grapes spurted across the path like spilled wine. The
sound of the green feet and the running of overhead laughter, as they
distanced him in front, came nearer and nearer behind him from across
the hall. He felt that he must follow and not turn, however beaten he
might be.

Presently a voice, that he knew was his Beloved's, cried,--

  'Heart that would have me must hatch me!
  Feet that would find me must catch me!
  Man that would mate me must match me!'

Oh, how? wondered spent feet, and failing heart, and reeling brain.
He stumbled slower and slower in the race, till presently with quick
innumerable patterings the green feet grew closer, and were overtaking
him from the rear.

Warm breath was in his hair,--lips and a hand; he turned, open armed,
to snatch the mischievous morsel, but all that he clasped was a gust
of air; and he saw the green feet scudding out and away on a fresh
start before him.

Again, with laughter, the voice cried,--

  'Lap for lap you must wind me:
  Equal, before you can find me!
  You are a lap behind me!'

Where they raced the surface of the glass sloped slightly to the
upward rise of its walls; Tulip shifted his ground, and ran where the
footing was leveller toward the centre, and the circle began to go
smaller. So he began to gain, till the green slippers, seeing how the
advantage had come about, shifted also in their turn.

Thus they ran on; there were no inner posts to mark the course, only
the great opal standing in the centre of all formed the pivot of the
race, and round and round it, a great way off, they ran.

All at once a big thought came into Tulip's head; he waited not to
count ten, but, before Green Slippers knew what he was after, he had
reached the opal centre, and was circling it. Then quickly all the
laughter stopped; the green feet came twinkling sixteens to the
dozens, so as to get round the post before him and away.

One lap, he was before her; two laps, he turned again to her coming,
and found her falling into his arms. She blossomed into sight at his
touch: from top to toe she was there! All rosy and alive he had her in
his clasp, laughing, crying, clinging, yet struggling to be free. She
made a most endless handful, till Tulip had caught her by the hair and
kissed her between the eyes.

All round and overhead the magic crystal reared up arches of fire, to
a roof that dropped like rain, while Tulip and his prize sank down
exhausted on the great hub of opal to rest. As he touched it all the
secret wonders of the Wishing-Pot were opened and revealed to his
gaze.

Crowds and crowds of faces were what he most saw; everywhere that he
turned he saw old friends and neighbours who, he thought, had been
dead and gone, looking sadly, and shaking long sorrowful faces at
him. 'You here too, Tulip?' they seemed forever to be saying. 'Always
another, and another; and now you here too!'

There was the dairyman's wife, who had waited seven years to have a
child, holding a little will-o'-the-wisp of a thing in her arms. Now
and then for a while it would lie still, and then suddenly it would
leap up and dart away; and she, poor soul, must up and after it,
though the chase were ever so long!

There also was Miller Dick with his broad thumbs, counting over a rich
pile of gold, which, ever and anon, spun up into the air, and went
strewing itself like dead leaves before the wind. Then he too must
needs up and after it, till it was all caught again, and added
together, and made right.

There were small playmates of Tulip's childhood, each with its little
conceit of treasure: one had a toy, and another a lamb, another a
bird; and all of them hunted and caught the thing they loved, and
kissed it and again let go. So it went on, over and over again, more
sad than the sight of a quaker as he twiddles his thumbs.

Whenever they were at peace for a moment, they turned their eyes his
way. 'What, you here too, Tulip?' was always the thing they seemed to
be saying.

While Tulip sat looking at them, and thinking of it all, suddenly his
lady disappeared, and only her green feet darted from his side and
began running round and round in a circle. Then was he just about to
set off running after them, when he felt himself caught up to the
coloured fires of the roof and sent spinning ungovernably through
space. Suddenly he was dumped to the ground, and just as his feet were
gathering themselves up under him he heard the Angelus bell ringing
from the village below the slopes of the wood.

He was standing again by the side of the Wishing-Pot, and the old
woman sat cowering, and blinking her spider-eye at him, too much
astonished to speak or move.

Tulip looked at her with a pleasant and engaging air. 'Oh, good
mother, what a treat you have given me!' he said. 'How I wish I had
money for another wish! what a pity it was ever to have wished myself
back again!'

When the old witch heard that she thought still to entrap him, and
answered joyfully, 'Why, kind Sir, surely, kind Sir, if you like it
you shall look again! Take another wish, and never mind about the
money.' So she said the spell once more which opened to him the
wonders of the Wishing-Pot.

Then cried Tulip, clapping his hands, 'What better can I wish than to
have you in the Wishing-Pot, in the place of all those poor folk whom
you have imprisoned with their wishes!'

Hardly was the thing said than done; all the children who had been
Tulip's playmates, and Miller Dick with his broad thumbs, and the
dairyman's wife, were every one of them out, and the old witch woman
was nowhere to be seen.

But Tulip put his eye to the mouth of the Wishing-Pot; and there down
below he saw the old witch, running round and round as hard as she
could go, pursued by a herd of green spiders. And there without doubt
she remains.

And now everybody was happy except Tulip himself; for the children had
all of them their toys, and the old miller his gold, and as for the
dairyman's wife, she found that she had become the mother of a large
and promising infant. But Tulip had altogether lost his lady of the
dear green feet, for in thinking of others he had forgotten to think
of himself. All the gratitude of the poor people he had saved was
nothing to him in that great loss which had left him desolate. For his
part he only took the Wishing-Pot up under his arm, and went sadly
away home.

But before long the noise of what he had done reached to the king's
ears; and he sent for Tulip to appear before him and his Court. Tulip
came, carrying the Wishing-Pot under his arm, very downcast and sad
for love of the lady of the dear green feet.

At that time all the Court was in half mourning; for the Princess
Royal, who was the king's only child, and the most beautiful and
accomplished of her sex, had gone perfectly distraught with grief, of
which nothing could cure her. All day long she sat with her eyes shut,
and tears running down, and folded hands and quiet little feet. And
all this came, it was said, from a dream which she could not tell or
explain to anybody.

The king had promised that whoever could rouse her from her grief,
should have the princess for his wife, and become heir to the throne;
and when he heard that there was such a thing in the world as a
Wishing-Pot, he thought that something might be done with it.

From Tulip he learned, however, that no one knew the spell which
opened the resources of the Wishing-Pot save the old witch woman who
was shut up fast for ever in its inside. So it seemed to the king that
the Pot could be of no use for curing the princess.

But it was so beautiful, with its shooting stars and coloured fires,
that, when Tulip brought it, they carried it in to show to her.

After three hours the princess was prevailed upon to open her eyes;
and directly they fell upon the great opal bowl, all at once she
started to her feet and began laughing and dancing and singing.

These are the words that they heard her sing,--

  'Lap for lap I must wind you;
  Equal, before I can find you;
  I am a lap behind you!'

Tulip, as soon as he heard the sweetness of that voice, and the words,
pushed his way past the king and all his court, to where the princess
was. And there over the heads of the crowd he saw his lady of the dear
green feet laughing and opening her white arms to him.

As she set eyes on his face the dream of the princess came true, and
all her unhappiness passed from her. So they loved and were married,
to the astonishment and edification of the whole court; and lived to
be greatly loved and admired by all their grandchildren.




THE FEEDING OF THE EMIGRANTS

[Illustration]

THE FEEDING OF THE EMIGRANTS


Over the sea went the birds, flying southward to their other home
where the sun was. The rustle of their wings, high over head, could be
heard down on the water; and their soft, shrill twitterings, and the
thirsty nibbling of their beaks; for the seas were hushed, and the
winds hung away in cloud-land.

Far away from any shore, and beginning to be weary, their eyes caught
sight of a white form resting between sky and sea. Nearer they came,
till it seemed to be a great white bird, brooding on the calmed water;
and its wings were stretched high and wide, yet it stirred not. And
the wings had in themselves no motion, but stood rigidly poised over
their own reflection in the water.

Then the birds came curiously, dropping from their straight course, to
wonder at the white wings that went not on. And they came and settled
about this great, bird-like thing, so still and so grand.

Onto the deck crept a small child, for the noise of the birds had come
down to him in the hold. 'There is nobody at home but me,' he said;
for he thought the birds must have come to call, and he wished to be
polite. 'They are all gone but me,' he went on, 'all gone. I am left
alone.'

The birds, none of them understood him; but they put their heads
on one side and looked down on him in a friendly way, seeming to
consider.

He ran down below and fetched up a pannikin of water and some biscuit.
He set the water down, and breaking the biscuit sprinkled it over the
white deck. Then he clapped his hands to see them all flutter and
crowd round him, dipping their bright heads to the food and drink he
gave them.

They might not stay long, for the waterlogged ship could not help
them on the way they wished to go; and by sunset they must touch land
again. Away they went, on a sudden, the whole crew of them, and the
sound of their voices became faint in the bright sea-air.

'I am left alone!' said the child.

Many days ago, while he was asleep in a snug corner he had found for
himself, the captain and crew had taken to the boats, leaving the
great ship to its fate. And forgetting him because he was so small, or
thinking that he was safe in some one of the other boats, the rough
sailors had gone off without him, and he was left alone. So for a
whole week he had stayed with the ship, like a whisper of its vanished
life amid the blues of a deep calm. And the birds came to the ship
only to desert it again quickly, because it stood so still upon the
sea.

But that night the mermen came round the vessel's side, and sang; and
the wind rose to their singing, and the sea grew rough. Yet the child
slept with his head in dreams. The dreams came from the mermen's
songs, and he held his breath, and his heart stayed burdened by the
deep sweetness of what he saw.

Dark and strange and cold the sea-valleys opened before him; blue
sea-beasts ranged there, guarded by strong-finned shepherds, and
fishes like birds darted to and fro, but made no sound. And that was
what burdened his heart,--that for all the beauty he saw, there was no
sound, no song of a single bird to comfort him.

The mermen reached out their blue arms to him, and sang; on the top of
the waves they sang, striving to make him forget the silence of the
land below. They offered him the sea-life: why should he be drowned
and die?

And now over him in the dark night the great wings crashed, and beat
abroad in the wind, and the ship made great way. And the mermen swam
fast to be with her, and ceased from their own song, for the wind sang
a coronach in the canvas and cordage. But the little child lifted his
head in his sleep and smiled, for his soul was eased of the mermen's
song, and it seemed to him that instead he heard birds singing in a
far-off land, singing of a child whose loving hand had fed them, faint
and weary, in their way over the wide ocean.

In that far southern land the dawn had begun, and the birds, waking
one by one, were singing their story of him to the soft-breathing
tamarisk boughs. And none of them knew how they had been sent as
a salvage crew to save the child's spirit from the spell of the
sea-dream, and to carry it safely back to the land that loved him.

       *       *       *       *       *

But with the child's body the white wings had flown down into the
wave-buried valleys, and to a cleft of the sea-hills to rest.




THE PASSIONATE PUPPETS

[Illustration]

THE PASSIONATE PUPPETS


When the long days of summer began, Killian, the cow-herd, was able
to lead his drove up into the hills, giving them the high pastures to
range. Then from sunrise to sunset he was alone, except when, early
each morning, Grendel and the other girls came up to carry down the
milk to the villages.

All day long the cow-bells sounded in his ears, but still the time of
his wedding was a long way off; it would be five years before he and
Grendel could afford to set up a house and farm, with cows of their
own.

The great stretch of world that lay out under him, like a broad map
coloured blue and green, made him full of a restless longing for a
move in life. Yonder he could pick out the towns with their spires and
glittering roofs, and the overhead mists, that gave token of crowded
life below. It was there that wealth could be got; and with wealth men
married soon, and were at ease. Somewhere, he had heard, lived kings
and queens, wearing rich robes and gold crowns on the top of their
heart's desire. For kings and queens, he supposed, loved as did he and
Grendel, regarding nothing else as much in the world besides.

So Killian put heart into his deft hands, and presently had set to
work.

One evening Grendel came up from the valley, after her day's work, to
have a look at her lover; she had brought him some brown cakes and a
bottle of wine. But Killian, who had caught sight of her eyes over the
green rise at his feet, was hiding something behind his back.

'Whatever have you there?' she asked, as she saw chips, and tools, and
bits of bright foil, lying scattered about the ground. Yet for three
days he would show her nothing, only he said, 'What I do is because we
love each other so.'

At the end of that time, he showed her what he had done. There she saw
a little king and queen, about six inches high; he was in blue, and
she in white; and they were both as dear as they were small. The king
was partly like a cow-herd, having a crown over his broad-brimmed hat,
with thick wooden shoes, and leather-bound legs; and the queen was
like Grendel, with great long plaits past her waist, and a gold-worked
bodice, such as Grendel had for Sunday wear. 'Aye, aye,' cried
Grendel, 'why, it is you and me!'

Then Killian showed her how the joints of the little puppets moved on
delicate wires, and how five strings ran up, one from each limb, to be
fastened to the player's fingers, so that he might make them act as
though life were in them.

'I shall take these down with me to the valley,' said Killian. 'First
I shall go about among the villages; then, when I can do better, I
shall go to the towns. After that no doubt the kings and queens will
hear of me, and will send for me to play before them, and I shall
become rich. Then I shall come home and marry you.'

Grendel thought her lover the most wonderful man in the world, and it
is the truth he was very clever; she kissed him a hundred times, and
the little marionettes also. 'Ah,' she said, 'now we shall not have to
wait five years! in five months you will come back rich and famous,
and we shall marry, and live happily.'

How Killian had loved her while making his puppets, only she knew as
well as he. Truly, he had put his heart into them, so that they were
like living beings,--and so small that their very smallness made them
a marvel. Being a lover, he had put inside each breast a little heart,
and, for the luck of the thing, had christened them with a drop of his
own blood, and a drop of Grendel's; so each heart had in it one little
drop of blood. Now he was to go out, and try his fortune.

He found a lad to come and take his place and see after the cows;
then he said good-bye to Grendel, and set off on a round of all the
villages of the plain.

At every inn where he put up, he called the country folk together to
the sound of his shepherd's bag-pipes, and showed them his play. It
was only himself and Grendel, no story at all, merely lovers parting
and meeting again, each believing the other dead, and in the end
living happily to the sound of cow-bells, that showed how rich they
were in herds.

And the villagers laughed and cried, and gave him pence, and a night's
lodging, and food; so that presently he was able to make himself a
little travelling-stage, and hire a piper to play dance-music for him.
But it was always the one story of himself and Grendel, and no other,
though the two puppets wore crowns upon their heads.

       *       *       *       *       *

The little marionettes had hearts. That was the beginning of things:
they remembered nothing else. When their eyes had grown open to the
fact, then for them life had begun. After that they lived like bee and
blossom, only that the bee never flew away, and the honey remained in
the blossom.

How this came to pass was a question they never asked; why they loved
each other they did not know. If they had had to think of it they
would have said, 'It is because we cannot help it.' And every day
one same thing happened to them that they could not help, the most
beautiful thing in life. It came to them by instinct, taking hold of
them from head to feet and saying, 'love, love, love,' in all sorts of
wonderful ways.

Whenever this thing happened they began to move about softly, going to
and fro, and round and round, dancing, and holding each other by
the hand, putting their cheeks so close together that their eyelids
brushed, and sometimes their little hearts that heaved. And all the
while music from somewhere was giving a meaning to these things; and
over and over again, 'love, love, love,' was what it kept saying to
them.

Their happiness was so great, that they would begin playing with it,
pretending that it was all turned into grief. First he would kiss her
from forehead to chin, and into the hollow of her little throat; and
then all down each dear arm, even to the finger-tips; and last of all
her feet; and again last of all her lips, and again last of all her
breast. And then he would go away, walking backwards most of the time,
or if not, still turning round and round to take another look at her.
Then when he was altogether out of sight, she would sit down and cry,
though all the while he would be peeping at her from his hiding-place,
to let her know that he was not really gone. Then she would lie down,
and cry more, and at last leave off crying and stay almost still on a
little bed, that seemed to come to her from nowhere, just when she was
ready to fall on it. Then, at last, she would shut her eyes, and cover
her face up very slowly with a sheet, and lie so still that he would
grow quite frightened, and come running from his hiding-place, and
lift the sheet, and look at her; then he would fall down as if his
legs had been cut from under him; then he would get up and throw
flowers over her, and at last catch her up and begin to carry her;
and at that she would wake up all at once and kiss him, to a sound of
bells.

They did not know why they did this; it was so beautiful they could
not have thought of it for themselves, and yet it said everything of
life that they wanted to say. For love was the beginning and the end
of it; and always, as they came to the sad part, they had tender
tremblings for fear the other should think the sorrow was real: he,
lest she should think he had really gone away and left her, never to
return; and she, lest he should believe that she always meant to lie
so cruelly still, with a sheet over her eyes. Yet the kissings that
came after made the fearfulness almost the sweetest thing in their
prayer-sayings to each other.

For to them this was a daily prayer, the most solemn thing in their
lives; heart praying to heart, and hand reaching to hand; and from
somewhere overhead gentle monitions as to what they must do next
coming to them, so that they knew how to pray best, now by lifting a
hand, or now by turning the head, or now by running fast with both
feet. And all this beautiful worship of love their bodies learned to
do more perfectly day by day; yet the little quaking of fear was still
in the centre of it all.

       *       *       *       *       *

Killian's fingers grew nimble; and yet he often wondered to see how
true to life his puppets were, how they sighed, how they embraced and
clung, as if their hearts were coming in two when the parting drew
near. How lingeringly the little queen drew up the sheet over her
face, when her lover did not return, and let it fall to cover her with
a quiet sigh. Often he cried when she did that part, so like Grendel
was it,--the tender waiting, and the last giving in! And then, how the
little king shuddered as he drew the cloth from her face; and how he
threw the flowers, as if there were not enough in the world to express
his grief! And yet it was only a play, made by the twitching of the
strings tied to his fingers, with love as the beginning and end of it.

Killian was getting quite rich in copper coin, so he sent some of it
home to Grendel, that she might buy stock for the home that was so
soon to be theirs. And presently he made bold to go into the towns,
where, instead of copper, he might gain silver. He built a bigger
stage, and had more music to go to the dance; but still it was the
story of himself and Grendel, with crowns upon their heads, and
nothing more.

And now, indeed, people began to cry, 'Here is a wonderful new actor!
He has it all at the ends of his fingers! What a pity he has no better
play in which to show himself off!' But Killian said, 'It is the only
play I know how to do.'

Presently there came a sharp fellow to him, who said: 'If you will
go shares with me, I will make your fortune. We have only to put our
heads together, and the thing is done. I will write the plays for you,
and you shall play them on the strings. What is wanted is a little
more real life.'

Killian was a simple fellow, who believed all the world to be wiser
than himself. He was glad enough to meet with a clever fellow who
could write plays for him. His partner wanted him to make new dresses
for the marionettes, to suit their new parts; but to that Killian
would not agree. So whatever they were they still wore their broad
hats and crowns, and their wooden shoes, that still he might watch
in his own mind himself and Grendel making their way to fortune and
happiness.

The marionettes grew bewildered with their new taking; they did not
understand the meaning of all the coarse things they had to do. So in
the middle of a play, the little queen would fail now and then in
her part, and move awkwardly, wondering what her lover meant when he
sprawled to and fro, and seemed trying to find in the air more feet
than he had upon the ground.

Yet the crowd found her bashful fear so irresistibly funny, that it
roared again. Also, when the little cow-herd with a crown on his head,
lifted his hand or foot toward his partner, and then shrank trembling
away, it roared yet more at the poltroon manner of the thing.

Killian's partner said, 'You alter all my plays, but the way you do
them is something to marvel at. Only, why do you always bring them
round again to that silly lover's ending?'

'I cannot help it,' said Killian; 'often now, with these new plays, I
can't get the strings to work properly. I think the poor puppets are
getting worn out.'

His partner began examining the puppets, and watching how Killian
played them, with more attention; and presently he knew that there was
more in it than met the eye. 'It is the puppets who are the marvel,
not the man,' he said to himself. 'I could work them better myself, if
I had practice.'

Soon after this he proposed that they should set off for another town;
it was the chief town of all, where they hoped at last to be allowed
to show their plays to the queen herself. 'It must be a real play this
time,' said the partner, 'a tragedy; but it wants a third person. You
must make another puppet, while I write the play!'

So Killian set to work. But he had no love for the third puppet, which
was neither himself nor Grendel, and he put no heart inside it, and no
little drop of blood. So the new marionette was but limbs, and a head
drawn on wires.

'Soon,' thought Killian, 'I shall be rich enough to go home and marry
Grendel. Then I will throw this stupid third one away; but the other
two we will always keep close to the niche with the statue of Saint
Lady, to help to make us thankful for the good things God gives us in
this world.'

It was beautiful late spring weather when he and his companion set out
for the capital. On the way Killian's partner told him the play that
would have to be played before the queen, and said, 'In case three
should be too much for you to manage, you had better teach me also
to handle the strings.' So Killian began to teach him, with the two
little marionettes alone, the first play which he had brought down
with him from the mountains,--that being the easiest of all to learn,
and the one he loved best to teach.

The partner was surprised to find how wonderfully the puppets followed
the leading-strings; in spite of his clumsiness the story acted itself
to perfection.

Simple-hearted Killian was charmed. 'Ah! you clever townsman,' said
he, 'see how at first trial you equal poor me, who have been at it for
months! It had better be you, after all, to do the play when it is
called for at the court.' And this Killian proposed truly out of pure
modesty, but also because he did not like the play his partner had
made for him. 'It is too cruel a one!' he said. 'After they have
played it together so long, I feel as if my two puppets can do nothing
else so well as love each other, and live happily.'

'Ah, but,' said his partner, 'the queen would find that very dull!'
Killian could not see why, but he believed that the townsman was wiser
than himself, and gave in. All he wanted now was to get money enough
to run back home with, and throw himself into his dear Grendel's arms
for life.

So they journeyed on, and at last, one day, they came in sight of
the capital. But it had been such a long way to come that when they
reached the gates they found them shut.

The night was warm, and a high moon was overhead. 'Come,' said
Killian, 'and let us lie down in one of these orchards that are
outside the walls!' So they left the high-road, and went and lay down.

First they ate some food that they carried with them. Then Killian
opened the case in which lay the two marionettes, and looked them over
to see that they were in working order. His partner took up the odd
number, and began practising it; but Killian's attention all went to
the little king cow-herd and his queen.

He fondled them gently with his hands, and as he looked at them his
heart went up into the mountains to pray for his dear Grendel.

Presently he began dreaming to himself like Jacob, only his dream was
just of the simple things of earth. Down the great green uplands came
troops of white cattle; but to him they seemed to be bridesmaids
coming to Grendel's wedding day, and the ringing of the cow-bells was
as sweet to him as the songs of angels. Before he was fast asleep the
two marionettes had slipped off his knee and lay in the deep grass
looking up at the sky.

       *       *       *       *       *

They had never seen so beautiful a sight before, for never had they
spent a night in the sweet open air till now. Over their heads swung
dusky clusters of blossom, that would look white by day; and over them
the moon went kissing its way from star to star.

Now and then single blossoms dropped as if they had something to say
to the little cow-herd and his queen, lying there in the cool grass.

But the marionettes said nothing; their hearts were very full; now, at
last, they found their old happiness return to them. Their prayers,
that they used to say to each other so tenderly, had been going wrong
for quite a long time; sudden starts and tremblings of fear had taken
hold of their light-hearted deceptions of each other; and every day
things had been going worse. But now they felt like entering upon a
long rest.

As they lay, their hands met together. The little cow-herd could
count her fingers across the palm of his hand, and never once did she
pretend to be drawing them away. How good it all seemed!

Close by them the odd man was strutting in stiff, ungainly attitudes,
cricking his neck and elbows, and tossing up his toes. How foolish he
seemed to them in their innocent wisdom! They knew he was nothing to
them, for he had no heart; he was nothing but a trick on springs. Yet
they wished he would go away, and give them room to be alone, while
the moon was making a white dream over their lives.

       *       *       *       *       *

The partner grumbled to himself at the awkward ways of the new
puppet. Instead of obeying, it kicked at the leading strings, and did
everything like a stick, all angles and corners. Presently he put it
back into its box; and then he saw the little king and queen lying
together on the damp grass. He picked them up, growling at Killian as
a simpleton, for leaving them there to get rusty with the dew. Then he
put them also away, and curled himself up to dream about the success
of his play on the morrow.

Quite early in the morning he and Killian went into the city, and set
up their stage in a corner of the marketplace. The wonderful acting of
the little king and queen, compared with the ungainly hobblings and
jerkings of the odd man, threw the townspeople into ecstasies of
laughter. They declared they had never seen so funny a sight in their
lives as the beautiful nervous acting of the pair, side by side with
the stiff-jointed awkwardness of the other.

Presently, sure enough, the queen heard tell of this new form of
entertainment, and sent word for the mummers to appear at the palace.

Killian said to his partner: 'There is something the matter with the
puppets to-day; they want careful handling. I am glad we settled
that you are to do the new play; for, before the queen and her great
ladies, I am likely to lose my head.'

All the court was gathered together to watch the puppet-play, while
behind the scenes the partner took all the leading strings into his
own hands.

       *       *       *       *       *

The two marionettes opened their eyes, and saw daylight; they began
moving to and fro softly; every now and then they put their faces
together and kissed. The stupid odd man seemed to have gone; they were
so glad to be left alone.

Soon the little king lay down, pretending to be tired, but it was only
that he might put his head in the queen's lap. She bent over him, and
laid her fingers on his eyes, seeming to say, 'Go to sleep, then! I
will shut your eyes for you.' How pretty it was of her!

Then she covered his face over with her handkerchief; and all at once
in came the odd man, walking on the points of his toes. The little
king, now that the handkerchief was over his face, opened his eyes,
and looked through it, to see what his dear queen would be doing now.
The odd man had his arms round her neck, and was kissing her, and the
queen looked as if she were going to kiss him back; but all at once
she had pushed away the odd man so hard that he fell down with his
heels in the air; and then she snatched the handkerchief from the
king's face, and began trembling, and kissing him.

The whole of the court shouted, first with laughter at the odd man's
fall, and then with admiration at the wonderful acting of the little
queen.

Behind the scenes the partner began grumbling to Killian: 'They are
going all wrong! It's all your doing, leaving them to lie in the damp
grass last night!'

But still the whole court shouted and applauded. So the play went on;
and now, more and more, the showman had cause to grumble. Whenever he
came to a part where the play required that the queen should turn from
her own cow-herd to the ugly odd man, everything went wrong. 'Very
well,' thought he at last, 'she may be as innocent as Desdemona but it
will all come to the same at the last!'

And so, still more, as the play went on, the little marionettes
trembled and shook with fear. They wished the silly odd man would go
away, and not come interrupting their prayers; and all the while they
loved each other so! No idea of jealousy ever entered the little
king's head; and as for the queen, if the odd man came and put his
arms round her neck and kissed her, could she help it? All she could
do was to run and put her arms round her own lover when he reappeared;
and how the court shouted and applauded, when she went so quick from
one to the other.

At last the final act was begun; the king came running in with a sword
in his hand, why, he did not know, until he saw his poor little queen
struggling in the arms of the odd man. 'Ah,' thought he, 'it is to
drive him away! Then we shall be by ourselves again, and happy.'

No one ever fought so wonderfully on a stage before as the little
cow-herd. All the court started to their feet, shouting; and still,
while they shouted, they laughed to see the impossible odd man
scooping about with his sword, and jerking head over heels, and high
up into the air, to get away from the little king's sword-play. The
partner had to keep snatching him up out of harm's way, for fear of a
wrong ending. Then, suddenly he let him come down with a jump on the
little king's head. And at that the king fell back upon the ground,
and felt a sharp pain go through his heart.

The odd man drew out his sword and laughed; on the end of it was a
tiny drop of blood. The poor little queen ran up, and bent down to
look in her lover's face, to know if he were really hurt. And then a
terrible thing happened.

Three times the little king raised his sword and pointed it at her
heart, and dropped it again. And all the time the partner was tugging
at the strings, and swearing by all the worst things he knew.

The little king felt himself growing weak; he was very frightened. He
felt as if he were going away altogether, and leaving her to think
he did not love her any more. And still his arm went up and down,
pointing the sword at her heart.

The showman tugged angrily; then there was the sound of a wire that
snapped--the king had thrown away his sword.

He reached up his two arms, and laid them fast round the queen's neck.
'Now at last she knows that I have not left off loving her.' He felt
her drawing herself away, he held her more and more tightly to his
breast; and now her little face lay close against his. Nothing should
take her away from him now!

The showman pulled violently with all his might, to get her away;
there was a snapping of strings, and then--the queen reached out two
weak little hands, and laid them under her lover's head.

They lay quite still, quite still for a long time, and never moved.
'The play is over!' said the showman, disgusted and angry at the wreck
of his plot.

Suddenly the whole stage became showered with gold; the great queen
and all her court threw out showers of it like rain. It fell all over
the two marionettes, covering them where they lay, just as the babes
in the wood when they died were covered over with leaves.

Killian dropped his head on to the boards of the little stage, and
sobbed. The partner let down the curtain, and began gathering up the
gold.

And still, from without, the queen and her court clapped, and cried
their applause; and still within lay Killian with his head upon the
stage, sobbing for the two little marionettes, lying still with all
the springs and strings of their bodies quite broken. Inside, though
he could not see them, their hearts were broken also. 'Now,' he
thought, 'I must go back to Grendel, or I too shall die!'

That night, in the middle of the night, the partner went away,
carrying with him all the gold that the little marionettes had earned
by their deaths. And these, indeed, he left, seeing that they were
useless any more. But to Killian, when he woke the next morning, they
were the only things left him in the world, to take back to Grendel.

He took them just as they were, locked in each other's arms, and went
back all the long way to Grendel, up into the hills of his home, as
poor in money as when he first started.

But Grendel saw that he had come back rich; for his face was grown
tender and wise. And for five years they waited very patiently
together, till by cow-keeping he had earned enough for them to keep
some cows of their own, and to live in married happiness.

The little marionettes they put on a shelf, beneath the cross, and the
statue of our Lady; and there, locked in each other's arms, those two
disciples and martyrs of love lie at peace, feeling no pain any more
in their broken hearts.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Field of Clover, by Laurence Housman

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE FIELD OF CLOVER ***

***** This file should be named 18872.txt or 18872.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/8/8/7/18872/

Produced by Brad Norton, Suzanne Shell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

*** END: FULL LICENSE ***

