Project Gutenberg's Lippincott's Magazine, Vol. 22, August, 1878, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Lippincott's Magazine, Vol. 22, August, 1878

Author: Various

Release Date: July 22, 2006 [EBook #18885]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LIPPINCOTT'S MAGAZINE ***




Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Lesley Halamek and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net







=LIPPINCOTT'S MAGAZINE=

OF

_POPULAR LITERATURE AND SCIENCE_.

AUGUST, 1878.

       *       *       *       *       *

Footnote: Entered according to Act of Congress, in the year 1878, by
J. B. LIPPINCOTT & CO., in the Office of the Librarian of Congress, at
Washington.

       *       *       *       *       *




ALONG THE DANUBE.

[Illustration: SOMENDRIA.]


Ada-Kale is a Turkish fortress which seems to spring directly from the
bosom of the Danube at a point where three curious and quarrelsome
races come into contact, and where the Ottoman thought it necessary to
have a foothold even in times of profound peace. To the traveller
from Western Europe no spectacle on the way to Constantinople was so
impressive as this ancient and picturesque fortification, suddenly
affronting the vision with its odd walls, its minarets, its red-capped
sentries, and the yellow sinister faces peering from balconies
suspended above the current. It was the first glimpse of the Orient
which one obtained; it appropriately introduced one to a domain which
is governed by sword and gun; and it was a pretty spot of color in the
midst of the severe and rather solemn scenery of the Danubian stream.
Ada-Kale is to be razed to the water's edge--so, at least, the treaty
between Russia and Turkey has ordained--and the Servian mountaineers
will no longer see the Crescent flag flying within rifle-shot of the
crags from which, by their heroic devotion in unequal battle, they
long ago banished it.

The Turks occupying this fortress during the recent war evidently
relied upon Fate for their protection, for the walls of Ada-Kale are
within a stone's throw of the Roumanian shore, and every Mussulman
in the place could have been captured in twenty minutes. I passed by
there one morning on the road from Orsova, on the frontier of Hungary,
to Bucharest, and was somewhat amused to see an elderly Turk seated
in a small boat near the Roumanian bank fishing. Behind him were two
soldiers, who served as oarsmen, and rowed him gently from point to
point when he gave the signal. Scarcely six hundred feet from him
stood a Wallachian sentry, watching his movements in lazy, indifferent
fashion. And this was at the moment that the Turks were bombarding
Kalafat in Roumania from Widdin on the Bulgarian side of the Danube!
Such a spectacle could be witnessed nowhere save in this land, "where
it is always afternoon," where people at times seem to suspend
respiration because they are too idle to breathe, and where even a dog
will protest if you ask him to move quickly out of your path. The old
Turk doubtless fished in silence and calm until the end of the war,
for I never heard of the removal of either himself or his companions.

The journeys by river and by rail from Lower Roumania to the romantic
and broken country surrounding Orsova are extremely interesting. The
Danube-stretches of shimmering water among the reedy lowlands--where
the only sign of life is a quaint craft painted with gaudy colors
becalmed in some nook, or a guardhouse built on piles driven into the
mud--are perhaps a trifle monotonous, but one has only to turn from
them to the people who come on board the steamer to have a rich fund
of enjoyment. Nowhere are types so abundant and various as on the
routes of travel between Bucharest and Rustchuk, or Pesth and
Belgrade. Every complexion, an extraordinary piquancy and variety of
costume, and a bewildering array of languages and dialects, are
set before the careful observer. As for myself, I found a special
enchantment in the scenery of the lower Danube--in the lonely inlets,
the wildernesses of young shoots in the marshes, the flights of
aquatic birds as the sound of the steamer was heard, the long tongues
of land on which the water-buffaloes lay huddled in stupid content,
the tiny hummocks where villages of wattled hovels were assembled. The
Bulgarian shore stands out in bold relief: Sistova, from the river,
is positively beautiful, but the now historical Simnitza seems only
a mud-flat. At night the boats touch upon the Roumanian side for
fuel--the Turks have always been too lazy and vicious to develop the
splendid mineral resources of Bulgaria--and the stout peasants and
their wives trundle thousands of barrows of coal along the swinging
planks. Here is raw life, lusty, full of rude beauty, but utterly
incult. The men and women appear to be merely animals gifted with
speech. The women wear almost no clothing: their matted hair drops
about their shapely shoulders as they toil at their burden, singing
meanwhile some merry chorus. Little tenderness is bestowed on these
creatures, and it was not without a slight twinge of the nerves that
I saw the huge, burly master of the boat's crew now and then bestow a
ringing slap with his open hand upon the neck or cheek of one of the
poor women who stumbled with her load or who hesitated for a moment to
indulge in abuse of a comrade. As the boat moved away these people,
dancing about the heaps of coal in the torchlight, looked not unlike
demons disporting in some gruesome nook of Enchanted Land. When they
were gypsies they did not need the aid of the torches: they were
sufficiently demoniacal without artificial aid.

Kalafat and Turnu-Severinu are small towns which would never have been
much heard of had they not been in the region visited by the war.
Turnu-Severinu is noted, however, as the point where Severinus once
built a mighty tower; and not far from the little hamlet may still
be seen the ruins of Trajan's immemorial bridge. Where the Danube is
twelve hundred yards wide and nearly twenty feet deep, Apollodorus
of Damascus did not hesitate, at Trajan's command, to undertake the
construction of a bridge with twenty stone and wooden arches. He
builded well, for one or two of the stone piers still remain perfect
after a lapse of sixteen centuries, and eleven of them, more or less
ruined, are yet visible at low water. Apollodorus was a man of genius,
as his other work, the Trajan Column, proudly standing in Rome, amply
testifies. No doubt he was richly rewarded by Trajan for constructing
a work which, flanked as it was by noble fortifications, bound the
newly-captured Dacian colony to the Roman empire. What mighty men were
these Romans, who carved their way along the Danube banks, hewing
roads and levelling mountains at the same time that they engaged the
savages of the locality in daily battle! There were indeed giants in
those days.

[Illustration: RUSTCHUK.]

When Ada-Kale is passed, and pretty Orsova, lying in slumbrous quiet
at the foot of noble mountains, is reached, the last trace of Turkish
domination is left behind. In future years, if the treaty of San
Stefano holds, there will be little evidence of Ottoman lack of
civilization anywhere on the Danube, for the forts of the Turks will
gradually disappear, and the Mussulman cannot for an instant hold
his own among Christians where he has no military advantage. But at
Orsova, although the red fez and voluminous trousers are rarely seen,
the influence of Turkey is keenly felt. It is in these remote
regions of Hungary that the real rage against Russia and the burning
enthusiasm and sympathy for the Turks is most openly expressed. Every
cottage in the neighborhood is filled with crude pictures representing
events of the Hungarian revolution; and the peasants, as they look
upon those reminders of perturbed times, reflect that the Russians
were instrumental in preventing the accomplishment of their dearest
wishes. Here the Hungarian is eminently patriotic: he endeavors as
much as possible to forget that he and his are bound to the empire
of Austria, and he speaks of the German and the Slav who are his
fellow-subjects with a sneer. The people whom one encounters in that
corner of Hungary profess a dense ignorance of the German language,
but if pressed can speak it glibly enough. I won an angry frown and
an unpleasant remark from an innkeeper because I did not know that
Austrian postage-stamps are not good in Hungary. Such melancholy
ignorance of the simplest details of existence seemed to my host meet
subject for reproach.

Orsova became an important point as soon as the Turks and Russians
were at war. The peasants of the Banat stared as they saw long lines
of travellers leaving the steamers which had come from Pesth and
Bazros, and invading the two small inns, which are usually more than
half empty. Englishmen, Russians, Austrian officers sent down to keep
careful watch upon the land, French and Prussian, Swiss and Belgian
military attaches and couriers, journalists, artists, amateur
army-followers, crowded the two long streets and exhausted the market.
Next came a hungry and thirsty mob of refugees from Widdin--Jews,
Greeks and gypsies--and these promenaded their variegated misery on
the river-banks from sunrise until sunset. Then out from Roumanian
land poured thousands of wretched peasants, bare-footed, bareheaded,
dying of starvation, fleeing from Turkish invasion, which, happily,
never assumed large proportions. These poor people slept on the
ground, content with the shelter of house-walls: they subsisted on
unripe fruits and that unfailing fund of mild tobacco which every male
being in all those countries invariably manages to secure. Walking
abroad in Orsova was no easy task, for one was constantly compelled to
step over these poor fugitives, who packed themselves into the sand at
noonday, and managed for a few hours before the cool evening breezes
came to forget their miseries. The vast fleet of river-steamers
belonging to the Austrian company was laid up at Orsova, and dozens
of captains, conversing in the liquid Slav or the graceful Italian or
guttural German, were for ever seated about the doors of the little
cafes smoking long cigars and quaffing beakers of the potent white
wine produced in Austrian vineyards.

Opposite Orsova lie the Servian Mountains, bold, majestic, inspiring.
Their noble forests and the deep ravines between them are exquisite in
color when the sun flashes along their sides. A few miles below
the point where the Hungarian and Roumanian territories meet
the mountainous region declines into foot-hills, and then to an
uninteresting plain. The Orsovan dell is the culminating point of
all the beauty and grandeur of the Danubian hills. From one eminence
richly laden with vineyards I looked out on a fresh April morning
across a delicious valley filled with pretty farms and white cottages
and ornamented by long rows of shapely poplars. Turning to the right,
I saw Servia's barriers, shutting in from the cold winds the fat
lands of the interior; vast hillsides dotted from point to point with
peaceful villages, in the midst of which white churches with slender
spires arose; and to the left the irregular line of the Roumanian
peaks stood up, jagged and broken, against the horizon. Out from
Orsova runs a rude highway into the rocky and savage back-country. The
celebrated baths of Mehadia, the "hot springs" of the Austro-Hungarian
empire, are yearly frequented by three or four thousand sufferers, who
come from the European capitals to Temesvar, and are thence trundled
in diligences to the water-cure. But the railway is penetrating even
this far-off land, where once brigands delighted to wander, and
Temesvar and Bucharest will be bound together by a daily
"through-service" as regular as that between Pesth and Vienna.

[Illustration: SISTOVA.]

I sat one evening on the balcony of the diminutive inn known as "The
Hungarian Crown," watching the sunbeams on the broad current of the
Danube and listening to the ripple, the plash and the gurgle of the
swollen stream as it rushed impetuously against the banks. A group
of Servians, in canoes light and swift as those of Indians, had made
their way across the river, and were struggling vigorously to prevent
the current from carrying them below a favorable landing-place. These
tall, slender men, with bronzed faces and gleaming eyes, with their
round skull-caps, their gaudy jackets and ornamental leggings, bore
no small resemblance at a distance to certain of our North American
red-skins. Each man had a long knife in his belt, and from experience
I can say that a Servian knife is in itself a complete tool-chest.
With its one tough and keen blade one may skin a sheep, file a saw,
split wood, mend a wagon, defend one's self vigorously if need be,
make a buttonhole and eat one's breakfast. No Servian who adheres to
the ancient costume would consider himself dressed unless the crooked
knife hung from his girdle. Although the country-side along the Danube
is rough, and travellers are said to need protection among the Servian
hills, I could not discover that the inhabitants wore other weapons
than these useful articles of cutlery. Yet they are daring smugglers,
and sometimes openly defy the Hungarian authorities when discovered.
"Ah!" said Master Josef, the head-servant of the Hungarian Crown,
"many a good fight have I seen in mid-stream, the boats grappled
together, knives flashing, and our fellows drawing their pistols. All
that, too, for a few flasks of Negotin, which is a musty red, thick
wine that Heaven would forbid me to recommend to your honorable self
and companions so long as I put in the cellar the pearl dew of yonder
vineyards!" pointing to the vines of Orsova.

While the Servians were anxiously endeavoring to land, and seemed to
be in imminent danger of upsetting, the roll of thunder was heard and
a few drops of rain fell with heavy plash. Master Josef forthwith
began making shutters fast and tying the curtains; "For now we _shall_
have a wind!" quoth he. And it came. As by magic the Servian shore was
blotted out, and before me I could see little save the river, which
seemed transformed into a roaring and foaming ocean. The refugees,
the gypsies, the Jews, the Greeks, scampered in all directions. Then
tremendous echoes awoke among the hills. Peal after peal echoed and
re-echoed, until it seemed as if the cliffs must crack and crumble.
Sheets of rain were blown by the mischievous winds now full upon the
unhappy fugitives, or now descended with seemingly crushing force
on the Servians in their dancing canoes. Then came vivid lightning,
brilliant and instant glances of electricity, disclosing the forests
and hills for a moment, then seeming by their quick departure to
render the obscurity more painful than before. The fiery darts were
hurled by dozens upon the devoted trees, and the tall and graceful
stems were bent like reeds before the rushing of the blast. Cold swept
through the vale, and shadows seemed to follow it. Such contrast
with the luminous, lovely semi-tropical afternoon, in the dreamy
restfulness of which man and beast seemed settling into lethargy, was
crushing. It pained and disturbed the spirit. Master Josef, who never
lost an occasion to cross himself and to do a few turns on a little
rosary of amber beads, came and went in a kind of dazed mood while the
storm was at its height. Just as a blow was struck among the hills
which seemed to make the earth quiver to its centre, the varlet
approached and modestly inquired if the "honorable society"--myself
and chance companions--would visit that very afternoon the famous
chapel in which the crown of Hungary lies buried. I glanced curiously
at him, thinking that possibly the thunder had addled his brain. "Oh,
the honorable society may walk in sunshine all the way to the chapel
at five o'clock," he said with an encouraging grin. "These Danube
storms come and go as quickly as a Tsigane from a hen-roost. See! the
thunder has stopped its howling, and there is not a wink of lightning.
Even the raindrops are so few that one may almost walk between them."

[Illustration: NICOPOLIS.]

I returned to the balcony from which the storm had driven me, and was
gratified by the sight of the mountain-side studded with pearls, which
a faint glow in the sky was gently touching. The Danube roared and
foamed with malicious glee as the poor Servians were still whirled
about on the water. But presently, through the deep gorges and along
the sombre stream and over the vineyards, the rocks and the roofs of
humble cottages, stole a warm breeze, followed by dazzling sunlight,
which returned in mad haste to atone for the displeasure of the wind
and rain. In a few moments the refugees were again afield, spreading
their drenched garments on the wooden railings, and stalking about in
a condition narrowly approaching nakedness. A gypsy four feet high,
clad in a linen shirt and trousers so wide as to resemble petticoats,
strolled thoughtlessly on the bank singing a plaintive melody, and now
and then turning his brown face skyward as if to salute the sun. This
child of mysterious ancestry, this wanderer from the East, this robber
of roosts and cunning worker in metals, possessed nor hat nor shoes:
his naked breast and his unprotected arms must suffer cold at night,
yet he seemed wonderfully happy. The Jews and Greeks gave him scornful
glances, which he returned with quizzical, provoking smiles. At last
he threw himself down on a plank from which the generous sun was
rapidly drying the rain, and, coiling up as a dog might have done, he
was soon asleep.

With a marine glass I could see distinctly every movement on the
Servian shore. Close to the water's edge nestled a small village of
neat white cottages. Around a little wharf hovered fifty or sixty
stout farmers, mounted on sturdy ponies, watching the arrival of the
Mercur, the Servian steamer from Belgrade and the Sava River. The
Mercur came puffing valiantly forward, as unconcerned as if no
whirlwind had swept across her path, although she must have been in
the narrow and dangerous canon of the "Iron Gates" when the blast
and the shower were most furious. On the roads leading down the
mountain-sides I saw long processions of squealing and grunting swine,
black, white and gray, all active and self-willed, fighting each other
for the right of way. Before each procession marched a swineherd
playing on a rustic pipe, the sounds from which primitive instrument
seemed to exercise Circean enchantment upon the rude flocks. It was
inexpressibly comical to watch the masses of swine after they had
been enclosed in the "folds"--huge tracts fenced in and provided with
shelters at the corners. Each herd knew its master, and as he passed
to and fro would salute him with a delighted squeal, which died away
into a series of disappointed and cynical groans as soon as the
porkers had discovered that no evening repast was to be offered them.
Good fare do these Servian swine find in the abundant provision
of acorns in the vast forests. The men who spend their lives in
restraining the vagabond instincts of these vulgar animals may perhaps
be thought a collection of brutal hinds; but, on the contrary, they
are fellows of shrewd common sense and much dignity of feeling.
Kara-George, the terror of the Turk at the beginning of this century,
the majestic character who won the admiration of Europe, whose genius
as a soldier was praised by Napoleon the Great, and who freed his
countrymen from bondage,--Kara-George was a swineherd in the woods of
the Schaumadia until the wind of the spirit fanned his brow and called
him from his simple toil to immortalize his homely name.

Master Josef and his fellows in Orsova did not hate the Servians with
the bitterness manifested toward the Roumanians, yet they considered
them as aliens and as dangerous conspirators against the public weal.
"Who knows at what moment they may go over to the Russians?" was the
constant cry. And in process of time they went, but although Master
Josef had professed the utmost willingness to take up arms on such an
occasion, it does not appear that he did it, doubtless preferring, on
reflection, the quiet of his inn and his flask of white wine in the
courtyard rather than an excursion among the trans-Danubian hills and
the chances of an untoward fate at the point of a Servian knife. It
is not astonishing that the two peoples do not understand each other,
although only a strip of water separates their frontiers for a long
stretch; for the difference in language and in its written form is a
most effectual barrier to intercourse. The Servians learn something of
the Hungarian dialects, since they come to till the rich lands of the
Banat in the summer season. Bulgarians and Servians by thousands find
employment in Hungary in summer, and return home when autumn sets
in. But the dreams and ambitions of the two peoples have nothing in
common. Servia looks longingly to Slavic unification, and is anxious
to secure for herself a predominance in the new nation to be moulded
out of the old scattered elements: Hungary believes that the
consolidation of the Slavs would place her in a dangerous and
humiliating position, and conspires day and night to compass
exactly the reverse of Servian wishes. Thus the two countries are
theoretically at peace and practically at war. While the conflict of
1877 was in progress collisions between Servian and Hungarian were of
almost daily occurrence.

The Hungarian's intolerance of the Slav does not proceed from unworthy
jealousy, but rather from an exaggerated idea of the importance of his
own country, and of the evils which might befall it if the old Serb
stock began to renew its ancient glory. In corners of Hungary, such as
Orsova, the peasant imagines that his native land is the main world,
and that the rest of Europe is an unnecessary and troublesome fringe
around the edges of it. There is a story of a gentleman in Pesth who
went to a dealer in maps and inquired for a _globus_ of Hungary,
showing that he imagined it to be the whole round earth.

[Illustration: THE DANUBE AT TRAJAN'S BRIDGE.]

So fair were the land and the stream after the storm that I lingered
until sunset gazing out over river and on Servian hills, and did not
accept Josef's invitation to visit the chapel of the Hungarian crown
that evening. But next morning, before the sun was high, I wandered
alone in the direction of the Roumanian frontier, and by accident came
upon the chapel. It is a modest structure in a nook surrounded by tall
poplars, and within is a simple chapel with Latin inscriptions. Here
the historic crown reposes, now that there is no longer any use for it
at Presburg, the ancient capital. Here it was brought by pious hands
after the troubles between Austria and Hungary were settled. During
the revolution the sacred bauble was hidden by the command of noblemen
to whom it had been confided, and the servitors who concealed it at
the behest of their masters were slain, lest in an indiscreet moment
they might betray the secret. For thousands of enthusiasts this tiny
chapel is the holiest of shrines, and should trouble come anew upon
Hungary in the present perturbed times, the crown would perhaps
journey once more.

It seems pitiful that the railway should ever invade this
out-of-the-way corner of Europe. But it is already crawling through
the mountains: hundreds of Italian laborers are putting down the
shining rails in woods and glens where no sounds save the song of
birds or the carol of the infrequent passer-by have heretofore been
heard. For the present, however, the old-fashioned, comfortless
diligence keeps the roads: the beribboned postilion winds his merry
horn, and as the afternoon sun is getting low the dusty, antique
vehicle rattles up to the court of the inn, the guard gets down, dusts
the leather casing of the gun which now-a-days he is never compelled
to use: then he touches his square hat, ornamented with a feather, to
the maids and men of the hostelry. When the mails are claimed, the
horses refreshed and the stage is covered with its leathern hood,
postilion and guard sit down together in a cool corner under the
gallery in the courtyard and crack various small flasks of wine. They
smoke their porcelain pipes imported from Vienna with the air of men
of the world who have travelled and who could tell you a thing or two
if they liked. They are never tired of talking of Mehadia, which is
one of their principal stations. The sad-faced nobleman, followed by
the decorous old man-servant in fantastic Magyar livery, who arrived
in the diligence, has been to the baths. The master is vainly seeking
cure, comes every year, and always supplies postilion and guard with
the money to buy flasks of wine. This the postilion tells me and my
fellows, and suggests that the "honorable society" should follow the
worthy nobleman's example. No sooner is it done than postilion and
guard kiss our hands; which is likewise an evidence that they have
travelled, are well met with every stranger and all customs, and know
more than they say.

The Romans had extensive establishments at Mehadia, which they called
the "Baths of Hercules," and it is in memory of this that a statue
of the good giant stands in the square of the little town. Scattered
through the hills, many inscriptions to Hercules, to Mercury and
to Venus have been found during the ages. The villages on the road
thither are few and far between, and are inhabited by peasants
decidedly Dacian in type. It is estimated that a million and a half
of Roumanians are settled in Hungary, and in this section they are
exceedingly numerous. Men and women wear showy costumes, quite
barbaric and uncomfortable. The women seem determined to wear as
few garments as possible, and to compensate for lack of number by
brightness of coloring. In many a pretty face traces of gypsy blood
may be seen. This vagabond taint gives an inexpressible charm to
a face for which the Hungarian strain has already done much. The
coal-black hair and wild, mutinous eyes set off to perfection the pale
face and exquisitely thin lips, the delicate nostrils and beautifully
moulded chin. Angel or devil? queries the beholder. Sometimes he is
constrained to think that the possessor of such a face has the mingled
souls of saint and siren. The light undertone of melancholy which
pervades gypsy beauty, gypsy music, gypsy manners, has an extremely
remarkable fascination for all who perceive it. Even when it is almost
buried beneath ignorance and animal craft, it is still to be found
in the gypsy nature after diligent search. This strange race seems
overshadowed by the sorrow of some haunting memory. Each individual
belonging to the Tsiganes whom I saw impressed me as a fugitive from
Fate. To look back was impossible; of the present he was careless; the
future tempted him on. In their music one now and then hears hints of
a desire to return to some far-off and half-forgotten land. But this
is rare.

There are a large number of "civilized gypsies," so called, in the
neighborhood of Orsova. I never saw one of them without a profound
compassion for him, so utterly unhappy did he look in ordinary attire.
The musicians who came nightly to play on the lawn in front of the
Hungarian Crown inn belonged to these civilized Tsiganes. They had
lost all the freedom of gesture, the proud, half-savage stateliness of
those who remained nomadic and untrammelled by local law and custom.
The old instinct was in their music, but sometimes there drifted
into it the same mixture of saint and devil which I had seen in the
"composite" faces.

[Illustration: BOATS ON THE DANUBE.]

As soon as supper was set forth, piping hot and flanked by flagons of
beer and wine, on the lawn, and the guests had assembled to partake
of the good cheer, while yet the afterglow lingered along the Danube,
these dusky musicians appeared and installed themselves in a corner.
The old stream's murmur could not drown the piercing and pathetic
notes of the violin, the gentle wail of the guzla or the soft
thrumming of the rude tambourine. Little poetry as a spectacled and
frosty Austrian officer might have in his soul, that little must have
been awakened by the songs and the orchestral performances of the
Tsiganes as the sun sank low. The dusk began to creep athwart the
lawn, and a cool breeze fanned the foreheads of the listeners. When
the light was all gone, these men, as if inspired by the darkness,
sometimes improvised most angelic melody. There was never any loud
or boisterous note, never any direct appeal to the attention. I
invariably forgot the singers and players, and the music seemed a
part of the harmony of Nature. While the pleasant notes echoed in the
twilight, troops of jaunty young Hungarian soldiers, dressed in red
hose, dark-green doublets and small caps sometimes adorned with
feathers, sauntered up and down the principal street; the refugees
huddled in corners and listened with delight; the Austrian officials
lumbered by, pouring clouds of smoke from their long, strong and
inevitable cigars; and the dogs forgot their perennial quarrel for a
few instants at a time.

The dogs of Orsova and of all the neighboring country have many of the
characteristics of their fellow-creatures in Turkey. Orsova is divided
into "beats," which are thoroughly and carefully patrolled night and
day by bands of dogs who recognize the limits of their domain and
severely resent intrusion. In front of the Hungarian Crown a large
dog, aided by a small yellow cur and a black spaniel mainly made up
of ears and tail, maintained order. The afternoon quiet was generally
disturbed about four o'clock by the advent of a strange canine, who,
with that expression of extreme innocence which always characterizes
the animal that knows he is doing wrong, would venture on to the
forbidden ground. A low growl in chorus from the three guardians was
the inevitable preliminary warning. The new-comer usually seemed much
surprised at this, and gave an astonished glance: then, wagging
his tail merrily, as much as to say, "Nonsense! I must have been
mistaken," he approached anew. One of the trio of guardians thereupon
sallied forth to meet him, followed by the others a little distance
behind. If the strange dog showed his teeth, assumed a defiant
attitude and seemed inclined to make his way through any number of
enemies, the trio held a consultation, which, I am bound to say,
almost invariably resulted in a fight. The intruder would either fly
yelping, or would work his way across the interdicted territory by
means of a series of encounters, accompanied by the most terrific
barking, snapping and shrieking, and by a very considerable effusion
of blood. The person who should interfere to prevent a dog-fight in
Orsova would be regarded as a lunatic. Sometimes a large white dog,
accompanied by two shaggy animals resembling wolves so closely that it
was almost impossible to believe them guardians of flocks of sheep,
passed by the Hungarian Crown unchallenged, but these were probably
tried warriors whose valor was so well known that they were no longer
questioned anywhere.

The gypsies have in their wagons or following in their train small
black dogs of temper unparalleled for ugliness. It is impossible to
approach a Tsigane tent or wagon without encountering a swarm of these
diminutive creatures, whose rage is not only amusing, but sometimes
rather appalling to contemplate. Driving rapidly by a camp one morning
in a farmer's cart drawn by two stout horses adorned with jingling
bells, I was followed by a pack of these dark-skinned animals. The
bells awoke such rage within them that they seemed insane under its
influence. As they leaped and snapped around me, I felt like some
traveller in a Russian forest pursued by hungry wolves. A dog scarcely
six inches high, and but twice as long, would spring from the ground
as if a pound of dynamite had exploded beneath him, and would make a
desperate effort to throw himself into the wagon. Another, howling
in impotent anger, would jump full at a horse's throat, would roll
beneath the feet of the team, but in some miraculous fashion would
escape unhurt, and would scramble upon a bank to try again. It was a
real relief when the discouraged pack fell away. Had I shot one of the
animals, the gypsies would have found a way to avenge the death of
their enterprising though somewhat too zealous camp-follower. Animals
everywhere on these border-lines of the Orient are treated with much
more tenderness than men and women are. The grandee who would scowl
furiously in this wild region of the Banat if the peasants did not
stand by the roadside and doff their hats in token of respect and
submission as he whirled by in his carriage, would not kick a dog out
of his way, and would manifest the utmost tenderness for his horses.

[Illustration: Orsova.]

Much as the Hungarian inhabitants of the Banat hate the Roumanians,
they do not fail to appreciate the commercial advantages which will
follow on the union of the two countries by rail. Pretty Orsova may in
due time become a bustling town filled with grain- and coal-depots and
with small manufactories. The railway from Verciorova on the frontier
runs through the large towns Pitesti and Craiova on its way to
Bucharest. It is a marvellous railroad: it climbs hills, descends into
deep gullies, and has as little of the air-line about it as a great
river has, for the contractors built it on the principle of "keeping
near the surface," and they much preferred climbing ten high mountains
to cutting one tunnel. Craiova takes its name, according to a somewhat
misty legend, from John Assan, who was one of the Romano-Bulgarian
kings, Craiova being a corruption of _Crai Ivan_ ("King John"). This
John was the same who drank his wine from a cup made out of the skull
of the unlucky emperor Baldwin I. The old bans of Craiova gave their
title to the Roumanian silver pieces now known as _bani_. Slatina,
farther down the line, on the river Altu (the _Aluta_ of the
ancients), is a pretty town, where a proud and brave community love to
recite to the stranger the valorous deeds of their ancestors. It is
the centre from which have spread out most of the modern revolutionary
movements in Roumania. "Little Wallachia," in which Slatina stands, is
rich in well-tilled fields and uplands covered with fat cattle: it is
as fertile as Kansas, and its people seemed to me more agreeable and
energetic than those in and around Bucharest.

He who clings to the steamers plying up and down the Danube sees much
romantic scenery and many curious types, but he loses all the real
charm of travel in these regions. The future tourist on his way to or
from Bulgaria and the battle-fields of the "new crusade" will be wise
if he journeys leisurely by farm-wagon--he will not be likely to find
a carriage--along the Hungarian bank of the stream. I made the journey
in April, when in that gentle southward climate the wayside was
already radiant with flowers and the mellow sunshine was unbroken by
cloud or rain. There were discomfort and dust, but there was a rare
pleasure in the arrival at a quaint inn whose exterior front, boldly
asserting itself in the bolder row of house-fronts in a long village
street, was uninviting enough, but the interior of which was charming.
In such a hostelry I always found the wharfmaster, in green coat and
cap, asleep in an arm-chair, with the burgomaster and one or two idle
landed proprietors sitting near him at a card-table, enveloped in such
a cloud of smoke that one could scarcely see the long-necked flasks of
white wine which they were rapidly emptying. The host was a massive
man with bulbous nose and sleepy eyes: he responded to all questions
with a stare and the statement that he did not know, and seemed
anxious to leave everything in doubt until the latest moment possible.
His daughter, who was brighter and less dubious in her responses than
her father, was a slight girl with lustrous black eyes, wistful lips,
a perfect form, and black hair covered with a linen cloth that the
dust might not come near its glossy threads. When she made her
appearance, flashing out of a huge dark room which was stone paved and
arched overhead, and in which peasants sat drinking sour beer, she
seemed like a ray of sunshine in the middle of night. But there was
more dignity about her than is to be found in most sunbeams: she was
modest and civil in answer, but understood no compliments. There was
something of the princess-reduced-in-circumstances in her demeanor. A
royal supper could she serve, and the linen which she spread on the
small wooden table in the back courtyard smelled of lavender. I took
my dinners, after the long days' rides, in inns which commanded
delicious views of the Danube--points where willows overhung the
rushing stream, or where crags towered above it, or where it flowed
in smooth yet resistless might through plains in which hundreds of
peasants were toiling, their red-and-white costumes contrasting
sharply with the brilliant blue of the sky and the tender green of the
foliage.

[Illustration: BELGRADE, FROM SEMLIN.]

If the inns were uniformly cleanly and agreeable, as much could not
be said for the villages, which were sometimes decidedly dirty. The
cottages of the peasants--that is, of the agricultural laborers--were
windowless to a degree which led me to look for a small- and dull-eyed
race, but the eloquent orbs of youths and maidens in all this Banat
land are rarely equalled in beauty. I found it in my heart to object
to the omnipresent swine. These cheerful animals were sometimes so
domesticated that they followed their masters and mistresses afield in
the morning. In this section of Hungary, as indeed in most parts of
Europe, the farm-houses are all huddled together in compact villages,
and the lands tilled by the dwellers in these communities extend for
miles around them. At dawn the procession of laborers goes forth,
and at sunset it returns. Nothing can give a better idea of rural
simplicity and peace than the return of the peasants of a hamlet
at eventide from their vineyards and meadows. Just as the sun was
deluging the broad Danube with glory before relinquishing the current
to the twilight's shades I came, in the soft April evening, into the
neighborhood of Drenkova. A tranquil afterglow was here and there
visible near the hills, which warded off the sun's passionate farewell
glances at the vines and flowers. Beside the way, on the green banks,
sat groups of children, clad with paradisiacal simplicity, awaiting
their fathers and mothers. At a vineyard's hedge a sweet girl, tall,
stately and melancholy, was twining a garland in the cap of a stout
young fellow who rested one broad hand lightly upon her shoulder. Old
women, bent and wrinkled, hobbled out from the fields, getting help
from their sons or grandsons. Sometimes I met a shaggy white horse
drawing a cart in which a dozen sonsie lasses, their faces browned by
wind and their tresses blown back from their brows in most bewitching
manner by the libertine breeze, were jolting homeward, singing as
they went. The young men in their loose linen garments, with their
primitive hoes and spades on their shoulders, were as goodly specimens
of manly strength and beauty as one could wish to look upon. It hurt
me to see them stand humbly ranged in rows as I passed. But it was
pleasant to note the fervor with which they knelt around the cross
rearing its sainted form amid the waving grasses. They knew nothing
of the outer world, save that from time to time the emperor claimed
certain of their number for his service, and that perhaps their lot
might lead them to the great city of Buda-Pesth. Everywhere as far as
the eye could reach the land was cultivated with greatest care,
and plenty seemed the lot of all. The peasant lived in an ugly and
windowless house because his father and grandfather had done so before
him, not because it was necessary. It was odd to see girls tall as
Dian, and as fair, bending their pretty bodies to come out of the
contemptible little apertures in the peasant-houses called "doors."

Drenkova is a long street of low cottages, with here and there a
two-story mansion to denote that the proprietors of the land reside
there. As I approached the entrance to this street I saw a most
remarkable train coming to meet me. One glance told me that it was a
large company of gypsies who had come up from Roumania, and were going
northward in search of work or plunder. My driver drew rein, and
we allowed the swart Bohemians to pass on--a courtesy which was
gracefully acknowledged with a singularly sweet smile from the driver
of the first cart. There were about two hundred men and women in
this wagon-train, and I verily believe that there were twice as many
children. Each cart, drawn by a small Roumanian pony, contained two or
three families huddled together, and seemingly lost in contemplation
of the beautiful sunset, for your real gypsy is a keen admirer of
Nature and her charms. Some of the women were intensely hideous: age
had made them as unattractive as in youth they had been pretty; others
were graceful and well-formed. Many wore but a single garment. The men
were wilder than any that I had ever before seen: their matted hair,
their thick lips and their dark eyes gave them almost the appearance
of negroes. One or two of them had been foraging, and bore sheeps'
heads and hares which they had purchased or "taken" in the village.
They halted as soon as they had passed me, and prepared to go into
camp; so I waited a little to observe them. During the process of
arranging the carts for the night one of the women became enraged
at the father of her brood because he would not aid her in the
preparation of the simple tent under which the family was to repose.
The woman ran to him, clenching her fist and screaming forth invective
which, I am convinced, had I understood it and had it been directed at
me, I should have found extremely disagreeable. After thus lashing the
culprit with language for some time, she broke forth into screams and
danced frantically around him. He arose, visibly disturbed, and I
fancied that his savage nature would come uppermost, and that he might
be impelled to give her a brutal beating. But he, on the contrary,
advanced leisurely toward her and spat upon the ground with an
expression of extreme contempt. She seemed to feel this much more than
she would have felt a blow, and her fury redoubled. She likewise spat;
he again repeated the contemptuous act; and after both had gratified
the anger which was consuming them, they walked off in different
directions. The battle was over, and I was not sorry to notice a few
minutes later that _paterfamilias_ had thought better of his conduct,
and was himself spreading the tent and setting forth his wandering
Lares and Penates.

A few hundred yards from the point where these wanderers had settled
for the night I found some rude huts in which other gypsies were
residing permanently. These huts were mere shelters placed against
steep banks or hedges, and within there was no furniture save one
or two blankets, a camp-kettle and some wicker baskets. Young girls
twelve or thirteen years of age crouched naked about a smouldering
fire. They did not seem unhappy or hungry; and none of these strange
people paid any attention to me as I drove on to the inn, which, oddly
enough, was at some distance from the main village, hard by the Danube
side, in a gully between the mountains, where coal-barges lay moored.
The Servian Mountains, covered from base to summit with dense forests,
cast a deep gloom over the vale. In a garden on a terrace behind the
inn, by the light of a flickering candle, I ate a frugal dinner, and
went to bed much impressed by the darkness, in such striking contrast
to the delightful and picturesque scenes through which I had wandered
all day.

[Illustration: THE IRON GATES]

But I speedily forgot this next morning, when the landlord informed
me that, instead of toiling over the road along the crags to Orsova,
whither I was returning, I could embark on a tug-boat bound for that
cheerful spot, and could thus inspect the grand scenery of the Iron
Gates from the river. The swift express-boats which in time of peace
run from Vienna to Rustchuk whisk the traveller so rapidly through
these famous defiles that he sees little else than a panorama of high
rocky walls. But the slow-moving and clumsy tug, with its train of
barges attached, offers better facilities to the lover of natural
beauty. We had dropped down only a short distance below Drenkova
before we found the river-path filled with eddies, miniature
whirlpools, denoting the vicinity of the gorges into which the great
current is compressed. These whirlpools all have names: one is called
the "Buffalo;" a second, Kerdaps; a third is known as the "Devourer."
The Turks have a healthy awe of this passage, which in old times was a
terrible trial to these stupid and always inefficient navigators. For
three or four hours we ran in the shade of mighty walls of porphyry
and granite, on whose tops were forests of oaks and elms. High up on
cliffs around which the eagles circle, and low in glens where one
sometimes sees a bear swimming, the sun threw a flood of mellow glory.
I could fancy that the veins of red porphyry running along the face
of the granite were blood-stains, the tragic memorials of ancient
battles. For, wild and inaccessible as this region seems, it has been
fought over and through in sternest fashion. Perched on a little
promontory on the Servian side is the tiny town of Poretch, where
the brave shepherds and swineherds fought the Turk, against whose
oppression they had risen, until they were overwhelmed by numbers, and
their leader, Hadji Nikolos, lost his head. The Austrians point out
with pride the cave on the tremendous flank of Mount Choukourou where,
two centuries ago, an Austrian general at the head of seven hundred
men, all that was left to him of a goodly army, sustained a three
months' siege against large Turkish forces. This cave is perched high
above the road at a point where it absolutely commands it, and the
government of to-day, realizing its importance, has had it fortified
and furnished with walls pierced by loopholes. Trajan fought his way
through these defiles in the very infancy of the Christian era; and in
memory of his first splendid campaign against the Dacians he carved
in the solid rock the letters, some of which are still visible, and
which, by their very grandiloquence, offer a mournful commentary on
the fleeting nature of human greatness. Little did he think when his
eyes rested lovingly on this inscription, beginning--

    IMP. CAES. D. NERVAE FILIUS NERVA. TRAJANUS. GERM. PONT. MAXIMUS.

--that Time with profane hand would wipe out the memory of many of his
glories and would undo all the work that he had done.

On we drifted, through huge landlocked lakes, out of which there
seemed no issue until we chanced upon a miraculous corner where there
was an outlet frowned upon by angry rocks; on to the "Caldron," as the
Turks called the most imposing portion of the gorge; on through an
amphitheatre where densely-wooded mountains on either side were
reflected in smooth water; on beneath masses that appeared about to
topple, and over shallows where it looked as if we must be grounded;
on round a bluff which had hidden the sudden opening of the valley
into a broad sweep, and which had hindered us from seeing Orsova the
Fair nestling closely to her beloved mountains.

EDWARD KING.




THE PARIS EXPOSITION OF 1878.


I.--BUILDINGS AND GROUNDS.

[Illustration: THE TROCADERO AND GROUNDS.]


It is customary to speak of things by comparison, and the question is
constantly propounded here, as it will be to returned Americans: "How
does the Exposition compare with the Centennial of 1876?" This is not
to be answered by vague generalities nor by sweeping statements.

It must of course be true that a great nation could not fail to make
interesting an object upon which it has lavished money and which has
obtained the co-operation of the principal foreign nations. So much
is true equally of Philadelphia and Paris, and the merits of each are
such that comparisons may be instituted which shall be derogatory to
neither.

The scale of each is immense, and the buildings of both well filled
and overflowing into numerous annexes. Fairmount had the advantage of
breadth of ground for all comers. The Champ de Mars is but little
over one hundred acres in area, while the portion of Fairmount Park
conceded to the Exposition was two hundred and sixty acres.

The Champ de Mars is simply crowded with buildings, and is hemmed in
by houses except at the end where it abuts upon the Seine. The space
between the river and the main building is the only breathing-ground
on that side of the river, the only place large enough for a band to
play in the open air with allowance for a moderate crowd of listeners;
and even this portion has a far larger number of detached houses than
elegance or convenience of view would dictate. It was otherwise in
Philadelphia, where the ample room gave a sensation of freedom, and
the wide lawns, and even rustic hollows, permitted rambles, picnic
lunches and parties. Herein consists one of the most striking features
of dissimilarity between the Philadelphia and Paris expositions. The
former had plenty of room--the latter has insufficient. The former,
with the exception of the Main and Machinery Buildings, with a
few adjuncts, and the Art-Gallery, a little retired from the Main
Building, had its structures dotted over a wide expanse bordering its
lakes or along an encircling drive. For want of any other sufficient
opportunity to display the architecture of the countries assembled,
one of the interior facades of the Paris building has a series of
characteristic house-fronts looking upon an allee of but fifty feet in
width, which is dignified by the title of "The Street of Nations."

This tight packing has, however, one compensation: it has permitted a
degree of finish to the grounds far superior to what was possible at
Philadelphia. All the space inside the enclosure is admirably laid out
in walks and parterres, and the two open places between the principal
buildings and the Seine display a truly beautiful and picturesque
garden, with winding walks, ponds, fountains, artificial mounds with
clumps of trees and evergreens, grottos, statues, trickling rivulets
with ferns and mosses, cozy dells with little cascades, and the walks
in the more open spots bordered with charming flowers and plants of
rich leafage. The lawns are something marvellous in the speed with
which they have been created. Thousands of tons, as it seems, of rich
mould have been deposited and levelled or laid upon the swelling
tumuli which border the more open space, and the grass grows with
denseness and vigor under the stimulating treatment of phosphates, its
greenness mocking the emerald, and forming a most vivid setting for
the darker leaves of the tree-rhododendrons, whose globular masses of
bloom look like balls of fire.

After all, it is only justice to mention two things at Philadelphia
which render it memorable among exhibitions, and which, I observe in
conversation with foreigners who visited it and are here now, made a
great and lasting impression. I do not mean that it had but two, but
these are so frequently referred to that it is fair to cite them
specially, even at the risk of a little repetition as to the
first--namely, the wide area and beautiful situation, with the views
of hill and river; the means of approach by carriage-drives through
the lovely Park, those so disposed being able to drive for miles along
the water-side, in the groves and to various commanding points of view
on their way to such of the remoter entrances as they might elect;
the railway, which enabled one not only to see the grounds without
fatigue, but while resting from the pedestrian work of the interiors
of the buildings; the sense of comfort in being able to retire for a
while to sylvan or floral retreats to digest the thoughts and rest
from seeing. Secondly, the various and ample accommodations offered
to the public--the postal and telegraph facilities; the Department
of Public Comfort; the lavatories and retiring-rooms so abundantly
furnished. A Moresque gentleman in turban who was in Philadelphia
fairly rubbed his hands as he referred to the lavish opportunities for
washing which were freely given in Philadelphia, and contrasted them
with the state of things here, where it costs ten cents to wash your
hands, and the supply of water is but meagre at that. But he is an
African, you know, and had learned to appreciate water, and plenty of
it, in a land where the washing of the face, hands and feet is among
the first civilities offered to a stranger.

A few figures, dry enough in themselves if there were nothing more,
will serve as a means of comparison of the relative spaces under
cover. The building on the Champ de Mars is stated officially to
be 650 metres long by 350 metres broad, which, reduced to our
measurement, will give 2,447,536 square feet. Deducting 150,000 feet
for two enclosed alleys, the area under roof will be 2,297,536 feet.
The area of the five principal buildings at the Centennial Exhibition
was:

                               Square feet.

Main Building.................... 872,320

Machinery Hall..................  504,720

Art-Gallery.....................   76,650

Agricultural Hall................ 442,800

Horticultural Hall...............  73,919
                                _________
                                1,970,409

So that the difference in favor of Paris is 327,127 feet. In round
numbers, the Paris Exposition building is one-fifth larger than the
united areas of the five principal buildings at the Centennial.
Without making a close calculation of the areas of the annexes and
detached buildings either of Philadelphia or Paris, I am disposed to
think that the 1876 Exhibition was not in excess of the present one in
this respect. Either exceeds, both in the main buildings and the swarm
of detached structures, any preceding exhibitions. The difference
between the Paris exhibitions of 1867 and 1878 is as 153 is to 240:
the London building of 1862 would bear to both the proportion of 92,
without any important annexes.

The high ground on the right bank of the Seine is occupied by the
Trocadero Palace, which faces that on the Champ de Mars, each building
being about five hundred yards from the bank of the river, which flows
in so deep a depression that it is visible from neither building, and
the grounds between the two appear to be continuous, though the bridge
suggests the contrary.

The cascade in front of the Trocadero occupies the site of the old
steps by which the steep hill was ascended, but the ground nearer to
the Seine has been so raised that the river-roads on each side run
in subways spanned by bridges, thus permitting free use of the great
thoroughfares without impeding communication between the two portions
of the Exposition. Indeed, they appear as one viewed in either
direction, notwithstanding the intervening streets and wide and rapid
river.

The change in the shape of the Trocadero hill to bring it into a
symmetrical position in front of the Champ de Mars has required the
quarrying of twenty-four thousand cubic metres of rock, leaving a
rough scarp on the northern edge quarried into steps, walks and
grottos, with flowers, ferns and mosses cunningly planted on the ledge
and creepers on the walls.

The Trocadero Palace is the most striking architectural feature of the
Exposition. Standing on a level one hundred and six feet above
the Quai de Billy and overlooking the city of Paris, the dome and
glittering minarets of the building are visible from many miles'
distance. It is not easy to describe its architecture, though it is
called "half Moorish, half Renaissance;" which is not very definite.
It has a large rotunda capable of accommodating seven thousand
persons, and the river-front has two spacious corridors on as
many stories. The central building is flanked by two tall square
campaniles, and from its sides extend long wings which curve toward
the river: these have colonnades and terraces in front overlooking
the garden, its picturesque and grotesque cottages and pavilions, its
fountains and its parterres of gay flowers.

The Trocadero has been purchased by the town council of Paris, and is
to be a permanent structure, its flanking salons, forty-two feet wide,
being known as "Galeries de l'Art Retrospective." Its collection is
to form a history of civilization, and will probably include the
Egyptian, Assyrian and similar collections from the Louvre, as well as
the Ethnological, which is at St. Germain. It is designed to represent
in chronological order ancient and historic art, both liberal and
mechanical, with the furniture, arms and tools of the Middle Ages and
Renaissance, arms, implements and fabrics from the East, Africa and
Oceanica, and a collection of musical instruments of all ages and
countries. This is an ambitious programme, but will no doubt be well
accomplished. Its general color is that of the beautiful stone of this
region, a delicate cream. The uniformity is broken by great boldness
and variety in the structural form of the building, and by its
pillars, deep colonnades and heavy cornices, giving shadows which
prevent monotony of tint.

While artists and architects disagree like the proverbial doctors, and
purists shudder at the jumble of orders, periods and nationalities, a
tyro may well hesitate. An opinion of the building will no more suit
everybody than does the building itself; but one cannot entirely
forfeit one's reputation for taste, for each will find some agreeing
judgments. All must acknowledge that it has a gala air. Its central
dome, tall minarets and wings widespread toward the river crown the
height and seem to foster the beauties they partly enclose.

The circular corridor of the rotunda is surmounted by the Muses and
other figures typical of the future purposes of the building. The
rotunda-walls are themselves castellated, the towers being interplaced
with windows of Saracenic arched form. The beton pavement of the
corridors and balcony is made of annular fragments, facets upward,
of black, red, white and slate-colored marbles, feldspar and other
stones. It is as hard as natural rock and as smooth as half-polished
marble. A tessellated fret pattern is made along the borders of the
corridor floor, consisting of triple rows of smooth cubes of marble
inserted in the cement. The square balusters are of red-mottled
marble, with base and entablature of dull rose. The square corner
pillars support figures allegorizing the six divisions of the earth.

The vestibules at the sides of the tower are open east and west for
the passage to and from the garden, and at the sides have doors which
admit to the Grande Salle and the flanking galleries respectively. The
interior red scagliola columns of the vestibule are in pairs, with
white bases and capitals, the latter combining the lotus-leaf with the
volute. The soffits of the ceiling have panels of yellow with orange
border, contrasting with iron beams painted a chocolate brown.

The uniformity of the long and curved colonnades which form the wings
of the building is broken by square porticoes, which have entrances to
the galleries and small terraces in front, with steps leading to the
garden. The wall back of the white pillars of this long promenade
is painted of a warm but not glaring red. The roof is of tile and
skylight. The base of the colonnade beneath the balustrade and pillars
is a rough concrete wall hidden by a sloping bank of evergreens,
upon which the eye rests pleasantly amid so much wall-space and
architectural decoration.

In front of the corridor of the rotunda is a projecting balcony,
with six gigantic female figures on the corners of its balustrade
representing Europe, Asia, North and South America, Africa and
Australia. These statues are of metal gilt, and typify by countenance
and accompanying emblems the portions of the globe they represent.
Europe is an armed figure with sword: at her side are the caduceus,
olive-branch, books and easel. Asia has a spear and a couch with
elephant heads. Africa is a negress, with the characteristic
grass-rope basket containing dates. North America is an Indian, but
the civilization of the land is indicated by an anchor, beehive and
cog-wheel. Australia is a gin, with a waddy, boomerang and kangaroo.
South America sits on a cotton-bale, has a condor by her side, and at
her feet are tropical fruits--pineapples, bananas and brazil-nuts.

The balustrade of the balcony is of a light marble with faint red
mottling, and in front of it is a boiling pool of water at the level
of the hand-rail. A large volume of water overflows the curved edge of
this pool and falls twenty feet into a basin beneath, the first of a
series of nine whose overflows in successive steps form the cascade
technically known as a "chateau d'eau," the finest of which
description of ornamental waterworks is at the Chateau St. Cloud, one
of the mementos of the fatal luxury which precipitated the Revolution
of 1789. The cascade of St. Cloud plays once a month for half an
hour--that at the Exposition during the whole day. From one jet at
St. Cloud issue five thousand gallons per minute: the supply at the
Exposition is twenty-four thousand cubic feet per hour. Most of
this water runs over the edge of the balcony-pool, and the fall of
fifty-six cubic feet per second a distance of twenty feet creates no
mean roar and mist in the archway beneath the balcony, where visitors
walk behind the falls and look through the sheet of water. It is not
fair to compare at all points the cascades of the Exposition and St.
Cloud. The amount of water may probably not be greatly different, but
the fantastic profusion of spiratory objects and long succession of
overflow basins and urns in the works at the chateau has no
parallel in those of the Trocadero. The cascades of St. Cloud are
disappointing: the object should be to add to landscape effect by
water in motion, and the principle is entirely missed when the
water is made a mere accessory to a series of stone steps, jars
and monsters. Steps are made to walk upon, jars to hold water. An
interminable series of either with water poured over them is not the
work of a genius. If the first suggestion to the mind be that a thing
is a stairway, the fact that it is made too wet to walk upon does not
constitute it a beautiful cascade. A row of jars on pedestals around a
grass-plat has a pretty effect, because they do or may hold flowers,
but to set several rows of them on a hillside and turn on the water is
not art. As an admirable illustration of fantasy well wrought out the
Fountain of Latona at Versailles may be cited. There Latona, having
appealed to Jupiter against the inhabitants of Argos, who had deprived
her of water, is deluged by jets from the unfortunates, who appear in
various degrees of transformation into frogs.

[Illustration: THE ENGLISH QUARTER, ON INTERNATIONAL AVENUE.]

The cascade of the Trocadero has nothing meretricious about it. It is,
like the building of which it is the finest ornament, of Jura marble,
while much of the adjacent work is of artificial stone so admirably
made that one cannot tell the difference, and is disposed to give the
preference to the latter as evincing greater ingenuity than the mere
patient chiselling of the quarry-stone. The pools are symmetrical, in
conformity to the style of their surroundings, their overflows curved,
the successive falls being about two feet after the first dash nine
hundred and twenty feet from the balcony level. Each side of the
cascade is flanked by six small pools in which are spouting and spray
jets. The course ends in a pool which may be described as square, with
circular bays on three of its sides. In this are one large jet and two
smaller ones, which are themselves beautiful and keep the surface in
a pleasant ripple. The corner pillars are crowned by colossal gilt
figures of animals, supposed to represent what we were used to call
the "four quarters of the earth"--Europe, Asia, Africa and America, as
the books had it before America had attained any prominence in public
estimation. These are typified by a horse, an elephant, a rhinoceros
and a bull, the latter probably a tribute to our bison, but not much
like him. These face the four winds, so to speak, and do indeed more
nearly, as they are set obliquely, than do the grounds and buildings,
the length of which runs north-west and south-east. Each animal has
his back to the pool, and with one exception is in a rampant attitude.

Many thousands of cubic metres of stone were quarried away to afford a
site for the cascade, for the system of water-pipes which supply the
various pools and jets and conduct off the surplus. The size of the
site occupied by these hydraulic works is 360 by 75 feet.

The balcony of the Trocadero facing toward the river and the Champ
de Mars affords the most extensive view obtainable in the grounds.
Beneath is the cascade with its basins and fountains, and spreading
away on each side is the garden with its various national buildings,
neat, gaudy or grotesque. Spanning the invisible roads and river is
the broad Pont d'Iena, and then comes a repetition of the garden, the
sward dotted with parterres and buildings. A broad terrace, crowned
with the splendid facade of the main building, does not quite
terminate the view, for from the height of the lower corridor of
the rotunda the buildings of Paris are seen to stretch away in the
distance. The hill of Montmartre on the north and the heights of
Chatillon and Clamart on the south terminate the view in those
directions.

The cascade immediately beneath us has been already described, but
how shall we give an impression of the appearance of the buildings
collected in groups on each side of the main avenue? So great is
the variety of objects to be presented that any very large unbroken
surface of sward is impossible. The general plan is geometrical, and
the absence of large trees on the newly-made ground has prevented any
attempt at woodland scenery.

The French make great use of common flowers in obtaining effects of
color. Some square beds of large size have centres of purple and white
stocks, giving a mottled appearance, with a border of the tender blue
forget-me-nots and a fringe of double daisies. Other beds are full
of purple, red and white anemones, multicolored poppies or yellow
marigolds. The sober mignonette is too great a favorite to be
excluded, though it lends little to the effect. The gorgeous
rhododendron is here massed in large beds, and there forms a standard
tree with a formal clump of foliage and gay flowers, contrasting with
the bright green of the succulent grass. The roses are by thousands
in beds and lining the walks, and here are especially to be seen the
standard roses for which Europe is so famous, but which do not seem to
prosper with us.

Besides the flowers and flowering shrubs, a most profuse use is made
of evergreens, which are removed of surprising size and forwardness of
spring growth. We can form little conception from our gardens at home
of the wealth, variety and exuberance of the evergreen foliage in
Southern England and Northern France--the Spanish and Portuguese
laurel, laurustinus, arbutus, occuba, bay, hollies in variety,
tree-box, with scores of species of pines, firs, arborvitae and yews,
relieved by the contorted foliage of the auraucarias, the sombre cedar
of Lebanon and the graceful deodar cedar of the Himalayas. As already
remarked, the tree-growth is small, as the ground was a blank and
rocky hillside two years ago, and was quarried to make a site for the
garden. The tree which seems best to bear moving, and is consequently
used in the emergency, is the horse-chestnut, the red and white
flowering varieties being intermingled. This is perhaps the most
common tree in the streets of Paris, though the plane and maple are
also favorites.

[Illustration: BIRD'S-EYE VIEW OF THE MAIN BUILDING AND ITS
SURROUNDINGS.]

Against the rocky scarp on the south of the garden a plantation of
aloes, yuccas and cactus has been made. These are in great variety,
and some of them in flower. It was especially pleasant to see the
independence which the gardener has shown in placing a fine clump of
rhubarb in one place where he wanted a green bunch. Some persons would
have been afraid of injurious criticism in the use of so common a
plant, but we all know what a vigorous, healthy green it is, and
as such not to be despised by the artist in color. There are a few
specialties in the way of gardening which are worth notice: one is the
array of tulips planted by the city of Haarlem, and representing the
municipal coat-of-arms in tulips of every imaginable color of which
the plant is capable, and around the figures the words "Haarlem,
Holland," in scarlet tulips on a ground of white ones.

Another novelty is the Japanese garden with its bamboo fence, the
posts and door of entrance being carved with remarkable taste and
boldness. The double gates are surmounted by a cock and hen in natural
attitudes, which is a relief from the absurdities of their impossible
storks and hideous griffins. Perhaps it shows that modern and European
ideas are at work there. The flag of Japan, by the way--a red circle
on a white ground--is a sensible design, and can be seen at a
distance: it contrasts favorably with the dragon on a yellow ground of
the Chinese pavilion. The Japanese garden has several large standard
umbrellas for permanent shade, and little bamboo-fenced yards for the
game chickens and the ducks. Two shrines are in the garden, and a
fountain with a feeble jet issuing from a stump and falling into
a little fanciful pond with small bays and promontories. On the
miniature deep a walnut-shell ship might ride, and on the shoals near
the bank aquatic plants are beginning to sprout, and their leaves will
soon touch the opposite shore if they are not attended to.

Rather a disparagement, as a matter of taste, to the somewhat formal
grace but undoubted beauty of this floral scene are the buildings
which are placed here and there over the surface. However, it is these
that we have come to see, for if we were in search of landscape or
Dutch gardening we should find it better elsewhere. This gardening
is only a setting, a frame, in which the various nations have set up
their cottages and villas. The ground surface between the houses has
been laid off ornamentally to please the eye and satisfy the sense
of order and beauty, but is not itself the object of which we are in
search. It is impossible perhaps to harmonize such an incongruous
set of buildings, adapted for different climates, habits, tastes and
needs. Here on the left is a large white castellated house of Algiers.
It has blank walls and loopholed towers, and no suggestion of a tree
or flower, but gives an idea of the land where the sand of the desert
comes up to the doorstep and beggars and thieves go on horseback. On
the opposite extremity, at the right, is a Chinese house with its
peculiar curved roof, suggested originally, doubtless, by the Tartar
tent, but having more curves and points than were ever shown by canvas
or felt. In a district by themselves the readers of the Koran--or a
set of people passing for such--have their Persian, Tunisian, Morocco
and Turkish kiosques, and the inhabitants seem perhaps one shade
cleaner than they did in Philadelphia. They are supposed, at least,
to be the same, and have an exactly similar lot of rubbish and brass
jewelry for sale, and oil of cassia, which they sell for the attar of
the "gardens of Gul in their bloom." Next is a campanile of Sweden,
and near it are the Swedish and Norwegian houses, armed against
winter. Then the Japanese cottage with sides all open, mats on the
floors and no furniture to speak of. Then comes a Moorish pavilion
of Spain with nondescript ornaments, the bulbous domes and pinnacles
supporting the flags of yellow and red--of barbaric taste, color and
significance.

We have yet to notice the Italian villa, the Oriental mosque, the
Swiss chalet and the log hut; also the modern pavilion with zinc
roof, the thatched houses of Britain and of Normandy, the Elizabethan
cottage and the English farm-house. What they lack in size they make
up in variety, may be said of the greenhouses and conservatories
dotted about the place. In and outside of them the marvellous
skill and patience of the gardener is seen in the rigidly-formal or
abnormally-directed limbs of the fruit trees. The fish-ponds and
fountains are neither numerous nor large, but the aquarium may merit
more extended description when completed.

Standing, sensible-looking and tasteful, in the midst of much that is
trumpery, but good enough for a summer fete, and placed here not as
exhibits of good taste, but of what their owners think good, rises the
wooden building with skylight roof of "The Administration of Forests
and Waters." It is on a beautiful knoll, and has a wooden frame with
tongued and grooved panels, the whole varnished to show the natural
grain of the timber. On the panels outside are arranged the tools and
implements of arboriculture and forestry.

The flags of the different nations displayed upon these buildings give
animation to the scene, and the glance might pass at once from this
panorama to the other side of the Seine, where the scene is repeated,
but for the intervention of long barnlike sheds with tile roofs which
intrude themselves along the banks of the river, and quench the poetry
of the fanciful and picturesque as the eye passes from the immediate
foreground and seeks the magnificent facade of the Salle d'Iena, the
river front of the main building occupying the Champ de Mars. The
flags of all nations are flying from the numerous minor pinnacles,
while the six domes on the ends and centres of the east and west
facades display the tricolor of France.

The best view of the exterior is obtained from the Trocadero. The
building itself is so large that some distance is necessary to take in
the whole at a glance. The approach to it by way of the Pont d'Iena
has been marred by raising the bridge to too great a height, so that
the impression in crossing the Seine is that the building stands upon
low ground. Standing upon the east end of the bridge, one cannot see
the base on the other side of the river, which suggests descent and
dwarfs the building. The bridge retains its colossal statuary, each
of the four groups consisting of an unmounted man and a horse. They
respectively represent a Greek, Roman, Gaul and Arab. The bridge was
erected to commemorate the victory over the Prussians in 1806, and
Bluecher, who had his head-quarters at St. Cloud in 1815, threatened to
blow it up. After crossing the bridge we find ourselves reaching
the work-a-day world. On the left are represented the foundries and
workshops of Creuzot, Chaumont and Serrenorri. Near by is a model
of the observatory of Mount Jouvis and an annex of the state
tobacco-factory of France.

The building on the Champ de Mars is 2132 feet by 1148. A wide and
lofty vestibule runs across the full extent of each end, and these
afford the most imposing interior views of the building. They are
known respectively as the Galerie d'Iena and Galerie de l'Ecole
Militaire, from their vicinity to the bridge and school respectively.
Being lofty themselves, and having central and flanking domed towers
which break the uniformity, their fronts form the principal facades
of the building, of which, architecturally speaking, they are the
principal entrances; but in fact, as happens with buildings of such
acreage, the actual inlets depend upon the predominance in numbers
of the people on one or another side of the building, the means of
approach by land and water, and the contiguous streets of favorite and
convenient travel. In the present case the bulk of the people reach
the grounds either by water at the south-east corner or by land at the
intersection of Avenue Rapp with the Avenue Bourdonnaye, which latter
bounds the Champ de Mars on its southern side.

The end-vestibules are connected by five longitudinal galleries on
each side of the open area in the middle of the building. The five
galleries on the southern side belong to France, and the five on the
northern side are divided by transverse partitions among the foreign
nations present, in very greatly differing quantities. England, for
instance, occupies nearly two-sevenths of the whole space devoted to
foreign exhibitors, being more than the sum of the amounts allotted to
Spain, China, Japan, Italy, Sweden, Norway and the United States. The
end-vestibules have curved roofs with highly ornamented ceilings of a
succession of flat domes along the centres, with three rows of deep
soffits on each side, gayly painted. The walls are nearly all glass
in iron frames, and the panes of white glass alternate in checkerwork
with those having blue tracery upon them. The whole building is
principally of iron and glass, the roof of wood, with zinc plates
and numerous skylights over the interior galleries. The machinery
galleries of each side are much the largest of the longitudinal ones,
and have high roofs with side windows above the levels of the roofs on
each side of them; but the four other galleries on each side of the
building have quite low ceilings, which make one fear for the quality
of the ventilation when the heat is at its greatest.

In the interior of the quadrangular building is an open space about
two hundred feet broad and nearly two thousand feet long, reaching
from one vestibule to the other; and in this space are two rows of
fine-art pavilions and a building for the exhibition of the municipal
works of the city. This isolated building is in the central portion
of the whole structure, the fine-art pavilions being arranged in line
with it, four in a group, the salons of a group connected by lobbies
and also with the large end-vestibules at the end upon which they
abut.

The French and foreign sides of the Exposition building on the Champ
de Mars have frontages upon the interior court, and the facades of
the foreign sections are made ornamental and are intended to be
characteristic of the countries. There is a great discrepancy in
the space assigned to each: that of Great Britain is the longest,
amounting to five hundred and forty feet in length, while the little
territories of Luxembourg, Andorra, Monaco and San Marino, which are
clubbed together, have unitedly about twenty-five feet of frontage. In
some cases the space assigned to a nation does not run back the full
four hundred feet to the outside of the building, but it is intended
that each shall have some part of the facade in this allee. Much
taste and more expense have been lavished upon the architectural
construction and embellishment of the facades, and the row reminds one
of the scenes in a theatre, where palace, cottage, mosque and jail
stand side by side, giving a particolored effect as various as the
different emotions which the respective buildings might be supposed
to elicit. The English space being so large, no single design was
adopted, as it could have but a monotonous effect, but the frontage
was divided into five portions, each of which illustrates some style
of villa or cottage architecture, and is separated from the adjoining
one by garden-beds. The first, counting from the Salle de la Seine,
is of the style of Queen Anne's reign. It is built of a patented
imitation of red brickwork. Thin slabs of Portland cement concrete are
faced with smaller slabs of red concrete of the size of bricks and
screwed to the wooden frame of the building. The house has tall
casements in a bay with a balcony, and an entablature on top of the
wall. The second house is the pavilion of the prince of Wales, and
is of the Elizabethan style. It is built of rubble-work faced
with colored plaster in imitation of red brickwork and Bath-stone
dressings. The front has niches for statuary, and above the windows
are shield-shaped panels for armorial bearings. The windows are in
square clusters, with small lights in hexagonal leaden cames. The
union jack flies from the staff. The third house is constructed of
red brick and terra-cotta, and is not specially characteristic of any
period. It is, in fact, a jumble of the early Gothic with a Moorish
entablature and a balustrade parapet. The stained-glass casement
windows are surmounted with circular lights in the arches. The fourth
house is built of pitch-pine framework, enriched with carving and
filled in with plaster panels--a style of construction known as
"half-timbered work," much employed in England from the fifteenth to
the seventeenth century. This house is placed at the disposal of the
Canadian commissioners. It has a large square two-story bay-window,
with the customary small glass panes in cames of lozenge and other
patterns, and is perhaps the neatest and most cozy house in the row.
The fifth is of the construction of an English country-house in the
reign of William III. It is of timber, with stucco and rough-cast
panels, and has a large bay-window in the second story, surmounted by
a gable to the street and covering an old-fashioned stoop with seats
on each side. The five houses have a pretty effect, and each has a
home look. The facades only are on exhibition, the interiors being
private. They contrast with others in the "street" in the same way as
the habits of the different peoples. Some build their houses to retire
into, and others to exhibit themselves. Each nation being asked for
the facade of a house, the Italian has built a portico where he
can lounge, see and be seen; the Englishman has in all serenity
represented what he deems comfort, and shuts the front door.

[Illustration: VIEW IN THE PARK OF THE TROCADERO, SHOWING THE
PAVILIONS OF PERSIA AND SIAM.]

The next in order is the United States house, which is plain and
commodious; the latch-string would be out, but that the front door is
everlastingly open. The style is perhaps to advertise to the world
that we have not yet had time to invent an order of architecture or
devise anything adapted to our climate, which has extremes utterly
unknown to our ancestors in Britain. The building is light and airy,
has office-rooms on each floor, and is described by one English
paper as "a sort of school-building which combines elegance with
usefulness." Another paper states that "it exemplifies the utilitarian
notions of our Transatlantic cousins rather than any artistic intent."
These comments are as favorable as anything we ourselves can say: we
accept the verdict with thanks and think we have got off pretty well.
In the squareness of its general lines, with arched windows on the
second floor and square tower over the centre, perhaps the architect
thought it was Italian. Sixteen coats-of-arms on the outside excite
admiration.

The building of Norway and Sweden is a charming cottage of handsome
and ample proportions. It has three sections: one of two stories with
low-pitched roof, and gable to the street, a middle structure with
colonnade, and one of three stories with high-pitched roof. The
windows are round-topped, made in an ingenious way, the upper member
being an arched piece with sloping ends, to match the springing on
the tops of the posts which divide the openings. The horizontal and
vertical bands are enriched by carving.

The facade of Italy may be pronounced pretentious and disappointing.
It is constructed of various kinds of unpolished marble and
terra-cotta panels. A tall archway is flanked by two wings having each
two smaller arches, the entablatures of which are enriched, if we
must so term it, with gaudy mosaic figures, portraits and heraldic
bearings, while the spans of the arches surmount pyramidal groups of
emblems, scientific, medical, lyrical and so forth. Red curtains with
heavy gilt cords and tassels behind the arches throw the columns with
composition (not Composite) capitals and the emblems into high relief.
Beneath the centre arch is the armorial bearing of the country. The
vestibules display statuary.

Japan has a quaint little house with a very massive gateway of solid
timber, flanked by two characteristic fountains of terra-cotta.
These represent stumps of trees, with gigantic lily-cups, leaves of
water-lilies, and frogs in grotesque attitudes in and around the
water.

China has a grotesque house, painted in imitation of octagonal
slate-colored bricks, covered with a pagoda-roof full of curves and
points. The red door has rows of large knobs and is surmounted by
colored and gilded carvings, representing genii probably. The pointed
flag has in a yellow field a blue dragon in the later stages of
consumption.

Spain has a Moorish building rich in gold and color--a central
portion with Italian roof, and two colonnade side-sections flanked by
castellated towers. Five forms of arches span the doors and windows,
and the artist has contrived to associate all forms of ornament,
running from an approach to the Greek fret down through the Arabesque
to the Brussels carpet.

Austro-Hungary has a long colonnade of white stone ornamented with
black filigree-work and supported by columns in pairs. The entablature
is surmounted by a row of statues, and the end-towers have parapets
with balustrade. The colonnade, with a chocolate-brown back wall,
affords shelter and relief for bronze and marble statuary. At each end
of this facade is a tall flagstaff striped like a barber's pole, and
so familiar to all who have visited the Austrian stations, at Trieste,
for example. From it flies the flag of horizontal stripes of red,
white and green, with the shield of many quarterings and two angelic
supporters.

Russia has a log-and-frame house of somewhat more than average
picturesque character. The projecting centres and wing-towers, the
outside staircase, and roofs conical, flat, pyramidal, bulbous and
Oriental, give it a miscellaneous toyshop appearance, characteristic
perhaps of the mosaic character of the nation. Barge-boards and
brackets of various cheap patterns are plentifully strewed over the
building.

Passing from the Russian to the Swiss building suggests inevitably
Mr. Mantalini's description of his former _cheres amies_: "The two
countesses had no outline at all, and the dowager's was a demmed
outline." A semicircular archway, over which is a high-flying arch
with a roof of six slopes surmounted by a bell-tower and pinnacle
roof; on the pillars two lions supporting a red shield with white
Greek cross in the field; two wings with flat arches containing
gorgeous stained-glass windows. But what avails description? There are
twenty-two armorial bearings on the spandrils of the arches, beating
the United States by six; but we had only room for the original
thirteen, the United States and two more. Oh that they had granted us
more space! High up aloft is the motto _Un pour tous, tons pour un_,
which was adopted by the French Commune.

Belgium is pre-eminent in the whole row, if expense determines. This
country has about three times as much space in the building as the
United States, and has worthily filled it. The Belgian facade on the
"Street of Nations" is reputed to have cost nearly as much as the
whole appropriation made by Congress for the United States exhibit. It
is of dark red brick with gray stone quoins and corners and blue and
gray marble pillars. The centre building is joined by two colonnades
to a flanking tower at one end and an ornate gable at the other. The
style is one familiar in the times when the great William of Orange
was alive, and was to some extent introduced into England soon after
another William took the place of his bigoted father-in-law. It
cannot be denied that the general effect is gray, sombre and
uncomfortable--that it is too much crowded with objects, and, though
of admirable and enduring materials, suggests a spasmodic attempt to
assimilate itself to the gala character of the occasion which called
it forth. It is the saturnine one of the row. It is said that the
pieces are numbered for re-erection in some other place.

Greece has an Athenian house painfully crude in color, white picked
out with all the hues of the rainbow and some others, suggesting muddy
coffee and chibouques.

Denmark has about twenty feet of front, utilized by a gable-end of
brick with facings of imitation stone.

The Central American States have about sixty feet of yellow front,
with three arched openings into the vestibule, which is flanked by a
tower and a gable.

Anam, Persia, Siam, Morocco and Tunis have unitedly a gingerbread
affair of four distinct patterns--we cannot call them styles. Siam in
the centre has a chocolate-colored tower picked out with silver, and
surmounted by a triple pagoda roof, whence floats the flag, a white
elephant in a red field. The six feet of homeliness belonging to Tunis
has a balcony of wood which neither reveals nor hides the almond-eyed
whose supposed relatives are selling trumpery in booths on the other
side of the Seine.

Luxembourg, Andorra, Monaco and San Marino unite in a facade
representing the different styles of architecture which prevail in the
several states: 1. A portion faintly suggesting the ancient palace
of Luxembourg, to-day the residence of Prince Henry of Holland; 2. An
entrance erected by the principality of Monaco as the model of that of
the royal palace; 3. A window contributed by San Marino, and showing
that the prevalent type in the little republic is more useful than
ornamental; 4. A balustrade surmounting the facade, supplied by the
republic of Andorra.

Portugal has an imitation in cream-colored plaster of a Gothic
church-entrance, and a highly-enriched arch with flanking towers,
whose canopied niches have figures of warriors and wise men.

Holland shows an architecture of two hundred years ago, the
counterpart of the houses we see in the old Dutch pictures. It is of
dark red brick with stone courses, and a tall slate roof behind its
balustered parapet.

We are at the end of the Street of Nations, somewhat under a third of
a mile in length.

It is evening, and the sun in this latitude--for we are farther north
than Quebec--seems in no hurry to reach the horizon. Two hours ago the
whistle sounded "No more steam," and the life of the building went
out. The attendants, tired of the show and _blases_ or "used up,"
according to their nationality, with exhibitions, have shrouded their
cases in sack-cloth and gone to sip ordinaire, absinthe or bitter ale.
I sit on a terrace of the Champ de Mars, the gorgeous building at my
back, and look riverward. Before me stretches away the green carpet of
sward one hundred feet wide and six hundred long, a broad level band
of emerald reaching to the gravel approach to the Pont d'Iena, each
side of which is guarded by a colossal figure of a man leading a
horse. The gravel around the _tapis vert_ is black with the figures of
those whom the fineness of the evening has induced to take a parting
stroll in the ground before retiring.

Flanking the gravel-walks the ground is more uneven, and Art, in
imitation of the wilder aspects of Nature, has done what the limited
space permitted to enhance the allied beauties of land and water,
where

  Each gives each a double charm,
  Like pearls upon an Ethiop's arm.

On the left is a rockery and waterfall on no mean scale, with a
romantic little lake in front. On the right a rocky island in a
corresponding lake is crowned with a thatched pavilion, the reflection
of which shines broken in the water ruffled by the evening breeze.
Groups of detached buildings hem in the view on each side, and their
flags wave with the sky for a background. Paris is invisible: at this
point the grounds are isolated from outside view.

Rising clear beyond the bridge, the approach to it on the other side
hidden by the lowness of the point of view, stands the palace of the
Trocadero, a broad sweep of green covering the hill, along whose
summit are the widespread wings of the colonnade, uniting at the
central rotunda, of which the domed roof and square campaniles rise
one hundred feet above all and dominate the middle of the picture. The
traces of the indefatigable swarms of workmen are obliterated, except
in the magical and finished work. The spray of the fountains of the
chateau d'eau drifts to leeward and hides at times patches of the
velvety grass on the hill. The central jet plays sturdily, and from
where I sit appears to reach the level of the second corridor of the
rotunda.

The eye fails to detect a single object, excepting the four statues on
the bridge, which is not the creation of a few months. The hill beyond
has been torn to pieces and sloped, and the palace built upon it.
Every house in sight is new. The very ground in front on which I look
down has been raised, and the terrace on which I sit has been built.
The ponds have been excavated, the mimic rocky hills have been piled
up, and the water led to the brink of the tiny precipice from the
artesian wells which supply this part of Paris.

The hum of many voices and the dash of waters make a deep undertone,
and one comes away with the feeling--not exactly that the scene is
too good to last, but--of regret that the result of such lavish care
should be ephemeral. In a few months all on the left side of the river
may again be parade-ground, and the thirty thousand troops which can
be readily man[oe]uvred upon it be getting ready for another conflict,
while the palace which the Genius of the Lamp had builded, as in
a night, shall be a thing of the past, as if whirled away by the
malevolent magician.

EDWARD H. KNIGHT.




  SENIORITY.


  Child! Such thou seemest to me that am more old
      In sorrow than in years,
  With that long pain that turns us bitter cold,
      Far worse than these hot tears

  Of thine, that fall so fast upon my breast.
      I know they ease thy grief:
  I know they comfort, and will bring thee rest,
      Thou poor wind-shaken leaf!

  Ah yes, thy storm will pass, thy skies will clear.
      Thou smilest beneath my kiss:
  Lift up the blue eyes cleansed by weeping, dear,
      Of every thought amiss.

  What seest thou, child, in these dry eyes of mine?
      Grief that hath spent its tears--
  Grief that its right to weeping must resign,
      Not told by days, but years.

  The bitterest is that weeping of the heart
      That mounts not to the eyes:
  In its lone chamber we sit down apart,
      And no one hears our cries.

  It comes to this with every deep, true soul:
      'Tis neither kill nor cure,
  But a strong sorrow held in strong control,
      A girding to endure.

  For no such soul lives in this tangled world
      But, like Achilles' heel,
  Hath in the quick a shaft too truly hurled--
      Flesh growing round the steel.

  And with its outcome would come all Life's flood:
      Joy is so twined with pain,
  Sweetness and tears so blended in our blood,
      They will not part again.

  For at the last the heart grows round its grief,
      And holds it without strife:
  So used we are, we cry not for relief,
      For we know all of life.

  And this is why I kiss thy tear-wet eyes,
      Nor think thy grief so great.
  Thou untried child! at every fresh surprise
      Thy heart springs to the gate.

  HOWARD GLYNDON.




"FOR PERCIVAL."


CHAPTER XXXV.

OF THE LANDLADY'S DAUGHTER.

[Illustration]


Early in that December the landlady's daughter came home. Percival
could not fix the precise date, but he knew it was early in the month,
because about the eighth or ninth he was suddenly aware that he
had more than once encountered a smile, a long curl and a pair of
turquoise earrings on the stairs. He had noticed the earrings: he
could speak positively as to them. He had seen turquoises before, and
taken little heed of them, but possibly his friends had happened to
buy rather small ones. He felt pretty certain about the long curl. And
he thought there was a smile, but he was not so absolutely sure of the
smile.

By the twelfth he was quite sure of it. It seemed to him that it was
cold work for any one to be so continually on the stairs in December.
The owner of the smile had said, "Good-morning, Mr. Thorne."

On the thirteenth a question suggested itself to him: "Was she--could
she be--always running up and down stairs? Or did it happen that just
when he went out and came back--?" He balanced his pen in his fingers
for a minute, and sat pondering. "Oh, confound it!" he said to
himself, and went on writing.

That evening he left the office to the minute, and hurried to Bellevue
street. He got halfway up the stairs and met no one, but he heard a
voice on the landing exclaim, "Go to old Fordham's caddy, then, for
you sha'n't--Oh, good gracious!" and there was a hurried rustle. He
went more slowly the rest of the way, reflecting. Fordham was another
lodger--elderly, as the voice had said. Percival went to his
sitting-room and looked thoughtfully into his tea-caddy. It was nearly
half full, and he calculated that, according to the ordinary rate of
consumption, it should have been empty, and yet he had not been more
sparing than usual. His landlady had told him where to get his tea:
she said she found it cheap--it was a fine-flavored tea, and she
always drank it. Percival supposed so, and wondered where old Fordham
got his tea, and whether that was fine-flavored too.

There was a giggle outside the door, a knock, and in answer to
Percival's "Come in," the landlady's daughter appeared. She explained
that Emma had gone out shopping--Emma was the grimy girl who
ordinarily waited on him--so, with a nervous little laugh, with a toss
of the long curl, which was supposed to have got in the way somehow,
and with the turquoise earrings quivering in the candlelight, she
brought in the tray. She conveyed by her manner that it was a new and
amusing experience in her life, but that the burden was almost more
than her strength could support, and that she required assistance.
Percival, who had stood up when she came in and thanked her gravely
from his position on the hearthrug, came forward and swept some books
and papers out of the way to make room for her load. In so doing their
hands touched--his white and beautifully shaped, hers clumsy and
coarsely colored. (It was not poor Lydia's fault. She had written to
more than one of those amiable editors who devote a column or two in
family magazines to settling questions of etiquette, giving recipes
for pomades and puddings, and telling you how you may take stains
out of silk, get rid of freckles or know whether a young man means
anything by his attentions. There had been a little paragraph
beginning, "L.'s hands are not as white as she could wish, and she
asks us what she is to do. We can only recommend," etc. Poor L. had
tried every recommendation in faith and in vain, and was in a fair way
to learn the hopelessness of her quest.)

The touch thrilled her with pleasure and Thorne with repugnance. He
drew back, while she busied herself in arranging his cup, saucer and
plate. She dropped the spoon on the tray, scolded herself for her own
stupidity, looked up at him with a hurried apology, and laughed.
If she did not blush, she conveyed by her manner a sort of idea of
blushing, and went out of the room with a final giggle, being confused
by his opening the door for her.

Percival breathed again, relieved from an oppression, and wondered
what on earth had made her take an interest in his tea and him. Yet
the reason was not far to seek. It was that tragic, melancholy, hero's
face of his--he felt so little like a hero that it was hard for him
to realize that he looked like one--his sombre eyes, which might have
been those of an exile thinking of his home, the air of proud and
rather old-fashioned courtesy which he had inherited from his
grandfather the rector and developed for himself. Every girl is ready
to find something of the prince in one who treats her with deference
as if she were a princess. Percival had an unconscious grace of
bearing and attitude, and the considerable advantage of well-made
clothes. Poverty had not yet reduced him to cheap coats and advertised
trousers. And perhaps the crowning fascination in poor Lydia's eyes
was the slight, dark, silky moustache which emphasized without hiding
his lips.

Another rustling outside, a giggle and a whisper--Percival would have
sworn that the whisper was Emma's if it had been possible that
she could have left it behind her when she went out shopping--an
ejaculation, "Gracious! I've blacked my hand!" a pause, presumably
for the purpose of removing the stain, and Lydia reappeared with the
kettle. She poured a portion of its contents over the fender in her
anxiety to plant it firmly on the fire. "Oh dear!" she exclaimed,
"how stupid of me! Oh, Mr. Thorne"--this half archly, half pensively,
fingering the curl and surveying the steaming pool--"I'm afraid you'll
wish Emma hadn't gone out: such a mess as I've made of it! What will
you think of me?"

"Pray, don't trouble yourself," said Percival. "The fender can't
signify, except perhaps from Emma's point of view. It doesn't
interfere with my comfort, I assure you."

She departed, only half convinced. Percival, with another sigh of
relief, proceeded to make the tea. The water was boiling and the fire
good. Emma was apt to set a chilly kettle on a glimmering spark, but
Lydia treated him better. The bit of cold meat on the table looked
bigger than he expected, the butter wore a cheerful sprig of green.
Percival saw his advantages, but he thought them dearly bought,
especially as he had to take a turn up and down Bellevue street while
the table was cleared.

After that day it was astonishing how often Emma went out shopping or
was busy, or had a bad finger or a bad foot, or was helping ma with
something or other, or hadn't made herself tidy, so that Lydia had to
wait on Mr. Thorne. But it was always with the same air of its being
something very droll and amusing to do, and there were always some
artless mistakes which required giggling apologies. Nor could he doubt
that he was in her thoughts during his absence. She had a piano down
stairs on which she accompanied herself as she sang, but she found
time for domestic cares. His buttons were carefully sewn on and his
fire was always bright. One evening his table was adorned with a
bright blue vase--as blue as Lydia's earrings--filled with dried
grasses and paper flowers. He gazed blankly at it in unspeakable
horror, and then paced up and down the room, wondering how he should
endure life with it continually before his eyes. Some books lay on a
side-table, and as he passed he looked absently at them and halted. On
his Shelley, slightly askew, as if to preclude all thought of care and
design, lay a little volume bound in dingy white and gold. Percival
did not touch it, but he stooped and read the title, _The Language
of Flowers_, and saw that--purely by accident of course--a leaf was
doubled down as if to mark a place. He straightened himself again, and
his proud lip curled in disgust as he glanced from the tawdry flowers
to the tawdry book. And from below came suddenly the jingling notes
of Lydia's piano and Lydia's voice--not exactly harsh and only
occasionally out of tune, but with something hopelessly vulgar in its
intonation--singing her favorite song--

  Oh, if I had some one to love me,
    My troubles and trials to share!

Percival turned his back on the blue vase and the little book, and
flinging himself into a chair before the fire sickened at the thought
of the life he was doomed to lead. Lydia, who was just mounting with
a little uncertainty to a high note, was a good girl in her way,
and good-looking, and had a kind sympathy for him in his evident
loneliness. But was she to be the highest type of womanhood that he
would meet henceforth? And was Bellevue street to be his world? He
glided into a mournful dream of Brackenhill, which would never be
his, and of Sissy, who had loved him so well, yet failed to love him
altogether--Sissy, who had begged for her freedom with such tender
pain in her voice while she pierced him so cruelly with her frightened
eyes. Percival looked very stern in his sadness as he sat brooding
over his fire, while from the room below came a triumphant burst of
song--

  But I will marry my own love,
    For true of heart am I.

Sometimes he would picture to himself the future which lay before
Horace's three-months-old child, whose little life already played so
all--important a part in his own destiny. He had questioned Hammond
about him, and Hammond had replied that he heard that Lottie and the
boy were both doing well. "They say that the child is a regular Blake,
just like Lottie herself," said Godfrey, "and doesn't look like a
Thorne at all." Percival thought, not unkindly, of Lottie's boy, of
Lottie's great clear eyes in an innocent baby face, and imagined him
growing up slim and tall, to range the woods of Brackenhill in future
years as Lottie herself had wandered in the copses about Fordborough.
And yet sometimes he could not but think of the change that it might
make if little James William Thorne were to die. Horace was very ill,
they said: Brackenhill was shut up, and they had all gone to winter
abroad. The doctors had declared that there was not a chance for him
in England.

At this time Percival kept a sort of rough diary. Here is a leaf from
it: "I am much troubled by a certain little devil who comes as soon as
I am safely in bed and sits on my pillow. He flattens it abominably,
or else I do it myself tossing about in my impatience. He is quite
still for a minute or two, and I try my best to think he isn't there
at all. Then he stoops down and whispers in my ear 'Convulsions!' and
starts up again like india-rubber. I won't listen. I recall some tune
or other: it won't come, and there is a hitch, a horrible blank, in
the midst of which he is down again--I knew he would be--suggesting
'Croup.' I repeat some bit of a poem, but it won't do: what is the
next line? I think of old days with my father, when I knew nothing of
Brackenhill: I try to remember my mother's face. I am getting on very
well, but all at once I become conscious that he has been for
some time murmuring, as to himself, 'Whooping-cough and scarlet
fever--scarlet fever.' I grow fierce, and say, 'I pray God he may
escape them all!' To which he softly replies, 'His grandfather
died--his father is dying--of decline.'

"I roll over to the other side, and encounter him or his twin brother
there. A perfectly silent little devil this time, with a faculty for
calling up pictures. He shows me the office: I see it, I smell it,
with its flaring gaslights and sickly atmosphere. Then he shows me
the long drawing-room at Brackenhill, the quaint old furniture, the
pictures on the walls, the terrace with its balustrade and balls of
mossy stone, and through the windows come odors of jasmine and roses
and far-off fields, while inside there is the sweetness of dried
blossoms and spices in the great china jars. A moment more and it is
Bellevue street, with its rows of hideous whited houses. And then
again it is a river, curving swiftly and grandly between its castled
rocks, or a bridge of many arches in the twilight, and the lights
coming out one by one in the old walled town, and the road and river
travelling one knows not where, into regions just falling asleep in
the quiet dusk. Or there is a holiday crowd, a moonlit ferry, steep
wooded hills, and songs and laughter which echo in the streets and
float across the tide. Or the Alps, keenly cut against the infinite
depth of blue, with a whiteness and a far-off glory no tongue can
utter. Or a solemn cathedral, or a busy town piled up, with church and
castle high aloft and a still, transparent lake below. But through it
all, and underlying it all, is Bellevue street, with the dirty men and
women, who scream and shout at each other and wrangle in its filthy
courts and alleys. Still, God knows that I don't repent, and that I
wish my little cousin well."


CHAPTER XXXVI.

WANTED--AN ORGANIST.


In later days Percival looked back to that Christmas as his worst and
darkest time. His pride had grown morbid, and he swore to himself that
he would never give in--that Horace should never know him otherwise
than self-sufficient, should never think that but for Mrs. Middleton's
or Godfrey Hammond's charity he might have had his cousin as a
pensioner. Brooding on thoughts such as these, he sauntered moodily
beneath the lamps when the new year was but two days old.

His progress was stopped by a little crowd collected on the pavement.
There was a concert, and a string of carriages stretched halfway down
the street. Just as Percival came up, a girl in white and amber, with
flowers in her hair, flitted hurriedly across the path and up
the steps, and stood glancing back while a fair-haired,
faultlessly-dressed young man helped her mother to alight. The father
came last, sleek, stout and important. The old people went on in
front, and the girl followed with her cavalier, looking up at him and
making some bright little speech as they vanished into the building.
Percival stood and gazed for a moment, then turned round and hurried
out of the crowd. The grace and freshness and happy beauty of the girl
had roused a fierce longing in his heart. He wanted to touch a lady's
hand again, to hear the delicate accents of a lady's voice. He
remembered how he used to dress himself as that fair-haired young
man was dressed, and escort Aunt Harriet and Sissy to Fordborough
entertainments, where the best places were always kept for the
Brackenhill party. It was dull enough sometimes, yet how he longed for
one such evening now--to hand the cups once again at afternoon tea, to
talk just a little with some girl on the old terms of equality! The
longing was not the less real, and even passionate, that it seemed to
Thorne himself to be utterly absurd. He mocked at himself as he walked
the streets for a couple of hours, and then went back when the concert
was just over and the people coming away. He watched till the girl
appeared. She looked a little tired, he fancied. As she came out into
the chill night air she drew a soft white cloak round her, and went
by, quite unconscious of the dark young man who stood near the door
and followed her with his eyes. The sombre apparition might have
startled her had she noticed it, though Percival was only gazing at
the ghost of his dead life, and, having seen it, disappeared into the
shadows once more.

"The night is darkest before the morn." In Percival's case this was
true, for the next day brought a new interest and hope. A letter came
from Godfrey Hammond, through which he glanced wearily till he came
to a paragraph about the Lisles: Hammond had seen a good deal of them
lately. "Their father treated you shamefully," he wrote, "but, after
all, it is harder still on his children." ("Good Heavens! Does he
suppose I have a grudge against them?" said Percival to himself, and
laughed with mingled irritation and amazement.) "Young Lisle wants a
situation as organist somewhere where he might give lessons and make
an income so, but we can't hear of anything suitable. People say the
boy is a musical genius, and will do wonders, but, for my part, I
doubt it. He may, however, and in that case there will be a line in
his biography to the effect that I 'was one of the first to discern,'
etc., which may be gratifying to me in my second childhood."

Percival laid the letter on the table and looked up with kindling
eyes.

Only a few minutes' walk from Bellevue street was St. Sylvester's, a
large district church. The building was a distinguished example of
cheap ecclesiastical work, with stripes and other pretty patterns
in different colored bricks, and varnished deal fittings and patent
corrugated roofing. All that could be done to stimulate devotion
by means of texts painted in red and blue had been done, and St.
Sylvester's, within and without, was one of those nineteenth-century
churches which will doubtless be studied with interest and wonder by
the architect of a future age if they can only contrive to stand up
till he comes. The incumbent was High Church, as a matter of course,
and musical, more than as a matter of course. Percival looked up from
his letter with a sudden remembrance that Mr. Clifton was advertising
for an organist, and on his way to the office he stopped to make
inquiries at the High Church bookseller's and to post a line to
Hammond. How if this should suit Bertie Lisle? He tried hard not to
think too much about it, but the mere possibility that the bright
young fellow, with his day-dreams, his unfinished opera, his pleasant
voice and happily thoughtless talk, might come into his life gave
Percival a new interest in it. Bertie had been a favorite of his years
before, when he used to go sometimes to Mr. Lisle's. He still thought
of him as little more than a boy--the boy who used to play to him in
the twilight--and he had some trouble to realize that Bertie must be
nearly two and twenty. If he should come--But most likely he would not
come. It seemed a shame even to wish to shut up the young musician,
with his love for all that was beautiful and bright, in that grimy
town. Thorne resolved that he would not wish it, but he opened
Hammond's next letter with unusual eagerness. Godfrey said they
thought it sounded well, especially as when he named Brenthill it
appeared that the Lisles had some sort of acquaintance living there,
an old friend of their mother's, he believed, which naturally gave
them an interest in the place. Bertie had written to Mr. Clifton, who
would very shortly be in town, and had made an appointment to meet
him.

The next news came in a note from Lisle himself. On the first page
there was a pen-and-ink portrait of the incumbent of St. Sylvester's
with a nimbus, and it was elaborately dated "Festival of St. Hilary."

"It is all as good as settled," was his triumphant announcement, "and
we are in luck's way, for Judith thinks she has heard of something for
herself too. You will see from my sketch that I have had my interview
with Mr. Clifton. He is quite delighted with me. A great judge of
character, that man! He is to write to one or two references I gave
him, but they are sure to be all right, for my friends have been so
bored with me and my prospects for the last few weeks that they would
swear to my fitness for heaven if it would only send me there. I
rather think, however, that St. Sylvester's will suit me better for a
little while. His Reverence is going to look me up some pupils, and I
have bought a Churchman's almanac, and am thinking about starting an
oratorio instead of my opera. Wasn't it strange that when your letter
came from Brenthill we should remember that an old friend of my
mother's lived there? Judith and she have been writing to each other
ever since. Clifton is evidently undergoing tortures with the man he
has got now, so I should not wonder if we are at Brenthill in a few
days. It will be better for my chance of pupils too. I shall look you
up without fail, and expect you to know everything about lodgings. How
about Bellevue street? Are you far from St. Sylvester's?"

Thorne read the letter carefully, and drew from it two conclusions and
a perplexity. He concluded that Bertie Lisle's elastic spirits had
quickly recovered the shock of his father's failure and flight,
and that he had not the faintest idea that any property of
his--Percival's--had gone down in the wreck. So much the better.

His perplexity was, What was Miss Lisle going to do? Could the "we"
who were to arrive imply that she meant to accompany her brother? And
what was the something she had heard of for herself? The words haunted
him. Was the ruin so complete that she too must face the world and
earn her own living? A sense of cruel wrong stirred in his inmost
soul.

He made up his mind at last that she was coming to establish Bertie in
his lodgings before she went on her own way. He offered any help in
his power when he answered the letter, but he added a postscript:
"Don't think of Bellevue street: you wouldn't like it." He heard no
more till one day he came back to his early dinner and found a sealed
envelope on his table. It contained a half sheet of paper, on which
Bertie had scrawled in pencil, "Why did you abuse Bellevue street? We
think it will do. And why didn't you say there were rooms in this
very house? We have taken them, so there is an end of your peaceful
solitude. I'm going to practise for ever and ever. If you don't like
it there's no reason why you shouldn't leave: it's a free country,
they say."

Percival looked round his room. She had been there, then?--perhaps had
stood where he was standing. His glance fell on the turquoise-blue
vase and the artificial flowers, and he colored as if he were Lydia's
accomplice. Had she seen those and the _Language of Flowers_?

As if his thought had summoned her, Lydia herself appeared to lay the
cloth for his dinner. She looked quickly round: "Did you see your
note, Mr. Thorne?"

"Thank you, yes," said Percival.

"I supposed it was right to show them in here to write it--wasn't it?"
she asked after a pause. "He said he knew you very well."

"Quite right, certainly."

"A very pleasant-spoken young gentleman, ain't he?" said Miss Bryant,
setting down a salt-cellar.

"Very," said Percival.

"Coming to play the High Church organ, he tells me," Lydia continued,
as if the instrument in question were somehow saturated with
ritualism.

"Yes--at St. Sylvester's."

Lydia looked at him, but he was gazing into the fire. She went out,
came back with a dish, shook her curl out of the way, and tried again:
"I suppose we're to thank you for recommending the lodgings--ain't we,
Mr. Thorne? I'm sure ma's much obliged to you. And I'm glad"--this
with a bashful glance--"that you felt you could. It seems as if we'd
given satisfaction."

"Certainly," said Percival. "But you mustn't thank me in this case,
Miss Bryant. I really didn't know what sort of lodgings my friend
wanted. But of course I'm glad Mr. Lisle is coming here."

"And ain't you glad _Miss_ Lisle is coming too, Mr. Thorne?" said
Lydia very archly. But she watched him, lynx-eyed.

He uttered no word of surprise, but he could not quite control the
muscles of his face, and a momentary light leapt into his eyes. "I
wasn't aware Miss Lisle _was_ coming," he said.

Lydia believed him. "That's true," she thought, "but you're precious
glad." And she added aloud, "Then the pleasure comes all the more
unexpected, don't it?" She looked sideways at Percival and lowered her
voice: "P'r'aps Miss Lisle meant a little surprise."

Percival returned her glance with a grave scorn which she hardly
understood. "My dinner is ready?" he said. "Thank you, Miss Bryant."
And Lydia flounced out of the room, half indignant, half sorrowful:
"_He_ didn't know--that's true. But _she_ knows what she's after, very
well. Don't tell me!" To Lydia, at this moment, it seemed as if every
girl must be seeking what she sought. "And I call it very bold of her
to come poking herself where she isn't wanted--running after a young
man. I'd be ashamed." A longing to scratch Miss Lisle's face was mixed
with a longing to have a good cry, for she was honestly suffering the
pangs of unrequited love. It is true that it was not for the first
time. The curl, the earrings, the songs, the _Language of Flowers_,
had done duty more than once before. But wounds may be painful without
being deep, although the fact of these former healings might prevent
all fear of any fatal ending to this later love. Lydia was very
unhappy as she went down stairs, though if another hero could be found
she was perhaps half conscious that the melancholy part of her present
love-story might be somewhat abridged.

The streets seemed changed to Percival as he went back to his work.
Their ugliness was as bare and as repulsive as ever, but he understood
now that the houses might hold human beings, his brothers and his
sisters, since some one roof among them sheltered Judith Lisle. Thus
he emerged from the alien swarm amid which he had walked in solitude
so many days. Above the dull and miry ways were the beauty of her
gray-blue eyes and the glory of her golden hair. He felt as if a white
dove had lighted on the town, yet he laughed at his own feelings; for
what did he know of her? He had seen her twice, and her father had
swindled him out of his money.

Never had his work seemed so tedious, and never had he hurried so
quickly to Bellevue street as he did when it was over. The door of No.
13 stood open, and young Lisle stood on the threshold. There was no
mistaking him. His face had changed from the beautiful chorister type
of two or three years earlier, but Percival thought him handsomer than
ever. He ceased his soft whistling and held out his hand: "Thorne! At
last! I was looking out for you the other way."

Thorne could hardly find time to greet him before he questioned
eagerly, "You have really taken the rooms here?"

"Really and truly. What's wrong? Anything against the landlady?"

"No," said Percival. "She's honest enough, and fairly obliging, and
all the rest of it. But then your sister is not coming here to live
with you, as they told me? That was a mistake?"

"Not a bit of it. She's coming: in fact, she's here."

"In Bellevue street?" Percival looked up and down the dreary
thoroughfare. "But, Lisle, what a place to bring her to!"

"Beggars mustn't be choosers," said Bertie. "We are not exactly what
you would call rolling in riches just now. And Bellevue street happens
to be about midway between St. Sylvester's and Standon Square, so it
will suit us both."

"Standon Square?" Percival repeated.

"Yes. Oh, didn't I tell you? My mother came to school at Brenthill. It
was her old schoolmistress we remembered lived here when we had your
letter. So we wrote to her, and the old dear not only promised me some
pupils, but it is settled that Judith is to go and teach there every
day. Judith thinks we ought to stick to one another, we two."

"You're a lucky fellow," said Percival. "You don't know, and won't
know, what loneliness is here."

"But how do _you_ come to know anything about it? That's what I can't
understand. I thought your grandfather died last summer?"

"So he did."

"But I thought you were to come in for no end of money?"

[Illustration: "SHE DREW A SOFT WHITE CLOAK ROUND HER, AND WENT
BY."--Page 173.]

"I didn't, you see."

"But surely he always allowed you a lot," said Lisle, still
unsatisfied. "You never used to talk of doing anything."

"No, but I found I must. The fact is, I'm not on the best terms with
my cousin at Brackenhill, and I made up my mind to be independent.
Consequently, I'm a clerk--a copying-clerk, you understand--in a
lawyer's office here--Ferguson's in Fisher street--and I lodge
accordingly."

"I'm very sorry," said Bertie.

"Hammond knows all about it," the other went on, "but nobody else
does."

"I was afraid there was something wrong," said Bertie--"wrong for you,
I mean. From our point of view it is very lucky that circumstances
have sent you here. But I hope your prospects may brighten; not
directly--I can't manage to hope that--but soon."

Percival smiled. "Meanwhile," he said with a quiet earnestness of
tone, "if there is anything I can do to help you or Miss Lisle, you
will let me do it."

"Certainly," said Bertie. "We are going out now to look for a grocer.
Suppose you come and show us one."

"I'm very much at your service. What are you looking at?"

"Why--you'll pardon my mentioning it--you have got the biggest smut
on your left cheek that I've seen since I came here. They attain to
a remarkable size in Brenthill, have you noticed?" Bertie spoke with
eager interest, as if he had become quite a connoisseur in smuts.
"Yes, that's it. I'll look Judith up, and tell her you are going with
us."

Percival fled up stairs, more discomposed by that unlucky black than
he would have thought possible. When he had made sure that he
was tolerably presentable he waited by his open door till his
fellow-lodgers appeared, and then stepped out on the landing to meet
them. Miss Lisle, dressed very simply in black, stood drawing on her
glove. A smile dawned on her face when her eyes met Percival's, and,
greeting him in her low distinct tones, she held out her white right
hand, still ungloved. He took it with grave reverence, for Judith
Lisle had once touched his faint dream of a woman who should be brave
with sweet heroism, tender and true. They had scarcely exchanged a
dozen words in their lives, but he had said to himself, "If I were an
artist I would paint my ideal with a face like that;" and the memory,
with its underlying poetry, sprang to life again as his glance
encountered hers. Percival felt the vague poem, though Bertie was at
his elbow chattering about shops, and though he himself had hardly got
over the intolerable remembrance of that smut.

When they were in the street Miss Lisle looked eagerly about her,
and asked as they turned a corner, "Will this be our way to St.
Sylvester's?"

"Yes. I suppose Bertie will make his debut next Sunday? I must come
and hear him."

"Of course you must," said Lisle. "Where do you generally go?"

"Well, for a walk generally. Sometimes it ends in some outlying
church, sometimes not."

"Oh, but it's your duty to attend your parish church when I play
there. I suppose St. Sylvester's _is_ your parish church?"

"Not a bit of it. St. Andrew's occupies that proud position. I've been
there three times, I think."

"And what sort of a place is that?" said Miss Lisle.

"The dreariest, dustiest, emptiest place imaginable," Percival
answered, turning quickly toward her. "There's an old clergyman,
without a tooth in his head, who mumbles something which the
congregation seem to take for granted is the service. Perhaps he means
it for that: I don't know. He's the curate, I think, come to help the
rector, who is getting just a little past his work. I don't remember
that I ever saw the rector."

"But does any one go?"

"Well, there's the clerk," said Percival thoughtfully; "and there's a
weekly dole of bread left to fourteen poor men and fourteen poor women
of the parish. They must be of good character and above the age of
sixty-five. It is given away after the afternoon service. When I have
been there, there has always been a congregation of thirty, without
reckoning the clergyman." He paused in his walk. "Didn't you want a
grocer, Miss Lisle? I don't do much of my shopping, but I believe this
place is as good as any."

Judith went in, and the two young men waited outside. In something
less than half a minute Lisle showed signs of impatience. He inspected
the grocer's stock of goods through the window, and extended his
examination to a toyshop beyond, where he seemed particularly
interested in a small and curly lamb which stood in a pasture of green
paint and possessed an underground squeak or baa. Finally, he returned
to Thorne. "You like waiting, don't you?" he said.

"I don't mind it."

"And I do: that's just the difference. Is there a stationer's handy?"

"At the end of the street, the first turning to the left."

"I want some music-paper: I can get it before Judith has done ordering
in her supplies if I go at once."

"Go, then: you can't miss it. I'll wait here for Miss Lisle, and we'll
come and meet you if you are not back."

When Judith came out she looked round in some surprise: "What has
become of Bertie, Mr. Thorne?"

"Gone to the bookseller's," said Percival: "shall we walk on and meet
him?"

They went together down the gray, slushy street. The wayfarers seemed
unusually coarse and jostling that evening, Percival thought, the
pavement peculiarly miry, the flaring gaslights very cruel to the
unloveliness of the scene.

"Mr. Thorne," Judith began, "I am glad of this opportunity. We haven't
met many times before to-day."

"Twice," said Percival.

She looked at him, a faint light of surprise in her eyes. "Ah! twice,"
she repeated. "But you know Bertie well. You used often to come at one
time, when I was away?"

"Oh yes, I saw a good deal of Bertie," he replied, remembering how he
had taken a fancy to the boy.

"And he used to talk to me about you. I don't feel as if we were quite
strangers, Mr. Thorne."

"Indeed, I hope not," said Percival, eluding a baker's boy and
reappearing at her side.

"I've another reason for the feeling, too, besides Bertie's talk," she
went on. "Once, six or seven years ago, I saw your father. He came in
one evening, about some business I think, and I still remember the
very tone in which he talked of you. I was only a school-girl then,
but I could not help understanding something of what you were to him."

"He was too good to me," said Percival, and his heart was very full.
Those bygone days with his father, which had drifted so far into the
past, seemed suddenly brought near by Judith's words, and he felt the
warmth of the old tenderness once more.

"So I was very glad to find you here," she said. "For Bertie's
sake, not for yours. I am so grieved that you should have been so
unfortunate!" She looked up at him with eyes which questioned and
wondered and doubted all at once.

But a small girl, staring at the shop-windows, drove a perambulator
straight at Percival's legs. With a laugh he stepped into the roadway
to escape the peril, and came back: "Don't grieve about me, Miss
Lisle. It couldn't be helped, and I have no right to complain." These
were his spoken words: his unspoken thought was that it served him
right for being such a fool as to trust her father. "It's worse for
you, I think, and harder," he went on; "and if you are so brave--"

"It's for Bertie if I am," she said quickly: "it is very hard on him.
We have spoilt him, I'm afraid, and now he will feel it so terribly.
For people cannot be the same to us: how should they, Mr. Thorne? Some
of our friends have been very good--no one could be kinder than Miss
Crawford--but it is a dreadful change for Bertie. And I have been
afraid of what he would do if he went where he had no companions. A
sister is so helpless! So I was very thankful when your letter came.
But I am sorry for you, Mr. Thorne. He told me just now--"

"But, as that can't be helped," said Percival, "be glad for my sake
too. I have been very lonely."

She looked up at him and smiled. "He insisted on going to Bellevue
street the first thing this morning," she said. "I don't think any
other lodgings would have suited him."

"But they are not good enough for you."

"Oh yes, they are, and near Standon Square, too: I shall only have
seven or eight minutes' walk to my work. I should not have liked--Oh,
here he is!--Bertie, this is cool of you, deserting me in this
fashion!"

"Why, of course you were all right with Thorne, and he asked me to let
him help me in any way he could. I like to take a man at his word."

"By all means take me at mine," said Percival.

"Help you?" said Judith to her brother. "Am I such a terrible burden,
then?"

"No," Thorne exclaimed. "Bertie is a clever fellow: he lets me share
his privileges first, that I mayn't back out of sharing any troubles
later."

"Are you going to save him trouble by making his pretty speeches for
him, too?" Judith inquired with a smile. "You are indeed a friend in
need."

They had turned back, and were walking toward Bellevue street. As they
went into No. 13 they encountered Miss Bryant in the passage. She
glanced loftily at Miss Lisle as she swept by, but she turned and
fixed a look of reproachful tenderness on Percival Thorne. He knew
that he was guiltless in the matter, and yet in Judith's presence he
felt guilty and humiliated beneath Lydia's ostentatiously mournful
gaze. The idea that she would probably be jealous of Miss Lisle
flashed into his mind, to his utter disgust and dismay. He turned
into his own room and flung himself into a chair, only to find, a few
minutes later, that he was staring blankly at Lydia's blue vase. But
for the Lisles, he might almost have been driven from Bellevue street
by its mere presence on the table. It was beginning to haunt him: it
mingled in his dreams, and he had drawn its hideous shape absently on
the edge of his blotting-paper. Let him be where he might, it lay, a
light-blue burden, on his mind. It was not the vase only, but he felt
that it implied Lydia herself, curl, turquoise earrings, smile and
all, and on the evening of his meeting with Judith Lisle the thought
was doubly hateful.


CHAPTER XXXVII.

LYDIA REARRANGES HER CAP.


Thus, as the days lengthened, and the winter, bitter though it was,
began to give faint promise of sunlight to come, Percival entered
on his new life and felt the gladness of returning spring. At the
beginning of winter our glances are backward: we are like spendthrifts
who have wasted all in days of bygone splendor. We sit, pinched and
poverty-stricken, by our little light of fire and candle, remembering
how the whole land was full of warmth and golden gladness in our
lavish prime. But our feelings change as the days grow clear and keen
and long. This very year has yet to wear its crown of blossom. Its
inheritance is to come, and all is fresh and wonderful. We would not
ask the bygone summer for one day more, for we have the beauty of
promise, instead of that beauty of long triumph which is heavy and
over-ripe, and with March at hand we cannot desire September.

Percival's new life was cold and stern as the February weather, but it
had its flitting gleams of grace and beauty in brief words or passing
looks exchanged with Judith Lisle. He was no lover, to pine for more
than Fate vouchsafed. It seemed to him that the knowledge that he
might see her was almost enough; and it was well it should be so, for
he met her very seldom. She went regularly to Standon Square, and came
home late and tired. She had one half-holiday in the week, but Miss
Crawford had recommended her to a lady whose eldest girl was dull and
backward at her music, and she spent a great part of that afternoon in
teaching Janie Barton. Bertie was indignant: "Why should you, who have
an ear and a soul for music, be tortured by such an incapable as that?
Let them find some one else to teach her."

"And some one else to take the money! Besides, Mrs. Barton is so
kind--"

Bertie, who was lying on three chairs in front of the fire, sat up
directly and looked resigned: "That's it! now for it! No one is so
good as Mrs. Barton, except Miss Crawford; and no one is anything like
Miss Crawford, except Mrs. Barton. Oh, I know! And old Clifton is
the first and best of men. And so you lavish your gratitude on
them--Judith, _why_ are all our benefactors such awful guys?--while
they ought to be thanking their stars they've got us!"

"Nonsense, Bertie!"

"'Tisn't nonsense. Aren't you better than I am? And old Clifton is
very lucky to get such an organist. I think he is thankful, but I wish
he wouldn't show it by asking me to tea again."

"Don't complain of Mr. Clifton," said Judith. "You are very fortunate,
if you only knew it."

"Am I? Then suppose you go to tea with him if you are so fond of him.
I rather think I shall have a severe cold coming on next Tuesday."

Judith said no more, being tolerably sure that when Tuesday came
Bertie would go. But she was not quite happy about him. She lived as
if she idolized the spoilt boy, but the blindness which makes idolatry
joyful was denied to her. So that, though he was her first thought
every day of her life, the thought was an anxious one. She was very
grateful to Miss Crawford for having given him a chance, so young and
untried as he was, but she could only hope that Bertie would not repay
her kindness by some thoughtless neglect. At present all had gone
well: there could be no question about his abilities, Miss Crawford
was satisfied, and the young master got on capitally with his pupils.
Neither was Judith happy when he was with Mr. Clifton. Bertie came
home to mimic the clergyman with boyish recklessness, and she feared
that the same kind of thing went on with some of the choir behind Mr.
Clifton's back. ("Behind his back?" Bertie said one day. "Under his
nose, if you like: it would be all one to Clifton.") He frightened
her with his carelessness in money-matters and his scarcely concealed
contempt for the means by which he lived. "Thank Heaven! this hasn't
got to last for ever," he said once when she remonstrated.

"Don't reckon on anything else," she pleaded. "I know what you are
thinking of. Oh, Bertie, I don't like you to count on that."

He threw back his head, and laughed: "Well, if that fails, wait and
see what I can do for myself."

He looked so bright and daring as he spoke that she could hardly help
sharing his confidence. "Ah! the opera!" she said. "But, Bertie, you
must work."

"The opera--Yes, of course I will work," Bertie answered. "Now you
mention it, it strikes me I may as well have a pipe and think about it
a bit. No time like the present, is there?" So Bertie had his pipe and
a little quiet meditation. There was a lingering smile on his face as
if something had amused him. He always felt particularly virtuous when
he smoked his pipe, because it was so much more economical than the
cigars of his prosperous days. "A penny saved is a penny gained."
Bertie felt as if he must be gradually making his fortune as he leant
back and watched the smoke curl upward.

And yet, with it all, how could Judith complain? He was the very life
of the house as he ran up and down stairs, filling the dingy passages
with melodious singing. He had a bright word for every one. The grimy
little maid-servant would have died for him at a moment's notice.
Bertie was always sweet-tempered: in very truth, there was not a touch
of bitterness in his nature. And he was so fond of Judith, so proud of
her, so thoroughly convinced of her goodness, so sure that he should
do great things for her some day! What could she say against him?

Percival, too, was fascinated. His room smelt of Bertie's tobacco and
was littered with blotted manuscripts. He went so regularly to
hear Bertie play that Mr. Clifton noticed the olive-skinned,
foreign-looking young man, and thought of asking him to join the Guild
of St. Sylvester and take a class in the Sunday-school. Yet Percival
also had doubts about the young organist's future. He knew that
letters came now and then from New York which saddened Judith and
brightened Bertie. If Mr. Lisle prospered in America and summoned his
son to share his success, would he have strength to cling to poverty
and honor in England? There were times when Percival doubted it. There
were times, too, when he doubted whether the boy's musical promise
would ever ripen to worthy fruit, though he was angry with himself
for his doubts. "If he triumphs, it will be _her_ doing," he thought.
Little as he saw of Judith, they were yet becoming friends. You may
meet a man every day, and if you only talk to him about the weather
and the leading articles in the _Times_, you may die of old age before
you reach friendship. But these two talked of more than the weather.
Once, emboldened by her remembrance of old days, he spoke of his
father. He hardly noticed at the time that Judith took keen note of
something he said of the old squire's utter separation from his son.
"I was more Percival than Thorne till I was twenty," said he.

"And are you not more Percival than Thorne still?"

He liked to hear her say "Percival" even thus. "Perhaps," he said.
"But it is strange how I've learned to care about Brackenhill--or,
rather, it wasn't learning, it came by instinct--and now no place on
earth seems like home to me except that old house."

Judith, fair and clear-eyed, leaned against the window and looked out
into the twilight. After a pause she spoke: "You are fortunate, Mr.
Thorne. You can look back happily to your life with your father."

The intention of her speech was evident: so was a weariness which
he had sometimes suspected in her voice. He answered her: "And you
cannot?"

"No," she said. "I was wondering just now how many people had reason
to hate the name of Lisle."

Percival was not unconscious of the humorous side of such a remark
when addressed to himself. But Judith looked at him almost as if she
would surprise his thought.

"Don't dwell on such things," he said. "Men in your father's position
speculate, and perhaps hardly know how deeply they are involved, till
nothing but a lucky chance will save them, and it seems impossible to
do anything but go on. At last the end comes, and it is very terrible.
But you can't mend it."

"No," said Judith, "I can't."

"Then don't take up a useless burden when you need all your strength.
You were not to blame in any way."

"No," she said again, "I hope not. But it is hard to be so helpless. I
do not even know their names. I can only feel as if I ought to be more
gentle and more patient with every one, since any one may be--"

"Ah, Miss Lisle," said Percival, "you will pay some of the debts
unawares in something better than coin."

She shook her head, but when she looked up at him there was a half
smile on her lips. As she moved away Percival thought of Sissy's old
talk about heroic women--"Jael, and Judith, and Charlotte Corday." He
felt that this girl would have gone to her death with quiet dignity
had there been need. Godfrey Hammond had called her a plain likeness
of her brother, but Percival had seen at the first glance that her
face was worth infinitely more than Bertie's, even in his boyish
promise; and an artist would have turned from the brother to the
sister, justifying Percival.

It was well for Percival that Judith's friendly smile and occasional
greeting made bright moments in his life, since he had no more of
Lydia's attentions. Poor grimy little Emma waited on him wearily, and
always neglected him if the Lisles wanted her. She had apparently laid
in an immense stock of goods, for she never went shopping now, but
stayed at home and let his fire go out, and was late and slovenly with
his meals. There was no great dishonesty, but his tea-caddy was no
longer guarded and provisions ceased to be mysteriously preserved.
Miss Bryant seldom met him on the stairs, and when she did she
flounced past him in lofty scorn. Her slighted love had turned to
gall. She was bitter in her very desire to convince herself that she
had never thought of Mr. Thorne. She neglected to send up his letters;
she would not lift a finger to help in getting his dinner ready; and
if Emma happened to be out of the way she would let his bell ring and
take no notice. Yet she would have been very true to him, in her own
fashion, if he would have had it so: she would have taken him for
better, for worse--would have slaved for him and fought for him,
and never suffered any one else to find fault with him in any way
whatever. But he had not chosen that it should be so, and Lydia
had reclaimed her heart and her pocket edition of the _Language of
Flowers_, and now watched Percival and Miss Lisle with spiteful
curiosity.

"I shall be late at Standon Square this evening: Miss Crawford wants
me," said Judith one morning to her brother.

"I'll come and meet you," was his prompt reply. "What time? Don't let
that old woman work you into an early grave."

"There's no fear of that. I'm strong, and it won't hurt me. Suppose
you come at half-past nine: you must have your tea by yourself, I'm
afraid."

"That's all right," he answered cheerfully.

"'That's all right?' What do you mean by that, sir?"

"I mean that I don't at all mind when you don't come back to tea. I
think I rather prefer it. There, Miss Lisle!"

"You rude boy!" She felt herself quite justified in boxing his ears.

"Oh, I say, hold hard! Mind my violets!" he exclaimed.

"Your violets? Oh, how sweet they are!" And bending forward, Judith
smelt them daintily. "Where did you get them, Bertie?"

"Ah! where?" And Bertie stood before the glass and surveyed himself.
The cheap lodging-house mirror cast a greenish shade over his
features, but the little bouquet in his buttonhole came out very well.
"Where did I get them? I didn't buy them, if you mean that. They were
given to me."

"Who gave them to you?"

"And then women say it isn't fair to call them curious!" Bertie put
his head on one side, dropped his eyelids, looked out of the corners
of his eyes, and smiled, fingering an imaginary curl.

"Not that nasty Miss Bryant? She didn't!"

"She did, though."

"The wretch! Then you sha'n't wear them one moment more." Bertie
eluded her attack, and stood laughing on the other side of the table.
"Oh, Bertie!" suddenly growing very plaintive, "why did you let me
smell the nasty things?"

"They are very nice," said Lisle, looking down at the poor little
violets. "Oh, we are great friends, Lydia and I. I shall have buttered
toast for tea to-night."

"Buttered toast? What do you mean?"

"Why, it's a curious thing, but Emma--isn't her name Emma?--always has
to work like a slave when you go out. I don't know why there should
be so much more to do: you don't help her to clean the kettles or the
steps in the general way, do you? It's a mystery. Anyhow, Lydia has
to see after my tea, and then I have buttered toast or muffins and
rashers of bacon. Lydia's attentions are just a trifle greasy perhaps,
now I come to think of it. But she toasts muffins very well, does that
young woman, and makes very good tea too."

"Bertie! I thought you made tea for yourself when I was away."

"Oh! did you? Not I: why should I? I had some of Mrs. Bryant's
raspberry jam one night: that wasn't bad for a change. And once I had
some prawns."

"Oh, Bertie! How _could_ you?"

"Bless you, my child!" said Bertie, "how serious you look! Where's the
harm? Do you think I shall make myself ill? By the way, I wonder if
Lydia ever made buttered toast for Thorne? I suspect she did, and that
he turned up his nose at it: she always holds her head so uncommonly
high if his name is mentioned."

"Do throw those violets on the fire," said Judith.

"Indeed, I shall do nothing of the kind. I'm coming to Standon Square
to give my lessons this morning, with my violets. See if I don't."

The name of Standon Square startled Judith into looking at the time.
"I must be off," she said. "Don't be late for the lessons, and oh,
Bertie, don't be foolish!"

"All right," he answered gayly. Judith ran down stairs. At the door
she encountered Lydia and eyed her with lofty disapproval. It did not
seem to trouble Miss Bryant much. She knew Miss Lisle disliked her,
and took it as an inevitable fact, if not an indirect compliment to
her conquering charms. So she smiled and wished Judith good-morning.
But she had a sweeter smile for Bertie when, a little later, carefully
dressed, radiant, handsome, with her violets in his coat, he too went
on his way to Standon Square.

If Judith had been in Bellevue street when he came back, she might
have noticed that the little bouquet was gone. Had it dropped out
by accident? Or had Bertie merely defended his violets for fun, and
thrown them away as soon as her back was turned? Or what had happened
to them? There was no one to inquire.

Young Lisle strolled into Percival's room, and found him just come in
and waiting for his dinner. "I'm going to practise at St. Sylvester's
this afternoon," said the young fellow. "What do you say to a walk as
soon as you get away?"

Percival assented, and began to move some of the books and papers
which were strewn on the table. Lisle sat on the end of the horsehair
sofa and watched him. "I can't think how you can endure that blue
thing and those awful flowers continually before your eyes," he said
at last.

Percival shrugged his shoulders. He could not explain to Lisle that to
request that Lydia's love-token might be removed would have seemed to
him to be like going down to her level and rejecting what he preferred
to ignore. "What am I to do?" he said. "I believe they think it
very beautiful, and I fancy the flowers are home-made. People have
different ideas of art, but shall I therefore wound Miss Bryant's
feelings?"

"Heaven forbid!" said Bertie. "Did Lydia Bryant make those flowers?
How interesting!" He pulled the vase toward him for a closer
inspection. There was a crash, and light-blue fragments strewed the
floor, Percival, piling his books on the side-table, looked round with
an exclamation.

"Hullo!" said Lisle, "I've done it! Here's a pretty piece of work!
And you so fond of it, too!" He was picking up the flowers as he
spoke.--"Here, Emma," as the girl opened the door, "I've upset Mr.
Thorne's flower-vase. Tell Miss Bryant it was my doing, and I'm afraid
it won't mend. Better take up the pieces carefully, though, on the
chance." This was thoughtful of Bertie, as the bits were remarkably
small. "And here are the flowers--all right, I think. Have you got
everything?" He held the door open while she went out with her load,
and then he came back rubbing his hands: "Well, are you grateful?
You'll never see that again."

Percival surveyed him with a grave smile. "I'm grateful," he said.
"But I'd rather you didn't treat all the things which offend my eye in
the same way."

Bertie glanced round at the furniture, cheap, mean and shabby: "You
think I should have too much smashing to do?"

"I fear it might end in my sitting cross-legged on the floor," said
Thorne. "And my successor might cavil at Mrs. Bryant's idea of
furnished lodgings."

"Well, I know I've done you a good turn to-day," Bertie rejoined: "my
conscience approves of my conduct." And he went off whistling.

Percival, on his way out, met Lydia on the landing. "Miss Bryant, have
you a moment to spare?" he said as she went rustling past.

She stopped ungraciously.

"The flower-vase on my table is broken. If you can tell me what it
cost I will pay for it."

"Mr. Lisle broke it, didn't he? Emma said--"

"No matter," said Thorne: "it was done in my room. It is no concern of
Mr. Lisle's. Can you tell me?"

Lydia hesitated. Should she let him pay for it? Some faint touch of
refinement told her that she should not take money for what she had
meant as a love-gift. She looked up and met the utter indifference of
his eyes as he stood, purse in hand, before her. She was ashamed of
the remembrance that she had tried to attract his attention, and
burned to deny it. "Well, then, it was three-and-six," she said.

Percival put the money in her hand. She eyed it discontentedly.

"That's right, isn't it?" he asked in some surprise.

The touch of the coins recalled to her the pleasure with which she had
spent her own three-and-sixpence to brighten his room, and she half
repented. "Oh, it's right enough," she said. "But I don't know why you
should pay for it. Things will get knocked over--"

"I beg your pardon: of course I ought to pay for it," he replied,
drawing himself up. He spoke the more decidedly that he knew how it
was broken. "But, Miss Bryant, it will not be necessary to replace it.
I don't think anything of the kind would be very safe in the middle of
my table." And with a bow he went on his way.

Lydia stood where he had left her, fingering his half-crown and
shilling with an uneasy sense that there was something very mean about
the transaction. Now that she had taken his money she disliked him
much more, but, as she _had_ taken it, she went away and bought
herself a pair of grass-green gloves. From that time forward she
always openly declared that she despised Mr. Thorne.

That evening, when they came back from their walk, Lisle asked his
companion to lend him a couple of sovereigns. "You shall have them
back to-morrow," he said airily. Percival assented as a matter of
course. He hardly thought about it at all, and if he had he would have
supposed that there was something to be paid in Miss Lisle's absence.
He had still something left of the small fortune with which he
had started. It was very little, but he could manage Bertie's two
sovereigns with that and the money he had laid aside for Mrs. Bryant's
weekly bill.

Percival Thorne, always exact in his accounts, supposed that a time
was fixed for the repayment of the loan. He did not understand that
his debtor was one of those people who when they say "I will pay you
to-morrow," merely mean "I will not pay you to-day."


CHAPTER XXXVIII.

CONCERNING SISSY.


Percival had announced the fact of the Lisles' presence in Bellevue
street to Sissy in a carefully careless sentence. Sissy read it, and
shivered sadly. Then she answered in a peculiarly bright and cheerful
letter. "I'm not fit for him," she thought as she wrote it. "I don't
understand him, and I'm always afraid. Even when he loved me best I
felt as if he loved some dream-girl and took me for her in his dream,
and would be angry with me when he woke. Miss Lisle would not be
afraid. It is the least I can do for Percival, not to stand in the way
of his happiness--the least I can do, and oh, how much the hardest!"
So she gave Thorne to understand that she was getting on remarkably
well.

It was not altogether false. She had fallen from a dizzy height, but
she had found something of rest and security in the valley below. And
as prisoners cut off from all the larger interests of their lives pet
the plants and creatures which chance to lighten their captivity, so
did Sissy begin to take pleasure in little gayeties for which she
had not cared in old days. She could sleep now at night without
apprehension, and she woke refreshed. There was a great blank in her
existence where the thunderbolt fell, but the cloud which hung so
blackly overhead was gone. The lonely life was sad, but it held
nothing quite so dreadful as the fear that a day might come when
Percival and his wife would know that they stood on different
levels--that she could not see with his eyes nor understand his
thoughts--when he would look at her with sorrowful patience, and she
would die slowly of his terrible kindness. The lonely life was sad,
but, after all, Sissy Langton would not be twenty-one till April.

Percival read her letter, and asked Godfrey Hammond how she really
was. "Tell me the truth," he said: "you know all is over between us.
She writes cheerfully. Is she better than she was last year?"

Hammond replied that Sissy was certainly better. "She has begun to go
out again, and Fordborough gossip says that there is something between
her and young Hardwicke. He is a good fellow, and I fancy the old man
will leave him very well off. But she might do better, and there
are two people, at any rate, who do not think anything will come of
it--myself and young Hardwicke."

Percival hoped not, indeed.

A month later Hammond wrote that there was no need for Percival to
excite himself about Henry Hardwicke. Mrs. Falconer had taken Sissy
and Laura to a dance at Latimer's Court, and Sissy's conquests were
innumerable. Young Walter Latimer and a Captain Fothergill were the
most conspicuous victims. "I believe Latimer rides into Fordborough
every day, and the captain, being stationed there, is on the spot. Our
St. Cecilia looks more charming than ever, but what she thinks of all
this no one knows. Of course Latimer would be the better match, as
far as money goes--he is decidedly better-looking, and, I should say,
better-tempered--but Fothergill has an air about him which makes his
rival look countrified, so I suppose they are tolerably even. Neither
is overweighted with brains. What do you think? Young Garnett cannot
say a civil word to either of them, and wants to give Sissy a dog. He
is not heart-whole either, I take it."

Hammond was trying to probe his correspondent's heart. He flattered
himself that he should learn something from Percival, let him answer
how he would. But Percival did not answer at all. The fact was, he did
not know what to say. It seemed to him that he would give anything to
hear that Sissy was happy, and yet--

Nor did Sissy understand herself very well. Her grace and sweetness
attracted Latimer and Fothergill, and a certain gentle indifference
piqued them. She was not sad, lest sadness should be a reproach to
Percival. In truth, she hardly knew what she wished. One day she came
into the room and overheard the fag-end of a conversation between Mrs.
Middleton and a maiden aunt of Godfrey Hammond's who had come to
spend the day. "You know," said the visitor, "I never could like Mr.
Percival Thorne as much as--"

Sissy paused on the threshold, and Miss Hammond stopped short. The
color mounted to her wintry cheek, and she contrived to find an
opportunity to apologize a little later: "I beg your pardon, my dear,
for my thoughtless remark just as you came in. I know so little that
my opinion was worthless. I really beg your pardon."

"What for?" said Sissy. "For what you said about Percival Thorne? My
dear Miss Hammond, people can't be expected to remember _that_. Why,
we agreed that it should be all over and done with at least a hundred
years ago." She spoke with hurried bravery.

The old lady looked at her and held out her hands: "My dear, is the
time always so long since you parted?"

Sissy put the proffered hands airily aside and scoffed at the idea.
They had a crowd of callers that afternoon, but the girl lingered
more than once by Miss Hammond's side and paid her delicate little
attentions. This perplexed young Garnett very much when he had
ascertained from one of the company that the old woman had nothing but
an annuity of three hundred a year. He hoped that Sissy Langton wasn't
a little queer, but, upon his word, it looked like it.

[TO BE CONTINUED.]




A WELSH WATERING-PLACE.


On the eastern shore of that stretch of land which forms the extreme
south-western point of Wales stands the stony little seaport town
of Tenby. It is an old, old town, rich in historical legends, an
important place in the twelfth century and down to Queen Elizabeth's
reign. Soon after her time it fell into woeful decay, and for years
of whose number there is no record Tenby existed as a poor
fishing-village and mourned its departed glories. That it would ever
again be a place of interest to anybody but people of fishy pursuits
was an idea Tenby did not entertain concerning itself; but, lo! in the
present century there arose a custom among genteel folk of going down
to the sea in bathing-machines. It was discovered that Tenby was a
spot favored of Neptune (or whatever god or goddess regulates the
matter of surf-bathing), and Tenby was taken down from the shelf, as
it were, dusted, mended and set on its legs again. The fashionables
smiled on it. Away off in the depths of wild Wales the knowing few set
up their select and choice summer abode, and vaunted its being so
far away from home; for Tenby was farther from London in those old
coaching days than New York is in these days of steamships. Even years
after railroads found their way into Wales, Tenby remained remote
and was approachable only by coach; but now you can step into your
railway-carriage in London and trundle to Tenby without change between
your late breakfast and your late dinner.

Probably no seaside watering-place known to the polite world contrasts
so strongly with the typical American watering-place as does this
Welsh resort. Not at Brighton, not at Biarritz, not at any German spa,
will the tourist find so complete a contrast in every respect to Long
Branch or Newport. Tenby is almost _sui generis_. A watering-place
without a wooden building in it would of itself be a novelty to an
American. Our summer cities consist wholly of wooden buildings, but
Tenby, from the point of its ponderous pier, where the waves break as
on a rock, to the tip of its church-spire, which the clouds kiss, is
every inch of stone. Welshmen will not build even so insignificant a
structure as a pig-sty out of boards if there are stones to be had. I
have seen stone pig-sties in Glamorganshire with walls a foot thick
and six hundred years old. There is not a wooden building in Tenby.
The station-buildings are "green" (as the Welsh say of a new house),
but they are solid stone.

Alighting from the railway-carriage in which you have come down from
London, you are greeted with no clamor of bawling hack-drivers and
hotel-omnibus men roaring in stentorian tones the names of their
various houses. Three or four quiet serving-men in corduroy
small-clothes and natty coats touch their hats to you and look in your
face inquiringly. They represent the various hotels in Tenby, and at
a gesture of assent from you one of them takes your bags, your wraps,
whatever you are burdened with, and conducts you to a somewhat
antiquated vehicle which bears you to your chosen inn through some
gray stony streets, under an ivy-green archway of the ancient
town-wall; and as the vehicle draws up at the inn-door the beauty of
Tenby lies spread suddenly before you--the lovely bay, the cliffs,
the sands, the ruined castle on the hill, the restless sea beyond. A
handsome young person in an elaborate toilet as regards her back hair,
but not otherwise impressive in attire, comes to the door of the hotel
to meet you, and gently inquires concerning your wishes: that you
have come to stay in the house is a presumption which no properly
constituted young person in Tenby would venture upon without express
warrant in words. Receiving information on this point from you, the
probability is that she imparts to you in return the information that
the house is full. Such, indeed, is the chronic condition of the
hotels at Tenby in the season; and unless you have written beforehand
and secured accommodations, you are not likely to find them. In the
life of a Welsh watering-place hotels do not fill the important place
they do in American summer resorts. Nobody lives at an hotel in Tenby.
If their stay be longer than a day or two (and very few indeed are
they who come to-day and are off to-morrow), visitors inevitably go
into lodgings. Such is the custom of the country, and there is no
provision for any other, no encouragement to a prolonged stay at an
hotel. The result is, that the hotels are in an incessant state of
bustle and change: there is a never-intermitting stream of arrivals,
who only ask to be made comfortable for a night or two while they are
looking for lodgings, and then make way for the next squad. Tenby
abounds in lodging-houses, the expenses of which are smaller than
hotel expenses, while their comforts are greater, their cares actually
less and their good tone unquestionable. The various lodging-house
quarters vie with each other in genteel cognomens and aristocratic
flavor. The Esplanade is but a row of lodging-houses. The various
Terraces, each with a prenomen more graceful than the other, are the
same. The windows of Tudor Square and Victoria street, Paragon Place
and Glendower Crescent, bloom with invitations to "inquire within." A
handsome parlor and bedroom may be had for two pounds a week, and the
cost of food and sundries need not exceed two pounds more for two
persons moderately fond of good living; which means, at Tenby, the
fattest and whitest of fowls, the freshest and daintiest salmon and
john dories, the reddest and sweetest of lobsters and prawns. Those
who prefer to take a house have every encouragement to do so. A bijou
of a furnished cottage, all overrun with vines and flowers, may be had
for three pounds a month, the use of plate and linen included. These
things are fatal to hotel ambition, for although the hotels are not
expensive, from an American point of view, they cannot compete with
such figures as these. Hence there is nothing to induce a change in
the customs of Tenby, which have prevailed ever since it became a
watering-place. Britons do not change their habits without good and
valid cause therefor, and no Americans ever come to Tenby, so far as I
can learn.

We are Americans ourselves, of course, and we are going to do as
Americans do--viz. make a very brief stay, and that in an hotel. We
obtain accommodations at last through a happy fortune, and presently
find ourselves installed in the grandest suite of hotel-apartments
at Tenby--a large parlor, handsomely furnished, with a piano, books,
_objets d'art_, etc., and a bedroom off it. At Long Branch, were there
such an apartment there--which there is not--twenty dollars a day
would be charged for it, without board and without compunction. Here
we pay nineteen shillings. There is a magnificent view from our front
windows. The hotel stands close to the cliff, with only a narrow
street between its doorstep and the edge of the precipice. The night
is falling, and the scene is like Fairy Land. We look from our windows
straight down upon the sands, a dizzy distance below (but to which it
were easy to toss a pebble), and out over the glassy waters, where
small craft float silently, with the gray old stone pier and the dark
ivy-hung ruin on Castle Hill, the one reflected in the waves, the
other outlined against the sky--a lovely picture. Tenby covers the
ridge of a long and narrow promontory rising abruptly out of the sea,
its stone streets running along the dizzy limestone cliffs. From the
highest point eastward--where is presented toward the sea a front
of rugged precipices which would not shame a mountain-range--the
promontory slopes gradually lower and lower till the streets of the
town run stonily down sidewise through an ancient gate and debouch
upon the south beach. Then, as if repenting its condescension, the
promontory takes a fresh start, and for a brief spurt climbs again,
but quickly plunges into the sea. This spurt, however, creates the
picturesque hill on which of old stood a powerful Norman fortress,
whose ruins we see. Local enterprise has now laid out the hill as a
public pleasure-ground, with gravelled paths and rustic seats, and
glorified it with a really superb statue of the late Prince Albert,
who, the Welsh inscription asserts, was _Albert Dda, Priod Ein
Gorhoffus Frenhines Victoria_.

We find upon inquiry that our hotel so far infringes upon primitive
Welsh manners as to provide a _table-d'hote_ dinner at six. This is
most welcome news, and we become at once part of the company which
sits down to the table d'hote. There are ten people besides ourselves,
and not a commonplace or colorless character among them. My left-hand
neighbor is a somewhat slangy young gentleman in a suit of chequered
clothes, who carves the meats, being at the head of the table; and
my happy propinquity secures me the honor of selection by the young
gentleman as the recipient of his observations: a toughish round of
beef which he is called upon to carve evokes from him an aside to the
effect that it is "rather a dose." The foot of the table is held by an
old gentleman in a black stock, with a tuft of wiry hair on the front
part of his head, and none whatever on any other part, who carves
a fowl, and in asking the diners which part they severally prefer
accompanies the question with a brisk sharpening of his knife on his
fork, but without making the least noise in doing it. My chequered
neighbor having advertised the toughness of the beef, everybody
murmurs a purpose of indulging in fowl, at which my neighbor observes
aside to me that he is "rather jolly glad," and the butler takes the
beef away. The dish next set before him proving a matter of spoons
merely, his relief at not being obliged to carve finds vent in a
whispered "Hooray!" for my exclusive amusement. One unfortunate
individual has accepted a helping of beef, however--a bald-headed man
in spectacles, not hitherto unaccustomed to good living, if one
might judge by his rounded proportions. It is painful to witness his
struggles with the beef, which he maintains with the earnestness of a
man who means to conquer or perish in the endeavor. Opposite sits as
fair a type of a ripe British beauty of the middle class as I have
anywhere seen--with a complexion of snow, a mouth like a red bud and
eyes as beautiful and expressive as those of a splendid large wax
doll, her hair drawn tensely back and rolled into billowy puffs, with
a rose atop. It is sad, in looking on a picture like this--superb in
its suggestions of pure rich blood and abounding health--to reflect
that such a rose will develop into a red peony in ten years. I do not
say the peony will not have her own strong recommendings to the eye:
we may not despise a peony, but it is impossible not to regret that a
rose should turn into one. There is a very good example of the peony
sort near the foot of the table--quite a magnificent creature in her
way. Her husband, who sits next her, is a fiercely-bearded man, but
has a strange air of being in his wife's custody nevertheless. The
lady is apparently forty-five, red to a fault, full in the neck, and
with a figure which necessitates a somewhat haughty pose of the head
unless one would appear gross and piggish. There is much to admire
in this lady, peony though she be. The fiercely-bearded husband is
smaller than his wife, and, in spite of her commanding air and his
subdued aspect, I have not a doubt he rules her with a rod of iron.
Appearances are very deceptive in this direction. I have known so many
large ladies married to little men who (the ladies) carried themselves
in public like grenadiers or drum-majors, and in private doted on
their little lords' shoe-strings! Next the fiercely-bearded husband
sits a very pretty girl, whom he finds his entertainment in constantly
observing with the air of a connoisseur. She is modesty itself; her
eyes are never off her plate; and from the at-ease manner in which he
contemplates her it is clear he no more expects her to return his gaze
than he expects a torpedo to go off under his chair.

The dinner proceeds most decorously. If it were a funeral, indeed, it
could hardly be less given to anything approaching hilarity. There
is now and then a little conversation, but the gaps are
frightful--yawning chasms of silence of the sort in which you are
moved to wild thoughts of running away, for fear you may suddenly
commit some act of horrible impropriety, like whistling in church. In
one of these gaps--during which the whole company, having finished the
course, is waiting gloomily for the victim of tough beef (who is still
struggling) to have done--my chequered neighbor remarks, in an aside
which makes every one start as if a pistol had been fired off,
"Goodish-sized pause, eh?"

But with the dessert we begin to unbend. We are still exceedingly
decorous, but our tongues are loosened a little, and we exchange
amiable remarks, under whose genial influence we begin to feel that
the worst is over. Unfortunately, however, with the spread of sunshine
among us there is the muttering of a storm at our backs: the butler
pushes his female assistant aside with deep rumbling growls, and
presently explodes with open rage at her stupidity. The diners turn
and stare incredulous and amazed. The butler rushes madly from the
room. The female assistant, agitated but obstinate, seizes the
blanc-mange and the cream and proceeds to serve them. I shall not be
believed, I fear, but I am relating simple truth: in her agitation
this incredible female spills the cream in a copious shower-bath over
me and my chequered neighbor, and excitedly falls to mopping it off us
with her napkin, like a pantomime clown. Fortunately, we are in our
travelling suits, and come out of this baptism unharmed. The incident
nearly suffocates the company, for there is not a soul among them who
would not sooner suffer the pangs of dissolution than laugh outright.
As for me, I am nearly expiring with the merriment that consumes me
and my efforts to prevent indecorous explosion. The young woman, after
having wiped me dry, once more presents the cream-jug, this time with
both hands, but I can only murmur faintly in my trouble, "Thanks,
no--no _more_ cream." This appears to be quite too much for the young
person, who throws up her arms in despair and rushes after the butler.
What tragic encounter there may have been in the servants' hall I know
not. Another servant comes and carries the dinner through.

It is entertainment enough for the first morning of your stay at Tenby
just to sit at the windows and observe what is there before you--the
street with its passers, the beach with its strange rock-formations,
the ocean thickly dotted with fishing-craft. The tide is out, and the
huge black block of compact limestone called God's Rock, with its
almost perpendicular strata, lies all uncovered in the morning sun--a
vast curiosity-shop where children clamber about and search for
strange creatures of the sea. In the pools left here and there by
the receding tide are found not only crabs and periwinkles in great
number, but polyps, sea-anemones, star-fishes, medusae and the like in
almost endless variety. Naturalists--who are but children older grown,
with all a child's capacity for being amused by Nature--get rages of
enthusiasm on them as they search the crevices of this and other like
rocks at Tenby. A floor of hard yellow sand stretches away into the
distance, visible for miles, owing to the circular sweep of the beach
and the height from which we are looking out, and it is dotted with
strollers appearing like black mice moving slowly about. The
long stretch of the cliff, from its crescent shape, is clearly
seen--sometimes a sheer, bare stone precipice, sometimes a steep slope
covered with woods and hanging gardens and zigzag, descending walled
paths.

Among those who make up the human panorama of the street under your
window are types of character peculiar to Wales. One such is the
peddling fisher-woman who strolls by with a basketful of bright
pink prawns, which she holds out to you temptingly, looking up. The
fisher-women of Tenby wear a costume differing in some respects from
that of all other Welsh peasants. Instead of the glossy and expensive
"beaver" worn in other parts, the Tenby women sport a tall hat of
straw or badly-battered felt. Another favorite with them is a soft
black slouch hat like a man's, but with a knot of ribbon in front. One
of the neatest of the fisher-women is an old girl of fifty or so, who
haunts your windows incessantly, and greets you with a quick-dropped
courtesy whenever you walk out. She is never seen to stand still,
except for the purpose of talking to a customer, but trots incessantly
about; and either for this reason, or from her constant journeys to
and fro between her home and the town, is given the nickname of Dame
Trudge. She usually has on her back a coarse oyster-basket called a
"creel," and in her hands another basket containing cooked prawns,
lobsters or other temptation to the gourmand. Her dress, though it is
midsummer, is warm and snug, particularly about the head and neck,
as a protection against the winds of ocean; and her stout legs are
encased in jet-black woollen stockings (visible below her short check
petticoat), while her feet are shod with huge brogans whose inch-thick
soles are heavily plated with iron. She lives ten miles from Tenby,
walks to and fro always, and sleeps under her own roof every night,
yet you never fail to see her there in the street when you get up in
the morning. There are many other oyster-women to be seen at Tenby,
but none so trim as good Dame Trudge. Here and hereabout grow the
largest, if not the sweetest, oysters in Great Britain, and their
cultivation is chiefly the work of the gentler sex. They do not look
very gentle--or at least very frail--as you come upon a group of
oyster-women in their masculine hats and boots munching their bread
and cheese under a wall, but they are a good-natured race, and most
respectful to their betters. Anything less suggestive of Billingsgate
than the language of these Welsh fisher-women could hardly be,
considering their trade.

The tide of passers is setting toward the south sands. Foreigners are
almost unrepresented in this throng. There is one Frenchman, who would
be recognizable as far off as he could be seen by his contrast to the
prevailing British tone. It is a mystery why he should be here instead
of at Trouville, Boulogne, Dieppe or Etretat, where the habits of the
gay world are all his own. Nobody seems to know him at Tenby. Behind
him walks quite as pronounced a type of the Welsh country gentleman--a
character not to be mistaken for an Englishman, in spite of the family
resemblance. A shrewd simplicity characterizes this face--an open,
guileless sharpness, so to speak, peculiarly Welsh. An indifferent
judge of human nature might venture to attempt heathen games with this
old gentleman, but no astute rogue would think of such a thing. A man
of this stamp, however green and rural, is not gullible. This Welsh
simplicity of character is very deceptive to the unwary, and many
besides Ancient Pistol have eaten leeks against their will because of
their ignorance concerning it.

We join the throng in the street and stroll leisurely down the long
incline. The whole town tips that way. A variety of more or less
quaint vehicles move about--cabriolets drawn by donkeys and ponies;
sedan chairs; a species of easy-chair on wheels, with a wooden apron,
and propelled by a boy or a decayed footman in seedy livery with
bibulous habits written on his face. Something of a similar sort was
seen at the Centennial, yet utterly unlike this, notwithstanding a
resemblance in principle. These invalid go-carts are very convenient
at Tenby, as they may be trundled everywhere, even on the sands, which
are hard and flat. A peculiarity of all the vehicles, even those drawn
by two animals, is that they go slower, as a rule, than on-foot people
do. Briskly-walking couples and groups of English and Welsh ladies
pass us, carrying over their arms bathing-dresses or towels, with the
business-like alacrity of movement characteristic of most Britons on
their feet. No one saunters except ourselves. All are hastening to the
south sands, looking neither to the right nor the left; but for
us there are eye-lures in every direction. The town abounds with
antiquities calculated to awaken the liveliest interest in a stranger:
every street is rich with romantic story; every hill and rock for
miles around has its legend, its ruin of castle, abbey or palace, or
its mysterious cromlech,--all that can most charm the soul of the
antiquary; and Shakespeare has honored this corner of Wales beyond
others by putting it in one of his tragedies. Considerable portions
of the ancient town-wall are standing, with the mural towers and
gateways. In the parish church, which we pass, are some most
interesting monuments of the early half of the fourteenth century, but
the Tenbyites look upon their church as rather a modern structure,
as churches go in Wales. They point out the place where John Wesley
preached in the street in 1763, when the mayor threatened to read the
riot act. There is still a law in Wales against street-preaching, but
it is not often enforced, unless the preacher happens to be drunk--an
incident not altogether unknown.

The old stone pier abounds with seafaring characters in holiday rig,
very picturesque to American eyes. They knuckle their foreheads and
remove their pipes as we pass, and by attitudes and gestures which
would inform a deaf-mute invite us to take a sail on the bay. They do
not audibly offer their services, for the municipal laws forbid them
to, but their figureheads are mutely eloquent. Here is one who might
be put right on the stage as he stands as the typical jolly Jack Tar
of the nautical drama. He wears a red liberty-cap, and a nose which
matches it to a shade. His jersey is blue and low in the neck, and his
trousers are of that roominess supposed to be necessary for nautical
purposes. Other mariners about him are quite as interesting.
Occasionally one is seen whose rig is so neat he might have stepped
out of a bandbox, but, though he is an ornamental mariner, he is not a
Brummagem one. These fellows all know storm and danger and severe toil
as common acquaintances. The neatest of them are understood to be
residents here, with wives or mothers who strive hard to keep them
looking nice in the fashionable season; and in blue flannel shirt with
immense broad collar, another broad collar of white turned over that,
hat of neat straw or tarpaulin with upturned rim and bright blue
ribbon, they form a feature of attractiveness which has no counterpart
at American seaside resorts. The rougher mariners, if not so handsome,
are still most picturesque: they are chiefly fishermen from the
Devonshire coast, who sail over here to take the salmon, mackerel,
herrings, turbots, soles, etc. which so abound at Tenby. The spot
still bears out, in spite of its modern glories as a watering-place,
its ancient renown as a fishing-point, which was so great that the
old-time Britons called it _Denbych y Piscoed_ ("the hill by the place
of fishes").

On the Castle Hill we find a great company gathered, looking down
on the still greater company which is gathered on the yellow sands.
Children are climbing and rolling on the soft greensward of the
terraces, and adults are sprawling at full length, completely at their
ease. Men and women lounge to and fro on the sea-wall promenade, a
miniature of the Hyde Park throng at mid-season. Others sit reading or
chatting or looking out over the sparkling sea. The grass and crags
are dotted with azure and purple flowers, and cushions of pink and
white stone-crop abound. Higher up the hill stand the ivied ruins of
the Norman castle, and the white memorial monument to Prince Albert,
with its sculptured panels bearing the arms of Llewellyn the Great,
the red dragon of Cadwalader, the symbolical leek and the motto,
_Anorchfygol Ddraig Cymru_ ("The dragon of Wales is invincible"). The
air is very cool and bracing on this hill. But the greatest crowd is
on the sands and on the rocks of the cliff immediately backing the
beach. It is difficult for one who is familiar only with the beach at
Long Branch or Cape May to comprehend such a scene as this which I
am trying to picture. In the first place, the field is so entirely
different from that at home; and in the second place, the bathing
population of the town is not broken up into a number of hotel
communities and cottage communities, but is all gathered at one spot.
It is true some residents on the north cliff bathe on the north sands,
but they come to the south sands after they have had their dip, to
meet _le monde_. There is room here for _le monde_ too; and the groups
not only sprinkle the wide yellow plain, but they are perched about
on the face of the cliff in grottos and on jutting crags; they are
grouped in the cool shade of rocky caverns at the precipice's base;
they are leaning on the battlemented walls that crown its summit. The
water is a considerable distance from where the people sit, and minute
by minute, as the time passes, it recedes farther and farther, until
at last it is a long walk away. The gay hues of red-coated soldiers
assist feminine attire in enlivening the scene with color. Children in
great numbers are scampering about, and busying themselves, much as
they do at home, with toy pails and spades; but if you take notice
you will find that their sand-structures differ widely from those of
children in America: you may even see a perfect model of a feudal
castle grow into shape, with barbacan, gate, moat, drawbridge, towers,
bastions, donjon-keep and banqueting-hall complete. A brass band--the
members in full uniform of bright colors, with little rimless
red-and-gold caps--is playing under the battlemented garden-wall which
backs the sands in one place. Listen to the tunes! Heard you ever
these peculiar airs before? The "Bells of Aberdovey" jangle their
sweet chime over the wind-blown scene. The "March of the Men of
Harlech" fills all the air with its stirring scarlet strain. The
quaint melody of "Hob y deri dando" moves the feet of youth to
restlessness: not that it is a jig, in spite of the jiggy look of
the words to English eyes, but because it has been twisted into the
service of Terpsichore by a famous band-master in his "Welsh Lancers."
"Hob y deri dando" is a love-song:

  All the day I sigh and cry, love,
        Hob y deri dando!
  All the night I say and pray, love,
        Hob y deri dando![A]

[Footnote A: This phrase is sometimes supposed to be the original
of the English "Hey down, derry, derry down!" but the old Druidic
song-burden, "Come, let us hasten to the oaken grove," is in Welsh
"Hai down ir deri dando," which is nearer the English phrase.]


A hand-organ with monkey attachment is delighting a group of children
on another part of the sands. Yonder, too, is a balladist with a
guitar, bawling at the top of his lungs,

  The dream 'as parst, the spell his broken,
    'Opes 'ave faded one by one:
  Th' w'isper'd words, so sweetly spoken,
    Hall like faded flow'rs har gone.
  Still that woice hin music lingers,
    Loike er 'arp 'oose silver strings,
  Softly swep' by fairy fingers,
    Tell of hunforgotten things.

Nobody pays much attention to this wandering minstrel: he is happy if
at the close of his song a penny finds its way into the battered hat
he extends for largess. He is clearly a stranger to this part of the
world, and has probably tramped down here from London by easy stages,
and will have to tramp back again as he came, without much profit from
his provincial tour.

The fashionable world which is sunning itself on the sands is made up,
for the most part, of the usual types of a British watering-place--the
pea-jacketed swell with blase manner and one-eyed quizzing-glass; the
occasional London cad in clothes of painful newness and exaggeration
of style, such as no gentleman by any chance ever wears in Britain;
the young sprig of nobility with effeminate face and "fast"
inclinations, who smokes a cigarette and ogles the girls, and utters
sentiments of profound ennui in a light boyish tenor voice. He is
the son of an English nobleman who has a Welsh estate, upon which he
passes a portion of his time, and can trace his lineage back to one of
the Norman adventurers who came over with William the Conqueror. For
an example of an older aristocracy than this, however, observe the
ancient couple sitting near us in the shadow of a cliff-rock, the wife
with a high-bridged nose and puffs of gray hair on her temples, the
husband with an easy-fitting hat and a coat-collar which rolls so high
as to give the impression he has no neck. These are aristocrats who,
although untitled and owners only of a few modest acres back in
Carmarthenshire, descend from ancestors that looked down on William
the Conqueror as a plebeian upstart.

There are bathers in the surf, but they are so far away from the
throngs on this vast plain of beach that they are as unindividual
as if they were puppets. One's most intimate friend could not be
recognized without the aid of a glass. The bathing-machines, which
serve in lieu of the huts common at American seaside resorts, are
merely huts on wheels instead of huts in stationary rows. They are
cared for by women, who escort you to the door of an untenanted hut,
collect sixpence and retire. You enter, and disrobe at your leisure.
The machine proves to be a snug box lighted by one little unglazed
window not large enough for you to put your head through, and having a
solid shutter. If you close this shutter the box is as dark as night,
for it is well built, with hardly a crevice in wall or roof or floor.
A small and very bad looking-glass hangs on the wall, and there is a
bench to sit on: that is the extent of the furniture. You have been
provided with towels and with the regulation bathing-dress for
men--linen breeches, to wit. While you are contemplating this garment
and questioning of your modesty as to the propriety of donning it,
there is a sound of rattling iron outside, and a tap on your door as a
warning that your machine is about to start. The machine is dragged
in lumbering fashion out into the sea by an antediluvian horse with
a small boy astride, and there the boy unhitches the traces from the
machine and goes ashore, leaving you with the waves breaking on
the steps before your door. You peep out dubiously. A shoal of
naked-shouldered men are swimming and splashing in the surf. Some
fifty yards away is another school of bathers, whose back hair betrays
their sex, and who are clad in garments made like those worn by
feminine bathers at Long Branch, etc. There is no commingling of the
sexes in the water, as our American custom is, but on the score of
modesty I must confess to a prejudice in favor of the American plan,
nevertheless. The British theory evidently presumes that men have no
modesty among themselves. Custom regulates these matters, I suppose.
I have never felt disposed to blush for my naked feet and arms while
conversing with a lady on the beach at Long Branch, being snugly clad
from head to foot in a flannel costume. But I confess to a shrinking
sense of the incompleteness of the prescribed fig-leaves as I stand
in the door of the bathing-machine at Tenby. To cover myself with the
water as quickly as possible appears to be the only remedy, however,
and I take a header from the doorsill. Ugh! The water is like ice! To
one accustomed to the warm American bathing-suit the linen substitute
of Tenby is a most insufficient protection. At home I have on occasion
extended the revels of the surf for a full hour, being a pretty strong
swimmer and exceedingly fond of the exercise. I get enough at Tenby
in precisely two minutes, and hasten to don my customary clothing.
Nevertheless, it is contended that the surf at Tenby is pleasant for
bathers as late as Christmas, and I am told there really are Britons
who bathe daily in the sea here quite up to the first snow. It is
certain that the fashionable season does not end till November, and
some stay straight on through the winter.

Among the lions of Tenby none is more interesting than St. Catharine's
Island, a great rugged hill of solid limestone almost devoid of
verdure and rent into innumerable fissures, with a succession of dark
romantic coves and caverns and jagged projecting crags fringing its
sides completely round. At high tide this islet is separated from the
mainland by a deep rolling sea. At low tide its shores are left dry by
the receding waters. It is a curious sight to watch this daily advance
and retreat of the sea. To see the tides of ocean come and go is no
novelty, but it becomes a novelty under circumstances like these,
where every day a dry bridge of yellow sand is stretched forth from
the islet to the mainland, across which a stream of humanity pours the
moment the path is clear. At first only one person at a time can pass.
Ten minutes later the sand-bridge is a broad road. Ten later, and all
Tenby might cross in a crowd. There is an iron staircase built up the
rocky face of the islet, winding about among its crags and fissures,
and the isle is overrun with people during the time the tide is out.
It has many attractions. The view is grand from those heights. Yawning
gulfs fascinate you to look dizzily down into the secret heart of the
isle. On the highest point of rock stood, a few years ago, an ancient
chapel which had in Roman Catholic days been dedicated to St.
Catharine. Within the past six years this chapel has given way to a
fortress, its walls partly embedded in the solid rock. The people who
throng to the islet between tides roam about, loiter with breeze-blown
garments on the stairs and landings, peer into the fortress, or,
perching themselves in the sheltered nooks which are innumerable among
the crags, sit and sew, read, chat, make love and watch the pygmy
bathers in the sea far down below. As long as the tide is low the
tenants of the islet are safe to remain, but as soon as it turns those
who are wise begin to gather up their things and clear out. Now
and then incautious ones get caught; and then there are screaming,
hurrying and a terrible fright, especially if the trapped ones are of
the gentler sex, and still more especially if their proportions are
ample. Such women are, as a rule, the cowardliest. Probably, they feel
their amplitude a disadvantage in moments of peril, and know emotions
which their scrawnier sisters escape. A case in point greets us this
morning as we stand watching the rising of the tide. A roly-poly woman
of forty or so is caught on the islet by the closing of old Ocean's
drawbridge. She is a fair being with dark hair and eyes, a sweet
smile, a clear complexion, and some two hundred and fifty pounds
avoirdupois, richly dressed, pleasant-mannered, and in all respects
no doubt a lady to be admired and loved, as well as respected, in the
social circle. But at present she is at a sad disadvantage. I noticed
her a few minutes ago at the top of the iron staircase, and said to
myself that she would have just time enough to come down, for there
was an isthmus of sand some twenty feet wide as yet to be obliterated
by the crawling tide. A quickly-tripping foot would have accomplished
it, but the fair-fat-and-forty lady occupied one whole minute in
coming down. Now that she has reached the bottom step there is a wide
wash of sea between her and the mainland, and she raises her hands in
horror. How is she to get over? There is no boat in sight. Shall
she wade? There is a nervous motion of her fat white hands in the
direction of her gaiters, but she hesitates. The woman who hesitates
is lost: the water grows deeper and deeper every instant; in ten
minutes it will be over her head. A bathing-machine boy comes trotting
his horse through the water, and, backing up by the rock on which the
distressed lady stands, bids her get on. Get on the back of a horrid
bathing-horse! behind the back of a horrid boy! Had she been a
sylph the prospect would have been most untempting, but a
two-hundred-and-fifty-pounder! Nevertheless, the unhappy fair one
begins to prepare for the sacrifice with grief and consternation in
her face. "How can I do it?" her trembling lips whisper, and she looks
about her on the rocks as if to say, "Oh, is there _no_ other way out
of this wretched predicament?" The boy, as he sits astride, is
getting his feet wet by this time: the horse will have to swim for it
presently. Still she hesitates, and throws a shrinking glance over the
vast audience gathered on the sands silently attentive--the band, the
organ-grinder and the balladist all breathlessly awaiting the issue,
no doubt feeling that it would be mockery to indulge in music at such
a moment. Suddenly a bare-headed and shirt-sleeved man is seen to dash
through the water, regardless of danger and of wet trousers, who,
seizing the fat lady round the knees in spite of her screams, dumps
her on the horse's back all in a heap. Saved! saved! Such a giggling
(for joy) has seldom been seen to shake a large assemblage. The
emotion caused by the spectacle of beauty in distress is no doubt a
pain to every masculine mind not hopelessly vitiated by the cynical
tendencies of the age; but the pain produced by the emotion of mirth
at seeing a fellow-creature at a ridiculous disadvantage is greater
when you feel bound not to laugh.

There are four strange caves piercing St. Catharine's Island
completely through from side to side. In rough weather the storming
of the sea through these extraordinary tunnels creates a prodigious
uproar. When the weather is still it is possible to take boat and sail
quite through one of them: at low tide you may walk through. Marine
zoological riches abound in these caverns, which have been for many
years a real treasure-house for naturalists. The walls are studded
with innumerable barnacles, dogwinkles and other shells--not dead and
empty, but full of living creatures, requiring only the return of the
tide to awaken them to an active existence. There are simply myriads
of them: a random stone thrown against a wall will smash a whole
colony; and there are besides polyps and sea-anemones and other
strange animals of eccentric habits in unusual abundance. The visitors
to Tenby find great diversion in these and the other caves on the
coast: in fact, the whole coast as far as Milford Haven is one
succession of natural curiosities and antiquities. One cavern bears
the name of Merlin's Cave, and is hallowed by a legend of the
enchanter, who was born at Carmarthen in the next county.

WIRT SIKES.




NOCTURNE.


  There'll come a day when the supremest splendor
    Of earth or sky or sea,
  Whate'er their miracles, sublime or tender,
    Will wake no joy in me.

  There'll come a day when all the aspiration,
    Now with such fervor fraught,
  As lifts to heights of breathless exaltation,
    Will seem a thing of naught.

  There'll come a day when riches, honor, glory,
    Music and song and art,
  Will look like puppets in a wornout story,
    Where each has played his part.

  There'll come a day when human love, the sweetest
    Gift that includes the whole
  Of God's grand giving--sovereignest, completest--
    Shall fail to fill my soul.

  There'll come a day--I will not care how passes
    The cloud across my sight,
  If only, lark-like, from earth's nested grasses,
    I spring to meet its light.

  MARGARET J. PRESTON.




THROUGH WINDING WAYS.

CHAPTER IV.


It was soon decided that I was to set out for The Headlands the first
week in October. I had studied too hard, and was growing so tall and
slight that Harry Dart used to draw caricatures of me, taking me in
sections, he declared, since no ordinary piece of paper would suffice
for a full-length. I was glad of a change, yet felt some sorrow about
it too. I knew nothing of what it was to miss the warm home-life and
the constant companionship which had filled every idle hour with
ever-recurring pleasures. I hated to part from my mother, who had
grown of late so inestimably dear to me; I should miss the boys; what
could make up to me for Georgy? I did not know that I was never again
to enjoy the old Belfield routine, with all my untamed impulses
making the wild, free physical life full of deep and passionate
delight--never again to stand the peer of all my mates, running the
familiar races, playing the familiar games. I did not know what a
changed life awaited me, and I looked forward to my opening vistas of
a bright future with longings inconceivably sweet.

I reached The Headlands one fine day in October a little past noon.
Mr. Raymond's carriage met me at the station, and a grave elderly
servant, who told me his name was Mills, put me inside and assumed
all responsibilities concerning my luggage. I had plenty of time to
remember with regret our homely, pleasant life at Belfield, and recall
Thorpe's words when he heard that I had been invited to The Headlands.
"It will be a glimpse of another life," he had remarked with his usual
air of consummate knowledge of the world. "Even I, who am used to
living on terms of intimacy with men of all ranks and positions, find
it difficult to adjust the balance in that quiet, stately house, where
everything goes on oiled wheels."

"But what makes it hard to get along?" I had inquired with a sort of
awe.

"Oh, I can't describe it," he had returned with a wave of his white
hand, "but you'll soon experience it for yourself."

But as I went on and the great sea opened before my eyes, I quite
forgot my fears in the pleasure of such wide horizons, such
magnificent scenery. The ocean was here in all its grandeur, yet there
was no bleakness or bareness in these rock-bound shores, softly veiled
in the haze of the October afternoon. The voices of the breakers
greeted me as something vaguely familiar: I seemed to have been
listening for them all my life. In such joys as I felt that day eyes
and ears do but little--imagination works most wonders.

I had not noticed, so raptly was I watching the fleeting tints of
opal, steel and blue which chased each other along the smooth slow
waves, that we had entered enclosed grounds, and when the carriage
stopped suddenly before a wide, pillared portico I was wholly taken by
surprise. Mills opened the carriage-door, and I got down with a blank,
dreamy feeling, and followed him up the steps through the wide portal
and along the hall. He ushered me into the library, and left me while
he went to announce my arrival.

I sat perfectly still in the lofty Gothic room. It was lined with
books except on the west side, where were long oriel windows of
stained glass, with figures of saints glorious in blue and gold and
crimson and purple, with aureoles of wonderful splendor above their
beautiful heads. The floor was of inlaid woods polished until it
shone, and over it was laid a Persian carpet thick and soft as moss.
The chimney-piece was of wonderful beauty, and extended into the room,
leaving a sort of alcove on each side, and a low fire was burning in a
quaintly-designed grate. Over the mantel hung a large picture which I
did not know, but which made my heart beat as I looked: it was a copy
of the Sistine Madonna. In front of the fire was an easy-chair piled
with cushions, and beside it a low stool, while on either hand were
painted screens: on one the field of brilliant azure was strewn with
flowers of dazzling hues; the other was crossed by a flight of birds
of gorgeous plumage.

I had looked at everything, had taken in every surprise of beautiful
form and color: then my eyes were lifted again to the windows, and I
was gazing at the meek saints with their shining raiment and radiant
hair when I was suddenly recalled to a recollection of where I was and
why I was there. A hand pushed aside the velvet curtain which hung
across the doorway--a child's hand--and then a little girl entered,
followed by a greyhound as tall as herself. I rose and stood waiting
while she advanced, the same sunshine which transfigured the saints in
the windows playing over her white dress in brilliant rainbow tints.

She was a very little girl, yet her large, serious dark eyes and her
lithe way of carrying her slim height impressed me with a sort of awe
which I might not have felt for a grown woman. When she neared me she
stood perfectly still, regarding me silently with a deliberate glance.
She was very pale, with a complexion like the inner leaves of a white
rose, but her eyes lent fire to a face otherwise proud and cold. Her
hair had evidently been cut short, and curled close to her head in
loose brown curls. When she had fairly taken me in she held out her
hand. "How do you do?" she asked in a clear, deliberate voice. "I am
very glad to see you."

"Did you expect me?" I inquired shyly.

"Of course we did," she answered with some imperiousness, "or we
should not have sent the carriage and servants to meet you."

Then we were both silent again, and went on mentally making up our
minds concerning each other.

"Yes," she said presently, putting her hand into mine again, "you look
just as I thought you did. I asked papa: he said you had brown hair
and gray eyes, and that you were good-looking when you smiled. And am
I like what you expected to see?"

I did not know, I told her. In fact, although I had heard much and
thought some about Helen, she had hitherto possessed no personality
for me except as Mr. Floyd's little girl. And now she impressed me
differently from any person I had ever seen before, and if I had
formed any previous conceptions, they all fled. She seemed, I will
confess, a haughty, aristocratic little creature, with her slight form
and somewhat imperious look, her deliberate, commanding voice and
intense eyes: still, I liked her at once. Mr. Floyd had begged me to
be kind to her, and it seemed easy for me to cherish and protect
her: she appeared to need being taken care of with both strength and
tenderness, for it was such a fragile little hand I held, and, with
all its beauty, such a wan little face I looked upon.

"I hope you will like me, Helen," said I bluntly, "for your father
wants you to enjoy my visit."

She smiled for the first time. "I like you very much already," she
said in the same distinct, melancholy voice; and without more words
she put up her little face to mine and kissed me softly on my lips. I
was unused to caresses, and my cheeks burned; but I followed her, at
her request, to the back lawn, where Mr. Raymond was waiting to see
me.

"Grandfather is not strong," she explained, "and we save him all the
steps we can. It is so sad to be old! Have you a grandfather?"

"No," I returned: "there is nobody in our family but mother and me."

"And I have got grandpa and papa too," said she thoughtfully. "Only
papa is so busy: he is never here but a week at a time."

We had passed through the hall, crossed the rear piazza and
descended the steps, and were advancing along the grassplat toward a
summer-house which faced the sea. I could now for the first time gain
an idea of the extent and grandeur of the place. The house towered
above us solemnly with its towers, pillared arches, cornices and
pediments, while, beyond, the glass roofs of numberless greenhouses
lifted their domes to the warm afternoon sun. All around the lawn
stood lofty trees, their foliage glorious with crimson, russet and
gold, and their shadows crept stealthily toward us as if they were
alive. And beyond house, lawns, gardens and tree-lined avenues was
a pine wood which extended its solemn verdure all round the place,
enclosing it almost to the edge of the bluff. All this on the right
hand: on the left the mysterious sea, whose music filled the fair
sunshiny world we two children were traversing hand in hand.

"There is grandpa," exclaimed Helen as we neared the summer-house;
and I saw an old man sitting in an arm-chair in the sunshine, looking
eagerly toward us as if in anxious expectation.

"You were gone a long time, Helen," he called out peevishly.

"Oh no, dear," she replied soothingly. "Here is Floyd, grandpa."

He had looked, when I first saw him from a distance, like a very old
man, but when I was shaking hands with him I was surprised to discover
that his face had little appearance of age. Even his thin dark hair
was but sprinkled with gray at the curly ends on the temples: his
eyebrows were a black silky thread, his eyes dark and full of a
peculiar glitter. His features were finely formed and feminine in
their delicacy, but the expression of his face was marred by the
restlessness of his eyes, and made almost pathetic by the dejected,
melancholy lines about his thin scarlet lips.

He shook hands with me gracefully, and made inquiries about my
journey, then sank back into his chair listlessly, and allowed Helen
to pull the tiger-skin which formed his lap-robe over his knees.
There was a peculiar feebleness about his whole attitude as he
sat--something almost abased in the sinking of his chin upon his
breast. It was hard for me to realize that he was the owner of all
this magnificence, and, dressed although he was with faultless
elegance, and although luxurious appurtenances filled the
summer-house, waiting for his momentary convenience, I was certain
that his great wealth brought him no pleasure, and that, except for
his little grandchild, he was comfortless in the world. He was full of
complaints toward her. He was sure, he said, that now when I had come
she would have no thought of him; that taking care of an old man was a
dreary and thankless task; that only the young could be beloved by the
young. And her way of listening and answering made me suspect that she
was but too used to such querulousness. I was perhaps too young to
understand mainsprings of action, yet nevertheless I seemed to know at
once that her calm, mature manner and precocious imperiousness were
the result of his weakness and wavering, of his selfish and morbid
doubts.

"You are older than I thought," Mr. Raymond said to me, regarding
me for the first time with languid curiosity. "I expected to see a
velvet-coated little fellow of Helen's size. What is your age, my
boy?"

I told him I should be fifteen the next spring, counting, as most
young people do, by the milestone ahead of me, instead of the one I
had passed.

"Oh, that is quite an age," said he with an air of relief. "Do not
expect to make a playmate of Mr. Floyd Randolph, Helen: he is quite
too old to care for a mere child like yourself."

"He is not nearly as old as papa." returned Helen quickly, "and papa
will play with me all day long."

"Yes, yes," said Mr. Raymond, sinking back among his cushions and
tiger-skins, "all the world can play but me. I must be content to sit
outside the joy and the sunshine. I have lived too long. Only the
young, bright people of the world are welcome even to my own little
grandchild."

Helen threw her arm about his neck and stroked his cheek with her slim
hand. "You know, grandpa," she said simply, "that I do not care for
play, and I love our quiet times together; but you forget what Dr.
Sharpe says--that I must run about out of doors and be as merry as I
can, or else--"

He stopped her with a quick, shuddering gesture. "Oh no," said he, "I
do not forget. Do not make me out worse than I am to Floyd, Helen." He
rang a hand-bell on the table by his side, and began feebly to adjust
the wrappings about his shoulders.--"I will go in, Frederick," he
murmured to the servant, who advanced at once as if he had been
waiting close by--"I will go in and sit by the fire.--Helen, you must
show Floyd the place.--There are greenhouses, and the stables are
worth seeing too," he added to me apologetically. "I hear that
Robinson has some rare fowls, and Helen has dogs of all kinds, and a
few deer. It will do her good to go about, you know." He broke off
suddenly, a spasm crossing his face, and without more words he turned
abruptly to his valet, took his arm and walked feebly toward the
house.

We stood together looking after him--I a little shy and perplexed in
my new position, Helen thoughtful and melancholy.

"Poor grandpa!" she said presently with a sigh: "he has only me, you
know, Floyd. He has nothing else in the whole wide world, and it
worries him to think that he cannot be with me always, that he
cannot--"

She broke off, and the small face twitched as if she were about to
cry, but she controlled herself.

The splendid house, with its gleaming windows and stately pillars, the
wide grounds, the air of quiet magnificence which reigned over the
whole place, had so much impressed me that I could not resist uttering
an exclamation at her words. She spoke of Mr. Raymond as having
nothing in the wide world but herself, yet he was rich enough to be
master of what appeared to me the pomp of kings; and I told her so.

She regarded me curiously. "Is grandpa rich?" she asked. "He says
sometimes that the greenhouses cost so much money that they will send
him to the poorhouse. I do not think grandpa can be rich. But if he
were rich," she cried out indignantly, "that makes no difference: he
has nothing but me--nothing to care about. There was poor grandmamma:
she died--oh so long ago!--and my uncles died when they were little
boys not so old as I. And mamma--she stayed the longest: then she
died. No, grandpa has nothing left but me."

"Your father too: he has only you. I wonder you do not live with your
father, Helen."

She shook her head. "Oh, you don't know," she returned. "I couldn't
leave grandpa. Oh, Floyd, if you knew how it hurts me to tell papa
that I must stay here! He does not understand. He will say, 'I want my
little girl: you can't guess how badly I want my little girl.'" She
finished with a great sob which shook her from head to foot. I pitied
her very much, and I could easily comprehend that she was too delicate
still to be allowed to have any sort of trouble. So I asked her to go
down to the shore with me, and while we went I told her all the funny
things I could remember until I made her laugh. She was quick and
sympathetic; and her spirit was so strong, yet so repressed, that
the moment she was really glad it seemed to have the exuberance of a
bird's joy at freedom after imprisonment.

I have reason, beyond that of mere admiration for its admirable
picturesqueness, to remember and note down the form of the shore at
The Headlands. The house stood on the highest part of the promontory,
and there was a gradual descent to the end of the bluff, which
terminated in a line of black rocks, some of which were firmly
embedded in the soil, while others lay piled above each other as they
had been tossed by some horrible convulsion of the sea. In one place
there was a perpendicular precipice of eighty feet, washed by the
waves at its base; but the beach was easily accessible from every
other point, although in some places the descent needed sure feet and
agile limbs. But I had always been the best climber in Belfield, and I
ran up and down the rocks now with the ease of a monkey, until Helen
begged me not to terrify her by any new exploits. Under the frowning
citadel of rocks the beach was particularly fine, well pebbled below
watermark and above a strip of shining sand. The tide was coming
in with a strong dull roar, and every wave broke on the shore with
curling cataracts of foam and a voice like thunder. It was hard for me
to realize that above us on the headland the mild October sunshine was
gilding and reddening the trees, for here we were in shadow, and the
cry of storm and the din of tempest were in our ears. Yet beyond the
bar opaline tints were playing along the sunlit sea, and the luminous,
shifting-hued swell of crested waves merged into the iridescent sky.
There was a secret and a mystery about the scene to me. I could not
understand its influence upon me, and felt under a spell as I gazed at
the distant white sails and listened to the roar of the waves as if I
could never hear it enough.

After Helen had shown me all the strange, beautiful places of the
beach, I helped her up the precipitous bank, where steps had been
carefully cut in the rock or laid upon the crumbling sods. She took me
to the stables, and I saw the horses, her pony and the blooded colt in
training for her: her dogs had followed us about, leaping and fawning
upon her and smelling suspiciously at me. Mr. Raymond disliked
animals, and it was to the stables or the gardener's cottage that the
child came to pet her hounds, her sheep-dog and her snowy Pomeranian:
not even Beppo, the Italian greyhound, was domesticated at the house.
Some shy deer peered out at us from their paddock, and a doe, less
timid than the rest, approached us and gave me a good look out of
her meek, beautiful eyes. Gold and silver pheasants lurked in the
shrubberies, and peacocks spread their tails and paraded before us on
the greensward. Everything seemed to be Helen's, and not a flower that
bloomed or a bird that flew but she gave it an ample tenderness.

We did not talk much, but stood together hand in hand, I gazing with
ardent delight and curiosity at all these beautiful expressions of
life which filled the place.

"Do you like it?" she inquired anxiously from time to time, and when
I answered her gravely that I liked it, she would smile a contented
little smile. She asked me if I rode, and carefully selected the
horse she considered suitable for me, and gave the groom orders
about exercising him regularly. The man took her instructions with
a respectful air: she was evidently mistress of the place, and the
centurion in the Gospel had not his servants better under his command
than had she. It was a quaint sight to see the child knitting her
brows over some complaint of Robinson's against McGill the gardener:
she settled it promptly with but half a dozen words. She had energy
enough and to spare for her duties, but she had nothing of that eager
bubbling up of light thoughts and bright hopes which other children
know and use in endless chatter and playful gambollings, like puppies
and kittens and other happy young things. There was always shrewd
purpose behind her few words, and she seemed always on her guard,
always ready to act promptly and with decision.

"Why don't you send those men to Mr. Raymond?" I burst out finally.
"You ought not to be bothered. What do you know about such things?"

"I know all about them," she returned gravely. "I never let anybody
trouble poor grandpapa."

"My mother would not let anything trouble me if she could help it, yet
I am a boy and almost fifteen years old."

She looked at me wistfully and smiled her peculiar indefinable smile,
then put her hand in mine, and we went toward the house together. Just
as night fell dinner-time came. I had gone to my room to dress at five
o'clock, but finding that all my windows looked out upon the water,
I had forgotten everything else in watching the sea, which took hue
after hue as the sun sank, growing black and turbid as it settled into
a bank of gray cloud, then, when the last beams reddened every rift,
lighting up into a brief splendor of crimson and gold, absorbing all
the glory of the firmament. I felt rather homesick and dreary. I knew
that in the dusky streets of Belfield the boys were walking up and
down beneath the russet elms, wondering about me while they talked. I
knew that my mother was sitting in the bay-window with the light of
the sunset in her face, and that she was longing to have me with her
again. When, finally, I roused myself to dress, and went along the dim
halls and down the great staircase lined with niches where calm-faced
statues stood regarding me with a fixed and solemn air, I was quite
dull and dreary, and needed all the cheerful influences of the warmed
and lighted rooms to brighten me up.

At dinner Mr. Raymond seemed more what I had expected him to be than
I had found him at first sight. He was dressed with scrupulous
propriety, and wore a ceremonious and precise air which better
accorded with his position as master of the house. He talked well, and
asked me many questions about our life in Belfield, made inquiries
about George Lenox, and was interested when I told him about Georgina.
And about Georgina I found myself presently talking with a freedom
which amazed myself, for my habits were reserved, and of all that I
felt and thought about Georgy I had never yet said anything except
to my mother. But in this beautiful house, which seemed so fitting a
place for my lovely princess, and which was of late the object of her
dreams, I felt moved to be her ambassador and to plead her cause as
well as I might. I spoke not only of her beauty and her cleverness,
but of the drawbacks to her success in life. I anticipated criticism,
and disarmed it. "Oh, Helen!" I burst out at length, "you would love
her so dearly--I am sure you would!"

Helen's eyes were shining, and her color came and went. "Oh, grandpa,"
said she softly, "why may I not ask her to come here? Floyd will like
it, and I--"

She could not finish, she was so glad and excited, and she ran around
the table and laid her cheek against Mr. Raymond's shoulder in mute
entreaty.

"Oh, do whatever you please," rejoined the old gentleman impatiently:
"you know very well that you must have your own way in everything."

The glad little face fell at once, and she went back to her chair
slowly and climbed into it. It was a high-backed, crimson velvet
chair, with a footstool for the child's feet to rest upon. She looked
very slight and young as she sat there, her baby face thrown into
clear outline and startling pallor by the ruby-colored cushions. She
filled the place well, however, helping to the soup and fish, and even
the meats after Mills had carved them at the sideboard. I noticed too,
with some surprise, that the decanter of sherry stood at her elbow,
and was not passed, but that she herself poured out Mr. Raymond's
glass of wine, and once replenished it. He sent it to her to be filled
for the third time, but she shook her head.

"No, no, grandpa," she said with a queer little smile: "you have had
two already."

He looked angry, and affirmed that she had given him but one glass,
appealing to Mills, who corroborated the words of his young mistress.
Helen said no more, but gave the decanter to the butler, who took it
away, and I heard him lock the door of the wine-closet and saw him
drop the key in his pocket. Then, presently, when coffee came on,
Helen and I went into the library, and left Mr. Raymond alone, with
his easy-chair turned toward the fire. I knew that something in the
house was wrong, and experienced a vague humiliation out of sympathy
for Helen, but what my fears were I did not name to myself.

"Promise me," said she, clasping my hand suddenly--"promise me to say
nothing to papa. Remember that grandpa is very old, and that he has
nothing in the world but me."

I gave the promise eagerly, more to avoid the subject than because I
understood as to what I was to be silent and why the subject should be
interdicted.

"You see," said she, her clear eyes meeting mine with their peculiarly
wistful, melancholy gaze, "this is why I cannot go away. Papa thinks I
do not love him: he does not know that it would not be safe for me to
leave grandpa all alone. If papa did know--"

"You ought to tell your papa everything," I said gravely.

"I wish I could," she cried in a trembling voice. "But I can't. He
would not let me stay here, and I could not go away. You must never
tell papa, Floyd--never!"

I said I would not tell with the air of one who never discloses a
secret; and she believed in me, and we were soon bright and happy
again, and wrote a letter to Georgy Lenox inviting her to The
Headlands on a visit.

With all his faults and weaknesses, I soon found there were good and
lovable traits in Mr. Raymond. He had been in early life a successful
merchant, and the habit of controlling widespread interests had given
him a broad and sympathetic insight into men and their ideas. He
possessed a graceful and comprehensive culture, and had embodied his
conceptions of the fitness of things in the arrangement of his home,
making it beautiful in all ways. He was an old man now, yet had not
lost the thirst for knowledge, and could talk, when inspiration was
upon him, generously and eloquently. He had been a part of the busy
great world; he understood society and social ways: all these talents
and acquirements made him a pleasant old gentleman when at his best,
but it needed only a touch of suspicion or jealousy to put him at his
worst. It was easy enough to see that Helen did not exaggerate when
she told me he had nothing to care for but herself; and his care for
her was so mixed with morbid fears that he was not first in her heart,
so embittered by a distrust of her love for her father, that she could
gain small comfort from all his overweening devotion and pride.

The child and I were constantly together in those October days. I do
not think it would have been so but for the fact that Mr. Floyd wrote
daily concise and peremptory orders that Helen was to be out of doors
from morning till night, and that Dr. Sharpe, a brisk, keen-eyed old
gentleman, came every morning at breakfast-time to feel the little
girl's pulse, order her meals and command Mr. Raymond to let her have
all the play she could get before the cold weather came.

"You see," Helen would explain to me as we tramped the meadows and the
uplands gorgeous with every mellow hue of autumn's glorious time--"you
see, Floyd, I was going to die in September when papa came. Oh, I felt
so tired I wanted just to go to sleep. But papa came, took me in his
arms and held me there. Whenever I woke up, there he was, his strong
arms holding me tight. He wouldn't let me go, you know, so I couldn't
die. I couldn't have lived for grandpa: I knew that he would die too,
and that perhaps it would all be best."

"But now you are getting strong," I said: "your cheeks are quite rosy
now."

"Oh yes," she answered. "I like to live now. I love you so dearly,
Floyd, and I have such good times."

I loved her dearly too, after a boy's fashion. It was easy for me to
talk to her, and I told her many things that lay near my heart and far
from my tongue--much about my mother and my worship of her--about our
home and its surroundings--about my father and my brother Frank, and
my grief when they died. I had never expected to tell any one these
memories, but I told them all to Helen.

One day we came in a little later than usual. We had carried our
luncheon down to the beach, and had eaten it there: we had never been
quite so happy together before, for everything had conspired to make
our enjoyment perfect. We had made up stories about the people on
board the ships that went up and down in the offing; strange and
beautiful things had looked at us from out the sea; a fisherman had
offered us some oysters as he coasted about the bar in his boat, and I
had bought some and opened them for Helen with my knife, every blade
of which I broke in the effort. Altogether, we had had a blissful
experience.

But as, upon returning, we neared the house, Mills met us on the
terrace with a grave face. "You'd better go to your grandfather, Miss
Floyd," said he--"you had, indeed, or it will be all over with him.
You must not blame me, miss--it was none of my fault--but some
gentlemen came here for lunch, and he's been a-drinking and a-drinking
ever since they went away, and will not let either decanter go out of
his hand."

Helen's little face had been warm with color, but it froze into pallor
while I looked at her. We entered the door, and she took off her
things slowly and gave them to Mills, smoothing her hair mechanically
with her little trembling hands.

"What shall I do?" I whispered, quaking as much as she. "Let me help
you somehow, Helen."

"You can't," she returned quietly: "nobody can help me."

She bade Mills go about his work: then went into the dining-room and
shut the door.

The man had tears in his eyes as he turned to me as soon as we were
alone. "I declare, Mr. Randolph," said he, "it's enough to break
anybody's heart to see that child a-bowed down at her age with the
care of an old man who can't be kept from drunkenness unless her eye
is on him every minute."

"Is he violent when he's--" I tried to ask the question, but could not
form the horrible word upon my tongue.

Mills did not flinch from facts. "When he's drunk?" he said. "He is
ready to break my head, but he's never anything but tender with her.
She's naught but a baby, but I have seen him, in a regular fury,
just fall a-whimpering when she came in and said, 'Oh, grandpa! oh,
grandpa! I'm so sorry!' Oh, it is a burning shame! And to think that
that splendid gentleman, her father, does not know it!"

"He ought to know it," I cried.

"And if he did, sir," said Mills solemnly, "he would take Miss Floyd
away, and the old gentleman would drink himself to death, and that
would kill the little girl too. It's hard to see the right of it, Mr.
Randolph. But," he added with a complete change of manner, "she would
be vexed to see me stand gossiping here."

He went up stairs with the cloak and hat, smoothing them with his big
hand as if to comfort somebody in need of comfort. I stole across the
hall and stood at the dining-room door, wishing to go in, yet fearing
to vex Helen by my intrusiveness. She opened the door presently, as if
she knew I was there, and beckoned me, and I entered. The old man
sat at the table in his usual place, looking half defiant and half
ashamed. She had removed both decanters and glasses to the sideboard,
and stood by him with her arm about his neck, urging him to go into
the library, kissing him now and then softly on the forehead.

"What do you think, Floyd," he said to me in a thick, unnatural
voice--"what do you think of the way my only grandchild treats me? She
despises me."

"No, no, grandpa! I love you dearly."

He went on with vehemence: "A few years ago I was living among the
finest ladies and gentlemen in the world: I was admired and sought. I
have been called the most accomplished of hosts, the most perfect of
gentlemen. Look about this house. Where in this entire country will
you find a more liberal patron of the arts than I? Yet this little
girl treats me like a servant. For a year she has not permitted me to
have even a few friends to dine with me. Because to-day I extended
hospitality to half a dozen gentlemen who drove over from the Point,
she fumes at me: she treats me as if I had committed a deadly sin.--By
and by, Miss Floyd, you can have it all your own way here: I shall be
dead."

She never flinched, nor did her face change as he glared at her, but
she went on smoothing his hair and softly putting her lips to his
temples. "Dear grandpa," said she, "come into the library now. It is
getting late, and Mills wants to set the table for dinner."

"Very well," he exclaimed with a sort of petulant dignity, and,
pushing back his chair, half rose. Helen gave me a swift glance, and
with our united strength we barely kept him from falling on his face.
He staggered to his feet, looking at us angrily, and not releasing
our hold we steadied him into the library and seated him in the great
chair before the fire. He sank down with some inaudible exclamation
not unlike a groan, and in five minutes he had fallen asleep with loud
breathings. Helen rang the bell and told Mills to send for Dr. Sharpe,
then came back and drew two low seats opposite the sleeper, and we sat
down together hand in hand. She was as pale as death, and her great
eyes dilated as she gazed steadily at her grandfather. From time
to time she felt his pulse and looked with painful scrutiny at the
temples and forehead, which grew every moment more and more crimson.
The half hour before the doctor came appeared to me endless. Inside it
was almost dark but for the firelight, and outside the twilight glooms
slowly gathered: a storm was coming on, and the waves bellowed against
the rocks. Mills lit the candles and drew the curtains, but could
not shut out the roar of the angry sea. I could see that Helen was
miserably anxious, but she said nothing, only sighed and set her lips
tight against each other, and seemed to listen. Presently we could
hear the gravel crunched under a horse's hoofs outside, then the sound
of wheels, and in another moment Dr. Sharpe came in.

"How is this?" said he without any salutation. "Somebody to lunch, eh?
---- luncheons! Where were you, Miss Chicken?"

"I am so sorry!" she faltered painfully. "But I was playing down on
the beach, and I did not know. You told me to play about out of doors,
doctor--you know you did," she added deprecatingly.

"Of course I told you to play about out of doors. You need it bad
enough, God knows! Now run away, both of you."

"Is there any danger?" she whispered.

"Not a bit," said Dr. Sharpe, adding, under his breath, "A good thing
for her if there were.--Run away, I say," he said, hustling us both
out of the door, "and send Mills and Frederick here."

We were shut away from the dim luxurious library with its blazing
fire, and the old man asleep before it, but we did not feel free to
move, and stood awed and speechless outside, listening and waiting.
Helen, who had been so brave, gave way now: her face was piteously
convulsed and the tears streamed down her cheeks. I made clumsy
attempts to soothe her, and finally took her in my arms and carried
her into the great lighted drawing-room and laid her on the sofa. She
uttered nothing of her impotent childish despair, but I could read
well enough her humiliation and her shame. Mills came in presently and
whispered to me that dinner was ready. She heard him and sprang up
with the air of a baby princess. "I will come to dinner in five
minutes, Mills," said she imperiously: then, when she met the honest
sympathy of his glance, she ran up to him and thrust her little slim
hand into his. "I trust you, Mills," she murmured, her lips quivering
again, "but you must never let papa know and never let the servants
suspect." And presently, with the outward indifference of a woman
of the world, the child took her place at table and entertained me
through dinner with an account of what we should do for Georgy Lenox.


CHAPTER V.


For Georgy was coming next day, and in spite of my unhappiness on
Helen's account I woke up the following morning with my pulses all
astir with joy. It would be something for me to have her here, away
from her mother, who always frowned upon me--away from Jack, whose
claim upon her time and attention made mine appear presumptuous and
intrusive--away from Harry Dart, with his teasing jokes, his wholesale
contempt for any weakness or romantic feeling. I had never declared to
myself that I was in love with Georgina, nor had I formed my wishes
to my own heart in distinct thoughts. Still, young although I was, I
should hardly dare to write down here how far above every other idea
and object on earth Georgina appeared to me. I never thought of her
then, I never looked upon her, without the blood thickening around my
heart as if I stood face to face with Fate: my every impulse toward
the future was blended with my desire to be something to her. I had
not dared to dream then that she could be anything to me.

Before I was out of bed that morning, Frederick, Mr. Raymond's valet,
came to me with the request that I should go to his master's room
before I went down stairs. It was in the wing, and the third chamber
of a handsome suite comprising study, dressing-room and bedroom.
It was hung and curtained with red; a wood-fire was burning on the
hearth; the chairs were covered with red; even the silken coverlet of
the bed was red, and the only place where living, brilliant color was
not seemed to be the pale shrunken face on the pillow, a little paler
and more delicate than usual: the hands, too, clutching each other on
the red blanket, had a look of languor and waste.

"Good-morning, Floyd," Mr. Raymond said, and then dismissed Frederick.

"But you ought not to talk, sir," expostulated the valet, "until you
have had your breakfast."

The sick man made a gesture for him to leave the room, watched him go
out, and then fastened his piercing black eyes on me and looked at me
long and fixedly. "You saw me yesterday?" said he at last, breaking
the silence.

I nodded, finding it a difficult task to speak.

"Are you a babbling child?" said he with considerable force and
earnestness, "or have you enough of a man's knowledge to have learned
to respect the infirmities of other men?"

"I tell no one's secrets, sir: they are not mine to tell."

He quite broke down, and lay there before me strangling with sobs and
cries. "Should Mr. Floyd know," he murmured, "should Mr. Floyd even
guess, that I am the wretched wreck of a man that I am, he would not
let Helen stay with me another moment. He would extenuate, he would
pity, nothing: he does not know what it is for a man like me, once
proud, witty, gay, to bear seclusion and depression and decay. I long
at times for some of the inspiration of my youth: it comes with a
terrible penalty."

I could believe it, for his face expressed such abasement and despair
as I had never dreamed of.

"I know," he continued, his voice broken and husky, "that I shadow
Helen's life. I know that if I had died last night she would be a
luckier girl to-day than she is now. But I sha'n't last long, Floyd.
Put your finger on my pulse."

I did so, and was obliged to grope for the uncertain, slow beating at
his wrist. It seemed as if so little life was there it might easily
flicker and go out at any moment.

"I may die at any time," said he, putting my unspoken thought into
words. "Dr. Sharpe tells me not to count on the morrow. What cruelty
it would be, then, to deprive me of my grandchild! What could I do
without her? What would become of me, living alone, with no company
but the gibbering shapes mocking at me out of the corners?" He cowered
all in a heap and looked up at me with clasped hands. "Let her stay,"
he went on imploringly. "It is only for a little while, and then
everything will be hers--this house and these grounds, my house in New
York and blocks of stores, all my pictures, my statues, my books.
Why, I tell you, Floyd, I am worth more than a million of dollars in
invested property that brings me in a return of ten per cent. It is
all for her. I save half my income every year to buy new mortgages
and stocks, that she may be the richer. I think," he exclaimed with a
sudden burst of feeling, "that such wealth as I shall give her might
atone for a great deal. Remember, Floyd, it is only a little while
that I shall burden her: let her stay."

He was pleading with me as if I were the arbiter of his fate. He had
grasped my arm, and his glittering eyes were fastened on me with the
intensity of despair in their expression.

"Why, Mr. Raymond," said I gently, "I have nothing to do with Helen's
going or staying. If you fear that I shall inform Mr. Floyd about
what--what happened yesterday, you do me injustice. I shall tell him
nothing. I have no right to say a word about anything that takes place
in your house."

"You are a good boy," said Mr. Raymond, with an expression of relief
relaxing his convulsed features. "I do not wonder that James loves you
as his own son--that it is the wish of his heart that you should grow
up with Helen, learn to love her, and marry her at last."

I listened doubtfully: it did not occur to me that his words had
any foundation in fact; yet, all the same, the newly-suggested idea
burdened me. "I think you are mistaken," said I gently. "Nothing of
that kind could ever possibly happen."

"Not for years--not until I am dead," returned Mr. Raymond peevishly.
"It was nothing--nothing at all. All that occurred I will tell you,
since I was foolish enough to speak of it in the first instance. James
said he wanted Helen to be much with you. 'You know how those childish
intimacies end,' I replied to him--'in deep attachment and desire for
marriage.'--'I ask nothing better for Helen,' James exclaimed. 'She
will grow up like other girls, and love, and finally become a wife;
and if she became Floyd's wife I should have no fears for her.'" Mr.
Raymond's eyes met mine. "You will never tell Mr. Floyd I spoke of
this to you," he said under his breath. "I am not quite myself this
morning, or I should not have suggested a thought of it to you."

I was very sure that I should never mention it, for I found the idea
of my marrying Helen so painfully irksome that it went with me all the
day, casting a shadow across our intercourse. I told myself over and
over that the idea was absurd--that such a thing could never, never
come to pass. She was so mere a child. I studied her face with its
baby contours, where nothing showed the dawn of womanhood yet except
the great melancholy eyes; I took her hand in mine, where it lay like
a snowflake on my brown palm; and I laughed aloud at the grotesqueness
of the fancy that I should ever put a ring on that childish finger.

"Why do you laugh?" she asked me wonderingly.

"To think," I rejoined, "how funny it is to remember one day you will
be grown up and have rings upon your fingers."

"Is that funny?" she asked. "Of course, if I live I shall grow up and
be a woman. My mamma was married when she was only seventeen, and in
seven years I shall be seventeen." I dropped her hand as if it had
stung me. "I have all mamma's rings," she went on: "I have a drawerful
of trinkets that mamma used to wear. When Georgy Lenox comes I shall
give her a locket and a chain that are so very, very pretty they will
be just right for her. Tell me more about her, Floyd."

It was easy enough for me to grow eloquent in talking of Georgina, and
Helen was as anxious to hear as I to tell. The little girl had had few
friends of her own sex and age: every summer had brought the New
York and Boston Raymonds to The Headlands, and when the neighboring
watering-place was in its season numerous flounced and gloved little
misses had been introduced to the shy, quaint child, who felt strange
and dreary among them all. In fact, the little heiress's position, so
unique in every respect, had isolated her from the joys of commonplace
childhood, and she found more companionship in her dumb pets, in the
sumptuous silence of the blossoming gardens, in the voices of the
shore, than among girls of her own age with their chatter about
their teachers or governesses, their dancing-steps and their games.
Nevertheless, she was both ardent and affectionate, and ready to love
all the world; and no sooner had Georgy appeared than she lavished
upon her all the passion of girlish fondness for her own sex which
had hitherto lain dormant within her. Georgy had always been used to
adulation and to lead others by her capricious will and her radiant
smile, and within a day after her coming had established almost a
dangerous supremacy over the child. It was at once fascinating and
disappointing to be under the same roof with Georgy: every morning
when I awoke it seemed a miracle of happiness that I had but to dress
and go out of my room to have a chance of meeting her, of perpetually
recurring smiles and conversation such as I had never enjoyed before
at Belfield. But the reality never bore out the promise of my vague
but delicious reveries. Mr. Raymond at once took an active, almost
virulent, dislike to his young guest, and pointed out her faults to
me with clear and concise words, each one of which pierced me like a
rapier; and the certainty of his condemnation gave me a keen, and at
times almost inspired, vision for her weaknesses.

Nothing could exceed her rapture at being in the beautiful house
which she had so long wished to see, and which she loudly asserted
a thousand times surpassed all her expectations. And she fitted
admirably into her costly surroundings: the sheen of her golden
hair made the dark velvet cushionings and hangings a more beautiful
background than before; she gave expression to the stately, silent
rooms; and what had at first been almost, despite its luxury, a
desert to me, became a fairy land. Little Helen was so burdened with
possessions that it was a pleasure for her to give them away. Still,
I wished that Georgy had not been so willing to accept all that the
lavish generosity of the child prompted her to offer. But Georgy was
no Spartan: she wanted everything that could minister to her comfort.
She was a natural gourmand, hungry for sweets and fruits all day long:
she coveted ornaments, and found Helen's drawer of trinkets almost too
small for her; she liked velvets and furs, silks and plushes, and wore
the child's clothes until Mr. Raymond sent his housekeeper to Boston
to purchase her a complete outfit of her own. But all these faults
I could have pardoned in Georgy, and ascribed them to her faulty
education and false influences at home, had she been grateful to
little Helen.

"She hates Helen for being luckier than herself," Mr. Raymond
affirmed: "she would do her a mischief if she could."

I could not believe that, yet I could see that she loved to torture
the child, whose acute sensibilities made her suffer from the
slightest coldness or suspicion.

"If you really loved me, Helen," Georgy would say, "you would do this
for me;" and sometimes the task would be to slight or openly disobey
Mr. Raymond, to outrage me or to make one of the dumb, loving pets
which filled the place suffer. And if at sight of the child's tears I
remonstrated, I was punished as it was easy enough for Georgy Lenox to
punish me.

She would melt Helen too by drawing a picture of her own poverty and
state of dreary unhappiness beside the good fortune of the heiress,
until the little girl would search through the house to find another
present for her, which she besought her beautiful goddess almost on
her knees to accept. All these traits, which showed that Georgina was
far from perfect, caused me a misery proportionate to my longing to
have her all that was lovely and excellent. It is indeed unfair to
write of faults which are so easy to portray, and to say nothing of
the beauty of feature and charm of manner, which might have been
enough to persuade any one who looked into her face that she was one
of God's own angels. What does beauty mean if it be not the blossoming
of inner perfection into outward loveliness? And Georgina Lenox was
beautiful to every eye. Let every one who reads my story know and feel
that she had the beauty which can stir the coldest blood--the eyes
whose look of entreaty could melt the most implacable resolution--the
smile which could lure, the voice which could make every man follow.


CHAPTER VI.


Mr. Floyd had again entered upon active life in Washington, and his
duties were so absorbing that it was almost impossible for him to find
any opportunity of joining me at The Headlands, as he had promised.
But just as my visit was drawing to an end he came, and kept me on for
the week of his stay. I had become used to the routine of life at Mr.
Raymond's, and had again and again wondered if Mr. Floyd's presence
there would make any difference; but the change in the entire aspect
of the household after the advent of my guardian absolutely startled
me. Mr. Raymond was again master of the house, and little Helen
was left free of all care and responsibility. There seemed a tacit
understanding between Mills and the child and her grandfather that Mr.
Floyd was to gain not the faintest idea of the usual state of things.
Mr. Raymond wore a dignity which was not without its pathetic side: he
no longer touched wine, although a different vintage was offered with
every course, and his selfish, peevish ways seemed entirely forgotten.
Helen had grown steadily stronger every week of my stay, and now that
her father was with her she rallied at once into a happy, careless
state of mind which made her almost as light-hearted a child as one
could wish. She had none of Georgy's gay boisterousness, but her
blitheness of heart seemed like a lambent fire playing over profound
depths of gladness and security.

Mr. Floyd was scarcely well pleased to find Georgy at The Headlands,
and at once observed with solicitude the influence she had gained over
his little girl. Georgy's idea of power was to put her foot on the
neck of her subjects and hold them at her mercy; and Mr. Floyd showed
his displeasure at her course by at once withdrawing Helen almost
entirely from her society. Georgy rebelled defiantly at this; and I
too felt keenly the injustice of leaving her so utterly alone as we
did day after day when Mr. Floyd, Helen and I went riding through the
woods together. Directly after breakfast my guardian and I mounted our
horses, and Helen her pony, and off we started for the hills, where
the keen autumn winds would put color into the little girl's pale
cheeks. Far below us we could see the curving reaches of beach and
promontory, the sparkling fall of the low surf, and in the offing
the white-winged ships bringing all the wonders of the East and the
richness of the tropics to our barren New England shores. What wonder
if I have never forgotten a single incident of those too swiftly
succeeding days? The glow, the enthusiasm, the wild gush of free,
untrammelled enjoyment, were to go from me presently, and to return no
more.

When Mr. Floyd first came he had shaken me roughly by the shoulder,
laughing in my face as he told me he had just come from Belfield,
where he had spent six hours with my mother. I felt ashamed to look
him in the eyes when I remembered my interference, and I began to
debate the question in my own mind whether I had not better yield my
boyish whim of pride and exclusive, domineering affection to this
noble, splendid gentleman, whom I loved better and better every day.

The week appointed for his visit at The Headlands had almost passed.
It was a Thursday morning, and we were to set out early the ensuing
day, when he asked me to walk with him an hour on the bluff, as he had
something to speak to me about. It was a lovely day: the fogs were
rolling off the water, and disclosed a sea of chrysoprase beneath.

"In my old courting-days," began Mr. Floyd at once, "I used to walk
here with Alice. We were engaged six weeks, and looking back
now eleven years the days seem all like this. It was the Indian
summer-time."

I was dumb, but stared into his face, which showed emotion, and
pressed his arm bashfully.

"I was thirty-four when I first met her," he went on, "and she was
just half my age. She was an heiress and I was poor, yet the world
called me no bad match for her. Still, I felt as if I could not marry
a rich woman: I went away, and tried to forget her, but stole back to
the Point, hoping to get one glimpse of her sweet face by stealth.
Then when I saw her I could not go away again, nor did she want me to
go. Mr. Raymond hated me in those days, yet we were so strong against
him that he gave his consent, and we were married on just such a
November day as this. It seems like a dream, Floyd, that I, so long a
lonely man, without a private joy, could ever have been so happy as I
was then. I loved her--the light of her eyes and the white lids that
covered them when I looked at her; the smile on her parted lips; the
way her hair curled away from her temples; the little dimples all over
her hands; her voice, her little ways. And while I loved her like
that, before the first year of my happiness had passed she was dead. I
hope you will never know what that means. That she had left me a child
was nothing to me: I was only a rapturous lover, and had not begun to
long for baby voices and upturned children's faces. When, finally,
I did turn to Helen, it was as you see now: to part her from her
grandfather would be to wrench body from soul."

"Mr. Raymond is a very old man," I suggested.

"He has a surer life than mine: I doubt if anybody would insure mine
at any price."

We were silent. I felt awkward and ashamed: I knew what was in his
thoughts.

"You wise young people!" said he presently, throwing his arm over my
shoulder--"oh, you wise young people!" Then turning me square about,
he looked into my face: "Oh, you foolish, foolish young people!"

I felt foolish indeed--so foolish I could not meet his eyes.

"Why begrudge us a few years of happiness together?" he asked in his
deliberate gentle voice. "Your mother is still young, and so beautiful
that she deserves to shine in a sphere worthy of her. I will say
nothing of my profound and respectful love for her. My love for Alice
was my passionate worship of a singularly charming child: your mother
commands a different feeling. But of that I will say nothing. Think,
Floyd, what a life I can offer her! It seems to me that in marrying me
she will gain much: what can she lose?"

What, indeed, could she lose? My doubt and dread shrank into
insignificant and petty proportions: it seemed to me the noblest fate
for any woman alive to gain the love of this man into whose face I was
looking earnestly. Yet I could find no words to utter, and he went on
as if trying to convince me against my will.

"You do not appear to entertain any aversion for me," he pursued,
smiling, "and in our new relation I will take care that you do not
like me less. You are dear to me now, yet when your mother is my wife
you will be much dearer."

My self-control vanished: my lip trembled. "What does mother say?" I
asked almost in a whisper.

He put his hands on my shoulders, laughing softly: "She says she has a
son whose love and respect she so highly prizes she will do nothing to
forfeit them."

"Does she love you, Mr. Floyd?" I questioned bluntly.

"I think she does--a little," he answered, dropping his eyes. "But,"
he went on more hurriedly, "in such a marriage love is not everything,
Floyd, although it is much. There is sympathy, constant close
companionship: of these both your mother and I have bitterly felt the
need."

"Don't say any more, sir," I cried, humbled to the dust. "When I first
saw what was coming I suppose I thought only of myself: now--"

"Now you think of two other people, and withdraw your opposition. I
confess I can't see how you will be worse off. Come now, give me your
hand, you young rascal! I shall go home with you to-morrow, and--"

"Will it take place at once?" I asked with a pang at my heart.

"What? our marriage? You are hurrying matters charmingly. Mrs.
Randolph has not yet accepted me. But I will confess to you, my boy,
that I shall be more than happy, more than proud, if I can persuade
her to allow me to introduce her to my friends in Washington in
December."

We walked about for more than an hour after, but said no more about
the matter, although it was stirring below every thought and word of
each of us. I felt the weariness of soul which succeeds a struggle,
and my guardian tried, but unsuccessfully, to conceal the elation
which follows victory. Yet subdued and unhappy though I was, haunted
by a sense of terrible loss, I was proud and glad to have contented
him. He talked to me intimately, and discussed my plans for the
future. I was to enter college the next year, and he pointed out
the fact, to which I was not insensible, that our old life at home
would necessarily have been broken up when I left Belfield. He spoke
of my pecuniary means, and frankly informed me that his property
amounted to three hundred thousand dollars, and that this amount he
had divided into thirds--one for my mother, one for Helen and one
for me.

"Oh, sir," I burst out, "you must not be so generous to me."

"And why not? My little girl has too much already: it has always been
one of the discomforts of my life that she is so rich, so raised above
all human wants, that I have had it in my power to do nothing for
her. I have seen poor men buying clothes and shoes for their little
sunburned children, and envied them."

We had been lounging toward the house, and now had reached the
terrace, where we found Mr. Raymond pacing feebly up and down in the
mild sunshine leaning on Frederick's arm. Mr. Floyd stepped forward
and took the valet's place, investing the slight courtesy with the
charm of his grand manner.

"Where is Helen?" asked Mr. Raymond. "I supposed that she was with
you, James."

"I have not seen her since breakfast.--Suppose you look her up, Floyd?
I am afraid she is with Miss Georgy, and in mischief, no doubt.--I
object, sir," Mr. Floyd added to his father-in-law, "to Helen's having
too much of the society of Miss Lenox. She is a pretty little devil
enough, but then I don't like pretty little devils."

"I have written to Mrs. Lenox to recall her," returned Mr. Raymond
stiffly. "She is no favorite of mine. There is a look in her eyes at
times that makes me shudder at the thought of the harm she is pretty
sure to do. Floyd here is her only partisan."

I had already sprung along the terrace, and quickly crossed the lawn
and garden to the rocks. I remembered having seen a blue and a scarlet
jacket going toward the shore during my talk with Mr. Floyd; and, sure
enough, on the rocks I found traces of the girls--a ribbon, the rind
of Georgy's oranges which she was always nibbling, and Helen's book.
Supposing they were on the beach, I descended the stone steps leading
to the sands. There was a faint plashing and lisping of the waves, but
otherwise no sound and no sight but the great rocks and the smooth sea
lustrous and glittering like steel. I had no doubt but that Helen and
Georgy were somewhere near me, and sat down to wait. My mind was full
of thoughts that came and went, bringing clear but swiftly-shifting
pictures of our old life and the new, which rose suddenly fresh and
vivid before me. I could see my mother's face, the color coming and
going like a young girl's, and the movement of her little hands
clasping and unclasping in her lap. I could see her, too, by the side
of Mr. Floyd in a bright, wonderful world of which I knew nothing. For
a moment I felt already parted from her, and the pang of separation
wrenched body from soul. I threw myself face downward on the sand and
declared myself profoundly miserable.

Suddenly I started to my feet. I was vaguely terrified, yet could not
tell what had aroused me from my brooding thoughts. I seemed conscious
of having heard a cry, but so faint and inarticulate as hardly to
differ from the distant note of a sea-bird. But as I ran frantically
along the sands I distinctly heard my name, and knew that the entreaty
was for help.

"I am coming!" I screamed at the top of my voice--"I am coming as fast
as I can." The rocks gave back so many deceitful echoes that I was not
certain from what point the imploring cry came; but I knew every inch
of the beach for a mile up and down, and knew, too, that there was but
one place in which with ordinary prudence there could be the slightest
danger. So with unerring instinct I flew along the wet shingle to
"Raymond's Cliff." At this point the beetling line of rocks which
coiled and frowned along the coast terminated abruptly in precipitous
crags. On one side it was sheer precipice, but on the other the cliff,
exposed both to wind and wave, washed by the rains and gnawed at its
base by ever-advancing and receding tides, had gradually been worn
away in the centre by the constant crumbling of the sandy soil, so as
to form a sort of ravine. It was a dangerous and gloomy place, and
I had received many a warning from Mr. Raymond never to take Helen
there.

"Helen!" I cried--"Helen! if you are here, answer me. I cannot see
you." A gull flew away from the cliff with a scream, and I could hear
no other sound. "Tell me, Helen, if you are here."

I heard a cry from above--almost inaudible it was so spiritless and
faint--yet, gaze as I might toward the top, I could see nothing. I
skirted the main rock and climbed as far as I easily could up the
ravine. Here my attention was arrested by a dot of scarlet against the
grim, bare face of the basalt. Yes, there she was, about forty feet
above me, hanging on to a shelving rock with her little Italian
greyhound in her arms. She was peering down, disclosing a pallid face.
I saw at once that she had hung there until her strength was almost
gone.

"Listen to me, Helen," said I, calmly and very gently, for I had a
ghastly dread that she would fall before my very eyes. "Don't look
down: just keep your eyes fixed on the rock, and hold on tight until I
reach you." She obeyed me. "Now," I went on authoritatively, "drop the
dog--drop him, I say!--Here, Beppo! here!"

She again obeyed me, and the dog scrambled down and fell--scratched
and bruised, no doubt, yet otherwise unhurt--at my feet. "Helen,
answer me one question," said I. "Can you wait until I go round up to
the top and get a rope?"

She gave a little scream of pitiful anguish: I saw her slight figure
sway, and some loose stones came rattling down. "I feel so sick, so
dizzy!" she cried.

"I will climb up, then. Hold on tight for a few minutes more. Keep
perfectly still, and don't look down: you know how well I can climb."

I was a capital climber, and could hold on like a cat where there was
a crevice to fasten my feet or my hands. Still, I was anything but
certain about these hollow, worn sides, which in places were as smooth
as glass. But it had to be done, and done quickly. If the child
fell she was dead or maimed to a certainty. She had crawled in some
unheard-of way down from the top, and must go back the way she had
come; and since I had no time to help her from above, I must go up
to her. A spar had been washed up among the debris upon which I had
mounted, and this helped me up a little way. Then I managed to creep a
trifle farther, hand over hand: whenever I could take breath I called
out to her that it was all right and I should be up in another minute.
The necessity of keeping up her courage endowed me with miraculous
strength, and in a little while I stood beside Helen on the narrow
shelf, and waited for a moment to breathe freely and see what was yet
beyond me. I smiled at her, and she looked steadily into my face, but
said not a word.

"How in the world did you get here, Helen?" I asked.

"I came after Beppo," she returned, her lip trembling.

"How did Beppo get here?"

"Georgy flung him down," cried the child, bursting into tears.
"Perhaps she did not mean to, but she was angry that he would not go
by himself after the stone she flung."

I had looked to the top by this time, and saw at once that the worst
part of the ascent was before me. It had been sheer rock beneath: here
the strata were crumbled, and the interstices filled with earth and
dried vegetation. The angle was much greater than it had been below,
and it was easy to see that even Helen's light footstep had loosened
every fragment it had touched. I gained a foothold above her;
stretched out my hand and drew her up; then another and another. Once
she lost her footing, but I caught the slim figure in my arms and went
on, with her half fainting against my shoulder, her puny strength
quite worn out.

When we were within a few feet of the top I told her to look up. "You
see that we are almost there," I said gently. "Can you do what I tell
you to do? When I raise you place one foot on my shoulder: ... now,
then, take hold of something firmly and clamber up."

My footing was precarious, and in order to lift her up I was obliged
to unfasten my hold of the few scant wisps of withered grass. If she
could but reach the top, I believed I could make a supreme effort to
save myself; and I risked everything.

In an instant she was on the brow of the cliff. She gave a convulsive
cry of joy and relief, and reached out her little hand to me. I almost
stretched out to grasp it; then, remembering that with her slight
weight I might easily drag her back into danger, I took hold of a
little bush: it was dried to the roots, and came out in my hand. My
footing gave way: I slipped down, with nothing to break my fall--not a
shrub, not a fissure in the rocks. The blue sky had been above me, but
that blessed glimpse of azure vanished, and I could see nothing
but the frowning sides of the precipice as I went down, my pace
accelerating every moment. I believed I could gain a hold or footing
on the shelving rock where I had found Helen, but it gave way as I
touched it and slid suddenly down the ravine. I was dizzy and bruised,
but was wondering if Helen would give the alarm--if Georgy would be
sorry. I thought with pity of my mother, who would surely weep for
me. Then I heard Beppo barking joyfully, and I knew that I was at the
bottom of the abyss. I suffered a few seconds of such terrible pain
that I was glad when a sickening sort of quietude settled over me, and
I felt that I must be dying.

ELLEN W. OLNEY.

[TO BE CONTINUED.]




A SEA-SOUND.


  Hush! hush!
    'Tis the voice of the sea to the land,
    As it breaks on the desolate strand,
  With a chime to the strenuous wave of life
    That throbs in the quivering sand.

  Hush! hush!
    Each requiem tone as it dies,
    With a soul that is parting, sighs;
  For the tide rolls back from the pulseless clay
    As the foam in the tempest flies.

  Hush! hush!
    O throb of the restless sea!
    All hearts are attuned to thee--
  All pulses beat with thine ebb and flow
    To the rhyme of Eternity!

JOHN B. TABB.




THE BRITISH SOLDIER.


I allude to the British soldier, more especially, as I lately
observed and admired him at Aldershot, where, just now, he appears
to particular advantage; but at any time during the past
twelvemonth--since England and Russia have stood glaring at each other
across the prostrate body of the expiring yet reviving Turk--this
actually ornamental and potentially useful personage has been
picturesquely, agreeably conspicuous. I say "agreeably," speaking from
my own humble point of view, because I confess to a lively admiration
of the military class. I exclaim, cordially, with Offenbach's Grand
Duchess, "Ah, oui, j'aime les militaires!" Mr. Ruskin has said
somewhere, very naturally, that he could never resign himself to
living in a country in which, as in the United States, there should be
no old castles. Putting aside the old castles, I should say, like Mr.
Ruskin, that life loses a certain indispensable charm in a country
destitute of an apparent standing army. Certainly, the army may be too
apparent, too importunate, too terrible a burden to the state and to
the conscience of the philosophic observer. This is the case, without
a doubt, just now in the bristling empires of the Continent. In
Germany and France, in Russia and Italy, there are many more soldiers
than are needed to make the taxpayer thrifty or the lover of the
picturesque happy. The huge armaments of continental Europe are an
oppressive and sinister spectacle, and I have rarely derived a high
order of entertainment from the sight of even the largest masses of
homesick conscripts. The _chair a canon_--the cannon-meat--as they
aptly term it in French, has always seemed to me dumbly,
appealingly conscious of its destiny. I have seen it in course of
preparation--seen it salted and dressed and packed and labelled, as it
were, for consumption. In that marvellous France, indeed, which bears
all burdens lightly, and whose good spirits and absence of the tragic
_pose_ alone prevent us from calling her constantly heroic, the army
scarcely seems to be the heavy charge that it must be in fact. The
little red-legged soldiers, always present and always moving, are
as thick as the field-flowers in an abundant harvest, and amid the
general brightness and mobility of French life they strike one at
times simply as cheerful tokens of the national exuberance and
fecundity. But in Germany and Italy the national levies impart a
lopsided aspect to society: they seem to drag it under water. They
hang like a millstone round its neck, so that it can't move: it has
to sit still, looking wistfully at the long, forward road which it is
unable to measure.

England, which is fortunate in so many things, is fortunate in her
well-fed mercenaries, who suggest none of the dismal reflections
provoked by the great foreign armies. It is true, of course, that they
fail to suggest some of the inspiring ones. If Germany and France are
burdened, at least they are defended--at least they are armed for
conflict and victory. There seems to be a good deal of doubt as to how
far this is true of the nation which has hitherto been known as the
pre-eminently pugnacious one. Where France and Germany and Russia
count by hundreds, England counts by tens; and it is only, strictly
speaking, on the good old principle that one Englishman can buffet
a dozen foreigners that a very hopeful view of an Anglo-continental
collision can be maintained. This good old principle is far from
having gone out of fashion: you may hear it proclaimed to an inspiring
tune any night in the week in the London music-halls. One summer
evening, in the country, an English gentleman was telling me about his
little boy, a rosy, sturdy, manly child whom I had already admired,
and whom he depicted as an infant Hercules. The surrounding influences
at the moment were picturesque. An ancient lamp was suspended from the
ceiling of the hall; the large door stood open upon a terrace;
and outside the big, dense treetops were faintly stirring in the
starlight. My companion dilated upon the pluck and muscle, the latent
pugnacity, of his dear little son, and told me how bravely already he
doubled his infant fist. There was a kind of Homeric simplicity about
it. From this he proceeded to wider considerations, and observed that
the English child was of necessity the bravest and sturdiest in the
world, for the plain reason that he was the germ of the English man.
What the English man was we of course both knew, but, as I was a
stranger, my friend explained the matter in detail. He was a person
whom, in the ordinary course of human irritation, every one else was
afraid of. Nowhere but in England were such men made--men who could
hit out as soon as think, and knock over persons of inferior race as
you would brush away flies. They were afraid of nothing: the sentiment
of hesitation to inflict a blow under rigidly proper circumstances
was unknown to them. English soldiers and sailors in a row carried
everything before them: foreigners didn't know what to make of such
fellows, and were afraid to touch them. A couple of Englishmen were
a match for a foreign mob. My friend's little boy was made like a
statue: his little arms and legs were quite of the right sort. This
was the greatness of England, and of this there was an infinite
supply. The light, as I say, was dim in the great hall, and the rustle
of the oaks in the park was almost audible. Their murmur seemed
to offer a sympathetic undertone to the honest conversation of my
companion, and I sat there as humble a ministrant to the simple and
beautiful idea of British valor as the occasion could require. I made
the reflection--by which I must justify my anecdote--that the ancient
tradition as to the personal fighting-value of the individual
Englishman flourishes in high as well as in low life, and forms a
common ground of contact between them; with the simple difference
that at the music-halls it is more poetically expressed than in the
country-houses.

I am grossly ignorant of military matters, and hardly know the names
of regiments or the designations of their officers; yet, as I said at
the beginning of these remarks, I am always very much struck by the
sight of a uniform. War is a detestable thing, and I would willingly
see the sword dropped into its scabbard for ever. Only I should plead
that in its sheathed condition the sword should still be allowed to
play a certain part. Actual war is detestable, but there is something
agreeable in possible war; and I have been thankful that I should have
found myself on British soil at a moment when it was resounding to the
tread of regiments. If the British army is small, it has during the
last six months been making the most of itself. The rather dusky
spectacle of British life has been lighted up by the presence in the
foreground of considerable masses of that vivid color which is more
particularly associated with the protection of British interests. The
sunshine has appeared to rest upon scattered clusters of red-coats,
while the background has been enveloped in a sort of chaotic and
fuliginous dimness. The red-coats, according to their number, have
been palpable and definite, though a great many other things have been
inconveniently vague. At the beginning of the year, when Parliament
was opened in the queen's name, the royal speech contained a phrase
which that boisterous organ of the war-party, the _Pall Mall Gazette_,
pronounced "sickening" in its pusillanimity. Her Majesty alluded to
the necessity, in view of the complications in the East, of the
government taking into consideration the making of "preparations for
precaution." This was certainly an ineffective way of expressing a
thirst for Russian blood, but the royal phraseology is never very
felicitous; and the "preparations for precaution" have been extremely
interesting. Indeed, for a person conscious of a desire to look into
what may be called the psychology of politics, I can imagine nothing
more interesting than the general spectacle of the public conduct of
England during the last two years. I have watched it with a good deal
of the same sort of entertainment with which one watches a five-act
drama from a comfortable place in the stalls. There are moments of
discomfort in the course of such a performance: the theatre is hot and
crowded, the situations are too prolonged, the play seems to drag,
some of the actors have no great talent. But the piece, as a whole, is
intensely dramatic, the argument is striking, and you would not for
the world leave your place before the denouement is reached. My own
pleasure all winter, I confess, has been partly marred by a bad
conscience: I have felt a kind of shame at my inability to profit by a
brilliant opportunity to make up my mind. This inability, however, was
extreme, and my regret was not lightened by seeing every one about me
set an admirable example of decision, and even of precision. Every one
about me was either a Russian or a Turk, the Turks, however, being
greatly the more numerous. It appeared necessary to one's self-respect
to assume some foreign personality, and I felt keenly, for a while,
the embarrassment of choice. At last it occurred to me simply that as
an American I might be an Englishman; and the reflection became
afterward very profitable.

When once I had undertaken the part, I played it with what the French
call _conviction_. There are many obvious reasons why the role,
at such a time as this, should accommodate itself to the American
capacity. The feeling of race is strong, and a good American could not
but desire that, with the eyes of Europe fixed upon it, the English
race should make a passable figure. There would be much fatuity in his
saying that at such a moment he deemed it of importance to give it the
support of his own striking attitude, but there is at least a kind of
filial piety in this feeling moved to draw closer to it. To see how
the English race would behave, and to hope devoutly it would behave
well,--this was the occupation of my thoughts. Old England was in a
difficult pass, and all the world was watching her. The good American
feels in all sorts of ways about Old England: the better American he
is, the more acute are his moods, the more lively his variations. He
can be, I think, everything but indifferent; and, for myself, I never
hesitated to let my emotions play all along the scale. In the morning,
over the _Times_, it was extremely difficult to make up one's mind.
The _Times_ seemed very mealy-mouthed--that impression, indeed, it
took no great cleverness to gather--but the dilemma lay between one's
sense of the brutality and cynicism of the usual utterances of the
Turkish party and one's perception of the direful ills which Russian
conquest was so liberally scattering abroad. The brutality of the
Turkish tone, as I sometimes caught an echo of it in the talk of
chance interlocutors, was not such as to quicken that race-feeling
to which I just now alluded. English society is a tremendously
comfortable affair, and the crudity of the sarcasm that I frequently
heard levelled by its fortunate members at the victims of the
fashionable Turk was such as to produce a good deal of resentful
meditation. It was provoking to hear a rosy English gentleman, who
had just been into Leicestershire for a week's hunting, deliver the
opinion that the vulgar Bulgarians had really not been massacred half
enough; and this in spite of the fact that one had long since made the
observation that for a good plain absence of mawkish sentimentality a
certain type of rosy English gentleman is nowhere to be matched.
On the other hand, it was not very comfortable to think of the
measureless misery in which these interesting populations were
actually steeped, and one had to admit that the deliberate invasion of
a country which professed the strongest desire to live in peace with
its invaders was at least a rather striking anomaly. Such a course
could only be justified by the most gratifying results, and brilliant
consequences as yet had not begun to bloom upon the blood-drenched
fields of Bulgaria.

To see this heavy-burdened, slow-moving Old England making up her mind
was an edifying spectacle. It was not over-fanciful to say to one's
self, in spite of the difficulties of the problem and the (in a
certain sense) evenly-balanced scales, that this was a great crisis
in her history, that she stood at the crossing of the ways, and that
according as she put forth her right hand or her left would her
greatness stand or wane. It was possible to imagine that in her huge,
dim, collective consciousness she felt an oppressive sense of moral
responsibility, that she too murmured to herself that she was on
trial, and that, through the mists of bewilderment and the tumult of
party cries, she begged to be enlightened. The sympathetic American
to whom I have alluded may be represented at such an hour as making
a hundred irresponsible reflections and indulging in all sorts of
fantastic visions. If I had not already wandered so far from my theme,
I should like to offer a few instances here. Very often it seemed
natural to care very little whether England went to war with Russia or
not: the interest lay in the moral struggle that was going on within
her own limits. Awkward as this moral struggle made her appear,
perilously as it seemed to have exposed her to the sarcasm of some of
her neighbors--of that compact, cohesive France, for instance, which
even yet cannot easily imagine a great country sacrificing the
substance of "glory" to the shadow of wisdom--this was the most
striking element in the drama into which, as I said just now, the
situation had resolved itself. The Liberal party at the present hour
is broken, disfigured, demoralized, the mere ghost of its former self.
The opposition to the government has been, in many ways, factious and
hypercritical: it has been opposition for opposition's sake, and it
has met, in part, the fate of such immoralities. But a good part of
the cause that it represented appeared at times to be the highest
conscience of a civilized country. The aversion to war, the absence
of defiance, the disposition to treat the emperor of Russia like a
gentleman and a man of his word, the readiness to make concessions, to
be conciliatory, even credulous, to try a great many expedients
before resorting to the showy argument of the sword,--these various
attributes of the peace party offered, of course, ample opportunity to
those scoffers at home and abroad who are always prepared to cry out
that England has sold herself, body and soul, to "Manchester." It was
interesting to attempt to feel what there might be of justice in such
cries, and at the same time feel that this looking at war in the face
and pronouncing it very vile was the mark of a high civilization. It
is but fair to add, though it takes some courage, that I found myself
very frequently of the opinion of the last speaker. If British
interests were in fact endangered by Russian aggression--though, on
the whole, I did not at all believe it--it would be a fine thing to
see the ancient might of this great country reaffirm itself. I did
not at all believe it, as I say; yet at times, I confess, I tried to
believe it, pretended I believed it, for the sake of this inspiring
idea of England's making, like the lady in _Dombey & Son_, "an
effort." There were those who, if one would listen to them, would
persuade one that that sort of thing was quite out of the question;
that England was no longer a fighting power; that her day was over;
and that she was quite incapable of striking a blow for the great
empire she had built up--with a good deal less fighting, really, than
had been given out--by taking happy advantage of weaker states. (These
hollow reasoners were of course invidious foreigners.) To such talk as
this I paid little attention--only just enough to feel it quicken my
desire that this fine nation, so full of private pugnacity and of
public deliberation, might find in circumstances a sudden pretext for
doing something gallant and striking.

Meanwhile I watched the soldiers whenever an opportunity offered.
My opportunities, I confess, were moderate, for it was not often my
fortune to encounter an imposing military array. In London there are a
great many red-coats, but they rarely march about the streets in large
masses. The most impressive military body that engages the attention
of the contemplative pedestrian is the troop of Life Guards or of
Blues which every morning, about eleven o'clock, makes its way down to
Whitehall from the Regent's Park barracks. (Shortly afterward another
troop passes up from Whitehall, where, at the Horse Guards, the guard
has been changed.) The Life Guards are one of the most brilliant
ornaments of the metropolis, and I never see two or three of them
pass without feeling shorter by several inches. When, of a summer
afternoon, they scatter themselves abroad in undress uniform--with
their tight red jackets and tight blue trousers following the swelling
lines of their manly shapes, and their little visorless caps perched
neatly askew on the summit of their six feet two of stature--it is
impossible not to be impressed, and almost abashed, by the sight of
such a consciousness of neatly-displayed physical advantages and by
such an air of superior valor. It is true that I found the other
day in an amusing French book (a little book entitled _Londres
pittoresque_, by M. Henri Bellenger) a description of these majestic
warriors which took a humorous view of their grandeur. A Frenchman
arriving in London, says M. Bellenger, stops short in the middle of
the pavement and stares aghast at this strange apparition--"this
tall lean fellow, with his wide, short torso perched upon a pair of
grasshopper's legs and squeezed into an adhesive jacket of scarlet
cloth, who dawdles himself along with a little cane in his hand,
swinging forward his enormous feet, curving his arms, throwing back
his shoulders, arching his chest, with a mixture of awkwardness,
fatuity and stiffness the most curious and the most exhilarating....
In his general aspect," adds this merciless critic, "he recalls the
circus-rider, minus the latter's flexibility: skin-tight garments,
simpering mouth, smile of a dancing-girl, attempt to be impertinent
and irresistible which culminates only in being ridiculous."

This is a very heavy-handed picture of those exaggerated proportions
and that conquering gait which, as I say, render the tall Life
Guardsman one of the most familiar ornaments of the London
streets. But it is when he is armed and mounted that he is most
picturesque--when he sits, monumentally, astride of his black charger
in one of the big niches on either side of the gate of the Horse
Guards, cuirassed and helmeted, booted and spurred. I never fail to
admire him as I pass through the adjacent archway, as well as his
companions, equally helmeted and booted, who march up and down beside
him, and, as Taine says, alluding in his _Notes sur l'Angleterre_ to
the scene, "posent avec majeste devant les gamins." If I chance to be
in St. James's street when a semi-squadron of these elegant warriors
are returning from attendance upon royalty after a Drawing-Room or
a Levee, I am sure to make one of the gamins who stand upon the
curbstone to see them pass. If the day be a fine one at the height of
the season, and London happen to be wearing otherwise the brilliancy
of supreme fashion--with beautiful dandies at the club-windows, and
chariots ascending the sunny slope freighted with wigged and flowered
coachmen, great armorial hammercloths, powdered, appended footmen,
dowagers and debutantes--then the rattling, flashing, prancing
cavalcade of the long detachment of the Household troops strikes one
as the official expression of a thoroughly well-equipped society. It
must be added, however, that it is many a year since the Life Guards
or the Blues have had harder work than this. To escort their sovereign
to the railway-stations at London and Windsor has long been their most
arduous duty. They were present to very good purpose at Waterloo, but
since their return from that immortal field they have not been out of
England. Heavy cavalry, in modern warfare, has gone out of fashion,
and in case of a conflict in the East those nimble, pretty fellows the
Hussars, with their tight, dark-blue tunics so brilliantly embroidered
with yellow braid, would take precedence of their majestic comrades.
The Hussars are indeed the prettiest fellows of all, and if I were
fired with a martial ambition I should certainly enlist in their
ranks. I know of no military personage more agreeable to the civil eye
than a blue-and-yellow hussar, unless indeed it be a young officer in
the Rifle Brigade. The latter is perhaps, to a refined and chastened
taste, the most graceful, the most truly elegant, of all military
types. The little riflemen, the common soldiers, have an extremely
useful and durable aspect: with their plain black uniforms, little
black Scotch bonnets, black gloves, total absence of color, they
suggest the rigidly practical and business-like phase of their
profession--the restriction of the attention to the simple specialty
of "picking off" one's enemy. The officers are of course more elegant,
but their elegance is sober and subdued. They are dressed all in
black, save for a broad, dark crimson sash which they wear across the
shoulder and chest, and for a very slight hint of gold lace upon their
small, round, short-visored caps. They are furthermore adorned with a
small quantity of broad black braid discreetly applied to their tight,
long-skirted surtouts. There is a kind of severe gentlemanliness about
this costume which, when it is worn by a tall, slim, neat-waisted
young Englishman with a fresh complexion, a candid eye and a yellow
moustache, is of quite irresistible effect. There is no such triumph
of taste as to look rich without high colors and picturesque without
accessories. The imagination is always struck by the figure of a
soberly-dressed gentleman with a sword.

The little riflemen, the Hussars, the Life Guards, the Foot Guards,
the artillerymen (whose garments always look stiffer and more
awkwardly fitted than those of their _confreres_) have all, however,
one quality in common--the appearance of extreme, of even excessive,
youth. It is hardly too much to say that the British army, as a
stranger observes it now-a-days, is an army of boys. All the regiments
are boyish: they are made up of lads who range from seventeen to
five-and-twenty. You look almost in vain for the old-fashioned
specimen of the British soldier--the large, well-seasoned man of
thirty, bronzed and whiskered beneath his terrible bearskin and with
shoulders fashioned for the heaviest knapsack. This was the ancient
English grenadier. But the modern grenadier, as he perambulates the
London pavement, is for the most part a fresh-colored lad of moderate
stature, who hardly strikes one as offering the elements of a very
solid national defence. He enlists, as a general thing, for six years,
and if he leave the army at the end of this term his service in the
ranks will have been hardly more than a juvenile escapade. I often
wonder, however, that the unemployed Englishman of humble origin
should not be more often disposed to take up his residence in Her
Majesty's barracks. There is a certain street-corner at Westminster
where the recruiting-sergeants stand all day at the receipt of custom.
The place is well chosen, and I suppose they drive a tolerably lively
business: all London sooner or later passes that way, and whenever
I have passed I have always observed one of these smart apostles of
military glory trying to catch the ear of one of the dingy London
_lazzaroni_. Occasionally, if the hook has been skilfully baited,
they appear to be conscious of a bite, but as a general thing the
unfashionable object of their blandishments turns away, after an
unillumined stare at the brilliant fancy dress of his interlocutor,
with a more or less concise declaration of incredulity. In front
of him stretches, across the misty Thames, the large commotion of
Westminster Bridge, crowned by the huge, towered mass of the Houses of
Parliament. To the right of this, a little _effaced_, as the French
say, is the vague black mass of the Abbey; close at hand are half
a dozen public-houses, convenient for drinking a glass to the
encouragement of military aspiration; in the background are the
squalid and populous slums of Westminster. It is a characteristic
congregation of objects, and I have often wondered that among so many
eloquent mementos of the life of the English people the possible
recruit should not be prompted by the sentiment of social solidarity
to throw himself into the arms of the agent of patriotism. Speaking
less vaguely, one would suppose that to the great majority of the
unwashed and unfed the condition of a private in one of the queen's
regiments would offer much that might be supremely enviable. It is
a chance to become, relatively speaking, a gentleman--more than a
gentleman, a "swell"--to have the grim problem of existence settled
at a stroke. The British soldier always presents the appearance of
scrupulous cleanliness: he is scoured, scrubbed, brushed beyond
reproach. His hair is enriched with pomatum and his shoes are
radiantly polished. His little cap is worn in a manner determined by
considerations purely aesthetic. He carries a little cane in one hand,
and, like a gentleman at a party, a pair of white gloves in the
other. He holds up his head and expands his chest, and bears himself
generally like a person who has reason to invite rather than to evade
the fierce light of modern criticism. He enjoys, moreover, an abundant
leisure, and appears to have ample time and means for participating in
the advantages of a residence in London--for frequenting gin-palaces
and music-halls, for observing the beauties of the West End and
cultivating the society of appreciative housemaids. To a ragged and
simple-minded rustic or to a young Cockney of vague resources all
this ought to be a brilliant picture. That the picture should seem to
contain any shadows is a proof of the deep-seated relish in the human
mind for our personal independence. The fear of "too many masters"
weighs heavily against the assured comforts and the opportunity of
cutting a figure. On the other hand, I remember once being told by a
communicative young trooper with whom I had some conversation that
the desire to "see life" had been his own motive for enlisting. He
appeared to be seeing it with some indistinctness: he was a little
tipsy at the time.

I spoke at the beginning of these remarks of the brilliant impressions
to be gathered during a couple of days' stay at Aldershot, and I have
delayed much too long to attempt a rapid and grateful report of them.
But I reflect that such a report, however friendly, coming from a
visitor profoundly uninitiated into the military mystery, can have but
a relative value. I may lay myself open to contempt, for instance,
in making the simple remark that the big parade held in honor of the
queen's birthday, and which I went down more particularly to see,
struck me, as the young ladies say, as perfectly lovely. I will
nevertheless hazard this confession, for I should otherwise seem
to myself to be grossly irresponsive to a delightful hospitality.
Aldershot is a very charming place--an example the more, to my sense,
if examples were needed, of the happy variety of this wonderful little
island, its adaptability to every form of human convenience. Some
twenty years ago it occurred to the late prince consort, to whom so
many things occurred, that it would be a good thing to establish a
great camp. He cast his eyes about him, and instantly they rested upon
a spot as perfectly adapted to his purpose as if Nature from the first
had had an eye to pleasing him. It was a matter of course that the
prince should find exactly what he looked for. Aldershot is at but
little more than an hour from London--a high, sunny, breezy expanse
surrounded by heathery hills. It offers all the required conditions
of liberal space, of quick accessibility, of extreme salubrity, of
contiguity to a charming little tumbled country in which the troops
may indulge in ingenious imitations of difficult man[oe]uvres; to
which it behooves me to add the advantage of enchanting drives and
walks for the entertainment of the impressible visitor. In winter,
possibly, the great circle of the camp is rather a prey to the
elements, but nothing can be more agreeable than I found it toward
the end of May, with the light fresh breezes hanging about, and the
sun-rifts from a magnificently cloudy sky lighting up all around the
big yellow patches of gorse.

At Aldershot the military class lives in huts, a generic name given to
certain low wooden structures of small dimensions and a single story,
covering, however, a good many specific variations. The oblong shanty
in which thirty or forty common soldiers are stowed away is naturally
a very different affair from the neat little bungalow of an officer.
The buildings are distributed in chessboard fashion over a very large
area, and form two distinct camps. There is also a substantial little
town, chiefly composed of barracks and public-houses; in addition to
which, at crowded seasons, far and near over the plain there is the
glitter of white tents. "The neat little bungalow of an officer," as I
said just now: I learned, among other things, what a charming form of
habitation this may be. The ceilings are very low, the partitions are
thin, the rooms are all next door to each other; the place is a good
deal like an American "cottage" by the seaside. But even in these
narrow conditions that homogeneous English luxury which is the
admiration of the stranger blooms with its usual amplitude. The
specimen which suggests these observations was cushioned and curtained
like a pretty house in Mayfair, and yet its pretensions were tempered
by a kind of rustic humility. I entered it first in the dark, but the
next morning, when I stepped outside to have a look at it by daylight,
I burst into pardonable laughter. The walls were of plain planks
painted a dark red: the roof, on which I could almost rest my elbow,
was neatly endued with a coating of tar. But, after all, the thing was
very pretty. There was a matting of ivy all over the front of the hut,
thriving as I had never known ivy to thrive upon a wooden surface:
there was a tangle of creepers about all the windows. The place looked
like a "side-scene" in a comic opera. But there was a serious little
English lawn in front of it, over which a couple of industrious
red-coats were pulling up and down a garden-roller; and in the centre
of the drive before the door was a tremendous clump of rhododendrons
of more than operatic brilliancy. I leaned on the garden-gate and
looked out at the camp: it was twinkling and bustling in the morning
light, which drizzled down upon it in patches from a somewhat agitated
sky. An hour later the camp got itself together and spread itself, in
close battalions and glittering cohorts, over a big green level, where
it marched and cantered about most effectively in honor of a lady
living at a quiet Scotch country-house. One of this lady's generals
stood in a corner, and the regiments marched past and saluted. This
simple spectacle was in reality very brilliant. I know nothing about
soldiers, as the reader must long since have discovered, but I had,
nevertheless, no hesitation in saying to myself that these were the
handsomest troops in the world. Everything in such a spectacle is
highly picturesque, and if the observer is one of the profane he
has no perception of weakness of detail. He sees the long squadrons
shining and shifting, uncurling themselves over the undulations of
the ground like great serpents with metallic scales, and he remembers
Milton's description of the celestial hosts. The British soldier
is doubtless not celestial, but the extreme perfection of his
appointments makes him look very well on parade. On this occasion at
Aldershot I felt as if I were at the Hippodrome. There was a great
deal of cavalry and artillery, and the dragoons, hussars and lancers,
the beautiful horses, the capital riders, the wonderful wagons and
guns, seemed even more theatrical than military. This came, in a great
measure, from the freshness and tidiness of their accessories--the
brightness and tightness of uniforms, the polish of boots and buckles,
the newness of leather and paint. None of these things were the worse
for wear: they had the bloom of peace still upon them. As I looked at
the show, and then afterward, in charming company, went winding back
to camp, passing detachments of the great cavalcade, returning also in
narrow file, balancing on their handsome horses along the paths in
the gorse-brightened heather, I allowed myself to wish that since, as
matters stood, the British soldier was clearly such a fine fellow and
a review at Aldershot was such a delightful entertainment, the bloom of
peace might long remain.

H. JAMES, JR.




A SAXON GOD.


In the year of grace 1854, Ernest Philip King, a young attache of the
English embassy at Athens, married Haidee Amic, the most beautiful
woman in that city. Neither of the pair possessed a fortune, and their
united means afforded a not abundantly luxurious style of living; but
they loved each other, and the fact that he was the portionless son
of a Church of England divine, and she the daughter of an impecunious
Greek of noble family and royal lineage, was no drawback to the early
happiness of their wooing and wedding. They had two children, a boy
and a girl, born within two years of each other in Athens: the girl,
the elder of the two, they named Hyacinthe; the boy was called
Tancredi.

Five years after this marriage had taken place King lost his position
at the embassy, and only received in exchange for it a mean government
clerkship in Rome at a meagre salary. Thither he removed, and after
dragging out a miserable and disappointed existence five years longer,
he died in the arms of his beautiful and still young wife. Thereafter
the youthful widow managed to keep life in herself and her two little
ones by dint of pinching, management and contrivance on the pittance
that had come to her from the estate of her impecunious father. They
lived in a palace, it is true--but who does not live in a palace in
Rome?--high up, where the cooing doves built their nests under the
leaden eaves, and where the cold winds whistled shrilly in their
season.

Such accomplishments as the mother was mistress of she imparted to
her children. What other education they received was derived from
intercourse with many foreigners, English, French, Russians, and from
familiarity with the sights and wonders of Rome, its galleries, ruins,
palaces, studios.

At eighteen Tancredi had obtained a situation as amanuensis to an
English historian resident in Italy; and Hyacinthe already brooded
over some active and unusual future that spread itself as yet but
dimly before her. She inherited from her mother her unparalleled
beauty--the clear, colorless, flawless skin, the straight features,
the lustrous eyes with their luxuriant lashes and long level brows,
her lithe and gracious figure and slender feet and hands: of the
English father her only physical trace was the large, full, mobile
mouth with its firm white teeth. She had from him the modern spirit
of unrest and the modern impetus and energy: from the Greek mother, a
counteracting languor of temperament and an antique cast of mind.

Such, in a measure, was Hyacinthe King at twenty--a curious compound
of beauty, unspent _verve_, irritated longings, half-superstitious
imaginings, and half-developed impulses, ideas and mental powers;
practically, an assistant to the worn mother in her household duties,
a haunter of the beautiful places in the city of her adoption, an
occasional mingler in the scant festivities of artists, a good
linguist, knowing English thoroughly and speaking French and German
with fluent accuracy. Watch her, with me, as she walks one spring day
along the narrow Via Robbia, down which a slip of sunlight glints
scantily on her young head, and, emerging into a wider thoroughfare,
ascends at last the Scala Regia of the Vatican. The girl is known
there, and the usually not over-courteous officials allow her to pass
on at her will through hall after hall of splendor and priceless
treasure. She is neither an English tourist with Baedeker, Murray and
a note-book, nor an American traveller with pencil, loose leaves and
a possible photographic apparatus in her pocket: therefore to the
vigilant eye of the guardian of the pope's palace she is an innocuous
being. Hyacinthe glides quietly through the Clementino Museum, with
never a glance for the lovely, blooming Mercury of the Belvedere, or
even one peep in at the cabinet where the sad Laocooen for ever writhes
in impotent struggles, or a look of love for rare and radiant Apollo,
or one of surprise for Hercules with the Nemean lion. She has reached
the Hall of Statues--that superb gallery with its subtly-tesselated
pavement, its grand marble columns with their Ionic capitals, its
arches and walls of wondrous marbles--and here she stops with a little
sigh before the Cupid of Praxiteles, shorn of his wings by ruthless
Time or some still more ruthless human destroyer. But oh the
lovesomeness of that wingless Love, the sensuous psalmody that seems
about to part the young lips, and the glad eyes one may fancy glancing
under that careless infant brow! Hyacinthe stands before it a long,
long time while many parties come in and go out, and only moves on a
little when an insolent young Frenchman offers a surmise as to her
being a statue herself. She moves only as far as Ariadne: the _jeune
Francais_ has made a progressive movement also, and notes behind his
Paris hat to his companion that the girl looks something like the
marble. She does. Though the grief of the face of the daughter of
Minos as she lies deserted by her lover on the rocky shore of Naxos be
a poignant and a present woe, there is the shadow of its mate on
the brow and lips of the girl who gazes at its pure and pallid and
all-unavailing loveliness.

The Frenchmen have gone with their guide, and there is a great
stillness falling on the place, and no more tourists come that way.
The light is fading, but Hyacinthe turns back to the mutilated Cupid,
and ere long sits down at the base of the statue, and her head rests
well on the cold marble while the darkness grows, and the guardians of
the Vatican either forget or do not distinguish the white of her gown
from the blurred blanchedness of the Greek Love.

So, while the mother waits at home, and wails and prays and wonders
and seeks comfort among her neighbors, the daughter sleeps and dreams;
and her dream is this: The wingless Love looks up and laughs as in
welcome, and Hyacinthe looks up too, and they both see a new marble
standing there in front of them: nay, not a marble, though white as
Parian, for the eyes that laugh back at Love's and hers are blue as
the blue Italian summer skies, and the curling locks of hair on the
brow are of shining gold, and the palms of the beautiful hands are
rosy with the bright blood of life.

And Love asks, "What would you?"

And the strange comer answers, "They say I need nothing."

And Hyacinthe in her dream says, "Is what they say the truth?" But
even while she speaks the stranger sinks farther and farther from her
sight, his glad blue eyes still laughing back at Love and her as he
fades into one with the darkness afar off where Ariadne slumbers in
sorrow. And the wingless Love smiles sadly as he speaks: "Seek your
art, O daughter of a Greek mother! and you will find in it the answer
to your question." And Hyacinthe, sighing, wakes in the dreary dusk of
the first dawn.

She was affrighted at first, and then slowly there came upon her, with
the fast-increasing daylight, a great peace.

"'Seek your art!'" the girl murmured to herself, pushing back her dark
locks and gazing away toward the spot where the hero of her dream had
vanished. "So will I, Cupid, and there I shall find the answer to my
question, to all questions; for I shall find him whom my soul loveth.
Who was he, what was he, so resplendent and shining among all these
old Greeks? Where shall I seek? Say, Cupid? But you are a silent god,
and will not answer me. I know, I know," she cried, clasping her
slender hands together. "I will go to my father's country, where, he
used to tell me, all the men are fair and all the women good. There I
shall find my art and you, my Saxon god."

When the mother heard of the dream and the resolution she was sad
at first, but decided finally to write to the two maiden sisters of
Ernest King, who had idolized their young, handsome brother, and who
answered promptly that they would gladly receive his only daughter.
Hyacinthe took a brave and smiling leave of the _madre_ and Tancredi,
after having gone to look her farewell at the wingless Love and the
sleeping stricken Ariadne. "Ah, dear Cupid," she whispered, "I am
going to-day to find my art and the Saxon whom my soul loveth.
_Addio_, you and Ariadne!"

From the old into the new, from the tried to the untried, from
inertness to action, from the Greek marbles to Saxon men and women,
from Rome to Britain, from breathing to living. Down the Strand, past
Villiers, Essex, Salisbury, Northumberland and many more streets
whose names tell of vanished splendors, whose dingy lengths are
smoke-blackened, and far enough off from the whole aroma of Belgravia,
is Craven street. The houses are all of a pattern--prim, dingy,
small-windowed habitations, but within this one there must be comfort,
for the fire-flames dance on the meek minute panes and a heavy curl
of smoke is cutting the air above its square, business-like little
chimney-pot. Drawing-room there is none to this mansion, but there is
a pleasant square substitute that the Misses King call "the library"
in the mornings, and "the parlor" after their early, unfashionable
dinner. It is full of old-time furniture, such as connoisseurs are
searching after now--dark polished tables with great claws and little
claws; high presses and cupboards brass bound and with numberless
narrow drawers; spindle-legged chairs, with their worn embroidered
backs and seats; a tall thin bookcase; a haircloth sofa with a griffin
at either end mounting savage guard over an erect pillow; a thick
hearth-rug; and two easy-chairs with cushioned arms and two little old
ladies, the one quaint and frigid--she had once loved and had had a
successful rival; the other quaint and sweet--she had loved too, and
had lost her lover in the depths of the sea.

The rattle of a cab down the still street, a pull-up, a short, sharp
knock, and in two minutes more Hyacinthe King had been welcomed kindly
by one aunt and tenderly pressed to the heart of the other. A sober
housemaid had taken her wraps, and was even now unpacking her boxes in
the chamber above. She was sitting in Miss Juliet's own armchair, and
had greatly surprised Ponto, the ancient cat, by taking him into her
lap.

"Will you ring for tea and candles, sister?" asked Miss King
primly.--"We have had tea of course, Hyacinthe, but we will have some
infused for you at once."

"Perhaps Hyacinthe doesn't like tea," suggested Miss Juliet with her
thin, once-pretty hand on the rope.

"Not like tea? Absurd! Was not her father an Englishman, I should like
to know? Our niece is not a heathen, Juliet."

"But, aunt," smiled Hyacinthe, "I do not like tea, after all. You are
both so kind to me," sighed she: "I hope you will not ever regret my
coming to England and to you."

"It is not likely that our niece--"

"That Ernest's daughter--" said Miss Juliet softly.

"Should ever do aught to give us cause to blush--"

"Save with pride and pleasure," added the younger old lady, laying her
fingers on the girl's soft, dark, abundant hair.

"I hope not, aunts." Hyacinthe looked at Miss King a bit wistfully as
she spoke. "You know I am not come to be a burden to you--the madre
wrote: I am come to England to pursue my art."

"My sister-in-law did--"

"Your dear mother did--" Miss Juliet chimed in gently.

"Write something of the kind, but, Hyacinthe, ladies do not go out
into the world seeking their fortunes. I believe I have heard"--Miss
King speaks austerely and as from some pinnacle of pride--"that
there are _women_ who write and lecture and paint, and, in short,
do anything that is disgraceful; but you, my dear, are not of that
blood."

"Yes, aunt, I am. I would do any of those things--must do one of them
or something--to help me find my Saxon god."

"Your what?" cries Miss King, staring over her spectacles at the
serene, heroic young face.

"Your what, dear child?" murmurs Miss Juliet protectively, looking
down into her niece's dark, fathomless eyes.

"Saxon god," says she quite low, for the first time in all her life
experiencing a conscious shyness.

"Are you a pagan, Hyacinthe King?" shrieks the elder aunt.

"Tell us all about it, my dear," says Miss Juliet soothingly.

And Hyacinthe tells them her dream and her resolve.

"So much for an honest English gentleman wedding with a--"

"Lovely Greek girl," finishes Miss Juliet quietly, glancing for the
first time at her sister. "They say your mother was very beautiful,
Hyacinthe."

"Yes the madre is beautiful: she is like the Venus of the Capitol."

Miss King utters a woeful "Ah!" which her sister endeavors to smother
in some kind inquiry.

When Hyacinthe has been shown to her room by the sober housemaid,
the two old ladies discuss the situation in full, and Miss Juliet's
gentleness so far prevails over Miss King's frigid despair as to wring
from the latter a tardy promise to let the young niece pursue the
frightful tenor of her way, at least for a time.

A week after her arrival in London, the girl, having informed herself
with a marvellous quickness of intelligence on various practical
points, calmly laid her plans before her aunts, the elder of whom
listened in frigid silence, the younger with assurances of assistance
and counsel. She then proceeded to put her projects into action with a
curious matter-of-factness that, considering the purely ideal nature
of her aim, is to be accounted for in no other way than by the
recollection of her parentage--the Greek soul and the British brain.

On a Wednesday morning Hyacinthe and Miss Juliet repaired to the
studio of a great sculptor: the niece had previously written to him
stating her desire, and the aunt, nervous and excited, clung to the
girl's firm arm in a kind of terror.

"You wish to know if you have a talent for my art?" he asked kindly,
looking into the pallid young face with its earnest uplifted look. "I
think that had you the least gift that way, having lived in Rome, you
would know it without my assistance. However, here is a bit of clay:
we shall soon see. Try what your fingers can make of it--if a cup like
this one." He turned off, but watched her, nevertheless, with fixed
curiosity as she handled the lump of damp earth.

Hyacinthe could make nothing of it save twist it from one shapeless
mass into another.

"I had hoped it would be sculpture," she said a bit regretfully as she
left the great man's workroom. "In my dream _he_ was a statue."

On Thursday the two went to the atelier of a renowned painter. He too
bent curious interested eyes upon the absorbed and searching face of
his strange applicant as he placed pencils, canvas and brushes before
her, and directed her to look for a model to the simple vase that
stood opposite or to the bust of Clyte that was beside her. But
Hyacinthe had no power over these things, and the two turned their
faces back toward the small house in Craven street.

On Friday they sought out a celebrated musician, but the long, supple
hands--veritable "piano-hands" he noted from the first--availed the
girl in no way here. The maestro said she "might spend years in study,
but the soul was not attuned to it."

When Saturday came they went to a famous teacher for the voice. But,
alas! Hyacinthe, he said frankly, had "no divine possibilities shrined
in her mellow tones." Perhaps she was a little, just a little,
disheartened on Saturday night. If so, none knew it.

On Sunday the old ladies took her to St. Martin-le-Grand's church, but
all she said over the early cold dinner was, "Women cannot preach in
the churches. I could not find him there."

And Miss King said grace after that meat in a loud and aggressive
voice, but Miss Juliet whispered a soft and sweet "Amen."

On Monday morning Hyacinthe slipped from the house unseen. There was
a vein of subtlety and finesse in her that came to the surface on
occasion: it had been in Haidee Amic and in her ancestors. She
repaired to a _maitre de ballet_, an old man who lived in an old house
in the East End.

"Can you learn to dance, mademoiselle--learn to dance 'superbly'?"
repeated the danseur after his applicant. "Well, I should say no, most
decidedly--never. You have not a particle of _chic_, coquetry: you
were made for tragedy, mademoiselle, and not for the airy, indefinable
graces of my art. You should devote yourself to the drama."

Hyacinthe looked up, and the old Italian repeated his assertion,
adding a recommendation to seek an interview with Mr. Arbuthnot,
the proprietor and manager of one of the principal theatres. Before
Hyacinthe returned to the little domicile in Craven street she had
been enrolled as a member of the company of this temple of the
dramatic art.

Arbuthnot was speculative, and withal lucky: he had never brought out
even a "successful failure," and a something in this odd young woman's
beauty, earnestness, frankness, pleased him. He gave her the "balcony
scene," of course, to read to him; noted her poses, which were
singularly felicitous; knew at once that she was not cast for the
lovesick Veronese maiden; was surprised to discover that she was quite
willing to follow his advice--to begin in small parts and work her way
up if possible. The shrewd London manager foresaw triumphs ahead
when the insignificant "Miss H. Leroy" should pass into the actress
Hyacinthe King.

"Aunts, I went out by myself," the girl says as she dawdles shyly over
her newly-acquired habit of tea-drinking that evening, "because I
knew--I fancied--that you, Aunt Juliet, would not care to go with me
where I was going."

"Yes, dear," says Miss Juliet, glad to have the curious child of her
favorite brother back with her in safety.

"A foolish and an unwarrantable step, Hyacinthe, which I trust--I
trust--you will never repeat." Thus Miss King, adding with severity,
"May I inquire, Hyacinthe, where you went?"

"To Bozati the ballet-master first."

"To whom?" Miss King draws forth an old-fashioned salts-bottle, and
Miss Juliet glances nervously at the tea-tray. "To whom? Can it be
possible that my niece, your father's daughter--No, no! my ears
deceive me."

"He said I never could learn to be anything more than a coryphee,
aunt, and I knew that that would not be accounted an art," she says
quite low. "But I then went to Mr. Arbuthnot. You know him, aunt?"

"I have heard of such a person," answers Miss King, peering austerely
over her spectacles at Hyacinthe.

"He has engaged me at a salary of two pounds a week, and he says that
some day I shall be great." Her eyes dilate and look out afar, through
the tiny window-panes, into a limitless and superb future. "I have
found my art; and I am so happy!"

Miss Juliet's glance intercepts her sister's speech. There is silence
in the quaint, small parlor that night; and for the first time in many
a year the memory of her lost lover's first kiss rests softly on Miss
King's wan, wrinkled cheek: for the first time in many a year she has
remembered the perfection of him and forgotten the perfidy.

That was October.

This is June.

"For thirty-seven consecutive nights the girl has held the public of
this great capital spellbound by the magical power of her art. She
has great beauty--Greek features lighted up by Northern vividness and
intellectuality; but transcendent beauty falls to the lot of very many
actresses, yet it is not to be said of any one of them that they have
what this unheralded, unknown girl possesses--tragic genius such as
thrilled through the Hebrew veins of dead Rachel, and flew from her, a
magnetic current, straight to the hearts and brains of her auditors.
Of such metal is made this new star. She has as yet appeared but in
one _role_, that of Adrienne in Scribe's play, but within the compass
of its five acts she runs the wild and weary gamut from crowned love
to crowned despair. It is a new interpretation, and a remarkable
one--an interpretation that is tinged with the blight of our
inquisitive and mournful age: self-consciousness, that terrible
tormentor in her soul, sits for ever in judgment upon every impulse
of the heart of Adrienne, and makes of pain a stinging poison, and
of pleasure but a poor potentiality. Her death-scene is singular and
awful--awful in its physical adherence to realism, and singular in
that it does not disgust, or even horrify, but leaves a memory of
peace with the listener, who has not failed to catch the last strain
for sight of the divine and dying eyes." So the critic of the London
oracle wrote of Hyacinthe King.

That night the people had crowned her with a wreath of gold
laurel-leaves, and she was walking to her dressing-room, when, as she
passed the green-room door, a merry laugh made her glance in. There
were fifty people there--actors, journalists, swells and hangers-on
of the playhouse. A little to the right of the group, and talking
and laughing with two or three others, stood a man both young and
handsome.

Hyacinthe went toward him, and the people, unused to seeing her there
for a long time past, hushed their talk, and one of them marked the
newness of the light that shone in her eyes and the happiness that
smiled on her lips as she came. He was a poet, and he went home and
made verses on her: he had never thought of such a thing before. She
raised the wreath of laurel from her brows and lifted it up to the
golden head of the man whose laugh she had caught. "My Saxon god!" she
murmured, so low that none heard her save him, and then, leaving the
crown on his head, she turned and walked away. She went home to the
shabby house in Craven street, which was still her home, and before
she slept she whispered to Miss Juliet, "I have found him."

In less than twenty-four hours the scene enacted in the green-room of
the theatre had been reported everywhere--first in the clubs, then
in all the salons--not last in the pretty boudoir of Lady Florence
Ffolliott.

Every night thereafter Hyacinthe saw her hero sitting in his stall: he
never missed once, but generally came in well on toward the end of the
performance. At the close of a fortnight, as she was making her way to
her room after the curtain had come down for the last time, she met
him face to face: he had planned it so.

"What would you?" she asked in the odd foreign fashion that clung to
her still, and showed itself when she was taken unawares.

"They say I need nothing;" and the blue eyes laugh down into hers.
"They say I need nothing now that I have been crowned by a King with
laurel-leaves." But even as he speaks the smile fades from his lips:
he sees no answering flash on hers.

"That is what you said in the Vatican that night," she says. "Is it
true?"

He begins to fear that she is losing her mind, but he speaks gently to
her: "Have we met before, then?"

Hyacinthe, standing between two dusty flies while the mirth of the
farce rings out from the stage, tells her dream, for the third time,
to-night to him. "Is it true that you need nothing?" she asks again,
raising anxious eyes to his.

For a moment the man wavers. Last night he would have laughed to scorn
the idea of _his_ not being ready with a pretty speech for a beautiful
actress: just now he is puzzled for a reply, and he knows full well
that some strange new jarring hand is sweeping the strings of his
life. "It is true," he sighs, remembering a true heart that loves
him. "I have wealth, position--these things first, for they breed the
rest," he says with a small sneer--"troops of friends and the promised
hand of a woman whom I have asked to marry me."

"I am sorry," she says at last with a child's sad, unconscious
inflection, "but all the same, I have found you. Cupid said I should."

He surveys her calculatingly: he is a very keen man of the world, and
he has recovered sufficiently from the peculiarity of the situation to
speculate upon it with true British acumen. Shall he, or shall he not,
put a certain question to her, or leave the matter at rest for ever?
Being a person well used to gratifying himself, he asks his question:
"Supposing that it had not been true, what would you have had to say
to me then?" And, strange to say, his face flushes as he finishes--not
hers.

"Nothing." The word comes coldly forth without a fellow. He knows then
that she has only looked at Love, and that the thoughtless harmony of
his life is done for him.

"May I see you sometimes?" he cries as she makes a step onward.

"When you will," she replies, going farther along the narrow passage,
and then looking back at him clearly. "I have found you: I am very
content. And if you thought I loved you--Well, Love, you know, was a
blind god, and so must ever be content to look at happiness through
another's eyes."

He went away, and he said to himself, "She does not know what love
means."

Night after night found him at the theatre, and night after night saw
him seek at least a few moments' talk with her; and always he came
away thinking her a colder woman than any of the statues she was so
fond of speaking about. In her conversation there was no personality;
and although her intellect pleased him, the lack of anything else
annoyed him in equal proportion. And yet he loved the woman whom he
was going to marry. She was a sweet woman--"God never made a sweeter,"
he told himself a hundred times a day. He had wooed her and won her,
and wished to make her his wife.

She _was_ a sweet woman. For weeks now she had heard harsh rumors and
evil things of him that made her heart ache, but she had given no
sign, nor would she have ever done so had not her friends goaded her
to the point. She hears the light footstep coming along the corridor
toward her, and she knows that it comes this morning at her especial
call. She sees the bonny face and feels the light kiss on her cheek.
Heaven forgive her if she inwardly wonder if these lips she loves have
last rested on another woman's face!

"Roy," she says, stealing up to him and laying one of her lovely round
arms about his neck, "tell me, dear, if you have ceased to love me--if
you would rather--rather break our engagement? Because, dear, better a
parting now, before it is too late, than a lifelong misery afterward."
There are tears in the blue bewitching eyes, and tears in the gentle
voice that he is not slow to feel.

"Florence"--the young man catches her in his arms--"who has--What do
you mean? I have not ceased to love you." All the fair fascination
that has made her so dear to him in the past rushes over him now to
her rescue.

"Then, Roy, why, why--Oh, I cannot say it!" Her pretty head, gold like
his own, falls on his shoulder.

"Look up, love." He is not a coward, whatever else. "You mean to say,
'Why do I, a man professing to love one woman, constantly seek the
society of another?' Do not you?"

She bows her head, her white lids droop. There is a pause so long that
the ticking of the little clock on the mantel seems a noise in the
stillness. He puts her out of his arms, rises, picks up a newspaper,
throws it down, and says, "God help me! I don't know." Then another
pause; and now the ticking of the little clock is fairly riotous.
"Florence, love," kneeling by her, "bear with me. It's a fascination,
an infatuation--an intellectual disloyalty to you, if you will--but it
is nothing more, and it must die out soon."

Lady Dering was a charming woman: all her friends agreed upon that
point, and also upon another--that an invitation to visit Stokeham
Park was equivalent to a guarantee for so many days of unalloyed
pleasure. It was a grand old place, not quite three hours from town,
with winding broad avenues and glimpses of sweeping smooth lawns
between the oaks and beeches. And the company which the mistress of
Stokeham had gathered about her this autumn was, if possible, a more
congenial and yet varied one than usual. Having no children of her
own, Lady Dering enjoyed especially the society of young people, and
generally contrived to have a goodly number of them about her--Mildred
and Mabel Masham, Lady Isobel French, Lady Florence Ffolliott, her
cousin the little Viscount Harleigh--who was very far gone in love
with his uncle's daughter, by the by--the Hon. Hugh Leroy Chandoce and
a host of others.

Her ladyship, telegram in hand, has just knocked at Florence
Ffolliott's door. Florence is a special favorite with the old lady:
she approves thoroughly of her engagement, which was formally
announced at Stokeham last year, and of the man of her choice, who at
the present moment is lighting a cigar and cogitating in a somewhat
ruffled frame of mind over the piece of news he has just been made
acquainted with by his hostess.

"Florence, my dear," says her ladyship, "I am the most fortunate
woman in the world. I have been longing for a new star in my domestic
firmament, and, behold! it dawns. I expected to have her here some
time, but not so early as this; and the charming creature sends me a
telegram that she arrives by the eleven-o'clock express this morning:
I have just sent to the station for her. I met Roy on my way to you,
and conveyed the intelligence to him, but of course he only looked
immensely bored: these absurd men! they never can take an interest in
but one woman at a time." Lady Florence's quick color came naturally
enough. "Now, my child, guess the name of the new luminary."

"I'm quite sure I can't," says the girl, her roses paling to their
usual pink. "Tell me, dear Lady Dering: suspense is terrible;" and she
laughs merrily.

"Hyacinthe King, the great actress, my dear: could anything be more
delicious?" Lady Dering has been absent on the Continent during the
season, and is utterly ignorant of all the _on dits_ of the day.

"Charming!" murmurs Florence Ffolliott with the interested inflection
of thorough good breeding; but her hands, lying clasped together on
her lap, clasp each other cruelly.

"Yes," continues her ladyship. "I knew her father in my young
days--Ernest King--the Kings of Essex, you know?" Florence nods
assent. "He was the handsomest fellow imaginable, married a lovely
Greek girl; and here comes his daughter startling the world with her
genius twenty odd years after my little flirtation with him. It makes
one feel old, child--old. I called on her the last day I was in
London, but she was out; so then I wrote and begged her to come to
Stokeham when she could. Now I must leave you, dear. What are you
reading? Poetry, of course. I never read anything else either when I
was your age and was engaged to Sir Harry." The bright, stately lady
laughs gayly as she goes, and Florence Ffolliott sits before her
fire until luncheon-time, turning over a dozen wild fancies in her
brain--fancies that do no honor either to the man she loves or the
woman whom she cannot help disliking heartily. But her just, and
withal generous, soul dismisses them at last, and she bows her head to
the blow and acknowledges it to be what it is--an accident.

That the advent of Hyacinthe King in their midst should have created
no sensation among the party assembled at Stokeham would scarcely be a
reasonable proposition: it did, and not only the excitement that the
coming of a renowned meteor of the theatrical firmament might be
expected to occasion in a house full of British subjects, but
an undertone of surmise, and some sarcasms, between those--the
majority--who were well enough aware of Roy Chandoce's peculiar
infatuation for the beautiful young player. The pair were watched
keenly, it must be confessed, but with a courtesy and _savoir faire_
that admitted no betrayal of this absolutely human curiosity--by
none more keenly and more guardedly than by Lady Florence Ffolliott.
Neither she nor they discovered aught in the conduct of either the man
or the woman to find fault with or cavil at.

Hyacinthe was quickly voted a "man's woman" by the women, and as
quickly pronounced a "thorough enigma" by the men, not one of whom had
succeeded, even after the lapse of fourteen days, in arousing in her
that which is most dear to the masculine soul, a preference--although
it be a mild, a shamming or an evanescent preference--for one of them
above another. Sir Vane Masham set her down over his third dinner's
sherry as "an iceberg," in which kind opinion the little viscount
joined, with the amendment of "polar refrigerator." Young Arthur
French, who was very hard hit indeed, said she was like a "beautiful,
heartless marble statue," but the poet, who had made verses on her,
called her a "white lily with a heart of flame."

Not one of them all, however, could dispute the perfect quality of her
beauty to-night. In a robe of violet satin, with pale jealous topazes
shining on her neck and arms and in the sleek braids of her dark hair,
Hyacinthe was fit for the regards of emperors had they been there to
see. They were not. In the conservatory at Stokeham, where she stood
amid the tropical trees and flowers and breathing the warm close scent
of rich blossoms foreign to English soil, there was only one man to
look at her, and he was no potentate, but a blond young fellow, with
blue blood in his veins and a sad riot in his heart.

For the first time since they have been in the house together he has
left his betrothed wife's side and sought hers: in the face of this
little watching world about him he has, at last, quietly risen from
the seat at Florence Ffolliott's side and followed that trail of
sheeny satin into the conservatory. "Not one word for me?" he says in
a low voice that has in it a sort of desperation.

She turns startled and looks at him: "Who wants me? Who sent you to
fetch me?"

"No one 'sent' me," he replies bitterly: "I 'want' you. Hyacinthe!
Hyacinthe!" He stretches two arms out toward her, and when he dies
Roy Chandoce remembers the look that leaps then into the eyes of this
girl.

"Do not touch me!" She shrinks away with the expression of awakened
womanhood on her fair face. "If you do, you will make me mad." For he
has followed and is close to her.

"No, no, no! Not 'mad'--happy! Ah, Hyacinthe!" His arms are no more
outstretched or empty: they enfold all the beauty and all the
bliss that now and then give mortality fresh faith in heaven. "Ah,
Hyacinthe!" That is all that he says, and she is silent while his
kisses fall upon her mouth and cheeks and brow and hands.

And when, ten minutes later, he goes back where he came from, he knows
that it is no "intellectual disloyalty" that lured him from his seat:
he knows that the poet was right, and Vane and the viscount and Arthur
all wrong.

There is to be a meet at Stokeham Park the next morning, and
Hyacinthe, for the first time in her life, witnesses the pretty sight.
Two or three only of the ladies are going to ride to cover, among them
Lady Florence Ffolliott, who looks superbly on her horse and in her
habit, and feels superbly too--in a transient physical fashion--as she
glances down at Hyacinthe, who in her clinging creamy gown, with a
furred cloak thrown about her, stands in the porch to see them off.
She knows nothing of horses or riding, and is therefore debarred from
the exhilarating pleasure, and has also declined Lady Dering's offer
to drive with her to the first cover that is to be drawn. But the
pretty and, to her, novel picture of the various vehicles with their
freight of merry matrons, girls and children, the scarlet coats of the
sportsmen and the servants, the hounds drawn up a good piece off, the
four ladies who are going to ride, and stately, cheery Lady Dering
exchanging cordial and courteous greetings with her friends and
neighbors, while good-hearted Sir Harry gives some last instructions
to his whip, is sufficiently charming.

"You have eaten no breakfast, Mr. Chandoce," cries the hostess, "and
you are quite as white as Lady Florence's glove there. I insist upon
your taking a glass of something before you are off.--Patrick!" But
before Patrick has even started on my lady's errand Hyacinthe has
fetched from the hall a glass of claret-cup, and holds it up to him
where he sits on his lithe and mettlesome hunter.

He takes it, drains it to the last drop and hands it back to her.
Their eyes meet, and his lips murmur very softly a Saxon's sweetest
word of endearment--"My darling!"

"Quarter-past eleven!" calls Sir Harry; and the gay cavalcade moves
off, and Hyacinthe, waving adieu to Lady Dering, watches it fade away
among the windings of the avenue.

"Mr. Chandoce has a green mount," mutters one of the footmen to
another.

"Yes, he have, but he's not a green horseman."

"No," admits the other.

Hyacinthe remembers their talk later in the day--that day that she
passes in such a restless wandering from one room to another--from the
conservatory to the library, and from music-room to hall. Finally, at
four o'clock she has composed herself with a book in the library, and
before the fire sits half lost in reading, half in wondering. Without,
the early gloom of the short day is gathering, and the bare trees cast
murk shadows all across the frostbitten lawns, and late birds twitter
their good-night notes, and a few sleepy rooks caw coldly to each
other.

She hears none of this, is as self-absorbed a being as ever lived--one
whose whole solitude is full to overflowing with the thought of
another. But at last there breaks in upon Hyacinthe's still dream a
shriek, and then wild tumult, noises and excited speech, and the girl
springs to her feet, and in a flash is out in the wide hall in the
very midst of it all.

He lies there quite, quite dead. For ever flown the breath that made
of this beautiful clay a living man. Lady Florence has him halfway in
her arms as she kneels on the floor beside the body of her lover, and
between her sobs cries out to them to "Go for the surgeons!" for whom
long since Sir Harry sent. Hyacinthe put her hands behind her and
leaned heavily against the column that by good chance she found there.
When the crowd parted from him a little she leaned over a bit and
stared: that was all.

"Do not _you_ touch him!" cried the English maiden, maddened by her
grief, as she glanced up at the fair face.

"No, I will not: I do not wish to," returns the other softly,
straightening herself; and leaning there in her close gown, she is as
tearless as some caryatid.

When the surgeons have come on their useless mission, and gone, when
Florence Ffolliott stands weeping and wringing her hands, Hyacinthe
ventures over a pace nearer to the two.

"You see, Lady Florence," she says very gently, and with that curious
sorrowful look on her face that made it so like to the Ariadne's--"you
see, he was not meant for any woman: he was a Saxon god."

A year later Lady Florence Ffolliott's engagement to her cousin, the
little lovelorn viscount, was announced.

Sir Henry Leighton told me last week that he had been called in
consultation with regard to Hyacinthe King, and that there were not
three months of life in her. "She cannot act," said the great medical
man: "she plays her parts, it is true, but the power to portray has
gone out of her. She is going back to Rome for a while, and, I can
assure you, she will never return."

MARGUERITE F. AYMAR.




MUSICAL NOTATION.


Why is it that the knowledge of music is not more common?--that is,
why is it that there are so few people in this and every other country
who are able to read and write music as they read and write their
mother-tongue? Is it that the musical ear is a rare gift? Evidently
not, for music is composed of a small number of elements, which are
found for the most part in any popular air, and almost every person
can sing one or more of these airs correctly. It is not, then, the
musical ear nor the sense of time which is wanting. Neither is the
cause to be attributed to the fact that few study music; for, although
the teaching of music is by no means so general as it should be, still
it is taught in our schools, public and private, singing-schools are
common even in our small villages, and there is no lack of teachers
both of vocal and instrumental music. And yet out of every hundred
who take up the study of music, it is safe to say that about
ninety abandon it after a short time, discouraged by the almost
insurmountable difficulties presented at every turn. Only those
succeed who are endowed with rare natural aptitude, an indomitable
will, and time--four or five years at least--to devote to an art which
is as yet a luxury to the masses of the people.

M. Galin, his pupil M. Cheve and other advocates of reform in musical
notation declare that the people are deprived of this grand source of
culture because of the blind, inconsistent and wholly unscientific
nature of the ordinary musical notation. At first this seems
incredible, but one has only to compare this notation with that
elaborated by Emile Cheve after Galin's theory to become convinced
that the statement is true. People are apt to say, "Why, it cannot
be that our system of writing music is so defective: in this age of
improvements and scientific precision gross inconsistencies would have
been eliminated long ago." And so, indeed, they would have been but
for the fact that the very basis of the system is altogether at
fault. How are the Chinese, for example, to "improve" their system of
writing? It is simply impossible. They have some thousands of abstract
characters, hieroglyphs standing for things or thoughts. All these
must be swept away, and in their place must come an alphabet where
each letter stands for an elementary sound. These elementary sounds
are few in number in any language. So of our musical notation. It is
doubtful if it can be materially improved; it must be discarded for a
system of fewer elements and a more clear and precise combination of
them.

No, it is not strange that we have not adopted a better method of
musical notation before this. Think how long a struggle it required to
abandon the cumbersome Roman notation for the short, clear and
precise Arabic--how many centuries of feeble infancy the science of
mathematics passed before the invention of logarithms rendered the
most tedious calculations rapid and easy. Most people take things as
they seem, giving but little thought to their meanings and relations
to each other; and so an awkward method may be followed a long time
without protest. People are blamed for their devotion to routine, but
devotion to routine is perfectly natural. It is mental inertia, and
corresponds to that property in physics--the inability of a body of
itself to start when at rest, or stop or change its course when in
motion. And then the general distrust of new things--"new-fangled
notions," as contempt terms them--retards the examination and adoption
of improved and labor-saving methods.

It is more than fifty years since Pierre Galin, professor of
mathematics in the institute for deaf mutes at Bordeaux, published his
_Exposition d'une nouvelle Methode pour l'Enseignement de la Musique_,
and more than thirty since his distinguished disciple, Emile Cheve,
demonstrated practically, in the military gymnasium at Lyons,
the immeasurable superiority of that method; and yet such is the
repugnance of teachers of music to any change in their routine that
they have paid little or no attention to the work of Galin and his
followers. The _Methode elementaire de la Musique vocale_, by M. and
Mme. Emile Cheve, has never been translated into English. It was
published in Paris by the authors in 1851--a work of over five hundred
pages in royal octavo, and a most clear and exhaustive exposition of
the method which they followed with such success.

In proof of the superiority of that method, an account of M. Cheve's
test-experiment at the military gymnasium at Lyons in 1843 will be
interesting. The gymnasium was at that time under the direction of two
officers of the French army, Captain d'Argy and Lieutenant Grenier.
The facts are taken from their official report of the experiment.

By order of Lieutenant-General Lascours the soldiers of the gymnasium
were placed at the disposition of M. Cheve, that he might make a trial
of his method. General Lascours further ordered that the officers in
charge of the gymnasium should be present at every lesson, and report
carefully the progress of the pupils and the final results of the
course.

The members of the class were taken at large from the twelfth,
sixteenth and twenty-ninth regiments of the line, fifty from each.
M. Cheve accepted all as they came, and agreed formally to bring
eight-tenths of the class of one hundred and fifty in one year to the
following results: (1) To understand the theory of music analytically;
(2) To sing alone and without any instrument any piece of music within
the compass of ordinary voices; (3) To write improvised airs from
dictation.

"Candor compels us to admit," says the report, "that nearly all of the
soldiers showed the greatest repugnance to attending the course, and
did so only because they were ordered to do so. Several months elapsed
before this bad spirit could be conquered, and before the majority
of them could be brought to practise the vocal exercises. Some even
refused to try to sing, on the ground that they were old, that they
had no voice, that they could not read, etc."

The first lesson took place October 1, 1842. There were five a week,
of an hour and a half each. At the end of the month the professor
wished to classify the voices, and required each pupil to sing alone.
The experiment was rather discouraging. _More than two-thirds were
unable to sing the scale_: twelve refused to utter a sound, and
declared that nothing would induce them to try. These twelve were
immediately dismissed. The rest remained, though some confessed that
they had not sung a note since the beginning of the course. These,
however, now promised to practise all the exercises in future. Under
these unfavorable circumstances the professor engaged anew to fulfil
his contract, on condition that the pupils would submit to practise
the exercises conscientiously and attend regularly. From this time,
with the exception of three or four rebellious spirits, none were
rejected.

The month of October was not very profitable to the pupils, on account
of continual absences necessitated by military reviews. April and May
of the following year (1843) also brought many interruptions through
the various demands of the service. Sickness, promotions, punishments,
mutations, and the disbanding of the class of 1836, which took away
several under-officers, gradually reduced the class, so that in July
only a little over fifty were left. This falling off greatly troubled
Professor Cheve, especially when the army at Lyons went into camp and
left him with only twenty-eight pupils. This reduction of the class
could not have been foreseen or prevented. M. Cheve could not be held
responsible for the fulfilment of his promise, except to eight-tenths
of those that remained.

Two months after the opening of the course M. Cheve printed at his own
expense a collection of one hundred and forty pieces of music from the
best composers, and gave a copy to each of his pupils, that they might
read from the printed page instead of the blackboard. Three months
after the opening of the course General Lascours visited the gymnasium
and was present during one of the lessons. He was struck, as were all
the visitors on that occasion, by the progress obtained. The pupils
were already far advanced in intonation and in time: they read easily
in all the keys, and sung pieces together with great spirit and
correctness.

On April 25, 1843, the general returned, accompanied by Madame
Lascours and all the officers of his staff. The following was the
programme of the occasion: (1) A quartette from Webbe; (2) A Languedoc
air in three parts, from Desrues; (3) A trio from the opera of
_[OE]dipus in Colonna_, by Sacchini; (4) Singing at sight intervals of
all kinds, major and minor; (5) Singing at sight in eight different
keys; (6) Two rounds in three voices from Siller; (7) A quartette from
the _Clemenza di Tito_ of Mozart; (8) A quartette from the _Iphigenia_
of Gluck; (9) A trio from the _Corysander_, or the _Magic Rose_ of
Berton; (10) Exercise upon the tonic in all the keys, major and minor;
(11) Exercise in naming notes vocalized; (12) Singing at sight a trio
from the _Magic Flute_ of Mozart; (13) _Ave Regina_, by Choron--three
voices; (14) The _Gondolier_, a round in three parts, by Desrues; (15)
A quartette from the _Magic Flute_; (16) Chorus from the _Tancredi_ of
Rossini; (17) The "Prayer" from _Joseph_, by Mehul.

This is certainly a remarkable programme to be filled by illiterate
soldiers with only six months' training. "It would be difficult," says
the official report, "to paint the astonishment of the spectators
upon this occasion. The confidence and readiness with which
these soldier-students of music sang at sight the most difficult
intonations, major and minor, the facility with which they read in all
the keys, and, finally, the certainty and spontaneity with which
they _all, without exception_, recognized and named various sounds
vocalized, showed clearly that they possessed a very superior
knowledge of intonation. All the pieces which they sung were rendered
with irreproachable correctness, though the professor did not beat the
time, except through the first bar to indicate the movement.

"With the consent of General Lascours, all the teachers and professors
in the city, including the members of the Royal College, were on one
occasion admitted to a private rehearsal of M. Cheve's class. The
result was the same--admiration and astonishment. The professor
received on all sides well-merited praise for a success gained in so
short a time and with such unfavorable conditions.

"These soldiers have at this moment (September 1, 1843) reached a
degree of power in intonation and in reading music at sight which is
fairly wonderful. They can sing together at sight any new piece in
three or four parts, the music being written, after the new method, in
figures. If the piece be written in the ordinary musical character,
no matter what the key, they can also sing it at sight together after
they have together sung each part by itself. All the members of the
class understand thoroughly the theory of music, and are able to write
from dictation a vocalized air never heard before, no matter what the
modulations may be.

"Such are the results obtained by Professor Cheve from a mass of men
taken at hazard and against their will. The experiment to-day has had
eleven months of duration, seventeen or eighteen lessons being given
every month. The pupils have never studied at all between the lessons,
and those who remain at the present time have lost many lessons from
punishments, illness, leave of absence, etc.

"As to the method pursued by M. Cheve, it is as follows: In theory he
demonstrates _de facto_ the inequality of major and minor seconds, and
from this he deduces the theory of the gamut. Here he follows in the
footsteps of his master, Galin. The theory of time he takes from
the same source. In practice, he employs the Arabic figures for the
musical notes, as proposed by J. J. Rousseau and modified by Galin,
using a series of exercises created by Madame Cheve. To these
exercises especially does M. Cheve owe his ability to make his pupils
masters of intonation in an incredibly short time. He teaches time by
itself, using a language of durations invented by the father of Madame
Cheve, M. Aime Paris, and tables of exercises in time made by Madame
Cheve. Transposition is also taught separately, and never does M.
Cheve require his pupils to execute two things simultaneously until
they understand perfectly how to do them separately.

"In this way M. Cheve leads his pupils through every step of the
theory of music until they are able to read _in the ordinary notation_
every kind of music, and to execute during any piece all the possible
changes of mode or key."

The report--which is duly signed by the officers having charge of the
gymnasium--ends with the expression of their "profound conviction that
the method of teaching music employed by Professor Cheve is faultless,
if it may be judged by its practical results."

There is a very common impression, in this country at least, that the
best new method of writing music has been tried and abandoned, weighed
in the balance and found wanting. This is far from the fact. It is
doubtful if there is one person in a hundred in this country who ever
heard even the name of Galin or Cheve. Some twenty years ago there was
a little interest excited in a new method of musical notation. A class
was formed in Lowell, Massachusetts, and a "singing-book" was used
there with the notes written with numerals on the staff instead of the
usual characters. But it could not have been the Cheve method that
the Lowell professor used, for he employed no new system of teaching
time--a prime characteristic of that method.

Those who examine the subject fairly will be compelled to take the
position held by Galin, Cheve and their school, that a new method of
writing music is imperatively needed, because that now in use lacks
the essential elements of a scientific system: it is neither simple,
clear nor concise. There are certain elementary principles which must
be observed in the exposition of any science, and especially in that
of music, which is addressed to all classes of intelligence. Among
these principles are the following, as stated by M. Cheve: _1st_.
Every idea should be presented to the mind by a clear and precise
symbol. _2d_. The same idea should always be presented by the same
sign: the same sign should always represent the same idea. _3d_.
Elementary textbooks or methods should never present two difficulties
to the mind at the same time; and such textbooks or methods should be
an assemblage of means adapted to aid ordinary intelligences to gain
the object proposed. _4th_. The memory should never be drawn upon
except where reasoning is impossible.

Let us test the exposition of the ordinary musical notation, and also
that of the school of Galin, by these principles and compare the
results.

_First_. Is every idea presented by a clear and precise symbol?

In the ordinary method, certainly not. The musical sounds or notes are
represented by elliptical curves with or without stems; by spots
or dots with plain stems, or with stems having from one to four
appendages, or with these appendages united, forming bars across the
stems. These curves and dots are placed on the five parallel lines of
a staff, as it is called, or between the lines of this staff, or on or
between added or "ledger" lines above and below the staff. Certainly,
these cannot be called precise symbols, especially when we reflect
that _any one of them placed upon any given line or space may
represent successively do, re, mi, fa, sol, la, si_, or the flats or
sharps of these notes. The notes, indeed, have no names, being all
alike for the various notes; but names are given to the lines and
spaces of the staff; and, alas! the names of these lines and spaces
change continually with the change of key or pitch. For example: if
we commence a scale with C, our _do_ will be on the first added line
below the staff, and its octave, _do_, on the third space counting
from the lowest. If we commence a scale with G, our _do_ will be on
the second line from the bottom, and the octave on the first space
above the staff; and so on for all the other scales except those which
commence a semitone below or above. For example: the scales of the key
of G and of G flat would be placed exactly the same upon the staff,
though the signature of G would be one sharp upon the staff at the
beginning, and that of G flat would be six flats. The same may be said
of the keys of D and D flat, F and F sharp, etc.

Again: the scales of the keys of G flat and of F sharp are the
same--are played on precisely the same keys of the organ or piano--yet
they are placed on different lines and spaces of the staff, and the
signature of the first is six flats, and of the second six sharps.

Think of the disheartened state of the victim of this notation when
he has learned to read comfortably in one key, and then, taking up a
piece of music written in another key, finds that he has all the lines
and spaces to relearn! The wonder is that he does not lose his wits
altogether.

Compare this maze of notes and lines and spaces, for ever changing
like a will-o'-the wisp, with the following:

  Low Octave.         Middle Octave.         High Octave.

                                             =.......=
  =1234567=             =1234567=            =1234567=
  =.......=

Here everything is as clear as day. Take any note--as =5=, for
example. This is _sol_--always _sol_, and never by any chance anything
else. If it has a dot under, it is _sol_ of the octave below the
middle; if it has no dot, it belongs to the middle octave; and if it
has a dot above, it belongs to the octave above the middle. These
three octaves are amply sufficient for all the purposes of vocal
music, which alone is considered here. For instrumental music, where
many octaves are used, the system is modified without losing its
simplicity and conciseness. To represent the flats, Galin crosses the
numerals with a line like the grave accent, and marks the sharps by a
line like the acute accent. For example, =\1\2\3\4\5\6\7=[*] represent
_do_ flat, _re_ flat, _mi_ flat, etc.: =/1 /2 /3 /4 /5 /6 /7=[*]
represent _do_ sharp, _re_ sharp, _mi_ sharp, etc.

[*: the slash goes _through_ the number (transcriber)]

A score of music in the new style of notation has no signature--that
is, no flats or sharps at the beginning. Above the line of numerals is
written simply "Key of G," "Key of A flat," etc. The pitch, of course,
must be taken from the tuning-fork or a musical instrument, as it is
in all cases.

_Second_. The same idea should always be presented by the same sign:
the same sign should always represent the same idea.

It has already been shown how this principle is disregarded; but take,
for further illustration, the symbols indicating silence. There are
seven different kinds of rests, and there is no need of more than one.
These signs are:

[Illustration of music rest symbols]

Again: these rests may be followed by one or two dots, which increase
their duration. For example: an eighth-note rest dotted equals an
eighth note and a sixteenth; and followed by two dots it equals an
eighth, a sixteenth and a thirty-second note in time. That is, the
first dot prolongs the rest one-half or a sixteenth, and the second
dot prolongs the value of the first dot one-half or a thirty-second.

To a disciple of Galin it is really amazing that such a bungling,
unscientific way of expressing silence should have been tolerated
so long. Compare these "pot-hooks and trammels," dotted and
double-dotted, with Galin's symbol of silence, the cipher (0)! This
is all, and yet it expresses every length of rest, as will be shown
presently.

Let us now examine the symbols representing the prolongation of a
sound. There are three ways by the common notation, where there should
be but one. First, by the form of the note itself, as--

[Illustration of musical note symbols]

Second, by one or more dots after a note, the first dot prolonging the
note one-half, and the second dot prolonging the first in the same
ratio. Third, by the repetition of the note with a vinculum or tie,
the second note not being sung or played. Galin uses simply a dot. It
may be repeated, as a rest or a note may, but then _its value is not
changed_, any more than in the case of notes or rests repeated. For
example:

  KEY OF E.

    1|3556|5.31|[7.]143|3.21|

Here are the first measures of a well-known hymn in common time,
four beats to the measure. As all isolated signs, whether notes,
prolongations or rests, fill a unit of time, or beat, it follows that
the dots following _sol_ and _mi_ prolong these through an entire
beat, for the dots are isolated signs. Whatever the time, _each unit
of it appears separate and distinct to the eye at a glance_; and all
the notes, rests or prolongations that fill a beat are always united
in a special way. This will be more fully shown hereafter.

_Third_. Elementary textbooks or methods should never present two
difficulties to the mind at the same time; and such textbooks or
methods should be an assemblage of means adapted to aid ordinary
intelligences to gain the object proposed.

The first thing that the student of music encounters is a staff of
five lines, armed with flats or sharps, the signature of the key, or
with no signature, which shows that the music upon it is in the key
of C. On this staff he sees notes which are of different pitch, and
probably of different length. In any case, there are at least three
difficulties presented in a breath--to find the name of the note,
give it its proper sound, and then its proper length; and these
difficulties are still greater because the ideas, as we have seen, are
hidden under defective symbols.

Take all the teachers of vocal music, says M. Cheve, place them upon
their honor, and let them answer the following question: "How many
readers of music can you guarantee by your method, out of a hundred
pupils taken at random and entirely ignorant of music, by one hour
of study a day during one year?" The reply, he thinks, will be: "Not
many." And if you tell them that by another method you will agree in
the same time to teach eighty in a hundred to read music currently,
and also to write music, new to them, dictated by an instrument placed
out of sight or from the voice "vocalizing," they will all declare
that the thing is impossible.

The great composers and renowned performers are cited as examples of
what the ordinary methods have accomplished. No, replies Cheve: they
are exceptional organizations. The methods have not produced them.
They have, on the contrary, arrived at their proficiency despite
the methods, while thousands fail who might reach a high degree of
excellence but for the obstacles presented by a false system to a
clear understanding of the theory of music, which in itself is so
simple and precise. In the study of harmony especially, says the same
authority, does the want of a clear presentation of the theory produce
the most deplorable results. It has made the science of harmony
wellnigh unintelligible even to those called musicians. Ask them why
flats and sharps are introduced into the scales; why there is one
sharp in the key of G major and five in B major; why you spoil the
minor scale by making it one thing in ascending and another in
descending--that is, by robbing it of its modal superior in ascending
and of its sensible in descending. They will in most cases be unable
to answer, for neither teachers nor textbooks explain. The catechisms
found in most of the elementary works upon music are replete with
stumbling-blocks to the young musician. Mr. R. H. Palmer, author of
_Elements of Musical Composition, Rudimental Class-Teaching_ and
several other works, says in one of his catechisms that "there are
two ways of representing each intermediate tone. If its tendency is
upward, it is represented upon the lower of two degrees, and is called
sharp; if its tendency is downward, it is represented upon the higher
of two degrees, and is called flat. There are exceptions to this, as
to all rules." This is deplorable. Music is a mathematical science,
and in mathematics there is no such thing as an exception to a rule.
But to quote further from the same catechism: "A natural is used to
cancel the effect of a previous sharp or flat. If the tendency from
the restored tone is upward, the natural has the capacity of a sharp;
if downward, the capacity of a flat. A tone is said to resolve when
it is followed by a tone to which it naturally tends." How long would
novices in the science of music rack their brains before they would
comprehend what the teacher meant by a tone tending somewhere
"naturally," or by the tendency of a restored tone being destroyed by
the "capacity of a flat"? The same writer, speaking of the scale of
G flat, says it is a "remarkable feature of this scale that it is
produced upon the organ and piano by pressing the same keys which
are required to produce the scale of F sharp." This is precisely
equivalent to saying that it is a remarkable feature that the notes C,
D, E, F are produced by pressing the same keys which are required to
produce _do_, _re_, _mi_, _fa_.

One more citation from the same author. Speaking of the formation of
scales, he says: "Thus we have another perfectly natural scale by
making use of two sharps." This vicious use of the term "natural" is
deplorable, because it is apt to give the pupil the notion that some
scales are more natural than others. A certain note is called "C
natural," and it is not uncommon for learners to suppose that it is
easier or more natural to sing in that key, as it is easier on the
piano to play anything in it because only the white keys are used,
while in any other at least one black key is required. Indeed, a pupil
may study music a long time before he finds out that there is no
difference between flats and sharps, as such, and other notes--that
all notes are flats and sharps of the notes a semitone above and
below. Seeing the staff of a piece of music armed with half a dozen
sharps or flats, the first thought of the pupil is that it will be
rather hard to sing. And many really suppose that flats and sharps
in themselves are different from other notes--a little "flatter" or
"sharper" in sound perhaps--and secretly wonder why their ear cannot
detect it. Of course it may be said that there is no necessity for
pupils to have such absurd notions, but it is inevitable where the
theory of music is made so difficult for the beginner. No doubt the
ambitious and naturally studious will delve and dig among the rubbish
of imperfect textbooks, analyzing and comparing the explanations
of different teachers, until order takes the place of chaos; but
textbooks should be adapted to ordinary capacities, and thereby they
will better serve the needs of the most brilliant.

_Fourth._ The memory should never be drawn upon except where reasoning
is impossible.

In science you have general laws, and from these deduce particular
facts depending upon them, but collections of facts and phenomena
without connection you must learn by heart. The extensive and involved
nomenclature of music, added to the complicated and inconsistent
system of notation, is a continual and exhausting strain upon the
memory. Teachers commence their drill in vocalization, as a rule, with
the scale of the key of C, and the pupils, fired with a noble ambition
to become musicians, make a strenuous effort to remember where _do_,
_re_, _mi_ and the other notes are placed on the lines and spaces of
the staff. Presently the "key is changed," and with that change comes
chaos. All the notes are now on a different series of lines and
spaces. The confusion continues until the series of seven notes is
exhausted. Then come scales with new names, commencing upon different
notes (flats and sharps), but with places on the staff identically the
same as others having different names!

Long before this point is reached by the pupil his courage flags,
his ambition cools, and in the greater number of cases dies out
altogether. To be sure, if he has the rare courage to persist he will
come to recognize the notes of any key, not by the number of lines
or spaces intervening between them and some landmark, but by their
relative distances from each other measured by the eye. But this
requires long practice. At first he must remember if he can, and when
he cannot he must count up to his unknown note from some remembered
one. It is, at best, a labor of Sisyphus. With many people--bright and
intelligent people, too--it requires years of practice to read new
music at sight even tolerably readily; for it is not simply a question
of learning the notes, difficult as that may be: there is a further
difficulty, and to many even a greater difficulty--that of the
measure. Not the number of beats in a measure or bar and their proper
accentuation--this is but the alphabet of time--but to group correctly
and rapidly the fractional notes, rests and prolongations in their
proper place in time. In very rapid music this becomes an herculean
task, requiring long-continued and arduous practice. It is not simply
a question of nice appreciation of rhythm, but of mathematical
calculation, to know instantly and unhesitatingly, for example, that
one-sixteenth, one half of one-sixteenth and one thirty-second added
together equal one-eighth--that is, one-third of the unit of time or
beat in six-eighths time.

Any one can see that such mental feats, ever varying as they are in
music, and demanding instant solution at the same time the attention
is given to the intonation, style, etc., must require an exceptional
temperament and natural capacity. The fact is, it is beyond the power
of most musicians. They must practise their instrumental and vocal
music, and learn it nearly "by heart," before they attempt to perform
it for others.

The writer of this has attended a class taught by one of Cheve's
pupils, and can testify to the efficiency of the method, though the
lessons were a very modest attempt to exemplify the perfection of
the system. The lessons of M. and Mme. Cheve were divided into three
parts: first, a drill in the principles of the theory of music;
second, singing scales and exercises; third, drills in "reading time,"
beating time, analyzing time, etc., ending with some diverting "round"
or "catch" or some exercise in vocal harmonies. On their method of
teaching time, more than on any other part of their system perhaps,
did the grand success of the Cheves depend. Rhythm was always taught
separately from intonation, it being contrary to their principle to
present two difficulties together before each had been mastered alone.

The first grand law of Galin's system is that _every isolated symbol
represents a unit of time_ or beat, whatever the measure. For example:

     5, unit of sound articulated.
     ., unit of sound prolonged.
     0, unit of silence.

The second law is that _the various divisions of the unit of time are
always united in a group under a principal bar, and such a bar always
contains the unit of time--never more, never less_. To illustrate:

     H | __        T | ___
     A | 55        H | 555
     L | __        I | ___
     V | ..        R | ...
     E | __        D | ___
     S | 00        S | 000
     . |           . |

Here the units of time--the numeral, the dot and the cipher--are
divided first into two equal parts, and then into three. In both cases
the groups represent units of time--one beat of a measure--according
to the rule. It will be noticed that the form of the notes is the
same whether whole or divided into fractions; that is, there are no
different forms for "crotchets," "quavers," "semiquavers," etc., the
expression of time being better provided for. Thus, halves or thirds
are indicated to the eye by a single bar surmounting two signs for
halves, three for thirds. If the halves or thirds have in their turn
been divided by _two_, then the principal bar covers two little groups
of _two_ signs each; if the halves or thirds have been divided by
_three_, then each principal bar covers two or three little groups of
_three_ signs each.

Nothing could be more simple than this. The eye has always before
it, separate and distinct, the unit of time or beat; and the mind
apprehends instantly the number of articulated sounds, prolongations
or silences (rests) that must be sung or played during that beat.
The eye has no hesitation, the mind no calculation, as to what note
commences or ends a beat. Even the most modest student of music will
see the immense advantage of this. Nor is there any need for the
multiplicity of fractions to express different kinds of time. The
moment the eye rests upon the score the student knows the measure as
definitely and certainly as he knows the letters of the alphabet.

"And is this all there is in this system of notation?" some one will
ask. Practically, Yes. There are the symbols of intonation, the
numerals and the dot--the dot below or above the notes showing the
octave ([5.] [.5]); the two diagonal lines indicating flats or sharps
(\3 /3); the horizontal bar indicating the time (123 123[*]); and the
vertical line or bar dividing the measures (123 | 432 |).

    ___ ___
[*: 123 123]

The following is the air "God Save the Queen!" or, as we call it,
"America," written in this method. The lower line, of course, is the
alto:

  KEY OF G.

                        _____                    ____
  1    1     2   |  7   .  1    2   | 3 3 4 | 3  .  2 1 |  2    1    7   |
  [5.] [5.] [6.] | [5.] . [6.] [7.] | 1 1 1 | 1  [7.] 1 | [6.] [5.] [5.] |

                    ___                       ___
  1 . 0 | 5 5 5 | 5 . 4 3 | 4    4    4   | 4 . 3  2   |
  5 . 0 | 3 3 3 | 3 . 2 1 |[7.] [7.] [7.] | 2 . 1 [7.] |

     ______    ______       ___     ___
  3  4    3    2    1   | 3 . 4 5 | 6 4 3  2   | 1 . . ||
  1 [6.] [5.] [4.] [3.] | 1 . 1 1 | 1   1 [7.] | 5 . . ||

It will be noticed that the dot in the second measure which prolongs
the note _si_ (7) is not placed against it, as we are accustomed to
see it. It is carried forward into the second beat, where it belongs.
There it is grouped with the note _do_ (1), and occupies one half of
that unit of time; for all the signs grouped under a line or under the
same number of lines are equal in time to each other, the same as
all isolated signs are. In the sixth measure the dot is isolated;
therefore it fills the whole beat, while the following beat is
represented by a rest (0). In two of the measures there are groups of
two notes. Each of the notes in these groups of course equals in time
half of an isolated note, for each occupies half the time of one beat.

The French say _dechiffrer la musique_--to puzzle it out, to decipher
it, as one would say of hieroglyphs on an Egyptian sarcophagus. The
term is well chosen. The causes of the obscurity of musical notation
are numerous, but the most prolific is undoubtedly expressing time by
the form of the symbols of sound. In slow movements, and where only
few modulations occur, this does not seem to be a serious
objection; but in the rapid movements of compound time it becomes
insupportable--at least after one has learned that there is a better
way. An example in 6/8 time--six eighth-notes to the measure--will
illustrate this:

[Illustration of 6/8 notes score]

Here each triplet fills the time of one-third of a beat; that is,
three-sixteenths equal one-eighth, according to the sublime precision
of the old notation! But then no such thing as a twenty-fourth note
is in use: three twenty-fourths would just do it! This is a part of a
vocal exercise. The learner would have to divide each beat into three
parts each, unless very familiar with such exercises; and one of these
divisions would fall on a rest, another in a prolongation, another in
the middle of an eighth note. In the new method see how the crooked
places are straightened:

     ---------------   ---------------
        -----  -----      -----  -----
     1  0 2 3  4 3 2   1  . 2 3  . 4 5

It "sings itself" the moment you look at it, after a little study
of this rational notation. Note also that there is no mathematical
absurdity here: the division is logical, and yet the air is perfectly
expressed in every particular.

The mastery of time in music is at best an arduous task, yet teachers
of music, as a rule, expect their pupils to learn it incidentally
while studying intonation. They give no special drill in pure time at
every lesson; and the result is that army of mediocre singers and
players who never become able to execute any but the very simplest
music at sight. They may know the theory of time, may be able to
explain to you clearly the divisions of every measure, but this is not
sufficient for the musician: he must decipher his measures with great
readiness, precision and rapidity, or he never rises above the
mediocre. The ambition to excel without hard labor is the bane of
students of the piano especially. It leads them to muddle over music
too difficult for them; finally, to learn it after a fashion, so that
they may be able to "rattle and bang" through it to the delight of
fond relatives and the amazement and pity of severe culture. Not that
we should have consideration for all that passes for severe culture
and exquisite sensitiveness among musical dilettanti. In no field of
art is there so much affectation, assumption and charlatanry as in
music. Some years ago a musician in New York of considerable
reputation refused to play on a friend's piano because, as he said, it
was a little out of tune and his ear was excruciated by the slightest
discord. The lady wondered that the instrument should be out of tune,
as it was new and of a celebrated manufacturer. She sent to the
establishment where it was made, however, and a tuner promptly
appeared. He tried the A string with his tuning-fork, ran his fingers
over the keyboard, declared the piano in perfect tune, and left. That
evening the musician called, and was informed that a tuner had "been
exercising his skill" upon the instrument. Thereupon he graciously
condescended to play for his hostess, and the sensitiveness of his ear
was no longer shocked. She never dared to undeceive him, but mentioned
the fact to another musician, a violinist, who exclaimed, greatly
amused, "The idea of a pianist pretending to be fastidious about
concord in music! Why, the instrument at its best is a bundle of
discords." Both of these musicians were guilty of affectation; for,
although the piano's chords are slightly dissonant, the intervals of
the chromatic scale are made the same by the violin-player as by the
pianist. What right, then, has the former to complain? To be sure, the
violinist _can_ make his intervals absolutely correct: he _can_ play
the enharmonic scale, which one using any of the instruments with
fixed notes cannot do. But does he, practically? Does he not also make
the same note for C sharp and D flat? The violinist mentioned of
course alluded to the process called _equal temperament_, by which
piano-makers, to avoid an impracticable extent of keyboard, divide the
scale into eleven notes at equal intervals, each one being the twelfth
root of 2, or 1.05946. This destroys the distinction between the
semitones, and C sharp and D flat become the same note. Scientists
show us that they are different notes, easily distinguished by the
ear. Representing the vibrations for C as 1, we shall have--

  C   C#    Db     D     D#    Eb     E,  etc.
  1 25/24  27/24  8/9  75/64  6/5    5/4, etc.

each note being increased by one twenty-fourth of itself, or in
absolute vibrations--

   C    C#   Db    D    D#   Eb     E,  etc.
  261  271  271   293  305  303    326, etc.

This is the enharmonic scale, having twenty-one notes. The chromatic
has eleven, and the name--it may be remarked in passing--is from the
Greek word for "color" ([Greek: chroma]) because the old composers
wrote these notes in colors, and had them so printed. Not a bad idea,
surely: many a learner on the piano would be overjoyed to see all the
ugly flats and sharps on the staff in brilliant holiday dress.

There is no reason at this day, when science in all fields is making
such progress, why the ordinary music-teacher should have so limited a
knowledge of his subject. He should be able to explain the fundamental
principles of the different scales upon the theory of vibration, and
to so educate the apprehension of his pupils that they will not be
content with the imperfect catechisms of the music-books in vogue. And
with the adoption of a rational system of writing music, which will
reduce the time and labor of learning it to one half, there will be
time for the niceties of a science of such vast importance to the
culture--and, indirectly, to the moral progress--of the world.

MARIE HOWLAND.




SAMBO: A MAN AND A BROTHER.


"But," I said eagerly, "you do not deny that slavery was a curse to
the country--to Southerners most of all?"

"My dear fellow," said Captain S----, knocking off the ashes from his
cigar, "don't go into that! We were talking about negroes, not about
slavery. I suppose," he added meditatively, "there are not many men in
the country who have faced more of the negro race than those of us
who spent some part of our term of service in the Freedmen's Bureau.
Imagine settling disputes from morning till night between negroes
and between negroes and whites! If you abolitionists--as you called
yourselves before the emancipation--want to have some of the romance
and sentiment of negroism dissolved, live amongst them for a time."

"You were in Virginia?" I said.

"Yes, but the negroes there are a better class than in the States
farther South and more remote from cities."

"How better?"

"Well, more intelligent. To see the deepest ignorance you have to
go to the cotton-plantations, miles in extent, where men, women and
children have been born and have died as cotton-pickers. Of course I
am not now speaking of the freedmen as they are, for it is ten years
since I was on duty in G----, Mississippi, where all the horrors of
freedom were first revealed to the poor creatures."

"'_Horrors_ of freedom!'" I repeated.

"It meant starvation to many, and intense suffering to others. Turn
out a nursery of children of five years old to care for themselves,
and they will fare better than many of the grown men and women of whom
I knew in my Southern experiences."

"You relieved G---- of the --th regiment?" I said.

"Yes, and I often think of our meeting at the depot. He had about two
minutes before taking the train to Vicksburg. 'Cap,' he said, 'go to
Sim's to board. Real Southern hospitality, and his wife's a mother if
you are sick--bound to have bilious fever, you know. And, Cap, those
confounded niggers think the Bureau is bound to back them up, right or
wrong, and in about ninety-nine cases out of a hundred they're wrong.
Clerk's got the reports and papers.'"

"Well?" I said.

"He was right. The way those planters allowed the negroes to impose
upon their good-nature and true generosity confounded me. I went to
relieve an oppressed race, and, by Jove! I was inclined to consider
the planters in that light."

"But I don't understand."

"I'll show you. When the planters found they could still have the
practised slave-labor in the cotton-fields by paying fair wages, they
made contracts with the negroes by the year. It was my fortune to be
the referee on all disputes on the accounts of the first year of such
contracts, and I solemnly declare the liberality and consideration of
the planters would astonish the hard-fisted business-men of some of
our factories. They knew the improvidence of the race, and out of
regard for them, instead of paying them in money, they allowed them to
obtain goods in their names at the leading stores. Almost invariably
these bills exceeded the amount stipulated for in the contract, but I
never knew one case where the employer made the negroes work out their
debt. When I would tell them how the accounts came out, they said:
'Well, captain, let it go: I'll pay the bills. These poor fellows do
not understand the use of money yet.'

"But the negroes had the laws of possession, the rights of freedom and
privileges of slavery in such a hopeless muddle that no Gordian knot
ever required more patience than an effort to enlighten them as to
their rights and wrongs. The only limit set to their credit at
the stores was that the purchases were to be confined to food and
clothing. Without any idea of money or economy, they were wasteful,
and heard with long faces that the pile of money they confidently
expected was awaiting them had already been spent. Conversations like
the following occurred many times a day:

"'No money, Mars' Cap'n? Why, ole mars' he done 'greed to gib me fou'
hund'ed dollars dis year, an' I done worked faithful, Mars' Cap'n; an'
now I ain't to have nuffin'!'

"'But you have had nearly five hundred dollars.'

"'Clare to Goodness, Mars' Cap'n, I ain't had one cent--not one cent.'

"'But you have had it in meal, bacon, calico and other goods at the
store.'

"'But dey allers gives a nigga his food and clothes, Mars'
Cap'n--_allers_. We ain't got to pay for dat ar, for sure?'

"'Yes. Now you can earn your own money you must pay for your own
food.'

"'But dey nebber does--nebber! And dar's only de ole 'ooman an' two
picaninnies. Dey's nebber ate fou' hund'ed dollars up in a year.'

"'But you have had a suit of clothes, and there is calico charged to
you.'

"'But we ain't got to pay for clothes? Dey allers 'lows a nigga two
suits a year--_allers_?

"And much argument failed to convince the poor fellows that food and
clothing were no longer to be had for nothing, the usual end of the
discussion being, often with great tears rolling down the black faces,
'An' I was promised fou' hund'ed dollars! Ole mars' done promised dat
ar, an' I've jes' worked dis whole year for nuffin'.'

"Their perfectly childlike faith in the promise of their old masters
made their disappointment more acute than can be imagined by those
who are used to the close bargains driven with the working community
farther North. 'Ole mars'' represented to them their sole idea of vast
wealth and power, and was usually almost worshipped.

"I do not deny the many horrible exceptions, the shocking cruelties,
that blot the records of slave-life; but I do maintain that they
were exceptions, and that nine cases out of ten--nay, more than that
proportion--that came under my personal observation proved that a
sincere love existed between masters and slaves. In many instances I
saw planters impoverished by the war supporting old slaves or whole
families in absolute idleness, simply because the poor creatures,
after a short trial of freedom's vicissitudes, had come back to 'home
an' ole mars',' and he had not the heart to turn them away.

"One woman, whose circumstances I knew, came to me for a pass to go
North.

"'But, Kate,' I said to her, 'you are much better off here than you
can be at the North.'

"'Done got _nuffin_' here,' she asserted positively.

"'You have that little cabin Mrs. H---- allows you to live in.'

"'Sho' now, Mars' Cap'n, 'course I has.'

"'But at the North you will have no house unless you can pay for it.'

"'Pay for it! Why, don't they gib deir niggas a cabin?'

"'No. You may get a room, but you will have to pay so much a week to
be allowed to live in it. And Mrs. H---- lets you have your food too.'

"'But dey'll gib a nigga her food, cap'n--nebber make her pay for a
han'fu' of meal an' a lash o' bacon?'

"'You will have to pay for every mouthful. And it is cold there too,
Kate--very cold at this time of the year. You will have to buy clothes
or freeze to death.'

"'But dey'll 'low me two suits?'

"'Not unless you pay for them. And work is not plenty, Kate, for the
cities are crowded with negroes who were discontented here. Suppose
you cannot get work, you will have no cabin, no food, no clothes.'"

"Did you convince her?" I asked.

"No. She said to me, 'Guess you's mistaken 'bout dat ar, Mars' Cap'n.
Dey _mus_' gib deir niggas a cabin an' a bite, you know; and dey makes
piles o' money. And sho' now, Mars' Cap'n, all de _free_ folks is
rich--dey mus' be. Nobody's po' dat's _free_.'

"You see," he added earnestly, "they did not know what freedom meant.
It was a gorgeous vision of doing as they pleased, unlimited riches
and idleness. They could work or not: whether they starved or not,
they had not taken into consideration. Freedom came upon them too
suddenly, and they had no idea of personal responsibility."

"But," I said, "they could form families, be free to keep their
children."

To my surprise, Captain S---- began to laugh. "Of all the ludicrous
scenes I remember," he said, "none were funnier than those occasioned
by the new ideas of matrimony. I remember one pretty pouting mulatto
about eighteen who came with a tall, powerful negro to the office for
a marriage license. They were married in the church, and some few
words were spoken of the solemnity of the bond between them. In about
two weeks the bride burst into my office one morning, followed by her
husband. 'Mars' Cap'n,' she said, 'can't I go home ef I choose?'

"'Certainly,' I said.

"'Dar, you nigga!' she said. 'I's gwine home dis bery day.'

"'But, Mars' Cap'n,' said the man, 'the minister said she was to lib
'long o' me fur allers.'

"'Oh,' I said, 'she wants to leave you?'

"'Jes' fo' sure I does! I'se gwine home: I done tired o' bein'
married, I is. I'se gwine back to ole missus.'

"'Does your husband treat you badly?' I asked.

"'Nebber, Mars' Cap'n,' said the man earnestly. 'I done make the fire
ebery mornin', an' cook her a hoecake 'long o' my own, so dat gal
sleep half de day. An' I done give her two pair earrings.'

"'What do you complain of?' I asked the bride.

"'Sho' now, Mars' Cap'n, I ain't a-complainin'; only I done tired o'
dat nigga, an' I'se gwine home.'

"It was wasted talk, I found afterward, that I spent in trying
to convince her of her duty to her husband. They left the office
together, but the bride disappeared, and the disconsolate husband
never found her, to my knowledge. One of the neighbors told me, 'He
jes' spiled dat gal, Mars' Cap'n, a-lettin' her have her own way all
de time. My ole woman ain't wuff shucks if I don't ware her out 'bout
onct a week.'

"'How do you wear her out?' I asked.

"'Jes' wif a stick, Mars' Cap'n. Women ain't good for nuffin' 'less
you give 'em a good warin' out when they gits sarsy.'

"And I found afterward that this man beat his wife till she fainted
about once a week. The best of the joke was, that when I remonstrated
with him the woman told me she 'didn't want no Bureau 'terference with
her ole man!'"

"But, Cap," I said, "you cannot defend the custom of tearing children
from their mothers?"

"No," he said gravely: "it hardened them. I have been as soft-hearted
as any man over the supposed maternal anguish of negro women, but I
assure you, old fellow, my own observation quite cured me. It may be
there are cases, such as we weep over in _Uncle Tom's Cabin_, but my
own experience shows not one. I think the custom of taking children
in infancy to put them in dozens under the care of old negresses past
work may be answerable for the indifference I have seen manifested by
negro mothers. I have known more than one case where the love of
a colored nurse for her white charge was strong as mother-love. I
remember one woman who came to me in a violent rage to ask if I could
not punish her mistress for striking her own child. The little fellow
had been naughty, and had been corrected by his mother. 'What fo' she
done slap Mars' Tom?' she asked: 'he ain't done nuffin', po' chile!'

"'Nonsense!' I said. 'The boy was naughty, and his mother boxed his
ears. Why, Chloe,' I added, 'what do _you_ mean by complaining? I
have seen you take your own baby by one leg and throw him across the
kitchen, without any regard to the stoves or kettles he might hit.'

"''Course you has,' she said coolly: 'he's allers under my feet.'

"'But you might strike his head and kill him.'

"'Well,' was the startling answer, 'he's nuffin' but a nigga.'

"And that was her own child, habitually treated with neglect and blows
by his mother, while she cried over the cruelty of slapping the white
child she had nursed. And it was not to curry favor, but from a
sincere belief that the one child should be caressed and loved, while
the other must expect knocks and blows, being 'nuffin' but a nigga.'

"One old crone told me, 'I've done had sixteen picaninnies, Mars'
Cap'n, but I nebber seed none o' dem after dey was 'bout six weeks
old. Dey was in de nussery, an' I was a rale smart cotton-picker, and
couldn't be spar'd to nuss chillen, nohow.'

"'But were you not allowed to see your own children?' I asked, as much
shocked as you would be.

"''Lowed! 'Course I was 'lowed ef I wanted to bother 'bout 'em. But
Law's sakes! dey was all mixed up 'long o' de others, an' I wa'n't
goin' fussin' 'bout some oder woman's baby, likely 'nuff.'

"Many such instances convinced me speedily that--whether from want of
natural affection or from their having been educated to indifference I
do not pretend to say--negro mothers in Mississippi had certainly no
violent affection for their own offspring.

"But the most shocking case that came under my immediate notice was
that of a woman seeking employment. She came to my office with two
handsome boys, all three being bright mulattoes. The little fellows
were about three and five years of age, with large brown eyes and
pretty faces, full of fun and vivacity. The mother was a tall,
fine-looking woman of twenty-two or -three, and claimed to be a good
cook. I had one place in my mind, and sent her there, as a friend had
mentioned to me that he wanted a cook, and if one came for employment
would like to have her sent to him.

"Unfortunately, he objected to the children, but, thinking the mother
could board them out, told her to 'get rid of the children' and he
would employ her.

"The next day he came to me with a face of horror. 'Captain,' he said,
'the cook you sent me has murdered both her children!'

"'Murdered them?' I cried.

"'Yes. She is in the office, and you will have to see her, I suppose.
It is awful!'

"I found the woman waiting my coming with a face of perfect composure.

"'Hannah,' I said, after I had heard the accusation of the people in
the house where the crime was committed, 'what have you to say?'

"'Nuffin', Mars' Cap'n. Mars' T---- done sed I mus' git rid o' de
picaninnies; and dey was bothersome, anyway--allers eatin', 'deed dey
was, Mars' Cap'n'--this very earnestly, as if to defend herself--'
allers a-hollerin' for suffin' to eat.'

"'But, Hannah, Mr. T---- wanted you to leave them with some of the
women to board.'

"'Nebber sed so. Jes' sed--'deed he did--"You get rid o' dem chillens
an' come here to cook." So I jes' waited till dey was asleep, an' cut
deir throats. Dey nebber screeched.'

"I was sick with horror, but through the whole of the examination the
woman showed no sign of emotion, though we all went to the house where
the two pretty babies lay, stone dead."

"What became of her?" I asked.

"I have forgotten. I sent her to Vicksburg, as the case was too grave
for my decision. I should not have held her accountable, as she was
evidently under the impression that absolute obedience was the law for
her race.

"It was odd," he continued, "but after that tragedy there came a farce
in true dramatic order. My office was hardly cleared of the parties
concerned in this dreadful murder when I was attracted to the window
by the most horrible yelping and squealing, and saw two negroes, black
as coals, barefooted, bareheaded and ragged, one leading a dog, one
trying to drag two pigs into the yard attached to my quarters. Seeing
me, one of them made a bow. 'Sarvent, Mars' Cap'n,' he said.

"'What do you want?' I asked. 'Tie those pigs up before you come in,'
for he was dragging them up the steps.

"'Likely shoats, ain't dey?' said the other eagerly. 'We jes' come
down 'bout dem ar shoats, Mars' Cap'n.'

"'An' dat ar dog,' broke in the other.

"Here the dog made a dash at the pigs, and in trying to escape the
latter ran between the legs of the men, upsetting one. Such a hubbub
of squealing pigs, barking dog, laughing and swearing men as ensued
beggars description. When there was some order restored, the pigs and
dog tied up in the yard, the biggest of the darkeys, scraping his best
bow, said, 'We jes' come, Mars' Cap'n, 'bout a little complexity 'long
o' dat ar dog and dem two shoats.'

"'No 'plexity it all, cap'n,' said the other.--'Jes' you keep to
facks, you Hannibal.--You see, Mars' Cap'n, dat ar nigga he had de
dog: jes' a good-for-nuffin' mongrel, _he_ is, fo' sure now.'

"'Rale likely dog, Mars' Cap'n,' broke in the other. 'Dat ar dog'll
twist a pig off'n his legs onto his back quicker'n winkin'--'deed will
he.'

"I had been long enough in G---- to appreciate this speech, having
seen droves of pigs in gardens or vegetable-patches routed by dogs.
A monstrous pig would roll over perfectly helpless after a dexterous
twist of a small dog holding the hind leg of the heavy animal between
his teeth. I do not know how they are trained, but it is far more
mirth-provoking than any circus to see two or three little yelping
dogs rout some fifty great pigs in this way.

'"Ain't wuff two shoats,' growled the other darkey.

"'Wuff twenty-'leven racks o' bones like dem ar.'

"'Stop!' I said.--'You speak, Hannibal, and you wait till your turn,'
I added to the other man.

"'You see, Mars' Cap'n,' said Hannibal, 'Bill he wanted dat ar dog o'
mine powerful bad--'deed you did, you nigga!--an' he done swopped off
two missable weak ole shoats on me for dat dog. Well, Mars' Cap'n, I
done fed up dem shoats fo' free or fou' months; an', now dey's likely
pigs an' a-makin' bacon, Bill he wants to swop back, he does.'

"'You see, Mars' Cap'n,' broke in the other, 'dat ar dog was to be
a huntin'-dog, he was. Wish ter gracious you'd jes' see him _hunt_!
Stan' an' bark an' yelp till dar ain't a quail in ten miles, he will,
an' splash inter de ribber till he'll scare ebery duck fo' seven
miles.'

"And then they went at it, abusing and defending the dog, till we
heard a great scuffling, and saw the pigs had broken loose and were
tearing down the street, followed by the dog, every nigger in sight,
and, bringing up the rear, Hannibal and Bill, who never returned. How
they settled their dispute I never heard."

"One! two!" chimed the mantel-clock, and we parted for the night,
while I lay awake a long time musing upon the "Sambo" of my
imagination and the "Sambo" of the experiences of Captain S----.

S. A. SHEILDS.




THE EMPRESS EUGENIE.


When the bloody business of the _coup d'etat_ was definitely finished,
the murder-stains washed from the streets, the victims interred, and
a few thousand of the best and boldest hearts of France had taken the
sorrowful road of exile, the new emperor bethought him of how best to
gild his freshly-gained throne.

A court was to be constructed, and that right speedily. After the
gloomy tragedy of the overthrow of the Republic, France was to be
treated to the grand spectacular piece of the Second Empire. And for
that a _corps de ballet_ and trained supernumeraries were needed. The
role of leading lady, too, was vacant. An empress was to be sought for
without delay. Negotiations were opened with several princely houses
for the hands of damsels of royal birth, but speedily came to
naught. As yet, the new-made emperor was a parvenu amid his royal
contemporaries. The negotiations for the hand of the Swedish princess
Vasa did indeed promise at one time to be crowned with success. But
the emperor sent his physician to take a look at the lady, and to
judge if her physique promised healthful and numerous offspring; and
this fact, coming to the ears of her family, caused a sudden stop to
be put to the whole affair. Meantime, at the reunions of Compiegne,
the personality of a young and lovely foreign countess was coming
prominently into notice, owing to the evident impression that her
charms had made upon the susceptible heart of Napoleon III. This lady,
Eugenie Montijo, countess de Teba, was no longer in the first bloom of
girlhood, having been born in 1826. But she was in the full meridian
of a beauty which, had the crown matrimonial of France, like the apple
of Ate, been dedicated to the fairest, would have ensured her the
throne by sheer right divine. It is indeed said that as a young girl
her charms were in no wise remarkable: on her first appearance in
society at the court of Madrid she created no sensation whatever. She
was too pale and quiet-looking to attract attention. But one day, the
court being at Aranjuez, during a _fete champetre_, Mademoiselle de
Montijo had the good or ill fortune to fall into one of the ornamental
fishponds in the garden. She was taken out insensible, and her wet and
clinging garments revealed a form of such statuesque perfection that
all Madrid went raving about her beauty. She plunged a commonplace
girl--she rose a Venus. And when she first attracted the notice of
Napoleon she was indisputably one of the loveliest women in Europe.
She was tall, slender, exquisitely proportioned, and her walk was that
of a goddess. Her features were delicate and regular; her eyes long,
almond-shaped, and full of a tender and dreamy sweetness: her small
and faultlessly-shaped head was set upon a long, slender neck with the
swaying grace of a lily upon its stalk; her shoulders were sloping and
beautifully moulded, notwithstanding her lack of embonpoint, for
in those days she was as slight as a reed. A profusion of fair
hair--which she wore turned back from the face in the graceful
style known as "a la Pompadour," but speedily to be rechristened "a
l'Imperatrice"--and a hand and foot of truly royal beauty completed an
ensemble of charms that were well calculated to drive poor masculine
humanity out of its seven senses.

Cold and calculating as was Napoleon III., it drove him out of _his_,
for in every respect such a marriage was an unwise and an impolitic
one. It lent to his new-founded throne neither the lustre of an
alliance with royalty nor the popularity that might have been gained
by the selection of a Frenchwoman as the partner of his fortunes. The
Spanish blood of the countess de Teba made her obnoxious in the eyes
of many of her future subjects. Moreover, the antecedents of the lady
were not altogether without reproach. Not that any actual stigma had
ever clung to her character, but she had always been looked upon in
European circles as that anomalous character in such society, a fast
girl. Stories, some true and some false, were circulated respecting
her follies and her escapades. Evidently, if Caesar's wife should be
above suspicion, she was not the person who should have been selected
to become the wife of Caesar.

The fact of the emperor's interest in the fair foreigner was revealed
by an incident, slight in itself and only important by the emotions
which it called forth. At one of the small intimate reunions at
Compiegne, Mademoiselle de Montijo happened, while dancing, to
entangle her feet in the long folds of her train, and she fell
with some violence to the floor. The extreme anxiety and distress
manifested by the emperor acted as a revelation to all present. A
stormy opposition to the projected alliance was at once organized
among the familiars of the emperor--the men who had aided in his
elevation, and to whom it was too recent for them to stand in awe of
him. MM. de Morny and de Persigny in particular were violent in their
opposition. In fact, the latter went so far as to tell the emperor at
the close of a long and stormy interview on the subject that it was
hardly worth while to have made a _coup d'etat_ to end it in such a
manner. M. de Morny argued and reasoned with his imperial brother, but
neither the violence of Persigny nor the arguments of De Morny made
any impression on the cold and inflexible will of Napoleon III., and
a few days later the countess made her appearance at one of the
court-balls in a dress looped and wreathed with the imperial
emblem-flower, the violet. The emperor, advancing toward her,
presented her with a superb bouquet of the same significant blossoms.
The meaning of that little scene was fully understood by the
spectators. The marriage was irrevocably decided upon, and all that
they had to do was to submit to the imperial will and make ready to
offer their homage to the new empress. With the solitary exception of
Prince Napoleon, the imperial family submitted with a good grace to
the matrimonial projects of their chief. The Princess Mathilde in
particular, although the marriage would depose her from the place
that she then occupied as the first lady of the court, declared her
willingness to bear the train of the new empress in public if such a
duty should be required of her, as it had been of the sisters of the
First Napoleon.

There remained, however, an arrangement to be completed which, though
awkward and painful, was yet positively necessary. No one better than
Napoleon III. was aware of the truth of the old adage which declares
that a man must be off with the old love before he is on with the new.
In an hotel on the Rue du Cirque dwelt a lady who had been the partner
of his days of exile and ill-fortune, who had impoverished herself in
his service, and who had devoted herself to furthering his aims with a
persistency worthy of a better cause. This lady, the well-known Mrs.
Howard, was now to be got rid of. A frank and open rupture was not in
the style or the ideas of her royal and sphinx-like lover. A pretended
secret mission to England lured her from Paris. She learned the truth
at Boulogne, and hastened back to her home. There she found that her
hotel had been visited by the police, and that a cabinet wherein she
kept the letters of Louis Napoleon had been broken open and rifled of
its contents. Deeply wounded by the treatment she had received, she
withdrew, not without dignity, from all attempt at contesting the
position with her rival. "I go," she wrote to Napoleon, "a second
Josephine, bearing with me your star." To do justice to the emperor,
it must be confessed that he treated her in other respects with royal
liberality. The title of countess of Beauregard and a fortune of a
million of dollars were allotted to her. She withdrew to England,
where she afterward married. In 1865 a great longing to behold
Paris once more came upon her. Her youth and beauty gone, a worn,
disappointed and unhappy woman (for her marriage had turned out
most wretchedly), she returned to Paris only to die. Her eldest son
succeeded to the title of count de Beauregard, and was made consul
at Zanzibar. Since the downfall of the Empire he has lived a sort of
Bohemian existence in Paris, where his striking resemblance to Louis
Napoleon has won for him the nickname of "the ghost" (_le revenant_).

Meanwhile, the preparations for the marriage were proceeding
vigorously. The future empress and her mother had been installed in
apartments at the Elysee. The household of the royal bride was already
formed, including the princess of Essling as chief lady-in-waiting,
and the Count (afterward Duke) Tascher de la Pagerie as
head-chamberlain. The nuptial ceremony took place on the 30th of
January. The bride's dress was composed of white velvet, with a veil
of point d'Angleterre, the time being too short to have one of point
d'Alencon manufactured. The details of the ceremony were closely
copied from those of the wedding of Napoleon I. and Marie Louise, and
the state-coach was the same that had been used at the coronation of
the great emperor. It was a magnificent vehicle, covered with gilding
and ornaments, and so heavy that the eight fine horses that drew it
were less for show than for actual service. The ceremony took place in
the cathedral of Notre Dame, which was illuminated for the occasion
with fifteen thousand wax-lights. The bride was visibly agitated.
She was as pale as death, and her voice in making the responses was
scarcely audible. No wonder if in that hour a premonition of
evil weighed upon her soul. The civil register of the imperial
family--which, preserved by the devotion of some of the adherents
of the Bonapartes, had been brought forth to be used at the civil
ceremony which had taken place the day before--might well have
thrilled her with forebodings. The last record inscribed on those
pages had been the birth of the king of Rome. How had it fared with
that scion of a mighty father? how might it fare with her own possible
offspring?

It speedily became evident that the marriage, unpopular as it had been
among the counsellors of the emperor, was still more so among the
people at large. No cries of "Long live the empress!" save from the
throats of paid agents of the government, rose to greet the beautiful
Eugenie when she appeared in public. People stared sullenly at her as
at a passing pageant, but were moved neither by her charms nor her
gentle and gracious courtesy to any outburst of enthusiasm. To the
masses she was "L'Espagnole," the heiress to the bitter hate inspired
by the Austrian, Marie Antoinette. Epigrams on the marriage, seasoned
with the cruel and ferocious wit for which the Parisians are so
famous, circulated on all sides. Some bold hand affixed to the walls
of the Tuileries a series of doggerel verses wherein the empress was
first called by the nickname of "Badinguette," which was universally
applied to her after the fall of the Empire. The author of these lines
was discovered and banished to Cayenne, but his verses, set to a
popular tune, were long sung in secret in the taverns and workshops of
the suburbs.

To a certain extent, popular opinion respecting the young and lovely
Eugenie was correct. She was indeed emphatically not the wife that
Louis Napoleon should have chosen. A woman of intelligence and force
of character might have done much to aid in founding his throne on
a more stable basis. The downfall of the Empire, though probably
inevitable, might have been delayed for at least a generation. But his
choice had fallen upon a lady who had but one qualification for the
position in which he had placed her--namely, extreme personal beauty.
She was indeed kind-hearted and amiable, and among the temptations
of a court as dissolute as was that of Louis XV. she preserved her
reputation unspotted. But she was narrow-minded and unintellectual, a
bigoted Catholic, and so blinded by national and religious prejudices
that many of the most fatal mistakes of the Empire are directly
traceable to her influence. An alliance with a royal princess would
have strengthened the throne of Louis Napoleon: an alliance with a
French lady would have drawn toward him the hearts of the nation. But
Eugenie was neither a princess nor a Frenchwoman, nor yet a woman
of vigorous and commanding intellect; and his union with her was
undoubtedly a serious political error.

But for some time all went well. She ruled gracefully over her
allotted realm, which was that of Fashion. The influence of a crowned
Parisian beauty over the social doings of the world can hardly be
over-estimated. Eugenie invented toilettes that were copied by all the
women in the civilized world: she invented crinoline, and added a new
product to the manufactures of the earth. No woman better understood
the art of dress than she. Certain of her toilettes have retained
their celebrity to this day. Never did the art of costly dress reach
so high a pinnacle. She fringed her ball-dresses with diamonds, and
covered them with lace worth two thousand dollars a yard. Then, like
many wise and economical ladies, she undertook to have her dresses
made at home, and installed a dressmaker's establishment in the
Tuileries, where these splendid garments were prepared under her
immediate supervision. The workroom was directly over her private
apartments. By means of a trapdoor, whose mechanism was skilfully
dissimulated among the ornaments of the cornice and ceiling, a
mannikin, arrayed in the garb that was in progress, could be lowered
for the empress's inspection. This singular branch of the royal
household was under the charge of a functionary whose business it
was to purchase silks, velvets and laces at wholesale prices and to
superintend the workwomen. The knowledge of its existence was soon
spread abroad, and did the empress infinite harm. The petty economy of
the proceeding horrified and disgusted the Parisians, who, economical
themselves, have ever scorned that virtue in their sovereigns. Many
of the partisans of the court denied the existence of such an
establishment, but during the period that elapsed between the downfall
of the Empire and the outbreak of the Commune the curious throngs that
visited the Tuileries might trace amid the mouldings of the ceiling in
the empress's boudoir the outline of the famous trapdoor.

It would have been well had she never turned her attention to any less
feminine or more dangerous pursuits. But in an evil hour for France
and for the nation she undertook to dabble in politics. Left regent
during the Austro-Italian campaign, she acquired a taste for reigning,
which was increased by the flatteries of her husband's ministers and
the counsels of her confessor. It was currently said at court that the
Mexican expedition "came ready-made from her boudoir." She hated the
United States, as a true daughter of Spain could not fail to detest
the coveters of Cuba and the friends of progress and of enlightenment.
Consequently, she did not fail to further a project whose real aim was
to deal the great republic, then struggling in the throes of civil
war, a decisive stab in the back. She approved of the war with China,
and condescended to enrich her private apartments with the spoils of
the Summer Palace. But her pet project, the one that she had most at
heart, was the war with Prussia. The now historical phrase, "This is
_my_ war," was uttered by her to General Turr soon after the outbreak
of hostilities. And when, an exile and discrowned, she first sought
the presence of Queen Victoria, she sobbed out with tears of vain
remorse, "It was all my fault. Louis did not want to go to war: 'twas
I that forced him to it." Poor lady! bitterly indeed has she atoned
for that unwise exercise of undue influence. The holy crusade of which
she dreamed against the enemies of her Church and of her husband's
throne ended in giving her son's inheritance to the winds.

Nor was her domestic life a happy one. She loved her husband;
and indeed Napoleon III. seems to have possessed a rare power of
attracting and securing the affections of those about him. Few that
came within the influence of his kindly courtesy, his grave and gentle
voice, but fell captive to the spell thus subtly exercised. He made
many and warm personal friends, even among those who were hostile to
his politics and his dynasty. And by three women at least he was loved
with a fervor and a constancy that no trial could shake. One of these
was the Princess Mathilde, his cousin and once his intended wife;
another was Mrs. Howard; the third was his wife. But, like many men
who are much loved, Louis Napoleon was incapable of anything like
genuine and constant love for any woman. His passion for his lovely
empress was as brief as it had been violent. He vexed her soul and
tortured her heart by countless conjugal infidelities. She resented
this state of affairs with all the vehemence of an outraged wife and a
jealous Spaniard. It is said that she once soundly boxed the ears of
the distinguished functionary who filled in her husband's household
the post that the infamous Lebel held during the latter days of the
life of Louis XV. Twice she fled abruptly from the court, unable to
bear the presence of insolent and triumphant rivals, and the ingenuity
of the fashionable chroniclers of the day was taxed to invent
plausible pretexts for her sudden journeys to the Scottish or the
Italian lakes. No wonder that the soft eyes grew sadder and the
smiles more forced as the years passed on and brought only weariness,
disenchantment and the shadow of the coming end.

Alphonse Daudet has said in _Le Nabab_ that there exists in the life
of every human being a golden moment, a luminous peak, where all of
glory or success that destiny reserves is granted; after which comes
the decadence and the descent. This golden moment in the life of the
empress Eugenie was the occasion of the first French international
exhibition in 1855. She was then in the full pride of her womanhood
and her loveliness. The greatest lady in Europe, Queen Victoria, had
been her guest, had embraced her as an equal and had given her proofs
of real and sincere friendship. Enveloped in clouds of priceless
lace and blazing with diamonds of more than regal splendor, she had
presided, _la belle des belles_, over the opening of the exhibition in
the Champs Elysees. And, above all, the event so anxiously desired by
her husband and by the supporters of his cause was near at hand. She
was soon to become the mother of the heir to the imperial throne. With
every aspiration gratified, every wish accomplished, she did indeed
seem in that year of grace the most enviable of human beings. The
later splendors of the exhibition of 1867 were more apparent than
real, and the gorgeous assemblage of reigning sovereigns brought
with it for Eugenie a subtle and premeditated insult. The kings and
emperors who responded to the imperial invitation and came to visit
the court of Napoleon III., with one exception, that of the king
of the Belgians, left their wives at home. They acted as men do in
private life when they receive invitations to a ball given by a family
of doubtful standing with whom they are unwilling to quarrel.

I have spoken of the birth of the prince imperial. It may perhaps
interest the reader to know how much this auspicious event cost the
French nation. Not less than nine hundred thousand francs (one hundred
and eighty thousand dollars), of which twenty thousand dollars were
paid for the young gentleman's first wardrobe. The whole amount
expended at the birth of the Comte de Paris did not exceed this latter
sum.

The details of the scenes at the Tuileries after the downfall of the
Empire, and those of the flight of the empress, are well known. It
is now generally conceded that after Sedan the fate of the imperial
dynasty was in the hands of Eugenie. Had she withdrawn to Tours or to
Bourges, summoned the Assembly to meet there, and called around her
the partisans of the Empire, she might have saved the heritage of her
son. But her essentially feminine and frivolous nature was not fitted
for deeds of high resolve or for heroic determinations. A morbid dread
of following in the footsteps of Marie Antoinette had pursued her in
the later years of her prosperity. She knew that she was unpopular,
and visions of the fate of the Austrian queen or of the still more
horrible one of the Princesse de Lamballe must have risen before her
as the shouts of the Parisian mob, exulting in the downfall of
her husband, met her ear. In that hour of disaster and of woe no
Frenchman, for all the boasted chivalry of the race, was at hand
to aid or protect the fair lady who had so long queened it at the
Tuileries. The Austrian ambassador, the Italian minister, the Corsican
Pietrio planned and managed her escape from the palace. She took
refuge in the house of an American, her dentist, Dr. Thomas W.
Evans. He it was who got her out of Paris and accompanied her to the
seacoast, placing his own carriage at her disposal. She crossed the
Channel in the yacht of an English gentleman. Thus guarded by aliens,
she passed from the land of her queenship to that of exile.

To-day, in her abode at Chiselhurst, the widow of Napoleon III.
attracts scarcely less of the world's interest and attention than
she did as throned empress and queen of Fashion. Unfortunately, the
supreme tact that once was her distinguishing quality seems to have
deserted her in the days of her decadence. She, the most graceful of
women, has not learned the art of growing old gracefully. She had
played the part of a beauty and the leader of fashion for years. Now
that she is past fifty that character is no longer possible to her.
But she might have assumed another--less showy, perhaps, but surely
far more touching. With her whitening hairs she might have worthily
worn the triple dignity of her widowhood, her maternity and her
misfortune. She has chosen instead, with a weakness unworthy of the
part that she has played on the wide stage of contemporary history, to
clutch vainly after the fleeting shadow of her vanished charms. A head
loaded with false yellow hair, a face covered with paint and powder, a
mincing gait and the airs and graces of an antiquated coquette,--such
to-day is she who was once the world's wonder for her loveliness and
grace, a bewigged Mrs. Skewton succeeding to the dazzling vision that
swerved the calculating policy of Napoleon III. and won his callous
heart, and that still smiles upon us from the canvas of Winterhalter.

LUCY H. HOOPER.

       *       *       *       *       *




OUR MONTHLY GOSSIP.



A LOST COLONY.


Why does nobody--antiquarian, historian, or even novelist--open again
that forgotten page of history, the story of the lost colony of
Norwegians who disappeared in the fourteenth century from the shores
of Greenland? Doctor Hayes, after he came back, had a good deal to say
of them, but he did not gather all the facts, and his book, I believe,
is now out of print.

I know no mystery made of such nightmare stuff as this in history;
and mysteries are growing scarce now-a-days as eggs of the terrible
Dinornis: we cannot afford to lose one of them.

The foremost figure in the story is of course Leif _hin-hepna_ ("the
happy"). There is much to be unearthed concerning that famous pioneer
in discovery and religion, and we Americans surely ought to have
enough interest in him to do it, as Leif unearthed this continent for
us out of the hold of the sea and Demigorgon ages ago, while the dust
of which Columbus was to be made centuries later was yet blowing loose
about the streets of Genoa. Leif, besides discovering new worlds,
turned the souls of all his father's subjects from paganism to such
Christianity as the times afforded. I protest, this vigorous young
Greenlander heads the roll of unrecognized heroes in the world:
heathen and Christians have made demigods and saints out of much
flimsier stuff than he.

The colony, too, out of which he came, what a spectral shadow it is
beside the live flesh-and-blood figures of other nations! At the
banquet of the boar-eating Scottish thanes there was one empty chair,
and that was filled by a ghost. We hear of the East and West Bygds,
settlements with hundreds of farms, churches, cathedrals, monasteries,
set on the narrow rim of green coast which edges Greenland, lying
between the impenetrable wall of ice inland and the Arctic Sea
without. They had their religion, which Leif brought to them; they
were busy and prosperous; they married, traded, fought, loved and
died; and with a breath they all vanished from off the face of the
earth. There is no ghost-story like this in literature.

Where will you find, too, such a delightful flavor of ancient mystery
as in the old chronicles which tell of these people? Besides the
Sagas there are the voyages of long-ago-forgotten navigators--Arthur
himself, the Venetian brothers Nicolo and Antonio Zeni, King Zichmni,
divers Frisian fishermen. These old records, coffee-colored with
age and frail as skeleton leaves, are yet to be found in certain
libraries, and surely would tempt any one with a soul above
newspapers. In them you shall hear how these voyagers, in their poor
barkentines of from ten to two hundred tons, entered into this region
of enormous tides, of floating hordes of mountainous icebergs, of
flaming signs in the sky--into all the horrors, in fact, of an
Arctic winter and night, darkened still deeper for them by nameless
superstitious terrors. They went down to these deeps in very much the
temper with which a living man now-a-days would adventure into hell.
The icy peaks of the far-off land they knew were glittering silver,
and the sea was full of malignant spirits which guarded it. A
mountain-magnet lay hid under the sea, dragging the ships down to it
(as late, indeed, as 1830 skilled Danish navigators declared that they
felt the stress from it, and fled in terror): the unnatural tides were
the breathing of angry Demigorgon. There were, however, other sights
and sounds not to be explained in even this reasonable fashion. On a
fair day and a calm sea panic would seize the soul of every man on
board, and the ship would turn and beat homeward, "as one who knows a
frightful fiend doth follow him behind."

It is the mystery of the lost colony, however, which ought to be
opened by some competent hand. In 1406, Queen Margaret, it will be
remembered, laid an interdict upon trade with them: for two centuries
afterward not even a passing barkentine touched upon the Greenland
shore. At the end of that time, when explorers were sent from the
civilized world in search of the long-forgotten colonists, they
had utterly vanished. There, to this day, are their dwellings and
churches, solidly built of stone in an architectural style which Graah
fifty years ago described as simple and elegant: there are even the
ruins of the monastery which the Zeni brothers declare was heated by
a magical hot sulphurous spring, the waters of which were conveyed
through the building by pipes. But the people had absolutely
disappeared. Not even a bit of pottery, a grave or a bone was left;
which last is a noteworthy circumstance, as portions of the human body
are almost indestructible in that climate. Seventeen expeditions have
been sent out by the Danish and Norwegian governments in search of
this lost colony, the last of which was within the present half
century. One of these was headed by Egedi, a poor Norwegian clergyman
to whom is owing the civilization of Greenland, and of whose strange
heroic life we know too little.

There are two or three conjectures to account for the disappearance of
this colony. One is that they were all murdered by the Skroeellings.
But where are their bones? Besides, the colonists numbered from
fifteen to twenty thousand, and were much superior to the natives in
size, strength, intelligence and knowledge of war.

Graah, a Danish navigator who came in search of them in 1828, believes
that they were carried off bodily by the English after the ravages
of the "black death" in England, to repair the waste of human life,
citing a treaty of 1433 in which England was charged with abducting
Danish subjects for that end. Another theory is that the Frisian king
Zichmni carried them off captive. Pope Nicholas asserts this outrage
as a fact in a bull in 1448. But Zichmni is as uncertain a personage
in history as Demigorgon; and the good popes were not so infallible as
to matters of general news before the establishment of telegraph and
postal service as they are now.

Mr. Dalton Dorr, who accompanied Hayes, tells me that among the
Esquimaux there is a tradition that a colony of foreigners once owned
the land, and about five centuries ago emigrated in a body northward,
crossing the Mer de Glace--that they found an open sea, and somewhere
within the eternal rampart of snow and ice now dwell securely by its
shores. As early as 1500 the migratory Skroeellings told of this colony
far to the north-east. These rumors possessed substance enough to
warrant the expeditions from Denmark, which have all been directed to
the eastern coast. Graah heard from his guides of a strange people
with high features, hoarse voices and large stature living beyond the
limits passed by Europeans.

Here is a mystery surely worth finding out--a people exiled from their
kind for centuries living at the Pole--something better worth search
than even Franklin's bones. To give it reality, too, we must remember
how many Arctic explorers have caught sight, as they thought, of an
open sea near the Pole--a sea with strong, iceless swells, and on
whose shores warm rains fell. Nobody need suggest that these people
would probably, after our search, not be worth looking for. What shall
we do with the North-west Passage when we have found it?

R. H. D.



THE DIFFICULTIES OF BEING AGREEABLE.


"A man will please more by never offending than by giving a great deal
of delight." In this remark of Doctor Johnson's lies the art of being
agreeable. But nothing is more difficult than to avoid offending. Most
people are offended by trifles. For instance, persons generally take
umbrage at superior brilliance of conversation. "The man who talks for
fame will never please." Even he who talks to unburden his mind will
please only some old and solitary friend. Large experience and great
learning, however quietly carried, are very offensive to those who
have them not. Clever things cannot be said unobtrusively enough. A
person so brilliant as to make others feel that his efforts are above
theirs will be detested. Moreover, one of the difficulties of being
agreeable is that the apprehension of offending and the small hope of
pleasing destroy all captivation of manner. The confident expectation
of pleasing is an infallible means of pleasing. Characters pleased
with themselves please others, for they are joyous and natural in
mien, and are at liberty from thinking of themselves to pay successful
attention to others. Still, the self-conceited and the bragging are
never attractive, self being the topic on which all are fluent and
none interesting. They who dwell on self in any way--the self-deniers,
the self-improvers--are hateful to the heart of civilized man.
The Chinese, who knew everything beforehand, are perfect in
self-abnegation of manner. "How are your noble and princely son and
your beautiful and angelic daughter?" says Mandarin Number One.--"Dog
of a son have I none, but my cat of a daughter is well," says Mandarin
Number Two.

To set up for an invariably agreeable person you must adjust yourself
to the peculiarities of others. You must talk of books to bookworms:
you must be musical with musicians, scientific with savants.
Furthermore, you have to make believe all the time that you are
enjoying yourself. The belle is a lady who has an air of enjoying
herself with whomsoever she talks. We like those who seem to delight
in our company. You must not overdo it, and thus make yourself
suspected of acting; but do not imagine that you will please without
trying. Those who are careless of pleasing are never popular. Those
who do not care how they look invariably look ugly. You will never
please without doing all these things and more.

What a Pecksniffian business it is to go into! Who wants to refrain
from smart, spiteful sayings when he happens to think of them, to
abjure laughing at friends and ridiculing enemies, to renounce the
tart rebuff, the keen _riposte_? Amazing that any succeed! and many
do. There are some gentlemen who are entirely agreeable--"gentlemen
all through," like Robert Moore in _Shirley_. They have order,
neatness, delicacy of movement, reticence, incuriosity: their
unaffected English has almost the charm of a musical composition. They
are generally men whose mothers well nagged them when they were small
with perpetual adjurations: "Do not bang the door," "Stop kicking your
feet," "Stop clinking your plate with your fork," and so on.

In some inscrutable way, young girls often attain thorough
agreeableness. Look at lazy little Jane: she has acquired the highest
charm of repose. Look at Sally, who used to be such an angular and
hurried little girl: she is all quips and cranks and wreathed smiles
now. And meek, humble-minded Martha, in former days so diffident,
blushing and taciturn, has found out the value of a deferential
demeanor and the knack of being a good listener, and can sing a ballad
with a pathos and dramatic effect that eclipse the highly-embellished
performances of other girls.

Ladies who make a profession of pleasing become irresistibly alluring.
Actresses have abundant hair, fine teeth, all physical beauty, because
they train themselves to beauty, though not originally better endowed
than most others. Actresses' voices are set habitually, not in
complaining, whining, creaking or vociferating keys, but in
chest-tones clear and calm in quality. Actresses do not grow old,
partly in consequence of their constant attention to the toilette,
partly in consequence of the fact that they have hope and ambition,
and enough occupation and enough rest, and do not worry over trifles.

To remain young is one of the difficulties of being agreeable. Whoever
does so is obliged to adopt the Aristotelian maxim of moderation,
Placidity of temper is necessary to the clear-pencilled eyebrow and
the magnolia complexion. Frowns, weeping, excitement, despair and
laughter wrinkle the face. Nature keeps women's forms well rounded to
extreme old age, and their faces remain agreeable when they take the
trouble to keep them so. The brow, the fair front, need never be
furrowed. Of all we meet in the street, very few have tranquil,
undistorted faces: the old are screwed out of shape, the young are
going to be so. A well-preserved beauty is one who neither puckers her
face into wrinkles nor mauls it with her hands: she never buries her
knuckles in her cheeks, nor rests cheek on palm or chin on hand, nor
folds her fingers around her forehead while reading, nor rubs her
"argent-lidded eyes." She veils her face from the wind; she does not
work with uncovered neck and arms: therefore they do not become tawny.
She avoids immoderate toil, which makes the hair to fall, the features
sharp, the skin clammy and yellow. She avoids immoderate laziness, as
causing obesity and a greasy complexion or pallor, lassitude and loss
of vitality. Such are; the difficulties of being agreeable.

M. D.



OUR SUB-GARDENER.


He who doubts that civilized progress and industry is beneficial to
birds, and promotes their comfort and multiplication, never saw
the robin and the purple grakle following the plough on a summer's
morning. The ploughman is not more punctually afield than his unbidden
but welcome feathered attendants. They are ahead of him, perched
patiently in the trees that dot fence or hedgerow. They see the team
afar off, and as the gate rattles in opening for its admission the
glad tidings is sent down the line in whistle or chirrup, the most
musical of breakfast-bells. The worm that but for the intrusive
ploughshare would blush unseen beneath the soil, and but for
the feathered detective on the lookout for him would regain his
subterranean retreat, might take a less cheery view of the philosophy
of the matter; but he too is, taken collectively, favored by tillage
and fattens on high-farming like an English squire. But we are not
at present occupied with his feelings. Somebody must suffer in the
battledore game of eat and be eaten, and we shall let the chain of
continuous destruction rest here with the grub that reaps where he
hath not sown. Horse, man and bird are honestly and harmoniously
picking up a living at the expense of a fourth party that also thrives
in the long run.

Not many of us get out with the plough at the orthodox hour of
sunrise. It is a privilege few, comparatively, possess, and fewer
still enjoy. The doctors recommend it warmly, on the ground that,
though perhaps productive of rheumatism, it is death to dyspepsia. The
faculty have, however, on this point piped to us in vain, and it is
not at all in consequence of their advice that those who luxuriate
in early agriculture adopt that system of hygiene, any more than the
birds, who, as we have remarked, are first up and out, and who, at
this season, in flat defiance of all medical rules, adopt a purely
animal diet. Later, long after Lent, their food is varied with fruits
and seeds, but never to such an extent as to amount to vegetarianism.
This carnivorous taste ranks high in the "charm of earliest birds" so
interesting to the cultivator. He, as a rule, is not wrapped up in
the strawberry or the cherry that in the fulness of time comes to
be levied on, in very moderate percentage, by a few of his musical
associates. We do not forget that the blackbird has a weakness for
planted maize, and that the quota of the cornhill is very truly and
safely stated in the doggerel--

  One for de blackbird, one for de crow,
  Two for de cut-worm, and two for to grow.

The cut-worm is here correctly defined as the enemy, while the excise
claimed by the birds is head-money for his extirpation. An adaptation
of this instructive couplet to gardening for the guidance of those of
us who do not farm, but garden in a small way, would naturally enlarge
the allowance of the cut-worm. From the more limited demesne the crow
and the grakle are generally excluded. What is their loss is
the cut-worm's gain. Nowhere does he run (or burrow) riot more
successfully than in old gardens. Living in darkness, from an apparent
consciousness that his deeds are evil, he seems to be fully advised of
all that goes on above ground. One would fancy that he has a complete
system of subterranean telegraphs, like those coming into vogue in
Europe. He learns within a few hours or minutes of every new lot of
plants sprouting from the seed or set out from the hotbed. Upon both
he sets systematically to work, following his row with a precision and
thoroughness at once admirable and exasperating. You go out of a May
afternoon, and with the tenderest care establish in their summer homes
your very choicest plants. Reverse "One counted them at break of day,
and when the sun set where were they?" and the tale that greets you
the next morning is told. Did the spoiler need them for food, you
would be partly reconciled to his proceedings, or at least would know
how to frame some sort of an excuse for them. But he merely divides
the succulent stem close to the surface of the ground, above or below,
and leaves the wreck unutilized even by him. A comfort is that flight
is not his forte. He is generally to be found by the exploring
penknife or trowel close by the scene of his crime, and is thus easily
subjected to condign punishment. But his wife, family and friends
survive in different spots of the adjacent underworld, to give
evidence of their existence only in subsequent havoc. The titillative
rake or the peremptory hoe does not help you much in their discovery;
for their color is that of the soil, their size as various as that
of bits of gravel, and they are not easily perceptible to a cursory
glance from the ordinary height of the eye. Here is where keener
optics than yours, sharpened perhaps by a keener impulse--that of the
stomach--come to the rescue. The catbird, whose imploring mew you
listened to from your bed some time before thinking proper to respond
to it, is intently watching operations from the other end of the
border or the square. His lusty youngsters have been trained, after
the good old fashion, to early hours, and they are impatient for
breakfast. Their parent sees what you do not, and astonishes you by
suddenly pouncing upon a bit of earth you have just broken and seizing
a stout worm. This stranger, if presentable to the family circle, he
is at once off with, his spouse taking his place in the field. Or the
youngsters may still be _in futuro_. All the same: whatever turns up
is welcome to him. His appetite seems as insatiable as that of half a
dozen nestlings: they, you know, will eat three or four times their
own weight in twelve hours. He is thus immensely useful to you, but
your appreciation of that fact is as nothing to his estimate of your
value to him. He accepts you as a being sent for his benefit. You are
a part of his scheme of providence. True, he pities while he rejoices
over you. Your blindness and stupidity in not seeing the fat and
luscious tidbits he snaps up from almost beneath your feet is of
course a subject of wonder and disdain. But he learns to make
allowances for you, and comes to view your failings charitably,
especially as they enure to his benefit, and so lean to Virtue's side.
Fear of you he has none. Indeed, you inspire in him a certain sense of
protection, for in your presence his habitual vigilance is lulled, and
his apprehensive glances over his right and left shoulders fall to a
lower figure per minute. He has learned there to feel safe from hawk
and cat, and knows enough of other birds to be sure that none of them
will "jump" his little claim of fifty feet square whereof you are the
moving centre. His individual audacity gives him the sway of that
small empire, and he doubts not that you will support him in acting up
to the motto of the Iron Crown of the Lombards. His cousin the robin
may, and very probably does, hover on the outskirts, but an exact
distance measures the comparative boldness and familiarity of the two
species. The catbird is, say, ten yards more companionable than his
red-vested relative in the latter's most genial and trustful mood; and
his faith is of a more robust type and less easily and permanently
weakened by rebuffs. The robin rarely hovers round you, but likes to
have the whole premises quietly to himself. His attachment does not
take a personal hue, but is rather to locality. His acquaintanceship
with you is never so intimate as that of the catbird, who soon
recognizes your step, your dress and the peculiar touch and cadence of
your hoe, even as a college oarsman will identify the stroke of a
chum or a rival a quarter of a mile off. If the robin does fix your
individuality in his mind, he deigns to make no sign thereof. At most
he accepts you as part of the mechanism of creation. You make no draft
upon his bump of reverence. He does not set you on his Olympus. This
mark of the spirit which makes him, on the whole, a more respectable
and dignified character than his less gayly-dressed cousin tends in
some sense to commend him the less to you, since we all like the
homage of the "inferior animals," birds or voters. You half dislike
the independence of the robin, who is equally at home in the parterre
or the forest, on the gravel-walk or in the upper air. On the other
you have more hold. He is rarely seen higher than twenty feet above
ground, and is strictly an appendage of the shrubbery and the orchard.
Even in his unhappy voice there is a domestic tone, closely imitated
as it is from Grimalkin. Imitated, we say, for we have never been able
fully to believe that this mew is the bird's original note. We shall
ever incline to the impression that it is an acquired dialect, picked
up in the mere wantonness born of a conscious and exceptional power of
mimicry.

E. C. B.



A NEW AND INDIGNANT ITALIAN POET.


Mrs. Leo Hunter's selection of an "Expiring Frog" as a subject for
poetical composition has lately been surpassed by a new Italian poet.
The latter, Signer Giovanni Rizzi, has just published at Milan a small
volume of sonnets, chiefly ironical in character, in which he gives
vent to his disgust at the positive and materialistic tendencies of
the present day. The theme of the three most remarkable among these
productions is that useful but not very aesthetic animal, the hog.

Signer Rizzi is the professor of literature at the military school and
the high school for girls in Milan. Not long ago his three sonnets
to the hog--or, more literally, the boar (_maiale_)--appeared in an
Italian journal called _Illustrazione Italiana_, prefaced by a letter
to the editor, in which the author stated that as apes, toads and
caterpillars have now been triumphantly introduced into literature, he
no longer felt any hesitation about bringing forward in the same way
his esteemed friend the boar. These three pieces, together with others
of the same form and character, have now been published as a book
under the title of _Un Grido_. This work begins with an address to the
reader, in which the poet laments the prevailing tendency of public
opinion, and protests against what he considers a determined war on
all old and honored beliefs and feelings, and a substitution therefor
of a vague and revolting materialism. Then come five sonnets to Pietro
Aretino, the witty poet and scoffer of the Renaissance era. Aretino is
invited to reappear among men, for the world, says Rizzi, has again
become worthy of such a man's presence. Leaving Dante to Jesuits, and
Beatrice to priests, it has made Aretino its favorite model, and has,
consequently, said farewell to everything resembling shame. In the
last of these five sonnets the poet addresses his beloved thus: "And
we too, O Love! do we still keep holy honor, home, faith, prayer,
truth and noble sorrow?"

After the five sonnets to Aretino come the three to the boar (_Al
Maiale_) which have already been mentioned. Here the author enters
into a mock glorification of that animal, and declares himself ready
to give up all pretensions to any superiority over it. He proceeds
to "swear eternal friendship" with it, and offers it his hand
to solemnize the compact; but, suddenly remembering that such
old-fashioned practices must be very distasteful to his new friend, he
immediately apologizes for having conformed to such a ridiculous old
prejudice. He does not expect his "long-lost brother" to make any
effort to elevate himself or to change his swinish nature in any
particular, but thinks we should all bring ourselves down to the
boar's mental and physical level as soon as we can. The closing verses
of the third sonnet may be freely rendered as follows:

  And when, at last, the grave shall close above us,
    No solemn prayer our resting-place should hallow,
  No flowers be strewn by hands of those that love us.

  But if, at times, you'll come where we are lying,
    O worthy friend! upon our graves to wallow,
  That thought should give us joy when we are dying.

The last piece in this little collection is addressed to "The Birds of
my Garden" _(Agli Uccelletti del mio Giardino)_. Though inferior to
the others in boldness and originality of conception, it is much more
graceful and attractive, and shows that the writer is by no means
deficient in elegance of style and delicacy of treatment.

Signor Rizzi may, it is probable, be taken as a type of a large class
among his countrymen, to which the iconoclastic tendencies of our time
seem strange and horrible. Indeed, it is possible that he is one of
the earliest heralds of a widespread reaction in opinion and feeling
throughout his native land. At any rate, his poems can hardly fail
to become popular, and to produce some effect among a people so
susceptible to the influences of witty and sarcastic poetry as are the
Italians even at this day.

W. W. C.



A NEZ PERCE FUNERAL.


"Call me, Washington, when they are going to bury him," said the
doctor.

George Washington, evidently not quite sure that he understood the
doctor, said with an interrogative glance, "You like--see him--dead
man--put in ground?" And, pointing downward and alternately bending
and extending one knee, he made a semblance of delving.

The doctor nodded.

"Good! Me tell you."

"I want to go, Washington," said the lieutenant.

"And I too," said the lieutenant's guest, myself.

George Washington was one of the Nez Perce prisoners surrendered by
Joseph to General Miles after the battle of Bear-Paw Mountain. The
dead man was one of the wounded in that action who died from his
wounds, aggravated, no doubt, by fatigue and exposure while the
prisoners were marching to the east in the winter of 1877 under orders
from the War Department. George spoke a few words of English, and was
quite an intelligent Indian. He was very clean--for an Indian--and was
comfortably clad.

"How soon?" asked the doctor.

"He--call me--when he ready: me call you."

"Good! Then I shall go to dinner."

"We had better eat our dinner," said the lieutenant: "it is growing
late.--Come and have some dinner, Washington."

Washington seemed not quite sure that he understood correctly. He had
a modest distrust of his English. In the matter of an invitation to
dinner doubt is admissible. "You--want _me_--" here George Washington
tapped himself on the savage breast--"eat--with _you_?" And here,
gracefully reversing his hand, with the index extended, he touched the
lieutenant on the civilized bosom.

"Yes: come in."

We three entered the tent. As it was an ordinary "A" tent, with a
sheet-iron stove in it, it was pretty full with the addition of two
good-sized white men and an Indian of no contemptible proportions. The
lieutenant and I sat on the blankets, camp-fashion: Washington sat on
my heavy riding-boots, with the stove perforce between his legs.

"Good wahrrm!" ejaculated George Washington, hugging the stove.

"Hustleburger!" shouted the lieutenant.

"Yes, sir."

"George Washington will take dinner with us. Set the table for three."

"All right, sir, lieutenant!"

"Good man--docther," Washington remarked, nodding several times to
emphasize his observation: "ver'--good man--docther."

We eagerly assented, pleased to see that the Indian appreciated the
doctor's kindness to his people.

Rabelais's quarter of an hour began to hang heavily on us. Washington
was equal to the occasion: taking a survey of the tent, he nodded
approvingly and remarked, "Good tepee."

"Not bad this weather."

"Good eyes!" said Washington in a burst of enthusiasm.

These two simple words in their Homeric immensity of expression meant
all this: "The fire made on the ground in our Indian lodges fills them
with continual smoke, and consequently we Indians suffer very much
from sore eyes. Now, your little stove, while it warms the tent much
better than a fire, does not smoke, and your eyes are not injured."

Our habitual table, a small box, was not constructed on the extension
plan. It would not accommodate three. So Hustleburger handed directly
to each guest a tin cup of macaroni soup. Washington disposed of the
liquid in a very short time, but the elusive nature of the macaroni
rather troubled him. We showed him how to overcome its slippery
tendency. Smacking his lips, he said, with a broad smile, "Good! What
you call him?"

"Macaroni."

"Maclony? Good! Maclony--maclony." he continued, repeating the word to
fix it in his memory.

Our only vegetable was some canned asparagus. Washington was
delighted with it after he had been initiated into the mystery of its
consumption. He did not stop at the white. "What you call--_him_?"

"Asparagus."

"Spalagus--spalagus? Goo-oo-d!"

"Did you never eat asparagus before, Washington?"

"Never eat him--nev' see him. Spalagus--spalagus! Goo-oo-d!"

Hustleburger now brought in the dessert, which consisted of canned
currant-jelly, served in the can. Each guest helped himself from the
original package, using a "hard tack" for a dessert-plate, _more
antiquo_. Washington was bidden to help himself. Before doing so,
however, he wished to test the substance placed before him, and,
taking a little on the end of his spoon, he carried it to his lips.
Then an expression of intense enjoyment overspread his dusky face; his
black eyes sparkled like diamonds; his full lips were wreathed in a
smile. "Ah! goo-oo-oo-d!" he cried, with a mouthful of _o_'s. "What
you call HIM?"

"Jelly."

"Yelly? Ah! yelly goo-oo-ood! Me--like--yelly--much." And he helped
himself plentifully.

A smell of burning woollen became unpleasantly noticeable. Washington
still had the stove between his legs: it was red-hot. He never moved,
but ate "yelly."

"Washington, you're burning!" cried the lieutenant.

Washington smiled. "Much wah-r-rum!" he remarked in the coolest manner
possible.

"Throw open the front, then."

A long, shrill cry now rang through the silence and the darkness.
Washington jumped up suddenly, ran out of the tent, and uttered a cry
in response so similar that it might pass for an echo of the first.
Then, returning, he said, "He call. He--ready--put--dead man--down.
Come! Me--come back--eat--yelly."

Fortunately, the Indian camp was not far off. The night was
pitch-dark. Led by Washington, we got through the thick underbrush
without much trouble. The grave was dug near the water's edge, where
the Missouri and the Yellowstone, meeting, form an angle. A large fire
of dry cottonwood at the head of the grave fitfully lit up the dismal
scene. A bundle of blankets and buffalo-robes lay by the open grave.
Some Indians of both sexes with bowed and blanketed heads stood near
it. Washington was evidently awaited. As soon as he appeared a little
hand-bell was rung, and a number of dark, shrouded figures with
covered faces crept forth like shadows from the lodges throughout the
camp and crowded around the grave, a mute and gloomy throng.

The bell was rung again, and the dark crowd became motionless as
statues. Then Washington in a mournful monotone repeated what I
supposed to be prayers for the dead. At the end of each prayer the
little bell was rung and responses came out of the depths of the
surrounding darkness. Then the squaws chanted a wild funeral song in
tones of surpassing plaintiveness. At its close the bell tinkled once
more, and the figures that surrounded the grave vanished as darkly
as they came. Washington, one or two warriors and ourselves alone
remained.

"You like--see--him--dead man?" asked Washington.

The question was addressed to me.

I never want to look on a dead face if I can avoid it; so with
thanks I declined. Washington seemed a little disappointed, as if he
considered we showed a somewhat uncourteous want of interest in the
deceased. Noticing this, the lieutenant said he would like to see the
dead man's face, and, preceded by Washington, we moved toward the
bundle of blankets and buffalo-robes that lay by the side of the
grave. Washington threw back the buffalo-robes, and a bright gleam of
the cottonwood fire disclosed the upturned face of the dead Nez Perce
and lightened up the long, thick locks of glossy blue-black hair. It
was the face of a man about thirty--bold, clear-cut features and long,
aquiline nose: a good face and a strong face it seemed in death.

When we had looked upon the rigid features a few moments, Washington
covered the face of his dead brother. The body, coffined in blankets
and skins, was placed in the grave, and the men began to throw the
earth upon it.

"That's--all," said Washington. "Come!"

And he moved away toward our tent.

He seemed to think some apology necessary for the simplicity of the
ceremonial. "If," said he, "Chapman [the interpreter]--he tell--we
sleep here to-morrow--we put dead man--in ground--when sun he ver'
litt'; an' Yoseph he come--an' you come--an' I come--all come--white
man an' Injun."

"He was a fine-looking young man," I remarked, alluding to the dead
Indian.

Washington was pleased by the compliment to his departed brother.
He stopped short, and, turning toward me, said, "Yes, he fine young
man--good man--good young man."

"I thought he was rather an oldish man," remarked the lieutenant.

"No, no," replied Washington, touching his head--"all black hairs--no
white hairs. Good young man."

And Washington led the way back toward the lieutenant's tent, saying,
"Let us go--eat up--yelly."

J. T.



REFORM IN VERSE.


A want of the day is some good fugitive poetry: bad is superabundant.
The demand is for short and telling effusions in plain, direct and
intelligible English, speaking to feelings possessed by everybody, and
placing incidents, scenes and creatures, familiar or exceptional, in
a poetic light, bright and warm rather than fierce or dazzling. The
millions are waiting to be stirred and charmed, and will be very
thankful to the singer who shall do it for them. Studied obscurity
of thought and language, verbal finicalities and conceits, and mere
ingenuities of any kind, rhythmic, mental or sentimental, will not
meet the occasion: that sort of thing is overdone already. It is the
"swollen imposthume" of refinement, an excrescence on culture, a
penalty of which we have suffered enough. The Heliconian streams which
are not deep, but only dark, must run dry if they cannot run clear.
Sparkling and pellucid rills, wherein we can all see our own-selves
and trace our own dreams, irradiated with light like the flickering
of gems, and set off with rich foil, are those to attract the popular
eye. Genuine humor, pathos, elevation and delicacy of fancy seek no
disguise, but aim at the utmost simplicity of expression. Inversions,
like affectation in every shape, are foreign to them. True songsters,
like the birds, warble to be heard, understood and loved, and not to
astonish or puzzle.

We read the other day, duly headed "For the ---- ----," and signed
with the contributor's name and place of residence, Wolfe's well-known
lines to his wife, the one good thing preserved of him, and better, in
our humble judgment, than those on the burial of Moore. The wearer of
borrowed plumes was obviously confident that his theft would not be
detected, readers of to-day having been so long unfamiliar with poetry
of that character as to be sure to set it down as original and hail
the reviver of it as a new light. Perhaps he may turn out to have been
right in that impression, and figure as the herald, if not an active
inaugurator, of a new era of taste in verse. He cannot remain the
only practical asserter of the theory that it is better to steal good
poetry than to write bad. Should his followers, however, shrink from
downright theft, they might consent to shine as adapters. Some who are
masters of English undefiled might help the cause by translating some
of the best bits of Browning, Swinburne and Rossetti, to say nothing
of Tennyson, who has gradually constructed a dialect of his own and
trained us to understand it.

By fugitive poetry we mean the work of those usually classed as
song-writers and lyrists, leaving out the big guns, if we have had any
of the latter tribe since Milton, who was himself strongest in short
poems. Most modern poets have made their debut in the periodical
press, and those who did not have shown a painful tendency to run to
epic. The age respectfully declines epics.

We should not despair of the suggested revival. Ours is not the first
period that has suffered under the dealers in _concetti_. They have
had things somewhat their own way before--in the century which
included Spenser and Donne, for instance. Our euphuists may pass away
like those of the Elizabethan era, or, like the best of them, live in
spite of faults with which they were gratuitously trammelled.

E. B.

       *       *       *       *       *




LITERATURE OF THE DAY.


Bits of Travel at Home. By H. H. Boston: Roberts Brothers.

The author's present home we should incline to fix in Colorado, but
she includes New England and California in her travels, and finds
something beautiful to describe wherever she goes within those broad
limits. The Yosemite, the Big Trees, the Mormons, the Chinese, the
snow-sheds, drawing-room cars, agates, prairie-and mountain-flowers,
New Hampshire life and scenery, and an infinity of like material,
are readably, and not incongruously, presented in her little book.
Population is so sparse and Nature so redundant in the scene of most
of her descriptions as to render them sometimes a little lifeless, and
oblige her to depend too solely upon her powers of landscape painting
with the pen. We miss the human element, as we do in the vast, however
luxuriant, pictures of Bierstadt and Moran--artists who preceded her
on the same sketching-ground. Not that she fails to make the most of
what Nature places before her. Rather, she makes too much of it, and
lavishes whole pages on truthful, minute and vivid, but bewildering,
detail of mountain, river, rock, plain, plants and sea. She is
enraptured, for example, with Lake Tahoe and with the wild flowers of
California and Colorado, and enables us to understand why she is so;
but the raptures are not shared by the reader, partly for the very
reason that they are so elaborately explained. Printer's ink, when
used as a pigment or pencil, should be used sparingly, with a few,
sharp, clear, bold touches, and without painful finish or niggling.
What amplification would not weaken instead of heightening the effect
of "the copse-wood gray that waved and wept on Loch Achray"? Breadth,
distance and atmosphere are obscured by H. H.'s carefully itemized
foregrounds. But the itemizing is done admirably and con amore by one
who is a botanist, a poet and an observer. The Great Desert is no
desert to her: no square foot of it is barren. Even the sage-brush has
a charm, if only from its dim likeness to a miniature olive tree, both
being glaucous and hoary. An oasis of irrigated clover on Humboldt
River is made a theme for an idyl. The vast rocks, when bare even of
moss, are at least rich and various in tint and form, and have plenty
of meaning to her.

A traveller between Omaha and San Francisco might well carry this
pocket volume as a lorgnette. It will show him what he might otherwise
miss, and make more visible to him what he sees. It belongs to a high
class of railroad literature, and is in style and matter so full of
movement as to suggest the railway to readers by the fireside.


Putnam's Art Handbooks. New York: G. P. Putnam's Sons.

This series of manuals for beginners with pencil and palette will
include five small books. The two before us treat of "Landscape
Painting" and "Sketching from Nature." Both are old acquaintances,
reprinted respectively from the thirty-fourth and thirty-eighth London
editions. When they first came under our eye, more years ago than we
need state, they bore the imprint of a London firm of color-dealers,
and were loaded down with advertisements and less direct
recommendations of their wares to an extent that rather obscured the
valuable and interesting part of the publications. This rubbish has
been swept away in the American edition, so that the tyro can get at
what he needs to know more readily, and use it with more confidence,
than when he was puzzled to distinguish between solid instruction and
hollow puffery. The notes added by the American editor are very scant,
and yet so sensible as to enhance one's regret at their paucity and
meagreness. Directions for the use of pigments and vehicles well
enough adapted for the English climate may require modification for
ours. Moreover, British artists have not unfrequently, in their
methods, shown themselves too prone to sacrifice durability to
immediate effect. The list of colors has, too, been enriched by some
accessions within the past third of a century which demand mention.
Such points should be considered in a new edition of the brochure on
landscape painting. Generally speaking, it is a good guide, and may
safely be placed in the hands of the young colorist.

The sketcher from Nature will find in the other a succinct set of
rules clearly stated. He will not need much else if he has a good hand
and eye, and the industry and perseverance to use them. He has first
to render objects and scenes by simple lines; and to assist him in
that the elementary laws of perspective are here laid before him. Some
mechanical appliances, such as a small frame that may be carried in
the pocket, divided by equidistant wires, vertical and horizontal, and
serving, when held before the eye, to fix the relative situation of
points in the view, we do not find alluded to. Perhaps they are as
well let alone, as corks have been abandoned in the swimming-school.

When the series is completed the whole may well be bound together.
Smaller type, thinner paper and less margin would make a book readily
portable, containing all that is indispensable to the student, and a
good deal besides that the maturer artist will be none the worse for
being reminded of. One who has attained some little facility with the
pencil might adopt it as a sufficient mentor in the field or in the
studio, and accept its guidance in a path to be perfected by his own
powers, according to their measure, toward such pleasure, elevation of
taste or fortune as art offers. Studies abound everywhere. The ruins,
arched bridges and picturesque dwellings and other erections of Europe
are but slenderly to be regretted by the American beginner. He has no
lack of clouds, rocks, trees, houses, etc., embracing within their
contours every possible line and shade. He may even learn precision of
line and tint better than his Transatlantic brother, who is apt to be
tempted into carelessness by the ragged variety and indecision of
the objects offered by his surroundings and nearly unknown here.
The broken and wandering touch suggested by the jagged stones of a
crumbling castle is not that which one should begin by cultivating.
Breadth and firmness in form, color and chiaroscuro are attainments to
be first held in view, and never to be lost sight of.

We have often wondered that the _technique_ of art should have so
meagre a literature. Its philosophy and poetry have employed many
pens, and been exhaustively analyzed, but this has been mostly the
work of outsiders--of critics devoid even of the qualification laid
down by Disraeli of having failed in the practical exploitation of the
field they discuss, but for all that often powerful critics. Artists
have rarely been able to paint their pictures in black and white
and run them through the press. They cannot so display the infinite
gradations that grow upon their canvas, nor trace in words the subtle
principles which have presided at the birth of their works and of
every part of them. General rules they can lay down, as poets can the
elements of their own trade; but these rules are at the command of the
veriest daub or rhymester; the manifold development of them to results
almost divine remaining, even to those who achieve it in either walk,
evasive and untraceable. The masters of verse and art have mapped
out for us none of their secrets. The deductions we make from their
practice are our deductions, not theirs. Raffaelle, if questioned,
could only point to his palette spread with the common colors, and
Homer had not even pen and ink. Our versifiers are provided with
admirable paper and gold pens, and our artists, young and old, with
the colors Elliott once told an inquirer he made his marvellous
flesh-tints with--red, blue and yellow.


Adventures of a Consul Abroad. By Luigi Monti. Boston: Lee & Shepard.

This is a didactic or illustrative story, with a moral we find thus
laid down on the last page: "Our government sends men abroad who,
after hard labor and long experience, learn a complicated, delicate
and responsible profession; and no sooner have they learned it, and
are able to perform creditably to themselves and the government
they represent all its intricate duties, than they are recalled and
replaced by inexperienced men, who have to go through the same ordeal,
and never stay long enough to be of real service to their country."

The gentleman upon whose shadowy shoulders is placed the heavy task of
pointing this dictum is Samuel Sampleton, Esq., teacher of a private
seminary on Cape Cod, who gets tired of the young idea and seeks more
profitable and expanded fields of labor. He has not, at the outset,
the slightest preparation for the duties of the position--that of
United States consul at Verdecuerno (a translation of Palermo into
"Greenhorn")--or even knowledge of what they are. His utter lack of
information in the premises is indeed quite exceptional, especially
in a New England teacher. We should have expected an average lad of
fourteen in any part of the Union to have suspected that a consul
would need some acquaintance with the language of the people among
whom he was stationed, if not some slight notion of the general
routine and purposes of the office. Mr. Sampleton, however, is not
lacking in shrewdness and energy, and sets to work manfully, despite
the difficulties of his situation, general and special. After several
trying years, the comical tribulations of which are graphically
set forth, he is just beginning to feel himself at home when he is
summarily placed there in another sense by recall. He comes back as
poor as he went, save in experience and the languages, and resumes the
ferule with the determination not again to abandon it for the pen of
the public employe.

It is chiefly to the social side of consular life that Mr. Monti
introduces us, and most of the scenes belong to that aspect. The
salary, no longer eked out by fees and other perquisites, is much
inferior to the emoluments of other consuls at the same port, and
the American representative is consequently entirely outshone by his
colleagues of other nationalities. A considerable degree of diplomatic
style is expected from the corps, and kept up by all but himself. In
dinners, equipages, buttons and gold lace, and display of every kind,
not merely France, England and Russia, but Denmark and Turkey, leave
him deep in the shade. They have consular residences, large offices
and reading-rooms, with secretaries, interpreters and the other
paraphernalia of a small embassy, while Jonathan nests, with his
wife, on the third or fourth flat of a suburban rookery, and uses his
dining-room for an office. The sea-captains grumble at having to seek
him in such a burrow, and being accorded nothing when they get there
beyond the barest official action. He cannot interchange courtesies
with the magnates of the city, and thus places himself and the
interests of his country, so far as that often potent means of
influence goes, at a great disadvantage. A pompous commodore brings an
American squadron into port, and is ineffably disgusted at finding
his consul utterly unable to do the honors or in any way assist the
cruise.

Our author holds that the compensation of these mercantile and
quasi-diplomatic agents ought to be largely increased, it being now
inadequate as measured either by their labor and responsibility or
by the allowances made by other nations, our commercial rivals.
Certainly, additional pay in any reasonable proportion would be but a
trifle in comparison with the result should it promote the rise of our
marine from its present unprecedented state of depression. If consuls
will create, or recreate, shipping, and reintroduce the American flag
to the numerous foreign ports to which it is becoming each year more
and more a stranger, let us by all means have them everywhere and at
liberal salaries, with quant. suff. of clerks, assistants, flunkeys,
dress-suits for dinner-parties and court-suits for state receptions,
and all the other necessaries of an efficient consulate, the want
whereof so vexed the soul of Mr. Sampleton. And then let us make
fixtures of these gentlemen, with good behavior for their tenure of
office, and in the selection of them endeavor to apply abroad the test
it seems next to impossible to adhere to at home--honesty, capacity
and fidelity.


_Books Received_.

The Bible for Learners. By Dr. H. Oort and Dr. I. Hooykaas. Volume II.
From David to Josiah, from Josiah to the supremacy of the Mosaic Law.
Authorized Translation. Boston: Roberts Brothers.

A Vision of the Future: A Series of Papers on Canon Farrar's "Eternal
Hope." By Various Divines. (No. 3 of the International Religio-Science
Series.) Detroit: Rose-Belford Publishing Co.

The Cincinnati Organ, with a Brief Description of the Cincinnati Music
Hall. Edited by George Ward Nichols. Cincinnati: Robert Clarke & Co.

Protection and Revenue in 1877. By William G. Sumner. (Economic
Monographs, No. 8.) New York: G. P. Putnam's Sons.

Hallock's American Club List and Sportsman Glossary. By Charles
Hallock. New York: Forest and Stream Publishing Co.

Shooting Stars, as observed from the "Sixth Column" of the _Times_. By
W. L. Alden. New York: G. P. Putnam's Sons.

Christ, His Nature and Work: A Series of Discourses by Eminent
Divines. New York: G. P. Putnam's Sons.

Poganuc People: Their Loves and Lives. By Harriet Beecher Stowe. New
York: Fords, Howard & Hurlbert.

Children of Nature. By the Earl of Desart. Toronto: Rose-Belford
Publishing Co.

Francisco: A Poem. By William Watrous. San Francisco: A. L. Bancroft &
Co.

Aspirations of the World. By L. Maria Child. Boston: Roberts Brothers.








End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Lippincott's Magazine, Vol. 22,
August, 1878, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LIPPINCOTT'S MAGAZINE ***

***** This file should be named 18885.txt or 18885.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/8/8/8/18885/

Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Lesley Halamek and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
