The Project Gutenberg EBook of Platform Monologues, by T. G. Tucker

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Platform Monologues

Author: T. G. Tucker

Release Date: August 2, 2006 [EBook #18969]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PLATFORM MONOLOGUES ***




Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Janet Blenkinship and the
Online Distributed Proofreaders Europe at
http://dp.rastko.net











  PLATFORM
  MONOLOGUES

  By

  T. G. TUCKER

  LITT.D. (CAMB.); HON. LITT.D. (DUBLIN)
  Professor of Classical Philology in the University of Melbourne

  MELBOURNE
  THOMAS C. LOTHIAN
  1914
  _PRINTED IN ENGLAND_

  Copyright.
  First Edition May, 1914.




PREFACE


The following monologues were given as public addresses, mostly to
semi-academical audiences, and no alteration has been made in their
form. Their common object has been to plead the cause of literary study
at a time when that study is being depreciated and discouraged. But
along with the general plea must go some indication that literature can
be studied as well as read. Hence some of the articles attempt--what
must always be a difficult task--the crystallizing of the salient
principles of literary judgment.

The present collection has been made because the publisher believes that
a sufficiently large number of intelligent persons will be interested in
reading it. On the whole that appears to be at least as good a reason as
any other for printing a book.

The addresses on "The Supreme Literary Gift," "The Making of a
Shakespeare," and "Literature and Life," have appeared previously as
separate brochures. Those on "Two Successors of Tennyson" and "Hebraism
and Hellenism" were printed in the Melbourne _Argus_ at the time of
their delivery, and are here reproduced by kind permission of that
paper. The talk upon "The Future of Poetry" has not hitherto appeared in
print.

Though circumstances have prevented any development of the powers and
work of the two "Successors of Tennyson," there is nothing either in the
criticism of those writers or in the principles applied thereto which
seems to call for any modification at this date. For the rest, it is
hoped that the lecture will be read in the light of the facts as they
were at the time of its delivery.




  CONTENTS


                                                                    PAGE

  PREFACE                                                              5

  THE SUPREME LITERARY GIFT                                            9

  HEBRAISM AND HELLENISM                                              53

  THE PRINCIPLES OF CRITICISM, APPLIED
    TO TWO SUCCESSORS OF TENNYSON                                     95

  THE MAKING OF A SHAKESPEARE                                        147

  LITERATURE AND LIFE                                                191

  THE FUTURE OF POETRY                                               219




The Supreme Literary Gift


When we have been reading some transcendent passage in one of the
world's masterpieces we experience that mental sensation which Longinus
declares to be the test of true sublimity, to wit, our mind "undergoes a
kind of proud elation and delight, as if it had itself begotten the
thing we read." We are disposed by such literature very much as we are
disposed by the Sistine Madonna or before the Aphrodite of Melos. Things
like these exert a sort of overmastering power upon us. Our craving for
perfection, for ideal beauty, is for once wholly gratified. Our spirit
glows with an intense and complete satisfaction. It would build itself a
tabernacle on the spot, for it recognizes that it is good to be there.
We do not analyse, we do not criticize, we simply deliver over our souls
to a proud elation and delight. Nay, at the moment when we are in the
midst of such spontaneous and exquisite enjoyment, we should, in all
likelihood, resent any attempt to make us realize exactly _why_ this
particular creation of art so fills up our souls down to the last cranny
of satisfaction while another stops short of that supreme effect.

And yet, afterwards, when we are meditating upon this strange potency of
a poem or a building or a statue, or when we are trying to communicate
to others the feeling of its charm, do we not find ourselves
importunately asking wherein lies the secret of great art? And, in the
case of literature, we think it at such times no desecration of our
delight to put a passage of Shakespeare or of Milton beside a passage of
Homer, of AEschylus, or of Dante, an essay of Lamb beside a chapter of
Heine, a lyric of Burns by one of Shelley, and to seek for some common
measure of their excellence.

Suppose that, in these more reflective moments, we can come near to some
explanation; suppose we can realize what it is that these supreme
writers alone achieve; then, when we read again, the very perfection of
their achievement springs forward and comes home to us with a still
keener delight. We feel all we felt before, but we enjoy it more,
because we understand in some degree why we feel it. Say what we will,
we are never really content with an admiration which cannot render to
itself a reason. What are all the thousand works of literary criticism
called forth by, unless it be by that perpetual question which nags for
an answer in all intelligent minds, the question "What is the gift
which, behind all mere diction, behind all cadence and rhythm and rhyme,
behind all mere lucidity, behind all mere intellect, and behind all
variety of subject matter, makes writing everlastingly fresh, admirable,
a thing of beauty and a joy for ever"?

Alas! we cannot, indeed, necessarily hope to get that gift into our own
power because we can perceive it in the great masters. According to the
Apostle, "Every good gift and every perfect gift is from above, and
cometh down from the Father of lights." "Their vigour is of the fire and
their origin is celestial," says the pagan. The _coelestis origo_ is
unpurchasable. Nevertheless, even for the ordinary being who aspires
himself to write, there is this practical benefit to be derived from an
insight into the truth--that he will know in what the supreme gift does
consist. He will not delude himself into fancying that it means merely
grammatical accuracy, or a command of words, or tricks of phrase, or a
faculty for rhyming, or logical precision, or any of those other
commonplace qualities and dexterities which are almost universally
attainable.

He will at least aim at the right thing, and, even if he fails, his work
will be all the higher for that aim.

       *       *       *       *       *

I do not propose to speak in general of great books, but only of great
literature. Literature proper is not simply writing. You may tell in
writing the most important and unimpeachable truths concerning science
and history, concerning nature and man, without being in the least
literary. You may argue and teach and describe in books which are of
immense vogue and repute, without pretending to be a figure in
literature. But, on the other hand, you may be very wrong; logically,
scientifically, historically, ethically altogether wrong; and yet you
may exercise an irresistible literary fascination over your own
generation and all that follow. Charles Lamb speaks disdainfully of
books which are no books, things in books' clothing. He had in mind Adam
Smith's _Wealth of Nations_, essays on population, treatises on moral
philosophy, and so forth. He meant that such works are works, but no
literature. Mill's _Logic_, geographical descriptions, guidebooks, the
_Origin of Species_, whatever may be the value of such volumes for
thought or knowledge, they are not literature. There is only one test to
apply to such books as those. If their statements are true, if their
reasoning is accurate, if their exposition is clear, such works are good
of their kind. Nevertheless, it is scarcely literary judgment which
judges them. You might as well apply "architectural" criticism to our
rows of tin-roofed cottages or to the average warehouse or wool-store or
tramshed. These are buildings, but they are not architecture.

Meanwhile Herodotus, with all his superstitions, his credulity and
mistakes; Plato, with all his blunders in elementary logic; Homer,
with all his naive ignorance of science and the wide world; Dante,
despite his cramped outlook; Milton, in spite of his perverse
theologizing--these and their like are, and will always be, literature.
No matter if Carlyle's _French Revolution_ be in reality as far from
the literal truth as the work of Froude, yet Carlyle and Froude are
literature, along with Herodotus and Livy and Froissart, while the most
scrupulously exact of chronicles may be but books.

The charm of supreme literature is independent of its date or country.
The current literary taste varies, we know, at different periods and in
different places. There are successive fashions and schools of
literature and literary principle--an Attic, an Alexandrian, an
Augustan, a Renaissance Italian, an Elizabethan, a Louis Quatorze, a
Queen Anne, a nineteenth century Romantic. And yet from each and all of
these there will stand out one or two writers, sometimes more, whom we
have enthroned in the literary Pantheon, and whose place there among the
gods seems only to grow the more assured as time goes on.

Now, what is it that is left, the common _residuum_, to all these
literary masters; to Homer, Sappho, AEschylus, Plato, Theocritus,
Juvenal; to Dante, Chaucer, Shakespeare, Moliere; to Goethe, Shelley,
Victor Hugo, Carlyle, in spite of all their manifest differences in
subject, and style, in ideas and ideals, in range of thought and
knowledge? When we have got behind all the varying and often
contradictory criticism of their several epochs; when we have stripped
away the characteristics which mark a special era; what is there
essentially and everlastingly good--in the true sense "classic"--in
virtue of which these particular writers renew for themselves with every
generation the suffrages of understanding humanity? If there is a
"survival of the fittest" anywhere, it is assuredly in art, and
especially in the art of literature. Seeing then that writer is so
unlike to writer, both in what he says and the way in which he says it,
what is that cardinal literary virtue, that quintessential _x_, in
virtue of which both alike are masters in their craft?

The answer is very elusive. Let us seek it, in the Socratic spirit,
together.

       *       *       *       *       *

But first let me remind you that in order to find the answer, the seeker
must possess both literary cultivation and also breadth of mind. Unless
we have read widely in literature of many sorts and kinds; unless we
have developed a generous catholicity of taste and appreciation, a
many-sidedness of sympathy and interest; unless we have corrected our
natural idiosyncrasies by what Matthew Arnold, after Goethe, calls a
"harmonious expansion of all our powers," we cannot see clearly; we
cannot distinguish between the impressions which we derive from literary
power and art, and the impressions which we derive from something else
to which we happen to be partial, but which is quite irrelevant to the
question. Any one who belongs to a particular "school," whether of style
or thought; any one who approaches literature with a spirit overweighted
by political bias, scientific bias, or religious bias, is disqualified.
He cannot hope to stand equally away from, or equally near to, Homer,
Dante, Shakespeare and Goethe, and, after setting aside their elements
of disagreement, distinguish and admire that which is definitely and for
ever admirable in their creations. Do we lack sympathy with the tragic
feeling? Do we shrink from it? Then we can be no judges of tragic art,
of _King Lear_ or the _OEdipus_. Have we no sense of humour, or only a
gross and vulgar sense of humour? Then we can be no judges of the
writings of Cervantes or of Sterne. Are we incapable of ardent idealism?
Then we cannot be just to Shelley. Is a capacity for profound reverence
and adoration not ours? Then we must not claim to say the last word on
Dante. The uncongenial subject prevents us from feeling with the writer,
and we therefore fancy a defect of literary power or charm in him, while
the defect is all the time in ourselves. We will, for the moment,
suppose ourselves to be the ideal critics. And let us first see what the
supreme literary gift is _not_.

       *       *       *       *       *

We may admit that, in all literature which the world will not willingly
let die, there must be expressed something worth expressing. The matter
must be, in some way, of interest. But it appears to signify little
_how_ it interests. It may be enlightening, elevating, or inspiriting:
it may be profoundly touching: it may be of a fine or gracious sentiment
or fancy: it may be startling: it may be simply entertaining. Some
people, perhaps, remembering certain French and other fiction, would say
that it may even be deliberately wicked. That I do not believe. On the
contrary, it is much to the credit of a world which is declared to be so
rotten with original sin, that deliberately wicked writing finds so
little lasting favour with it. It does gladly let such writing die,
however well written. Interest fails, and admiration of the literary
skill is speedily swallowed up in disgust. Moreover it is seldom that
the true possessor of the supreme literary gift turns it to base ends.

Consummate literature, we have admitted, must be interesting. It would
be truer to say that the possessor of the supreme literary gift will
_make_ his matter interest us, however light or serious, however literal
or imaginative, it may be. But, when once of interest, the matter may be
anything you will.

The supreme literary gift, for example, does not imply profundity or
originality of thought. Homer and Chaucer are not deep thinkers, nor is
Herodotus or Virgil, Burns, Keats, or Tennyson. There need be nothing
philosophically epoch-making about a literary creation which is destined
to be immortal. Nor yet does the supreme literary gift necessarily imply
extraordinary depth of emotion. Of the writers just named Burns and
Keats perhaps have this capacity, but the rest--including
Tennyson--reveal little of it. We do not find burning passion to be a
distinct feature in Plato, in Milton, in Goethe, or in Matthew Arnold,
while it is emphatic in Sappho, in Byron, and in Shelley. Again, the
supreme literary gift does not imply any special expression of truth or
instruction, moral, religious or other. Homer and Dante cannot both be
right. If Homer is right, then Dante is lamentably wrong; and if Dante
is right, Goethe is unforgivably wrong. Wordsworth cannot be harmonized
with Shelley. Milton was a Puritan, Keats a neo-pagan. In the domain of
literal and historical truth what becomes of _Gulliver's Travels_, or
Scott's novels, or, for the matter of that, _Paradise Lost_?

All this is self-evident. Yet, if we do not ask our superlative writers
to be heaven-sent teachers, to be prophets, to be discoverers, what do
we ask of them? Is it to write in a particular style, in a given lucid
style, a given figurative style, or a given dignified style? Nay, it is
only very mediocre writers who could obey such precepts. Every supreme
writer has his own style, inalienable and inimitable, which is as much a
part of him as his own soul, the look in his eyes, or his tones of
voice. Bethink yourselves of Carlyle, how his abrupt, crabbed, but
withal sinewy and picturesque, prose compares with the pure crystalline
sentences of Cardinal Newman, and how these again compare with the
quaintly and pathetically humorous chat, the idealized talk of Charles
Lamb. Think how easy it is to recognize a line of Shakespeare, of
Milton, or of Wordsworth, almost by the ear; how audibly they are
stamped with the character of their creator. There are, in fact, exactly
as many styles as there are superlative writers. Indeed this
individuality of style is the outward and visible sign of their inward
and spiritual literary gift, which is the gift to express--_oneself_.

       *       *       *       *       *

Then what does the superlative writer do? The fact is that literature in
the proper sense is an art, as much an art as painting or sculpture or
music. The supreme masters in literature are artists, and the consensus
of the world, though unconsciously, comes to judge them simply as
such--not as thinkers or teachers, sages or prophets. They are artists.

And what is the province of art? After all the definitions and
discussions are exhausted, we are, I believe, brought down to one solid
answer, the answer of Goethe, "art is only the giving of shape and
form." That is to say, the object of art, whether in words or colours or
shapes or sounds, is simply to give expression to a conception, to a
thought, a feeling, an imagined picture which exists in the mind of the
artist. His aim is to communicate it truly, wholly, perfectly to the
minds of his fellow men, by one of the only two possible channels. By
means of art mind can communicate itself to mind either through the eyes
or through the ears; by spoken words and music through the ears, by
painting and sculpture and written words through the eyes.

I need not dwell upon the thought what a wonderful thing this
communication is, whereby the pictures and feelings existing in one
brain are flashed upon another brain. Nor need I elaborate the point
that this communication is rarely absolute, rarely even adequate. To
make people understand, even those who know us best, how difficult that
is!

The Greek sculptor Praxiteles conceives a human form of perfect beauty,
posed in an attitude of perfect grace, wearing an expression of perfect
charm and serenity. It exists but as a picture in his brain; but he
takes marble and hews it and chisels it till there stands visible and
unmistakable before us his very conception. He has given body and form
to his imagination. Perfect artist as he is, he communicates with
absolute exactness his mental picture to all the world of them who
behold his work.

The Italian painter Raphael conceives a woman of infinite loveliness and
purity and tenderness to represent the mother of Christ. How are we to
be sharers in that conception? He takes brushes and paint, and there
grows upon his canvas the Sistine Madonna, that picture of such mystic
potency, which to see at Dresden is never to forget. He stamps upon our
minds the very image and the very feeling which were upon his own.

The great musician hears imaginary sounds and harmonies within his
brain, proceeding from or accompanying emotions of divers kinds. He
forthwith, by arrangements and combinations of musical notes, their
times and qualities, communicates to us also those sounds and harmonies;
he reproduces in us those same emotions.

Do not say that it is the function of an artist to communicate to us
beautiful things or ugly things, things graceful or things profound,
things of pleasure or things of grief. Say rather, simply, it is his
function, as artist, to communicate--perfectly, absolutely--whatsoever
he seeks to communicate, in its form, with its feeling, in its mood;
the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth of his conception
and its atmosphere. No doubt the thing of beauty, the profound thing,
the thing of joy, is most delightful for the spectator to contemplate;
to the artist himself it is apt to be most inspiring, and therefore art
seems to be concerned mainly with beauty and joy. But that is the only
reason. As artist, his function is simply to body forth, and present to
other minds, whatever he conceives, and he is consummate artist just in
proportion as he secures that end.

Now take the literary artist. He in his turn conceives a thought, or
picture of the imagination or fancy. A feeling may come over him with a
gentle grace, a subtle influence, an overmastering passion. A mood--a
state of soul--may colour all his view, tinging it with some haunting
melancholy or irradiating his whole world till it seems a Paradise. How
is he to communicate to us this thought, this picture, this fancy, the
grace and subtlety and passion, the precise hues of his mood for
sombreness or radiancy? Well, he takes words, and by selecting them, by
combining them, by harmonizing them with a master's hand, he sets
before us certain magic phrases wrought into a song, an ode, an elegy,
or whatsoever form of creation is most apt and true, and he makes us see
just what he sees and feel just what he feels, printing it all upon our
own brains and hearts.

In this then must lie the essence of the literary gift--in the power of
a writer to express himself, to communicate vividly, without mistiness
of contents or outline, his own spirit and vision. I repeat that it is
irrelevant whether what he sees and feels be beautiful or not, joyful or
not, profound or not, even true or not. Nor does it matter either what
his style may be. He is a master in the art of writing when he can make
his own mind, so to speak, entirely visible or audible to us, when he
can express what his inward eye beholds in such terms that we can behold
it in the same shape and in the same light--if, for example, when he
sees a thing in "the light which never was on sea or land, the
consecration and the poet's dream," he can make us also see it in that
faery light.

This is no such easy thing. The fact that there are a hundred thousand
words in the English dictionary does not make it easier. It is not
those who know the most words that can necessarily best express
themselves. Neither is it true that, because feeling is real, it can
therefore speak. "Out of the fulness of the heart the mouth speaketh"
has no such sense as that. Many and many a fine thought is lost to the
world, and all the value of many a deep emotion, because he who thinks
or feels cannot voice himself, any more than you or I can necessarily
take a brush and paint, like Turner, the unspeakable glories of a sunset
which our eyes and soul can nevertheless appreciate to the very full.
"What makes a poet?" says Goethe, and he replies, "A heart brimful of
some noble passion." No doubt the noble passion must be there _before_ a
man can be a poet, but equally beyond doubt the passion alone cannot
make him one. To say that a heart full of the ardour of religion, of
love, of hope, of sorrow or joy, can always express its ardour, is an
assertion against which thousands of poor inarticulate human beings
would rise in protest. It is simply contrary to experience. There is
many a man and woman besides Wordsworth to whom "the meanest flower that
blows can give thoughts that do often lie too deep for tears"; but,
unlike Wordsworth, no sooner do these less gifted men and women attempt
to express one such thought and impart it to others, than lo! the subtle
thought evades them and is gone. They can give it no embodiment in
language. Their attempt ends in words which they know to be obscure,
cold, trivial, hopelessly ineffectual.

       *       *       *       *       *

How unevenly distributed is this power of expression! Let us begin as
low in the scale of verbal art as you choose. Let two observers chance
to see some previously unknown plant, with novel leaf and flower and
perfume. If they could paint the leaf and flower, well and good; but ask
each separately to communicate to you in words a mental picture of that
plant. Observe how, with equal education in the matter of language, the
one will describe you the forms and colours and fragrance in apt and
expressive terms and comparisons, which seem to paint it before your
eyes. The other plods and halts and fails, and leaves no clear
impression. If to the one the flower is just red and pointed, to the
other it is, perhaps, a tongue of flame. The one has but literal facts
to tell, the other is full of imagination and similitude.

Take a step higher. Have you seen and heard the lark, and studied his
movements and his song aloft in the sky of Europe? Can you express
simply what you then saw and heard, so that all who have witnessed the
same can see and feel it over again? How many words would you take, and
how vivid might your picture be? Then compare your effort with Shelley's
famous

  Higher still and higher
    From the earth thou springest,
  Like a cloud of fire;
    The blue deep thou wingest,
  And singing still doth soar, and soaring ever singest.

  In the golden lightning
    Of the sunken sun,
  O'er which clouds are bright'ning,
    Thou dost float and run,
  Like an unbodied joy whose race is just begun!

Another step, and we come to a region no longer of outward description,
but of thought, of feeling, of delicate fancy, of soaring imagination.

I suppose thousands upon thousands of persons possessed of what our
great-grandfathers used to call "sensibility," have felt at eventide,
when alone in certain spots, a kind of subduing awe, as if some great
spirit-existence pervading all nature were laying a solemn hush upon
the world. In various degrees one here and one there can express that
feeling, but how many can express it as simply and yet effectually as
Wordsworth does:--

  It is a beauteous evening, calm and free;
  The holy time is quiet as a nun
  Breathless with adoration; the broad sun
  Is sinking down in its tranquillity;
  The gentleness of heaven broods o'er the sea:
  Listen! the mighty Being is awake,
  And doth with his eternal motion make
  A sound like thunder--everlastingly!

       *       *       *       *       *

To express and body forth: there is room for the manifestation of this
prime literary gift in all sort of subjects. It may be shown in a fable
of AEsop, in _Robinson Crusoe_, in a children's story, in Mark Twain's
boyish experiences on the Mississippi, in a Barrack-room Ballad of
Rudyard Kipling, in Thackeray's _Esmond_, in Shelley's _Ode to a
Skylark_, in either a comedy of Shakespeare or his _Hamlet_, in a sonnet
of Dante's _Vita Nuova_ or in his _Inferno_. AEsop's communication of his
point of view is final. So is Defoe's communication of mental pictures.
So is Mark Twain's of that Mississippi pilotage. So is Kipling's in his
_Drums of the Fore and Aft_, or his _Mandalay_. These men are all
admirable literary artists in their own domains. Each fulfils all that
is demanded of his art. If we could keep this fact clearly before us,
our judgments of writers might be more discriminating. Do we think
Kipling possessed of an extraordinary degree of the literary gift? Who
could think otherwise, seeing that he can effect exactly what he sets
out to effect by means of words? His scenes and his thoughts--such as
they are--start forth living before us. But do we then think a Kipling
proved equal to a Shakespeare in sheer excellence of his gift? That is
another question. The things which Shakespeare realizes and expresses
demand powers of realization and expression more far-reaching and more
subtle than are required by those things to which a Kipling gives shape
and form. In Shakespeare are multitudes of deep and rare reflections,
vivid imaginings, penetrations of sympathy and insight, and all so
clearly crystallized, with such apparent ease, that they become ours at
once, as if they were natural to us. His communication of the most
subtle states of mind is complete. But in a Kipling we cannot pretend
that there is infinite subtlety and elusiveness, that there is a cosmic
condensing of a whole nebula of spiritual experience. His task was less
hard.

And what then of Homer? Can we call _his_ task a difficult one? Is he,
too, full of infinitely delicate or far-reaching thoughts and feelings?
No. But his aim is to reproduce all the freshness and breeziness of a
fresh and breezy atmosphere, to make us live again amid all that
simple wholesome strenuousness of the childhood of the western world.
That, too, is exceedingly elusive, and almost impossible to
catch--immeasurably more difficult than all those coarsely, if
strenuously, marked characteristics of the British soldier and other
bold figures on the canvas of Kipling.

That, I believe, is the right attitude to assume, when we endeavour to
measure the literary power of one writer against that of another--if we
must do such a thing at all. It is not the morality or non-morality, the
importance or non-importance, the beauty or ugliness, inherent in what
is said, which determine the degree of the literary gift. It is rather
the relative elusiveness of the thing said, the difficulty of
surrounding it, of condensing it, of giving it perfect body, and
communicating it in that body. And that is why it is an error to put,
let us say Gray, in the foremost rank of literary artists. How well he
does this thing! But was it, after all, so transcendently difficult to
do?

The vaguer, the deeper, the more comprehensive, the subtler the thought
or feeling or fancy, the greater demand is there upon the literary
power. One can say no more. It is as in sculpture, which finds it
infinitely easier to give embodiment to straining muscles and an
agonized face than to carve a statue in perfect restful beauty and with
a countenance of benign and strong tranquillity.

Ask a hundred people to write about the spring--simply to describe it
with its sights and sounds and odours--and most of them can perform the
task more or less well. Ask them to bring home the physical and
emotional influence of spring, and many of those who feel that influence
most keenly will give up the task. And then comes Chaucer with his few
touches, his "blissful briddes" and "fressche flowres," and tells us how
"full is my heart of revel and solace," and behold! the passage breathes
to the reader's heart the very spirit of youth and springtide.

A simple statement of a simple fact calls for no "literary" gift. A
description of externals demands some, but not often a great, degree of
it. A thought or feeling, which is suggested by the fact or object, may
require either little or much in proportion as the thought or feeling is
fine and fugitive. But a _mood_ induced by the thought or feeling
generally demands the gift in its highest degree. "A primrose by the
river's brim," whether "a yellow primrose 'tis to him," or a
dicotyledon, may be outwardly described more and less well; but we
require for that purpose only the rudiments of literary prose. But,
next, there is the pure and appealing beauty of the flower; and that
evokes gathering recognitions of the beauty of nature and its grace to
us. Then upon this there steals a feeling of exhilaration in the glad
and gay atmosphere of the re-awakening world; and this, again, may open
into a whole vista of recollections far back from childhood; and so the
result may be one of many moods. We have all this time been brought up a
sort of gradient of literary difficulty; and he is the supreme of
supreme literary artists who can body forth the most subtle of all these
thoughts and moods.

Let me illustrate. Take for the purpose of contrast this passage of
purely external description from Cowper:--

  Forth goes the woodman, leaving unconcerned
  The cheerful haunts of man, to wield the axe
  And drive the wedge in yonder forest drear,
  From morn to eve his solitary task.
  Shaggy and lean and shrewd, with pointed ears
  And tail cropped short, half lurcher and half cur,
  His dog attends him. Close behind his heel
  Now creeps he slow, and now with many a frisk,
  Wide-scampering, snatches up the drifted snow
  With ivory teeth, or ploughs it with his snout:
  Then shakes his powdered coat and barks for joy--

and so forth. There you have clear and faithful observation, clearly and
faithfully reproduced. I do not want to depreciate the amount of
literary skill necessary for putting those right words in their right
places. Nevertheless I cannot bring myself to think it particularly
remarkable. The picture is distinct, but it is of the eye alone; it
involves nothing in the way of imagination, nothing in the way of subtle
feeling blending with the sight in the brain of the writer. Next take a
stanza from Matthew Arnold's _Thyrsis_:--

  So, some tempestuous morn in early June,
    When the year's primal burst of bloom is o'er,
  Before the roses and the longest day--
    When garden walks and all the grassy floor
      With blossoms red and white of fallen May
  And chestnut flowers are strewn--
    So have I heard the cuckoo's parting cry,
      From the wet field, through the vext garden trees,
      Come with the volleying rain and tossing breeze:
  "_The bloom is gone, and with the bloom go I._"

Now to me that passage expresses something immeasurably more difficult
of expression. The whole tone of the environment is reproduced in a few
touches. We not only realize the scene, but we also feel in its
description the same mood of subtle pensiveness, with its flavour of
melancholy, in which the writer saw and felt it. For myself I know that
the passage brings back to me, exactly and perfectly, not only a mental
picture, but also a frame of mind, which I can recognize across the
years which now separate me from those English "garden walks and all the
grassy floor" strewn with "blossoms red and white of fallen May and
chestnut flowers."

If you have never experienced precisely that frame of mind, you cannot,
of course, appreciate the literary power, any more than you can
appreciate Shelley's all-exquisite

  The One remains, the many change and pass;
    Heaven's light for ever shines, earth's shadows fly;
  Life, like a dome of many-coloured glass,
    Stains the white radiance of eternity,
  Until Death tramples it to fragments--

unless you have pondered the mystery of life and eternity somewhat as he
had done.

Yes! that must be premised all through. You must have had your own mood
of profound world-weariness, before you can appreciate the utter
completeness of the cry of Beatrice Cenci:--

  "Sweet Heaven, forgive weak thoughts! If there should be
  No God, no Heaven, no Earth in the void world,
  The wide, gray, lampless, deep unpeopled world!"

The highest attainment then of literary power is the "exquisite
expression of exquisite--that is to say, rarely intense or
subtle--impressions." The language, said Wordsworth, should be the
"incarnation of the thought." The highest gift of the writer is to make
his words and their combinations not clever, not dazzling, not merely
lucid, but to make them, by their meanings, their associations, and
their musical effects, exactly reproduce what he thinks and sees and
feels, just in the special light in which he thinks and sees and feels
it.

This involves, of course, a perpetual struggle between thought and
language. Language is for ever striving to overtake thought and feeling.
Browning indeed may say:--

  Perceptions whole, like that he sought
  To clothe, reject so pure a work of thought
  As language.

But in this we must not acquiesce. Browning himself, indeed, however
immense his range of sympathies, however extraordinary his dramatic
insight, falls far short in the purely literary gift. He is not a master
of language as Shakespeare was or as Tennyson was. Extremist votaries of
Browning are accustomed to say either that he is not obscure at all, or
else that his obscurities are inseparable from the thoughts. We must not
admit this latter plea until we are prepared to call Isaiah and
Shakespeare shallower than Browning.

The transcendent literary artist is always compelling language to
express what it had seemed incapable of expressing. Indeed the "advance
of literature" often means no more than a greater degree of success in
giving recognizable shape to the hitherto vague and elusive, in
communicating what was supposed to be incommunicable. Often, when we
say that such and such a writer gives us "new glimpses," or "opens up
new thoughts," it only means that he has discovered how to express such
thoughts, so that we can realize and recognize them. He is not an
inventor, but a revealer.

And the highest revealer is the great poet. Poetry is language and
music. Musicians tell us that music is intended to impart what language
cannot express--something unspeakably more delicate, more subtle,
emotionally more powerfully or more tranquillizing. But music must not
aim at too much. It cannot really describe action or define thoughts; it
can only translate feelings and moods into sounds. Now just as music is
always advancing, always endeavouring to fulfil more perfectly the
functions of art--which are, as I have said, to communicate the spirit
of one human being to his fellows--so language also is ever struggling
to enlarge its powers and to do what musicians tell us music alone can
do. Language, too, must translate feeling, and moods, but into words. It
in a sense invades the region of music. And herein lies the
justification--the necessity--for poetry, or for a prose which is
virtually poetry in its language and movement and imagination. Poetry,
in that broad sense, must always be the literary form for the expression
of that which is most difficult to express, I mean of anything which is
pervaded by a rare exaltation and passion of feeling, or by a delicate
grace and charm.

       *       *       *       *       *

Some people pretend to think that poetry is a wholly artificial thing;
that it is merely a pleasing trick, when it is not an irritating trick,
with language. Well, alas! it is quite natural that many stern spirits
should be irritated by verses; for it is entirely true that nine-tenths
of what is being, or has been, written in verse might better have been
written in prose, or rather not written at all. The young author, and,
for the matter of that, the old author, who thinks that he has a perfect
right to choose between the verse form and the prose form simply
according as he can versify or not, is grievously in the wrong. There is
no more justification for, say, a purely didactic poem or descriptive
poem than there is for the rhyming which begins somebody's treatise on
optics with these egregious words:--

  When parallel rays
  Come opposite ways
  And fall upon opposite sides.

Everything depends upon the nature of that which a man has to say.

What are the external marks of poetry as distinct from real prose?
These: the choice of words of a special emotional or pictorial force,
combined with musical cadences, rhythm, and sometimes rhyme. And why are
these employed? To tickle the ear? By no means. It is simply because
they are most effective agents in that communication of his mood and
spirit which is the aim of the artist. When a mere fact has to be
stated, there is no defence for verse, unless as an aid to memory, just
as we say--

  Thirty days hath September,
  April, June, and November.

When a thing can be said just as well in prose, there is no excuse for
not putting it in prose. That axiom should kill off half our amateur
poets and rid the world of a nuisance. On the other hand, when a thought
or a feeling is to be communicated from a mind profoundly stirred,
exalted, filled with fervour, or from a mind tingling with exquisite
perceptions, then there can be no true and full communication to
another mind, unless that mind also is stirred, exalted or made to
tingle. Music can so dispose that other mind. So too can language; for,
under the influence of poetry of perfect sound, we find stealing over
us, thanks largely _to_ the sound, a mood which could never result from
prose; and so our minds are polarized to feel the actual thing expressed
exactly as the writer feels it, to see it exactly as he sees it.
Verse-poetry, therefore, is no idle invention. It has its sound
philosophical basis; and where poetry is really demanded by the subject,
it is part and parcel of the supreme literary gift to wed the music of
the verse so aptly to the thought, that the communication from soul to
soul is utterly complete.

Is verse a mere conviction? Let us see. Does any one pretend that his
spirit would be just as much moved by the mere sense of this passage of
Tennyson, if it were stripped of its verse form and turned into prose:--

  Tears, idle tears, I know not what they mean.
  Tears from the depths of some divine despair
  Rise in the heart, and gather to the eyes,
  In looking on the happy autumn fields,
  And thinking of the days that are no more.

and--

  Dear as remember'd kisses after death,
  And sweet as those by hopeless fancy feign'd
  On lips that are for others; deep as love,
  Deep as first love, and wild with all regret;
  O Death in Life, the days that are no more.

If he does, let us not envy him his powers of perception or sensation.

Would you feel for Coleridge just the same mood of sympathy, if he told
you his sad case in prose, as when he writes:--

  A grief without a pang, void, dark and drear,
  A stifled, drowsy, unimpassioned grief,
  Which finds no natural outlet, no relief,
  In word or sigh or tear.

Listen once more to this:--

  Do ye hear the children weeping, O my brothers,
      Ere the sorrow comes with years?
  They are leaning their young heads against their mothers--
      And _that_ cannot stop their tears.
  The young lambs are bleating in the meadows;
      The young birds are chirping in the nest;
  The young fawns are playing with the shadows;
      The young flowers are blowing toward the west--
  But the young, young children, O my brothers,
      They are weeping bitterly!--
  They are weeping in the playtime of the others,
      In the country of the free.

Verily I believe a few of these stanzas of Elizabeth Barrett Browning
have more effect in moving the average human soul than forty prose
sermons and a hundred prose tracts. And why? Because they express, not
mere thoughts, not mere arguments, but a mood, a disposition, a soul.

Verse-poetry can never die. It is for evermore inseparable from the
art of communicating the spirit in words.

       *       *       *       *       *

The supreme literary gift then is the power to embody even the most
subtle conception in a communicable shape. And is this a mere knack,
with which brain-power has little or nothing to do? Not so. Observe what
the task implies on the part of the writer, over and above his perfect
control of words.

It implies, to wit, that he shall first realize those conceptions
luminously to himself. Before he can utter them, his brain must have
grasped them, formed a vivid picture of them. Most of us, when we become
aware of a fancy or a feeling within ourselves, are unable to get it
into focus. The power of undergoing a deep emotion, of thinking a
far-reaching thought, of experiencing a keen sensation, is, I assert,
by no means rare in the world. But as soon as we begin to look
steadfastly at it and try to realize to ourselves exactly what it is
like and what it means; when we ask ourselves, "what precisely is it I
am thinking and feeling?" it evades us; it begins to break up and fade
away, like a phantom or like mist. It is as when we think of some one's
face, filled with a certain expression. The face starts out before our
mind's eye, and for a moment we see it well and truly. But for most of
us, unless we are painters, or possess the gift which might make us
painters, it is impossible to keep that face, with that expression,
steadily before our inward vision. As we gaze upon it, it changes and
passes into a blur and refuses to be held.

But the mental retina of the great painter can hold such things as he
has seen till he transfers them to the canvas; so can the brain of the
great masters who paint for us in words, till they embody them in
delicate prose or exquisite poetry. The lack of power to express often
comes of a lack of this power to realize; and that power, I believe, is
what is meant by "the vision and the faculty divine," and by "shaping
imagination," and by other phrases which get so bandied to and fro that
the world almost ceases to attach any meaning to them at all.

I remember some years ago, in an essay on _Literary Judgment_, asserting
that the quality which chiefly distinguished the immortal works from the
transient was sincerity, single-heartedness, reality of intention and
love of the work for the work's sake. That was only a partial view of
the truth. It is right in a measure, since that sincerity, that absence
of make-believe, in the literary creation is a prime necessity; but it
is not sufficient. It is, indeed, a prime necessity, because it means
that the superlative writer must write at first hand of things genuinely
conceived and realized by his very self. It is, indeed, a prime
necessity, because you cannot conjure up vividly and hold in steady view
the communicable picture of your feeling or your thought, _unless_ you
feel it or think it with all your own being. But the sincerity is only a
pre-supposed condition. The supreme literary quality is the power to
realize the picture and so body forth the thing thought or felt. The
great dramatic genius, for example, first realizes a character and his
thoughts and feelings, and then, identifying himself with that
character, gives them expression. When Homer imagines Odysseus
descending to the nether world and meeting there the shades of heroes
whom he had known at Troy, his Odysseus accosts this one or that and
receives answer as befits the person. But to Ajax, son of Telamon,
Odysseus had indirectly done a wrong, and caused his suicide, and, when
the ghost of Ajax appears, Odysseus speaks to it gentle and soothing
words of explanation and self-defence. And what does that proud injured
Ajax reply? Well, on Homer's brain the picture is very vivid. His brain
becomes practically the brain of the very Ajax, and the continuation
shows it: "So I spake, but he answered me not a word, and passed on to
Erebus after the other spirits of the departed dead." That silence of
Ajax is truer than the most scathing of speeches.

So is it with Shakespeare. He sees his characters and realizes their
sensations so vividly that his brain and feelings become the brain and
feelings of his creations; and thus only does his Lear say with such
perfect naturalness, "Pray you, undo this button." Hence, too, all the
distinctness of character in his lifelike men and women, be it Hamlet or
Falstaff, Cordelia or Lady Macbeth.

"Imagination," "the shaping gift of imagination," is this power of first
presenting a thing to your own brain with luminousness. For once
etymology lends real aid. _Imaginatio_ is "the making of pictures." It
is inseparable from the power of perfect expression.

Why did the people of Verona whisper of Dante, "Yonder is the man who
has been in Hell?" Simply because of this power. Dante saw the place of
torment in his imagination, not as any of us might see it, vaguely
terrible, but clear in every dread and horrid detail. And, having so
seen it, he lends to that seeing the gift of expression, and with a few
simple verbs and nouns and plain forceful similes he makes his readers
see what he had seen. So did it come about that he was regarded as the
man who had actually "been in Hell." How far does Milton stand below him
in this imaginative vision! Milton, too, describes an Inferno, but it
lacks the convincingness of one who has seen it for himself. We could
never say that Milton was the man who had "been in Hell."

What is the special power of Carlyle in his dealings with history? It is
the power of summoning up visions of the past, standing out clear to
the last particular, as if lightning illuminated them against the
background of the ages.

I do not know whether any better definition of imagination can be given
than that of Ruskin in his _Modern Painters_. "Imagination is the power
of seeing anything we describe as if it were real, so that, looking at
it as we describe, points may strike us which will give a vividness to
the description that would not have occurred to vague memory, or been
easily borrowed from the expressions of other writers." I do not say we
can necessarily describe a thing _because_ we so see it, but I do say
that we cannot describe it _unless_ we so see it. Therefore the supreme
literary gift of communicating exactly what we think and feel, exactly
as we think and feel it, involves no mere control of language, but,
therewith, an imaginative brain to realize conceptions as vivid
pictures. To combine these powers is to be a genius of great rarity.

In one part of the _Inferno_ of Dante it rains fire. To say that much
would be enough for the ordinary writer. But Dante not only sees fire
falling; he sees exactly how it falls, and the picture in his mind
becomes the picture in ours, when he simply says that it fell silently,
steadily "as fall broad flakes of snow when winds are still." Perfectly
easy, is it not? Yes, for Dante. But for the ordinary writer it would
have been no more than "A rain of fire." But what manner of rain, O thou
ordinary and inadequate writer? We do not, indeed, want scorching
rhetoric and verse piled on verse. We want the "inevitable" word, the
simple and the home-coming, the Dantesque. Byron now and again exhibits
the power. Mazeppa is bound naked on the wild horse, and--

  The skies spun like a mighty wheel,
  I saw the trees like drunkards reel,
  And a slight flash sprang o'er my eyes,
  Which saw no further....

       *       *       *       *       *

With the consummate literary artists the picture, whether it be of a
real scene, an imagined scene, or a feeling, is given in few but
effective strokes. And it is so given simply because they see it all so
distinctly. As Longinus says of Sappho's famous ode of passion, the
supreme writer seizes upon the essential and salient features, combines
them, and trusts to your and my imagination to supply the rest. When a
writer welters in words and lines, when he elaborates touch upon touch,
you may be sure that he is trying to fill the picture into his
imagination, instead of being possessed by an imagination which
determine the picture.

In the _Ancient Mariner_ Coleridge describes the passing of the spectral
ship:--


  The western wave was all aflame,
  The day was well-nigh done!
  Almost upon the western wave
  Rested the broad bright Sun,
  When that strange shape drove suddenly
  Betwixt us and the Sun.

  And straight the Sun was fleck'd with bars,
  (Heaven's Mother send us grace!)
  As if through a dungeon-grate he peer'd
  With broad and burning face.

  Are those her ribs through which the Sun
  Did peer, as through a grate?
  And is that Woman all her crew?
  Is that a Death? and are there two?
  Is Death that Woman's mate?

and then--

  The Sun's rim dips; the stars rush out;
  At one stride comes the dark;
  With far-heard whisper, o'er the sea,
  Off shot the spectre-bark.

For my own part those words make me see it all fully, vividly. I do not
merely behold the scene: I feel the peculiar awe of the narrator. Can
you doubt that Coleridge saw this in his brain exactly as if it were
real?

When Keats in his mind's eye saw Madeline praying under that Gothic
window which was so "innumerable of stains and splendid dyes" he beheld
the scene as if he were positively on the spot to paint it. And how does
he paint it? What an opportunity for the display of pictorial technique
in words! But Keats is not thinking of that. One does not really
perceive a myriad little details at such a time. You never do actually
see all the things which you would describe if you sat down to think
details out one by one. If you had really fixed your eyes on the
kneeling Madeline, as Porphyro did on that eve of St. Agnes, you could
not also be taking an inventory of the particulars in the situation. The
inferior writer forgets this, because he is writing from his wits, and
not, as Keats wrote, from the spontaneous picture of imagination. What
Keats sees is this:--

  Full on this casement shone the wintry moon,
  And threw warm gules on Madeline's fair breast,
  As down she knelt for Heaven's grace and boon;
  Rose bloom fell on her hands, together prest,
  And on her silver cross fair amethyst,
  And on her hair a glory, like a saint.

That is all, and it is enough. A kneeling figure, the wintry moon, and
some few of the colours of the glass, described as they fall upon what
you would really note, the head and breast and the clasped hands. What
would not a Rossetti have done with such material!

These are descriptions. It is the same with emotions. "Pray you, undo
this button." The supreme writer does not tear passion rhetorically to
pieces. He does not elaborate it till he fritters it away. He condenses
it all into the poignant cry which goes straight from heart to heart.
What in the circumstances could Burns have said more final than--

  Had we never loved sae kindly,
  Had we never loved sae blindly,
  Never met and never parted,
  We had ne'er been broken-hearted.

I know that there are people who cannot see that these four simple lines
are the consummate expression of a vast range of feeling. We can only
pray that Heaven will some day be merciful to them.

       *       *       *       *       *

One word more seems necessary to be said. How can we tell when a writer
is succeeding in his effort to communicate, to body forth what he seeks
to body forth? Simply by our own complete apprehension, by the universal
humanity in us, by the fact that we keenly recognize that such and such
a sensation is one in which we have at least shared, but which we have
never known how to express. We realize how it has been brought over us
by loneliness, mountain solitude, a sunset, great heights, stormy seas,
music, sorrow, love, the sound of distant bells, calm evenings, summer
and the perfume of the flowers, fine characters, heroic deeds, and a
thousand other causes, within us and without: and, when the supreme
writer voices it for us, whatever it may be, we feel and know it at once
for the final and the perfect.

If that test is not sufficient, I know no other.




Hebraism and Hellenism


Students of the history of society and literature have grown fond of
distinguishing between two powerful influences upon our ways of thinking
and of looking at life. They find two chief attitudes of mind, two chief
animating spirits, so different from each other in the main that they
deserve and have received special and practically antithetical names.
Our manner of regarding life and society, morals and sentiment, nature
and art, is determined by whichever of these two spirits predominates in
us. Sometimes one whole nation has its view in almost all things
pervaded by the one set of principles; another nation is no less
manifestly informed by the other set. At other times it is an individual
who stands out in broad spiritual and intellectual contrast with another
of the same people and the same age. These two spirits have been called
by Matthew Arnold the "Hebraic" and the "Hellenic"; the one Hebraic,
because its clearest and most consistent manifestation has been among
the Hebrews; the other Hellenic, because its clearest and most
consistent manifestation has been among the Hellenes, or ancient Greeks.
And not only have these two spirits been specially manifested there, but
it is directly from those peoples that two corresponding influences have
spread to all the more highly civilized portions of the world. From the
Hebrews there has spread one great force, and from the Hellenes another
great force, and these two forces have in a larger or smaller measure
determined the characters and views of those peoples, who, being neither
Hebrews nor Hellenes, had not of themselves developed so intense a
spirituality or so active an intellectuality as one or other of these
two possessed.

It is rather in their historical aspect that I propose to make some
observations upon these two forces.

I feel a natural diffidence and some little constraint in treating such
a subject before a specially Hebrew gathering. But the Hebrews of whom I
have to speak are not yourselves, but your ancestors, and they are
ancestors with a history so remarkable and a spirit so potent that,
though I have no share in your pride, I can in a large measure cordially
share in your admiration of them. In a large measure, I say, for I
propose to show how the mental view and temperament of Israel, when
Israel was his truest self, needed to be qualified and corrected by
another mental view and temperament--that of the Greeks, when the Greeks
were their truest selves. And if there were here any descendant of
Pericles or Sophocles or Phidias, I should similarly say to him that,
though I feel the keenest zest of admiration for the many sublime things
which his Athenian ancestors did and wrote and wrought, yet the full
perfection of human character and life was not reached by them, and
could not be reached by them, until their own spirit was corrected by
another, the spirit exemplified in the Hebrews. You will, I am sure,
allow me to say whatever I feel to be just. And that there may be no
misconception, let me add that, whenever I speak of the Hebraic spirit,
I shall mean, not the spirit which an individual contemporary Hebrew may
happen to display, but the spirit which was characteristic of Israel as
a nation before the dispersion. In the same way the Hellenic spirit
will mean the spirit which was characteristic of the pure Hellene before
he was demoralized and adulterated by Roman, Slav, and Turk.

Man, chameleon-like, is apt to take the colour of the land on which he
happens to be, and a Jew who lives in modern times, amid social and
religious conditions, education, and material circumstances so different
from those of ancient Palestine, may differ very widely from the type of
the race as we gather it from history and literature. Nor is race
everything. Even if the Jews once more gathered together into one nation
from all quarters of the earth, we should by no means necessarily behold
a people of the same spiritual attributes and ideals as the Hebrews who
built the Temple under Ezra, or who fought like lions under the
Maccabees. As with the early Saracens, it is often some one great idea
or principle which--for the time at least--determines the whole current
of a nation's mental and spiritual being. But that idea may gradually
lose its intensity and its energizing power, and the Saracen sinks into
the voluptuous Mussulman. Hebraism and Hellenism, therefore, mean the
diverse spirits of two peoples as they once were, not as they may be
now, or will necessarily be again.

One cannot with truth draw absolutely clear and sharp distinctions
between the mental processes of different peoples. One cannot say that a
Hebrew, in virtue of being a Hebrew, would necessarily act and think
thus and thus, while a Greek, in virtue of being a Greek, would
necessarily act and think in some other definite way. Here and there a
fervid or brooding mind among the Greeks, such as that of AEschylus,
might often approach the lines of Hebraism. Here and there some son of
Shem must have been mentally constituted more like the sons of Javan.
None the less, when we survey the history and study the literature of
these two races as a whole, it is impossible not to perceive a clear and
consistent difference between their respective ways of looking at
things, at life and conduct, sentiment and nature and art.

Max Mueller, speaking of the English people, says that we are Jewish in
our religion, Greek in our philosophy, Roman in our politics, and Saxon
in our morality. This ingenious remark is, as such absolute analyses are
apt to be, only partially true. We have, indeed, borrowed from the
Jews, from the Greeks, and from the Romans, in those several
departments. But those departments over-lap and interpenetrate each
other. The fact is that, in us English, with certain Teutonic qualities
ineradically at the bottom of our nature, the modes in which our
religion, philosophy, politics, and morality have developed themselves
have been determined by a blending of all that we have learned from
Jews, Greeks, and Romans alike. In the workings of our intellect and
morals, Athens and Jerusalem in particular have operated upon us far
more than we can now exactly estimate.

Looking at the matter historically, the special quality and type of
Hebraism we must deduce from Hebrew literature, from Hebrew history,
from the characteristics of eminent Hebrews, and from the average of
testimony to Hebrew character supplied to us by reputable authors, Jew
and Gentile, in poetry, drama, fiction, or other forms of literary
creation. The special quality and type of Hellenism we must deduce from
similar material concerning Greeks and things Grecian. And here I must
confess that I am no Hebraist. I am not intimately acquainted with the
heterogeneous compilation called the Talmud, nor with Alexandrine and
mediaeval Jewish literature. Nevertheless no one brought up strictly in a
Christian Church can help becoming in some measure versed in things
Hebraic. To be perpetually exercised from early childhood in reading,
marking, learning, and inwardly digesting the one great Hebrew document,
the Bible; to have its very words and phrases ready to spring to one's
lips; to be saturated with its sentiments; to have been made much more
familiar with the sayings and doings of Abraham and Joseph, David and
Solomon, Isaiah and Ezekiel, than even with those of the kings, heroes,
and poets of one's own people--all this cannot but impart to a receptive
mind the power of distinguishing with fair accuracy the Hebraic quality
from the un-Hebraic. On the other hand, in Hellenic studies I may be
allowed to take a more confident stand; and as sometimes the long august
procession of Hebrew history and Hebrew letters passes across the mind,
and sometimes again the brilliant march of Grecian deeds and Grecian
words, one cannot fail to be more and more impressed with the contrast
between the excellences or the shortcomings of the two.

Up till the present time, the life and literature of Europe in general
has twice passed beneath Hebraic influences, twice beneath Hellenic.
Each influence has been greater or less, more or less durable, in
different regions; nevertheless there are two clearly distinguishable
invasions of the influences in each case. The intellectual influence of
Greece was first felt in pagan times, when Greek ideas and Greek
philosophy passed westward to Rome and through Rome permeated the
peoples under Roman sway. The spiritual influence of Hebraism was first
felt when, soon after this, the Christian Jews carried the doctrine of
one God amongst the pagans, and when Christianity,--which, however
otherwise diverse from Judaism, is none the less its outcome--became the
religion of all the European stocks. The first influence which came from
Greece was an intellectual influence, the passing of a fresh and
stimulating breeze. The first influence of Jerusalem was a moral
re-awakening and revelation, the shaking of a rushing mighty wind. The
moral principle of Hebraism, in the special guise of Christianity,
transformed the whole life and conduct and ideals of European men. What
had been virtues in some cases became vices, what had been weaknesses
became virtues.

We need not dwell upon this immense change; its nature is known to all,
and its source was Jewish. Centuries pass by. The Christianised world
has sunk its intelligence beneath the prescriptions of a demoralized
Church; the moral impulse of the religion borrowed from the Hebrews has
died down into formalism. I speak of the period immediately preceding
the later Renaissance and the Reformation. Strange to say, it was in a
large measure the Ottoman Turk who came to the rescue. He over-ran
Greece, captured Constantinople, and was the cause of a great westward
exodus of Greek talent and learning. Italy in particular was filled with
Greeks whose profit and pride it was to spread far and wide the
literature and culture of their nation. The avidity with which this new
learning was received was marvellous; still more marvellous was the
effect. It was, in truth, a _renaissance_, a new birth of intellect. It
meant no less than a general revival of the spirit of inquiry, of
open-eyed observation, of a desire and a resolve to see things as they
were, and not as tradition and dogma had taught men to see them. Italy,
France, Germany and England became alive with fresh efforts of the
reason, inspired with fresh ideas of taste and beauty in artistic
creation, and with new hopes and schemes of progress. The astonishing
abundance, the immense variety, and the splendid quality of the
Elizabethan literature are due to no other recognisable cause. It was
one and the same cause that made Michael Angelo, Shakespeare, and Bacon
possible. A new springtime seemed to have dawned upon the world of
thought. This was the second period of Hellenic influence, an influence
wholly intellectual and artistic.

Following the re-awakening of speculation came the Reformation. The
Reformation brought the reading of the Bible at first hand, and a new
style of preaching and exhorting directly from it. In religion and
morals the reformers fell back upon the Scriptures themselves. They
drank in the Scriptures, and therewith the Hebraic spirit which pervades
them. In most cases the salutary effect upon character and conduct can
hardly be overstated. In other cases there was extravagance and harm.
Uncompromisingly, and not very intelligently, did they speak Scripture,
think Scripture, and act Scripture, like Hebrews born out of due
season. Knox invested himself with the austere authority of the Hebrew
prophet; Calvin was fain to hew Agag in pieces before the Lord. The
Puritans of England became fanatical in their sombre conception of sin
and in the rigour of their exaggerated Hebraism. Here was the second
period of Hebraic influence, an influence wholly moral and religious.

In each case the new invasion of the Hellenic spirit precedes, and is
the handmaid of, the Hebraic. In each case the influence of Greece is to
procure the open mind, that of Jerusalem, to mould the unsteady heart.
The Greek works first upon the intellect to make it supple, the Hebrew
comes after and gives robustness to the moral will. Such, in the main,
is the distinction and the historic sequence of the two forces. We have
twice passed under each, and we shall, I believe and hope, feel the
strong power of each again, for we sorely need, on the one hand,
something to give stamina to our weak moral conceptions, and, on the
other, something to give us clear principles of social life, art, and
culture.

Let us look a little closer at what our distinction implies.

Physically the unlikeness of Hebrew to Greek was very marked. Allowing
for climatic effects, the Hebrew physiognomy has preserved itself until
to-day. The true, or at least the ideal, Greek type is almost lost in
hybrid forms, yet we know what it was. The ideal Hellene was tall,
upright, strong and supple withal, his lightish hair and beard were
thick and curling, his features straight and firm, his brow broad, his
eyes full and light. The whole form and aspect expressed a healthy zest
of life, an open-eyed contemplation of men and things, and a belief in
the sovereign virtue of reason. The outward aspect of the Hebrew type is
very different from this. The inward difference of the two races was no
less great. The essential contrast between them is not one of brow and
eye, it is one of thinking and seeing, a contrast between two sets of
ideals and principles, two ways of looking at life and the world. Romans
like Juvenal, who saw both Greeks and Jews numerous in the imperial
city, could only superficially observe that the Jew was unsocial, narrow
in his prejudices and obstinate in his superstitions, while the Greek
was as devoid of principle as he was brilliantly versatile. The Jew and
Greek whom he saw were those of a demoralised period; but in any case
the Roman did not understand either; he did not know that each was the
representative of a certain important set of principles carried to
excess. He would hardly have thought it worth his while to reflect on
such a matter. It is otherwise with us, to whom all great human
phenomena are of significance for that sound thinking which is essential
to progress.

How can we describe in brief and intelligible terms these two spirits,
the Hebraic and the Hellenic? One might use many figures of speech.
Matthew Arnold's antithesis of Hellenic thinking to Hebraic doing needs
much qualification. Perhaps it would be nearer the truth to say that the
Hebraic spirit is heat, the Hellenic spirit is light. Hebraism means
moral fervour; Hellenism means intellectual sensibility. Hebraism
suggests strength of conviction, tenacity of resolve, prophetic
vehemence; Hellenism suggests flexibility of thought, adaptability to
circumstances, artistic serenity. Hebraism suggests the austere and
spiritual life, Hellenism the social and sensuous life. Yet none of
these brief antitheses can be wholly or exclusively true. The difference
is not thus to be labelled away, any more than one can label the
difference between scents of flowers or tones of voices. There are two
experiences which are apt to change the whole complexion of things; the
one is religious conversion, the other falling in love. Yet how could
one sum up the transformation except by those terms "converted" and "in
love"? So, when the Hebrew, morally introspective, reliant on some great
power outside himself, fervid in his beliefs as in his passions, intense
in his imaginations and enthusiasms, is compared with the Hellene, a
being intellectually open and curious, artistically sensitive, a
cultivator of humanity and its delights, many-sided and self-possessed,
by what condensed terms shall one describe their diverse ways of taking
the whole of life and its concerns? In default of such terms let us hear
a modern descendant of Israel, one who was at the time half thinking of
this very distinction. Heinrich Heine, though an apostate from Judaism,
and though he liked to fancy himself a Hellene, was nevertheless by
constitution a Hebrew. He describes a visit which he paid to Goethe,
than whom in form and mind and principle no more perfect Hellene ever
lived in Hellas itself. When Heine came face to face with Goethe at
Weimar, he tells us that he felt as if Goethe must be Jupiter, and that
he involuntarily glanced aside to see whether the eagle was not there
with the thunderbolt in his beak. He almost addressed him in Greek, but,
finding he "understood German," he made the profound remark that the
plums on the road were delicious. And now, hear how Heine draws the
contrast between the Hellenic Teuton and himself, the Teutonic Hebrew:
"At bottom Goethe and I are opposite natures and mutually repellent. He
is essentially a man on whom life sits easily, who looks on enjoyment of
life as the highest good, and though at times he has glimpses and vague
feelings of the ideal life and expresses them in his poems, yet he has
never comprehended it, much less lived it. I, on the contrary, am
essentially an enthusiast, that is, so inspired by the ideal as to be
ready to offer myself up to it, and even prompted to let myself be
absorbed by it. But, as a fact, I have caught at the enjoyments of life,
and found pleasure in them; hence the fierce struggle that goes on in me
between my clear reason, which approves the enjoyments of life, and
rejects the devotion of self-sacrifice as a folly, and my enthusiasm,
which is always rising up and laying violent hands on me, and trying to
drag me down again to her ancient solitary realm. Up, I ought perhaps to
say, for it is still a grave question whether the enthusiast who gives
up his life for the idea does not in a single moment live more and feel
more than Herr von Goethe in his sixth-and-seventieth year of egotistic
tranquillity." Heine was not a typical Hebrew, and hence the struggle of
which he speaks; but his words express what we want to have expressed.
The true Hellene lives for the sake of life, and for whatsoever things
are lovely and charming. The true Hebrew lives for the sake of his idea,
and for whatsoever things are of spiritual power.

The consequence is that, while the imagination, the rapture, and the
pathos of the Hebrew rose to heights and descended to depths utterly
beyond the consciousness of the ordinary Hellene, the Hellenes, on the
contrary, attained to a justness of intellectual and artistic perception
which formed no part of the ordinary Hebrew culture. The general manner
of all the Hebrew prophets, of Isaiah, Ezekiel, Jeremiah, or Joel, is
the same--the manner of the fiercest afflatus, of entire abandonment,
finding expression in phrases of magnificent solemnity and in imagery
of the profoundest awesomeness. This manner the Greeks never show. Not
even AEschylus, the most Hebraic of Hellenes, has any passages in which
he loses control of his artistic sense. Neither he nor any other Hellene
sees ecstatic visions or dreams ecstatic dreams. There is no place in
the Greek comprehension for that state of mind which can beget visions
like these: "And I looked, and behold! A whirlwind came out of the
north, a gray cloud and a fire enfolding itself, and a brightness was
about it, and out of the midst thereof as the colour of amber, out of
the midst of the fire"--with the further visions of living creatures
"like burning coals of fire," and the "wheels within wheels," with the
rings of them full of eyes. To this there is not and could not be any
parallel in the Greek. When the Persian queen in AEschylus dreams the
most startling dream of her life, it is obviously a vision constructed
by the poet's intellect alone. When Plato sees visions, they, too, are
intellectual constructions with the meaning as clear as the words. There
is nothing rapt, nothing fantastic. Greek imagery in this region is to
Hebrew imagery what the sculpture of Greece is to those weird creations
of symbolism at Nineveh and Babylon, the colossal human-faced bulls and
the genii with the eagle-head. And if you remind me that I am comparing
prophet with poet, and not prophet with prophet, I answer that the poets
are the only analogue of the prophets that Greece possessed; and that
very fact illustrates what is meant when we say that the Hellenic spirit
had no capacity for, the Hellenic view of life no impulse to, that
intensity of feeling which could produce imagery so stupendous in such
awe-inspiring phrase.

The Hebraic character, therefore, is one of strength and depth. Even now
no Jew in fiction is ever a weakling or a trifler. In whatever light he
is presented, a Shylock of Shakespeare, an Isaac of Scott, a Nathan of
Lessing, a Sidonia of Disraeli--revengeful, avaricious, bigoted,
benevolent, magnificent, talented--he is always a character of striking
power and intensity. The ancient type of Greek does not appear in modern
fiction. If he did, it would be as a subtle reasoner, perfect critic,
polished man of the world, full of the intellectual and social graces,
ever adaptable to circumstance, choosing his idea and never letting the
idea govern him. And, in the matter of loves and hates, it was rather
his maxim that one should neither hate nor love over-much, since he
might some day come to hate the person he loved and love the person he
hated. The Hellenic watchwords "nothing too much"; and "measure in
everything"; the Hellenic hatred of "unseasonableness" and dread of
"infatuation"--these things show how the ideal of the Greek was ever to
be master of himself by aid of reason. The Hebraic spirit, on the
contrary, would strive and cry without scruple of measure or season in
any matter on which its conscience or desire was fixed.

The Hebraic spirit is uncompromising; it does not readily admit other
points of view. Hebrew history, for example, is wholly one-sided, seen
wholly in the colour of a Hebrew's feelings. The peoples with whom
Israel comes in contact are either so many impious men made to be slain,
or they are wicked tyrants, allowed by Heaven to chastise the chosen for
some allotted period. This was the necessary outcome of the theocratic
principle. How different from history as written by the Greek
Thucydides! To that historian facts are so many facts, to be seen as
they are, and to be told without undue enthusiasm, without obtrusive
expression of moral approval or disapproval. Never since those Hellenic
days has a historian been able so perfectly to contemplate the triumphs
and disasters of his own country as if himself quite aloof from personal
interest or stake in the result. Unclouded vision, purely intellectual
observation, could no further go.

With such temperaments and mental habits, what view of life did the
Hebrews entertain, and what the Hellenes? Our view of life is in the
greatest measure a matter of religion or non-religion, and the Hebrews
possessed a highly spiritualised and devotional religion, while the
Greeks, if not easy-going polytheists, had at best some rationalistic
system of philosophy. The difference is immense. The Hebrew creed, a
real and absorbing belief, involved a certain code of laws for the
guidance of conduct, certain definite sentiments, certain definite hopes
and fears, certain definite axioms as to the aim and end of existence.
The highest good and the worst evil had for the Hebrews unmistakable
senses. It was not so with the Greeks. They too--when they thought at
all--sought for a systematic conception of life, but not for one in
which they should be subordinated to some authority outside themselves.
They desired to see life steadily and see it whole, but they must do so
by the light of their intellect. Their conduct, aims, sentiments, hopes,
fears, must depend upon axioms to which their reasoning brought them.
What the Hebrews called sin in the sight of Heaven, the Greeks called an
error or an offence to society. It was wrong socially, or it was wrong
intellectually. Greece therefore had no place for religious fervour. It
was tolerant almost to indifference. Athens might arraign Anaxagoras for
impiety or Socrates for heresy, but these charges were either mere
pretexts or were viewed simply in their social bearing. When a Hebrew
speaks of a valley full of dry bones, and of life being breathed into
them, we know that he is speaking in the moral sense. A Hellene would
have meant a revival of intelligence. The Hebrew prophet speaks of
"taking the heart of stone out of them and giving them a heart of
flesh." A Plato would rather have spoken of taking the films from their
intellectual gaze and opening their eyes to the pure essences of things.
The Hebrew would sit in sackcloth and ashes to atone for his offences
and to induce the proper spiritual submission. The Hellene would only
fast, if he fasted at all, so that he might by his plain living secure
high thinking. No ardent missionaries, Jonahs or Pauls, could come out
of Greece; it could produce no martyrs. The _De Profundis_ of a Greek
would signify, not moral abasement, but physical and mental suffering.

Not that the Hellenes were shallow. Far from it. Racially, indeed, they
had neither the Hebraic zeal nor the Hebraic conscience. But of vastly
more importance is the fact that in their conception of life they
started with different premises. They found themselves in life, their
hope ending with life, and their object was to make the best and
happiest of it. The hereafter was not pleasant to contemplate. Achilles,
when he meets Odysseus in the netherworld, declares that he would rather
be a poor labouring thrall on earth than a king among the dead. Had the
Hellenes been shown the modern doctrine of evolution, it is easy to
fancy how eagerly they would have sprung at it. To the Hebraic spirit it
would have been flat, stale, and unprofitable. In a word, while to the
best of Hebrews life was almost a sacrament, to the best of Hellenes
there was nothing sacramental but intelligence. The national pride of
the Hebrews lay in a religious reason--their election as a peculiar
people; the national pride of the Greeks lay in the intellectual,
social, and artistic culture which distinguished them from the
_barbaroi_. If Hellas had had its Zion, it would have meant a city which
was the pre-eminent abode of perfected human thought, society, and arts.
"The name of the city of that day shall be the 'Lord is there,'" is of
the essence of Hebraism. The Hellene would have thought of a city filled
with Hymns to Intellectual Beauty, hymns to Athena, goddess of arts and
wisdom, and to Apollo, the embodied idea of light.

In their outlook upon nature, animate and inanimate, there was a
corresponding contrast. Neither Greek nor Hebrew, indeed, contemplated
nature as we do in modern times. Neither was haunted as with a passion
by the beauty and grandeur of woods and streams and hills. To the
Hellene, as to Dr. Johnson or to Sydney Smith, nature was but a
background for man. Homer's moons and clouds, rainbows and hail-storms,
are used for the most part only for similitudes. To the Hebrew the glory
of the Heavens and the wonders of the deep are meet subjects upon which
to praise the Lord for his wonderful works. At the most, the Hellene
found in nature a sensuous delight, a part of the multitudinous joy
which, in a healthy condition, he found in all life. It is a mistake,
indeed, to suppose that the Greek was insensible to natural beauty. The
daffodils, crocuses, anemones, and hyacinths, the countless laughter of
the AEgean and the gleaming Cyclades, were delightful to his eye, the
trill of the nightingale to his ear; but neither he nor the Hebrew could
have felt much sympathy with the state of mind of a Wordsworth, to whom
nature, in and for itself, had the effect of a living and inspiring
power. Neither would have understood Wordsworth's--

  To me the meanest flower that blows can give
  Thoughts that do often lie too deep for tears.

Of the Hebrew conception of nature as shown in the Psalms or the book of
Job we need say nothing. Let us by an instance or two show just how far
the Greek appreciation of it went. In Theocritus a number of friends
walk into the country to a harvest festival:--"There we reclined on deep
beds of fragrant lentisk, and rejoicing we lay in new-stripped leaves of
the vine. And high above our heads waved many a poplar, while close at
hand the sacred water from the nymphs' own cave welled forth with
murmurs musical. On shadowy boughs the brown cicalas kept their
chattering toil. Far off the little owl cried; in the thick thorn-brake
the lark and finches sang; the ringdove moaned; the yellow bees were
flitting round the springs. All breathed the scent of opulent summer, of
the season of fruits. The pears at our feet and apples by our side were
rolling plentiful; the tender branches, with wild plums laden, were
earthward bowed." Here, it will be seen, the delight is purely sensuous,
a delight in sweet sighs, sweet sounds, sweet smells. In the _OEdipus
Coloneus_ of Sophocles there is a choral song of somewhat higher note
than this: "Stranger, thou hast come to earth's fairest home, to white
Colonus, where the nightingale, a constant guest, trills her clear note
in the covert of green glades, dwelling amid the wine-dark ivy and the
God's inviolate bowers, rich in berries and fruit, unvisited by sun,
unvexed by wind of any storm; where the reveller Dionysus ever walks the
ground, companion of the Nymphs, and, fed by heavenly dew, the narcissus
blooms morn by morn with fair clusters, crown of the great Goddess from
of yore, and the crocus blooms with golden beam. Nor fail the sleepless
founts whence the waters of Cephisus wander, but each day with stainless
tide he moveth over the land's swelling bosom for the giving of quick
increase."

Yet here, too, so far as the charm is not merely sensuous, Nature is but
the background for the passing of the bright Gods to whom humanity owes
progress and delights. There is nothing awesome, nothing pride-abasing,
in nature to the Hellene as to the Hebrew.

When we come to deal with art, whether plastic art or the art of
letters, there stands out the same difference of spirit. And on all
sides it is admitted that in this region Hellenism reached nearly to
perfection. It is scarcely worth while here to descant upon the work of
Phidias or Sophocles, and to analyse its excellence. In the domain of
art the word 'Hellenic' implies absolute truth of form, absolute truth
of taste, grace and elegance. It means the selecting and simplifying of
essentials into an ideal shape; and therefore it implies the absence of
all superfluity, incongruousness, bombast, extravagance or
purposelessness. The Parthenon and the statue of the grey-eyed goddess
standing up in faultless symmetry against the clear blue sky of Attica;
Plato's _Apology of Socrates_ breathing serene and lucid thought in
language lucid and serene--these are the types of art as understood by
the Hellenic spirit. We nowadays prate much of real and ideal. The Greek
combined them without prating. The anatomy of a Grecian statue is
anatomically true in proportion and in pose, while the whole figure is
none the less of an ideal beauty which could rarely have existed outside
the imagination. To the French the word _emphase_ has come to mean, not
emphasis, but fustian. To the Greeks, with their love of measure, their
instinctive avoidance of the "too much," _emphase_ in letters or other
arts was irritating and distressful. Mr. Andrew Lang selects a sentence
of Macaulay: "Even the wretched phantom who still bore the imperial
title stooped to pay this ignominious blackmail." And Mr. Lang justly
says: "The picture of a phantom who is not only a phantom, but wretched,
stooping to pay blackmail which is not only blackmail, but ignominious,
may divert the reader." The Greeks were neither deceived nor diverted by
such bad art; their sympathies were chilled, and they called the thing
"frigid." Meanwhile the special art of the Hebrews is, perhaps, the art
of Mendelssohn and Meyerbeer, music which is so often joined to
profound emotional susceptibility. They had no statuary, their
architecture does not remain for us to criticise it, their literature
alone supplies us with material for comparison, and even in this there
is not that diversity of epic, dramatic, and lyric matter, of history,
oratory and philosophy, which we have from Greece. Nevertheless, so far
as material offers itself, we find in Hebrew art just those qualities we
might expect from Hebraism.

The Hebrews had none of the Hellenic instinct for simplicity and grace
and directness. They delighted in deep symbolism and parable, in thunder
and lightning of diction and imagery, in pomp and state and grandeur.
They felt no scruples about going beyond the golden mean. With them all
art of writing or creating was but means to an end, and not an end in
itself. Let any one read the Bible and observe its unqualified figures
of speech--how the hills skip and the floods clap their hands--and then
let them ponder this Hellenic criticism of Longinus: "AEschylus, with a
strange violence of language, represents the palace of Lycurgus as
'possessed' at the appearance of Dionysus: '_The hills with rapture
thrill, the roof's inspired._' Here Euripides, in borrowing the image,
softens its extravagance: _and all the mountain felt the God_.'"

The Hellene, you observe, is not to let his intellect lose control over
his imagination; the Hebrew wholly abandons his imagination to his
master passion.

This, you may say, is merely the difference between being inspired and
not being inspired; and it may be urged that Plato himself puts the
Greek conception otherwise:

"All good poets compose their beautiful poems, not as works of art, but
because they are inspired and possessed ... for the poet is a light and
winged and holy thing, and there is no invention in him until he has
been inspired. When he has not attained to this state he is powerless
and unable to utter his oracles. Many are the noble words in which poets
speak of the actions which they record, but they do not speak of them by
any rules of art, they are inspired to utter that to which the Muse
impels them, and that only."

All of which is true enough, but what it amounts to is this--that
artistic rules cannot invent the poetic thought and utterance; it does
not mean that the inventing Muse ever ignores the rules of art. And, as
a matter of fact, there never is, in Hellenic poetry, anything of utter
abandonment. There is reason, warmed and coloured by sentiment and
imagination, but reason is never imperilled by any conflagration of
emotion.

We began by saying that in all our modern thought and conduct we are
either more Hebraic or more Hellenic one than another. In what Carlyle
would call our heroes, in our writers, and in our own lives, the one
spirit or the other predominates. Happy, but exceeding rare, is he who
blends the best elements of both. Literature, perhaps, affords the
readiest means of illustration. Not every sentiment, it is true, of
modern European letters has been either distinctly Hellenic or
distinctly Hebraic in its character. The spirit of romantic poetry, and
of the poetry of nature, has no analogy in Greece or Palestine.
Nevertheless, inasmuch as no great European writer has failed to pass
under the moral influence of Christianity or of Judaism, or to feel
directly or indirectly the intellectual influence of Greece, we may, in
those great voices of a generation who are called its great writers,
listen for the differing tones of these differing forces, as betrayed
either in their substance or in their form.

It is not easy to select complete types of one or the other. Roughly,
perhaps, one might speak of the Hebraic Dante, Bunyan, or Carlyle; of
the Hellenic Johnson, Goethe or Tennyson: but one could not rightly draw
up two catalogues of authors and set them in contrast as perfect
embodiments, the one of Hebraism, the other of Hellenism. On the other
hand, it is not so difficult in the case of a great writer to
distinguish his Hebraic from his Hellenic moods and manners, and to
gather how far the one element or the other holds the chief sway in him.
That Dante's moral force is Hebraic is the natural and correct
impression of one who compares the _Divine Comedy_ with the _Odyssey_ of
Homer on the one side, and with the _Psalms_ or Isaiah on the other. Yet
even in Dante there is a certain repose of contemplation and a careful
justness of language which belong rather to the Hellene. The character
of Luther, again, might seem wholly Hebraic to those who see him only as
a zealot of fiery controversy, so carried out of himself that his very
visions of Beelzebub acquired all the vividness of reality. Yet there
are times when another spirit is upon him, when his reasoning is cool
and colourless as that of a Greek philosopher. The misfortune of Luther
is that he could not, as a Melancthon in large measure could, amalgamate
the best elements of these complementary natures.

If from the names of English literature one were asked to choose our
most Hebraic poet, the name of Milton would perhaps be the first to
offer itself to many minds. Yet this would be a mere illusion. We must
not confound the subject of poetry with its spirit. The subject of
_Paradise Lost_, _Paradise Regained_, and _Samson Agonistes_ is Hebraic;
the spirit and manner are by no means so. Distinguish in these works all
that which cannot properly be said to belong to the poet himself, the
evident paraphrase of Bible language and Bible narrative; set by itself
that which is Milton's own imagining; mark the spirit and manner which
pervade it; and it will be seen that prophetic fervour is hardly there,
profound moral enthusiasm is hardly there. What we chiefly discover is
the intellect of a theological student, working in a certain rich
material, the magnificent Miltonic diction. The true Hebraic note is
rather struck in the sonnet, "_Avenge, O Lord, thy slaughtered saints,
whose bones Lie scattered on the Alpine mountains cold_," in that
fierce reproach of the Church in _Lycidas_, and in certain passages of
his prose. Milton is in fact a Hellene made subject to Hebraic moods by
his Hebrew studies, the Puritan Hebraism of his training, and the Hebrew
connexion of his subjects. It is when he writes _Comus_ or _L'Allegro_
that he is giving expression to his natural poetic bent. It may seem a
paradox if, on the other hand, we say that there was much of Hebraism in
one whose purity and justness of language and grace of form seem wholly
Hellenic; I mean Shelley. Shelley was intense in imagination, capable of
boundless rapture and absorption, subject to white heats of passion and
conflagration of moral wrath. In truth his nature was a rare blending,
left crude by his early death. As faultless in diction as a Hellene, in
philosophical speculation almost a copy of Plato, he was in capacity for
reaching the heights and depths of spiritual possession the equal of any
Hebrew. And this it is which makes one think that Shelley's early death
robbed us of much that would have been of quite supremest worth in
poetry.

This is not the time and place to take authors and deal with them one by
one, showing how the moral Hebraism is entirely possessed of Bunyan,
how entirely Hellenic are the spirit and style of Goethe and the clear
criticism and unperturbed intellectual processes of Johnson. I will
content myself with touching in no ordered way upon the Hebraic and
Hellenic note as it is uttered by one or two passages which I choose
almost at random. And first let us hear this passage of Carlyle:--

"A second thing I know. This lesson will have to be learned under
penalties. England will either learn it or England also will cease to
exist amongst nations. England will either learn to reverence its
heroes, and discriminate them from its sham heroes and valets and
gas-lighted histories, and to prize them as the audible God's voice
amid all inane jargons and temporary market-cries, and say to them with
heart loyalty, 'Be ye King and Priest and Gospel and guidance for us,'
or else England will continue to worship new and ever new forms of
Quackhood and so, with what resiliences and reboundings matter little,
go down to the Father of Quacks. Can I dread such things of England?
Wretched, thick-eyed, gross-hearted mortals, why will ye worship lies
and stuffed cloth suits, created by the ninth parts of men? It is not
your purses that suffer, your farm rents, your commerces, your mill
revenues--loud as ye lament over these things. No, it is not these
alone, but a far deeper than these. It is your _souls_ that lie dead,
crushed down under despicable nightmares, atheisms, brain fumes."

What is there here but the uncompromising moral attitude and
denunciation of the Hebrew seer? What is there but the same stormy
phrase, tumultuous almost to chaos? Carlyle is our own era's type of the
Hebraic temperament. Behind him follows Ruskin, a Carlyle tempered by
the spirit of Hellenic art without the balance of Hellenic calm. In what
Ruskin has to say on how we live and think, his sentences are one and
all of Grecian form, but the breath they breathe is Hebrew. I read in
Swinburne this address to England:--

  Oh thou clothed round with raiment of white waves,
  Thy brave brows brightening through the gray wet air,
  Thou lulled with sea-sounds of a thousand caves
  And lit with sea-shine to thine inland lair:
  Whose freedom clothed the naked souls of slaves
  And stripped the muffled souls of tyrants bare:
  O! by the centuries of thy glorious graves,
  By the live light of th' earth that was thy care,
  Live! thou must not be dead!
  Live! let thine armoured head
  Lift itself to sunward and the fair
  Daylight of time and man,
  Thine head republican,
  With the same splendour on thine helmless hair
  Within his eyes kept up a light,
  Who on thy glory gazed away their sacred sight.

These verses might almost be the verses of a Greek. And this is true not
merely of the art and grace of form; it is equally true of the mental
condition of the writer. The sentiment is intellectually just, and the
expression is artistically just. Exhortation there is, a certain ardour
there is, but it is the sober and restrained ardour of the Greeks; it is
not Hebraic. But I read again of how the Armada flies:--

  Torn by the scourge of the storm-wind that smites as a harper smites
    on a lyre,
  And consumed of the storm as the sacrifice, loved of their God, is
    consumed with fire,
  And devoured of the darkness as men that are slain in the fires of his
    love are devoured,
  And deflowered of their lives by the storms as by priests is the spirit
    of life deflowered.

And here is neither Hellenic seasonableness and proportion, nor Hebraic
fervour, nor truth as it is understood by either Hebrew or Hellene. It
is the work of a man who endeavours to lash himself into an intensity
which is not of him, and who trifles with a Hebraism which rejects him.

Tennyson is, in point of the adaptation of form to matter, in the
absolute justice and delicacy of his diction, in the perfect proportion
and symmetry of his images, the completest reproduction among moderns of
the Hellenic literary artist. What could be more luminously seen or more
luminously expressed than

  The curled white of the coming wave,
  Glassed in the slippery sand before it breaks?

Hellenic Tennyson is also in his appreciation of all beauty. More
important, he is Hellenic in his tranquil open-eyed outlook upon the
world. It is in these things that he is his best self. He is least
himself when he seeks to pass into the prophetic sphere. He is _poeta_
more than _vates_, and he is least Tennysonian in a poem like "Maud."
The Hebraic element in Tennyson is not innate, it is but what he has
gathered from his training in Hebraic morality and the sentiment which
comes of it. "His strength was as the strength of ten, because his heart
was pure" is not a sentiment natural to a pagan Greek, but it is natural
enough to a christianised Hellene whose Hellenic temperament is
otherwise quite unchanged.

But we must not let ourselves be lured on by specimen after specimen
over the wide field of literature. Rather let us return to some
practical bearing of this whole question. For a practical bearing it
has. It is this. Life consists of knowing, acting, admiring, loving, and
hoping. The ideal man would be at the same time sage, poet, artist, man
of virtue, and man of deeds. The perfect man would have all his
faculties of thinking, feeling, and doing wholesomely blended. Now
neither Hebraism nor Hellenism could produce the ideal man or
harmoniously develop all his best powers. Each had its defects. The
Hebrew, along with his intense spirituality and his moral strenuousness,
lacked intellectual justness, sense of proportion, social
appreciativeness, artistic truth and sobriety. The Hellene, along with
his lucidity of intellect, his justness of perception in art, and his
social aptitudes, lacked that sustained zeal for some moral principle
which leads either to the doing of great things or to the attainment of
sublime character. The dangers of Hebraism lay in excess of absorption,
in a proneness to fanaticism, in an obstinacy which might become
rabidness, in a certain misplaced loudness and disregard of dignity. The
dangers of Hellenism lay in proneness to sacrifice character to talent,
and deeds to thought. Hebraism tended towards asceticism and bigotry;
Hellenism towards indifference and self-indulgence. The narrow Puritans
of the seventeenth century revealed some of the dangers of excessive
Hebraism; some of the dangers of excessive Hellenism have appeared in
France. The modern French are in many things, though by no means in all
things, a copy of the ancient Greeks. They are so in their passion for
clear ideas. France is the land of the _philosophes_ and the critics.
The French are Hellenic in their dislike of _emphase_ and of
_originalite_, a word which comes to mean not so much originality as
eccentricity. And in such a connotation of _originalite_, there betrays
itself an important fact--that France is hardly the best country for the
production of great characters. "The great Frenchmen," it has been said,
"are apt to be Italians." Greece, too, failed to produce great
characters. Homer's heroes, like the eminent figures of Grecian history,
are of little moral force. Where the correct state of mind is to have
_point de zele_, as at Paris and Athens, mankind may avoid the
ridiculous, but can scarcely reach the sublime. Where the guiding force
is some clear idea, men may rise to some signal effort, like the battle
of Salamis or the French Revolution; but intellectual impulse has none
of the durability of moral impulse, and the fibre of resolve is soon
relaxed into languid discontent. Thus much may be said of Hellenism in
excess. Yet its services are immense. The social and material progress
of the world requires free play of thought, a certain boldness and
open-mindedness of inquiry; and for this we look rather to the spirit of
the _audax Iapeti genus_--the Hellenic spirit--than to the firm-set
minds of the sons of Shem. And, on the contrary, whatever may be urged
against Hebraism in excess, it is all the better for human life that men
should have the capacity for emotional depth and fervour, for tenacious
adherence to some high moral purpose. In these days of clamour and
dispute we need a diffusion of the Hellenic spirit to enable us to look
out on things exactly as they are, and to deliver us from fads and
fatuous agitations. But in these same days of weak convictions we need a
measure of Hebraic ardour and Hebraic fortitude to make our conduct
answer to what we see, and to prevent our seeing from ending in thoughts
and words.

What is principally needed is a blending in just proportion of the two
spirits. We want Hellenism for knowing and enjoying, Hebraism for
acting, loving, and hoping. "Without haste, without rest," should be our
maxim for progress. And that is equivalent to saying that neither the
Hebraic zeal nor the Hellenic repose can of itself satisfy our needs.

This blending could be obtained, more than we now seek to obtain it. The
leopard cannot change his spots, and the human being cannot wholly rid
himself of his congenital qualities. Nevertheless culture and habit are
second nature. There is scarcely a disposition of mind or manner of
sentiment into which we cannot bring ourselves by steadily encouraging
it. The faculties of the mind are like the muscles of the body. They
shrink to nothing if not exercised; they can be exercised symmetrically;
or some can be exercised at the expense of the rest. What we want is a
school culture, and a self-culture, which shall bring out all our best
powers, not one only of them or some few of them. At present our system
is all for knowledge. We seek for understanding of facts, but we do not
seek for a systematic view of life, for clear principles of art, or for
social many-sidedness. Of the best elements of the Hebraic spirit, we
are almost ceasing to seek anything at all. And this is wholly bad. We
shall breed up a race not only without what Matthew Arnold calls
distinction, but without any common animating soul, unless it be a
general selfishness and a general Philistinism.

What we want is a broader, less mechanical culture. We want to be
steeped not only in facts, but in stimulating thoughts, religious and
poetical. Splendid culture means splendid ideals, and if a nation could
acquire the clear thinking of Hellenism combined with the immense moral
resolve of Hebraism, that nation, knowing its aims, and making steadily
towards them, would afford a spectacle of grandeur and of power such as
no nation now presents.




  The Principles of Criticism
  Applied to
  Two Successors of Tennyson


It is perhaps hardly necessary to explain that in the words "successors
of Tennyson" I make no reference to an actual or a prospective Poet
Laureate. The position primarily held by Tennyson in his lifetime, and
the only position in which posterity will regard him, is the position of
the poet. That he was the laureate also is no doubt a matter of some
biographical interest, but it is of little further significance. It will
be doing no injustice to the large quantity of agreeable verse-writing
which has been executed by Mr. Alfred Austin if we take it for granted
that his appointment carries the laureateship back to what it was before
Wordsworth and Tennyson lent it the lustre of their names. The laureate
is now, as in the days of Southey, a literary officer in the Queen's
service, chosen, as other officers are wont to be chosen, by the
political powers that be. Our present interest is rather in those who
come after Tennyson as pre-eminent among the free and single-hearted
servants of the Muses.

Again, by his "successors" I mean simply those who come after--those
masters of younger birth who seem most nearly to take his place now that
he is gone--not any avowed disciples, still less servile imitators of
his thought or style. Following upon Homer there was the school of the
Homeridae, or "sons of Homer." A cluster of poets at the beginning of the
seventeenth century were styled "the sons of Ben Jonson." There are no
doubt "sons of Tennyson" at this present date. With these we have now no
concern. They are but satellites, while that for which we are scanning
the poetical horizon is a rising star of a magnitude in some degree
comparable with the stars which have set with the deaths of Matthew
Arnold, Browning and Tennyson. There is, I believe, more than one such
star already well advanced into the firmament. I am one of those who
believe that this is an age unusually rich in genuine poetry. There are
to-day singing in the English tongue enough of so-called minor poets to
have made the poetical fortune of any epoch between the Elizabethan
period and our own. This century has seen re-enthroned the Miltonic
doctrine that poetry should be "simple, sensuous, and passionate"; it
has learned from Wordsworth of the divinity in Nature, from Shelley of
the passion in it, from Tennyson how to express its moods; it has
learned from Byron how to be frank about humanity, from Wordsworth how
to sympathize with it, from Browning how to understand it; it has been
taught by Shelley how to write with melody, by Keats how to write with
richness, by Wordsworth with simplicity, by Tennyson with grace and
luminousness, by Arnold with chasteness. It has availed itself of these
great examples to such good purpose that the average of reputable verse
written to-day is more instinct with feeling, more vitalised with
thought, more satisfying in expression, than much which is studied and
belauded and quoted because it was written a century or two ago.

With great boldness perhaps, but with no less deliberateness of
judgment, I maintain that contemporary men and women might better spare
for the living, breathing, and often very beautiful work of their
contemporaries, some of the time and appreciation which they do not
grudge to give over and over again, even if it be with some conscious
effort, to the elaborate conceits of the seventeenth century, to the
rather frigid frugalities of a Gray, the laborious melancholies of a
Collins, or the cold transparencies of a Landor. No doubt justice will
be done in the end, but why not do as much of it as possible at once?

It is for these reasons that I beg your attention to an attempt at an
appreciation of two contemporary singers, both excellent, though
differing in the nature of their excellence. Their names are John
Davidson and William Watson.

But first it would be well to look a little closely at that word
"appreciation," and to examine frankly the considerations which make up
a literary judgment. I am induced to take this course after a somewhat
amused survey of a series of criticisms which have been passed upon the
two poets who are our immediate subject. One writer, for instance,
speaks of Mr. Davidson's works as "marked from end to end by the
careless fecundity of power," while the next tells us of the self-same
verses that they have "the severe restraint and very deliberately willed
simplicity of M. Guy de Maupassant." Careless fecundity and deliberate
restraint are sufficiently irreconcilable terms to apply to the same
creations. Another critic tells us of Mr. Watson that "it is of
'Collins' lonely vesper-chime' and 'the frugal note of Gray' that we
think as we read the choicely worded, well-turned quatrains that succeed
each other like the strong unbroken waves of a full tide," and I cannot
but wonder how a full tide of strong waves can suggest anything either
"frugal" or "well-chosen." It is turbid judgments such as these, and an
intellectual slovenliness which is content to accept words and phrases
without attaching definite notions to them, that discredit the average
English criticism, when set beside the lucid Greek appreciation of
Aristotle and Longinus, or of those Frenchmen like Taine or Ste. Beuve
who know exactly what they look for and why they look for it. We still
require a few Matthew Arnolds to drill us in the first steps in
criticism. It seems almost as if we had accepted for literature the
ultra-democratic maxim that every man has as much right as every other
man to judge a poem--if not a good deal more right.

The appreciation of a poet means the estimation of his rank, the
separation of his precious metal from his dross, to the end that we may
get the utmost enjoyment out of his beauties, while we feel the
intellectual satisfaction which comes of a reasoned opinion at first
hand. We appreciate the poet at his true value when we set his
particular contribution to the literary joys of life neither too high
nor too low. We fully appreciate him when we derive from him the keenest
delight which he is capable of affording. And I know of no other process
for the attainment of this end than the one which I am about to
propound. It is, I think, a method which is analytical without being
mechanical, and judicial without being cold.

The excellence of the poems of Tennyson has been placed beyond doubt by
a consensus of the best judgment, when there some day swim into our ken
first one and then another small volume bearing the name of William
Watson or John Davidson. We perhaps read these volumes receptively
enough, and form some sort of impression concerning them. But we are not
sure of ourselves; we wait to hear what other people have to say. If we
hear praise, we feel encouraged to join in it; if we hear disparagement,
we grow suspicious of our own more favourable judgment. Perhaps, on the
other hand, with that half-resentment which we are always apt to feel at
new claims to poetic eminence, and for which a large measure of excuse
is to be found in the fact that ambitious but futile rhymesters are a
veritable plague of flies to publisher and public--in this spirit of
half-resentment we ask, "Who is this Watson?" "Who is this Davidson?"
and incontinently proceed to examine them in a cold and carping spirit,
with a keen eye to their faults of detail, and with a sort of illogical
assumption that if they had been of much account we should somehow have
heard of them before.

It is but rarely that an accomplished judge of literature will speak out
boldly and unequivocally, without "hedging," so to speak, and not only
declare that such-and-such a work reveals a rising genius, but give his
reasons why he declares it, distinguishing the poetical elements in
which the genius is shown. The critic should frankly analyse; but mostly
he does not. He tells us, for instance, that Walt Whitman is the "Adam
of a new poetical era," or else that he is "a dunce of inconceivable
incoherence and incompetence"; but usually he does not show us the
precise data upon which either conclusion is based. Cannot profundity of
thought, ardour of emotion, power and charm of expression, be actually
demonstrated as present or absent in a poet, when the critic is
addressing himself to his natural readers, to wit, persons in whom are
pre-supposed a certain amount of brains and heart, and cultivation of
both? If they cannot, has criticism any real existence?

To begin with, each reader is bound to recognise how far he is himself
at any time capable of appreciating particular kinds of poetry. Out of
epic, lyric, dramatic, and descriptive poetry there is usually some one
kind with which we have no natural sympathy. It follows not that,
because a man is fond of peaches, pears, and grapes, he is also fond of
passionfruit or tomatoes. Of these latter he may be no judge whatever.
_Non omnia possumus omnes_ in the criticism of poetry, any more than in
other departments of activity.

There are, for instance, some who have no patience with poetry of the
mystic, half-dreamy kind, but must have their conceptions one and all
definitely realized for them. They cannot away with emotional
arabesques; they must have recognizable and rememberable outlines. There
are others who cannot bring themselves to care for the poetry which
broods upon inanimate nature; their interest centres wholly on the
problems of man; just as there are limited souls who find no delight in
landscapes, and think figure-painting the only field of art. These are
no critics, perhaps never could be critics, of more than the verbal
expression in those uncongenial regions of poesy. To be a true
appreciator of all poetry a man must possess a harmoniously-developed
nature, as full and large and liberal as poetry itself. Let us,
therefore, begin by admitting and allowing for our limitations where we
feel them to exist.

In the first place, we must set about our reading only when we are in
the proper mood of receptivity. Poetry is not science, any more than
painting is photography, or architecture is building in squares and
cubes and circles. To approach the great poetry of "high seriousness"
when we are in a cynical or flippant mood; to snatch glances at a great
drama or epic when we are in a hurry; to begin from the very first line
by examining with a cold-blooded criticism a passionate elegy or fiery
lyric, is to act as if one sat at a concert of unfamiliar music only to
criticise the gestures of the performers or to watch for an occasional
weakness of the second violin. It is almost always open to adult human
beings not to be reading poetry if they are not feeling disposed for it.
I say "almost always" because the "indolent reviewer" is apt to be an
exception. Yet even the indolent reviewer might with advantage often
remind himself that poetry is written for people who want to read it,
and when they want to read it, and that no art pretends to force men
into enjoying it at all times and seasons. Granting, then, that we know
our own personal limitations, and what particular sense our organisation
lacks; granting also that we are reading our poet spontaneously, simply
because the pleasure of poetry is the pleasure we happen to be seeking;
granting, further, that we are sufficiently cultivated and experienced
in literature to possess ready apprehension of a thought, a fair taste
in expression, and an ear for cadence and melody, there is, I believe,
but one certain way of telling whether a verse-writer is a poet at all,
and then whether as poet he is greater or less.

He must be read a first time without effort at criticism of any kind.
The words and rhythms, the thoughts and feelings contained in a
particular poem will thus leave a certain general effect, an unanalysed
impression. It will be as it is with the true judge of art when he
stands before a picture, a statue, or a building. In its presence he
either feels the spontaneous delight which comes of a general
satisfyingness, or he feels the annoyance of a general unsatisfyingness,
or he feels neither one nor the other. So with a poem. We shall either
feel that the sounds and melodies have bathed us in delight, or we shall
think them harsh, or we shall think nothing about them at all. We shall
feel a high intellectual stimulation or a strong emotional excitement,
or we shall think the passage rather futile, or we shall be aware of no
pronounced feeling one way or the other. If we are constrained to say to
ourselves, "What a noble passage!" "What splendid verse!" "What a sweet
song!" or to use any of those unstudied exclamations which spring to the
lips before we have had time or inclination to realize our impressions
more definitely--then, I maintain, we are justified in calling the
writer at once and definitively a poet. Whether he is a greater poet or
a minor poet remains still to be estimated, but poet he is, be he Burns
or Swinburne, Tennyson or Watson or Davidson. Here, for instance, is a
passage from Watson's elegy upon Tennyson, which he has called _Lachrymae
Musarum_. I do not choose it because it is his best, but because it is
typical:--

  He hath returned to regions whence he came;
  Him doth the spirit divine
  Of universal loveliness reclaim,
  All nature is his shrine.
  Seek him henceforward in the wind and sea,
  In earth's and air's emotion or repose,
  In every star's august serenity,
  And in the rapture of the flaming rose.
  There seek him if ye would not seek in vain,
  There, in the rhythm and music of the whole,
  Yea, and for ever in the human soul
  Made stronger and more beauteous by his strain.

  For lo! Creation's self is one great choir,
  And what is Nature's order but the rhyme
  Whereto the world keeps time,
  And all things move with all things from their prime?
  Who shall expound the mystery of the lyre?
  In far retreats of elemental mind
  Obscurely comes and goes
  The imperative breath of song, that as the wind
  Is trackless, and oblivious whence it blows.

  Demand of lilies wherefore they are white,
  Extort her crimson secret from the rose,
  But ask not of the Muse that she disclose
  The meaning of the riddle of her might.
  Somewhat of all things sealed and recondite,
  Save the enigma of herself, she knows.
  The master could not tell, with all his lore,
  Wherefore he sang, or whence the mandate sped;
  E'en as the linnet sings, so I, he said--
  Ah! rather as the imperial nightingale
  That held in trance the ancient Attic shore,
  And charms the ages with the notes that o'er
  All woodland chants immortally prevail!
  And now from our vain plaudits, greatly fled,
  He with diviner silence dwells instead,
  And on no earthly sea, with transient roar,
  Unto no earthly airs, he trims his sail,
  But, far beyond our vision and our hail,
  Is heard for ever and is seen no more.

Now it matters not what flaws the austere critic might find with a
microscope in those lines. I feel certain that there is no one who would
not at this first reading experience that inevitable glow of
satisfaction which, in the cultured mind, is the unfailing criterion
that the art is good. Whether Mr. Watson is further an original poet, a
signal poetic force; whether he is a poet for the mind as much as for
the ear, is a further question to be decided by a detailed analysis; but
that he is a poet is, I beg leave to think, wholly undeniable. At first
sight, has there been anything better in this vein since _Lycidas_?

Here, again, is a brief part of a song from Davidson's _Fleet Street
Eclogue_ of May Day. I quote these lines in particular, because, unlike
most very short passages of this poet, they admit of being disentangled
from their setting. They are typical of only one side of a many-sided
being, the side which exults in the simple sensuous delights of nature.
They are two stanzas from the song of the nightingale as interpreted by
Basil:--

  The lark from the top of heaven raved
    Of the sunshine sweet and old;
  And the whispering branches dipped and laved
    In the light; and waste and wold
  Took heart and shone; and the buttercups paved
    The emerald meads with gold.

       *       *       *       *       *

Now it is night, and--

  The wind steals down the lawns
    With a whisper of ecstasy,
  Of moonlit nights and rosy dawns,
    And a nest in a hawthorn tree;
  Of the little mate for whom I wait,
    Flying across the sea,
  Through storm and night as sure as fate,
    Swift-winged with love for me.

And again I ask, has there, at first sight, been anything more like
Shelley since Shelley's _Cloud_?

Assuming that the first step in our method has left us quite satisfied
that a writer (and here I leave Mr. Watson and Mr. Davidson and revert
to the general case) possesses enough share in the divine gift to be
called "poet," we may, if we are bent upon truly "appreciating" him,
proceed to taste his lines over and over, to dwell in detail upon his
expression, upon its charms and splendours and felicities, its vigour
and terseness and simplicity. It may be that we shall find our first
admiration continually increased, especially when we learn to realise
the full music of the verse, the subtle tones of its "flutes and soft
recorders," or the swell of the "organ-voice." We may come to taste "all
the charms of all the Muses often flowering in one lonely word." It
might be, on the other hand, that we should detect a certain
over-fulness--what Coleridge has called a too-muchness--of diction; or a
certain want of correspondence between the melodious language and any
clearly apprehended mental picture. We might find the vigour too often
lapsing into sheer bad taste, or the simplicity taking the fatal step
into simpledom, as when Tennyson ends the story of Enoch Arden with the
banal remark that

                  the little port
  Had seldom seen a costlier funeral.

We might, unhappily, discover these things, or, on the contrary, we
might find them so rare that our admiration at the expressive genius of
the poet would increase, until we were sure that the thing of beauty was
really and truly a superlative joy for ever.

And not only in diction and melody, but in that supreme Shakespearian
poetic gift of imagination which can vividly portray, body forth in
clear form, what others can only feel in a vague and misty way while
lacking the power to express it--in this gift also the great poet is
known, not at the first reading, nor at the second, nor at the third. An
image, a metaphor, which seems most perfect when first met, may lose
much of its apparent completeness and depth when the mind examines it;
whereas upon many another, which appeared at first so easy and obvious,
there is revealed the very stamp of that godlike genius which creates,
as if without effort, the one unsurpassable, soul-satisfying "name."
If, the more we return to a poet's work, the more it grows upon us and
the more we see in it, then, as Longinus truly declares, it possesses
the quality of the sublime. Without that result the poet may be great,
but not of the greatest. To employ once more that definition which I
still find the best yet constructed, true poetry is the "exquisite
expression of an exquisite impression." For a reader to reach the
apprehension of such an impression in all its exquisiteness, and to
recognize the full exquisiteness of its expression, requires some
effort. Under the pellucid diction may lurk amazing depths. We must
therefore read a poet, and read him anew. This is the way to attain to a
reasoned and discriminating judgment, and to escape those vain and vague
impressions which we can neither trust ourselves nor impart to others.

So much for the heads of the sermon. The application is to Tennyson's
successors. Of William Watson and John Davidson as men, I know
practically nothing. I am fain to confess that I have no desire to know
anything. There is too much personal gossip already interfering with our
enjoyment of literature. These men's work is presumably their best
selves, and except for such hints of their personality as occur in their
poems, I know not "whether they be black or white." Incidentally, Mr.
Watson lets us learn that he is from the North of England, and I gather
that Mr. Davidson is a Scot from the fact that he scans "world" as two
syllables, uses "I mind" in the sense of "I remember," and talks
unpatriotically enough of his nurture in that easily identifiable region
where are to be found--

  A chill and watery clime; a thrifty race
  Using all means of grace
    To save their souls and purses.

Among their many points of difference, the two men have this prime
quality in common, that they are ready to rely upon their own poetical
resources. Their work contains, indeed, many an echo of their great
predecessors, many a suggestion of familiarity with Milton or Pope,
Wordsworth, Shelley, or Tennyson. It is evident that both have steeped
themselves in the literature which is best calculated to make an English
poet. But it is equally evident that they have mastered their material,
and not allowed their material to master them. Watson, it is true, has
attained to a much less firm and spontaneous style than Davidson, but it
would be false to say of him that he is, in point of diction, the
imitator of any poet in especial, or that he moulds his style upon
Tennyson more than on Milton, or upon Milton more than on Wordsworth.
And what is true of their form is true of their matter. They think with
their own brains and feel with their own natures. They fall back upon no
master and no fashion to direct them what to say or leave unsaid.
Whatever opinion we may form of their force and range, we cannot but
recognise that it is themselves whom they are expressing. And it may be
taken as an axiom that nothing so commends the man who speaks to the
interest of the man who listens as this--the fact that the speaker is
telling his own thought. That, I believe, is the secret of the hold
which Browning possesses upon his votaries, and which Goethe will for
all time exercise.

We recognise with both our poets that this initial charm is theirs, and
if we find in Davidson the richer nature and the more robust, the more
infused with Browning's rough, virile strain, we are no less confident
that Watson's verse is the natural cream gathered from his daintier and
more purely intellectual moods. But in thus comparing the men I
anticipate my evidence.

The poems of John Davidson upon which I have based my judgment are those
contained in the _Fleet Street Eclogues_ (the first and second series),
and in the volume of _Ballads and Songs_. The name of the latter
explains itself. In the former are contained some dozen pieces, written
in dialogue, in various metres. The interlocutors are London journalists
and poets, who meet in Fleet Street on such holidays as Lammas, May Day,
Michaelmas, and the New Year, and there hold a kind of discursive
symposium on such themes as then and there present themselves. I mildly
call the discussion "discursive," though it would be fair in one or two
instances to dub the piece frankly a medley. Usually the special holiday
suggests a reference to the charms of nature as they are to be seen in
the country at that date, and as they are, alas! not to be seen in Fleet
Street. This device affords scope for not a few charming word-pictures,
as simple in outline and as complete in suggestion as the drawings of
flowers and tree sprays made by the Japanese, and as effective in the
artistic directness and simplicity of the language as if they had been
written by Burns or by a Greek lyrist. I do not think that it would be
possible to find anywhere in the English language more pure and fresh
delight in the sights and sounds of rural nature expressed with such
apparent naivete. And all the time the mind's eye is kept so closely, so
distinctly, on the object that the result is often the sublimity of art
as defined by Longinus, the selection and combination of exactly those
features which are the most essential and most telling. For instance, no
man who did not feel and realize with vividness, no man who lacked a
genius for expression, could so select and place just the touches which
describe the sudden descent of the lark in the evening sky. The lines
occur in the song of "Spring" in _Ballads and Songs_:--

  High, O high, from the opal sky,
    Shouting against the dark,
  "Why, why, why, must the day go by?"
    Fell a passionate lark.

The words "opal," "shouting," "fell," and "passionate," are exactly the
words, and all the words, which could be demanded in an ideal
word-picture by those who have been familiar with the scene itself. And
to make the ideal twice ideal, the very sound of the bird is brought
before one's mind after a score of years, by the whole passage, and
particularly in the reiterated "Why, why, why." If there is more
consummate simplicity of art anywhere contained in as small a compass of
words, I confess I do not know where it is to be found. Shelley does not
surpass this.

Throughout Davidson's poems there is this same positive revelling in
those delights of the eye and ear and smell which meet the wanderer in
the country. They are fresh to him every time; and he realizes and
fulfils that function of the poet, the bringing back of new freshness
into things common, at which he hints when he makes one of his
characters say:--

  Dear Menzies, talk of sight and sound,
    And make us _feel_ the blossom-time.

In these more sensuous moods he is so filled with the simple Chaucerian
gladsomeness of spring that he can sing, or make one of his characters
sing--for after all, his characters are but so many sides of himself--

  I have been with the nightingale;
    I have learned his song so sweet;
  I sang it aloud by wood and dale,
    And under my breath in the street.

And again--

  I can hear in that valley of mine,
    Loud-voiced on a leafless spray,
  How the robin sings, flushed with his holly-wine,
    Of the moonlit blossoms of May.

In all such passages there is the genuine note of the vernal joy which
stirs naturally in the blood of all men who are men. The writer feels as
the birds feel, nay, as the burgeoning hedges feel, when--

  The blackbirds with their oboe voices make
    The sweetest broken music, all about
  The beauty of the day, for beauty's sake,
    And all about the mates whose love they won,
    And all about the sunlight and the sun.

Or when--

  A passionate nightingale adown the lane
  Shakes with the force and volume of his song
  A hawthorn's heaving foliage.

But this sensuous rapture, which reminds us of Keats, though of a Keats
whose expression is more like that of Shelley, is by no means all that
Davidson can feel in nature. Through the eyes and other senses the
influence of nature penetrates to his soul and spirit. He touches
Wordsworth in such lines as these:--

  All my emotion and imagining
  Were of the finest tissue that is woven,
  From sense and thought....
  I seemed to be created every morn.
  A golden trumpet pealed along the sky:
  The sun arose: the whole earth rushed upon me.
  Sometimes the tree that stroked my windowpane
  Was more than I could grasp; sometimes my thought
  Absorbed the universe.

It is true that these words are put in the mouth of that one of his
dramatis personae who is of the most melancholy and brooding disposition;
but he who can make another say--

  I am haunted by the heavens and the earth;
  ... I am besieged by things that I have seen:
  Followed and watched by rivers; snared and held
  In labyrinthine woods and tangled meads;
  Hemmed in by mountains; waylaid by the sun;
  Environed and beset by moon and stars;
  Whispered by winds and summoned by the sea.

--he who can put this thought in another's mouth has necessarily first
experienced some measure of it himself.

But it is not merely about external nature that our Fleet Street
journalists talk. They speak of such questions of man and life and
destiny as are wont to engage any gathering of thoughtful men, and
particularly those who are poetically disposed. The contrasts between
the beauty of rural nature and the squalor of life, especially the life
of the town, these and other matters receive such suggestive treatment
as can be given to them by a poet who has no desire to become a
preacher, and no desire to pose as an exhaustive philosopher. Upon such
questions the many-sided poet, whose sympathies are wide, and whose
moods are varied, will touch with a certain suggestiveness; he will
flash a ray of cheerfulness into the haunts of pessimism, or throw a new
pathos into common situations. And Mr. Davidson possesses a large
measure of this many-sidedness, this versatility of sympathy. He appears
a very human man, a man unfettered by cant or creed, observing men and
things from various sides, and entering into their circumstance. Is he
without a creed? From his verses on the _Making of a Poet_ it would
appear so--

  No creed for me! I am a man apart:
  A mouthpiece for the creeds of all the world;

       *       *       *       *       *

  A martyr for all mundane moods to tear;
  The slave of every passion, and the slave
  Of heat and cold, of darkness and of light;
  A trembling lyre for every wind to sound.
  I am a man set to overhear
  The inner harmony, the very tune
  Of nature's heart; to be a thoroughfare
  For all the pageantry of Time: to catch
  The mutterings of the Spirit of the Hour
  And make them known.

       *       *       *       *       *

Nevertheless he, or one of his avatars, can also say of the celebration
of Christmas with its "sweet thoughts and deeds"--

  A fearless, ruthless, wanton band,
    Deep in our hearts we guard from scathe
  Of last year's log a smouldering brand,
    To light at Yule the fire of faith.

He makes no vulgar boast about escaping from the fetters of religion. He
spares us any flouts of intellectual superiority. He is apparently an
evolutionist, but withal finds little saving grace in that doctrine, and
is not uninclined to envy the old days

  When Heaven and Hell were nigh.

It is true that behind his Basil and Herbert and Brian and Sandy and
Menzies and Ninian, who converse there in Fleet Street, we find it hard
to discover any definite synthetic philosophy of Davidson himself. On
the other hand, we have no particular wish to discover one. He is a
poet, not a Herbert Spencer. We may reasonably be content to catch the
side-lights which a poet throws from a large and liberal nature; to be
led by him to different points of view. If the result is that we find
the man himself to evade us, we can only admit that the same result
occurs with Shakespeare. Indeed, there is a hint that a synthetic
philosophy is exactly what Davidson never seeks to attain. Says
Ninian:--

  Sometimes, when I forget myself, I talk
  As though I were persuaded of the truth
  Of some received or unreceived belief;
  But always afterwards I am ashamed
  At such lewd lapses into bigotry.

And though another immediately ejaculates

  Intolerantly tolerant!

we have a feeling that the poet has betrayed an attitude of mind not
wholly unlike his own.

His outlook is both bright and dark. The modern dragons, it has been
said, are dooming "religion and poetry." The answer comes--

  They may doom till the moon forsakes
    Her dark, star-daisied lawn;
  They may doom till Doomsday breaks
    With angels to trumpet the dawn;
  While love enchants the young
    And the old have sorrow and care,
  No song shall be unsung,
    Unprayed no prayer.

Nature is full of joy, man may find abounding delight of life in the
midst of it; but what of his destiny?

  For the fate of the elves is nearly the same
    As the terrible fate of men;
  To love, to rue, to be, and pursue
    A flickering wisp of the fen.
  We must play the game with a careless smile,
    Though there's nothing in the hand;
  We must toil as if it were worth our while
    Spinning our ropes of sand;
  And laugh, and cry, and live, and die
    At the waft of an unseen hand.

And again--

  I am not thinking solely of myself,
  But of the groaning cataract of life,
  The ruddy stream that leaps importunate
  Out of the night, and in a moment vaults
  The immediate treacherous precipice of time,
  Splashing the stars, downward into the night.

And apart from destiny, which is beyond human control, society is much
at fault. Not only is Davidson plainly democratic, he expresses the
complaints and aspirations of the higher type of those who might be
socialists, if socialism were allowed to be a development, and not
tyrannously imposed as a system. He talks of--

            ... Slaves in Pagan Rome--
  In Christian England--who begin to test
  The purpose of their state, to strike for rest
  And time to feel alive in.

And--

  Hoarsely they beg of Fate to give
    A little lightening of their woe,
  A little time to love, to live,
    A little time to think and know.

There are other wrong elements in society besides poverty, and the poet
finds occasion to express one in particular. But what Mrs. Grand
requires three volumes to discuss is treated with infinitely more effect
by him in a dozen lines. The purport may be gathered from these three:--

                     ... My heart!
  Who wore it out with sensual drudgery
  Before it came to me? What warped its valves?
  It has been used; my heart is secondhand.

This is not the time to exhaust the Davidsonian philosophy, if there be
such. We are treating the writer as a poet, and the examples which I
have quoted of his joy in nature and his fellow-feeling with mankind,
should, I think, demonstrate that he has the gifts of vivid seeing, of
vivid feeling, and of vivid expression. If genuine poetry consists of
two essentials, substance and form, we cannot deny the substance in Mr.
Davidson. He has the gift of "high seriousness," which Arnold declares
to be a requisite of all that is classic. He is not always deep; he is
not faultless. The same writer who can condense a thought thus--

  On Eden's daisies couched, they felt
  They carried Eden in their heart,

is also capable of writing, as poetry, these lines:--

  For no man ever understood a woman,
  No woman ever understood a man,
  And no man ever understood a man:
  No woman ever understood a woman,
  And no man ever understood himself;
  No woman ever understood herself.

We can only surmise that Mr. Davidson had just been reading Whitman, and
was under the temporary hallucination that this poor stuff was profound
thinking. But all poets, nay, all prose-writers, even the greatest,
have their lapses into bathos. Yes, even--and I say it with
trembling--even Shakespeare.

Let us look, now, for a few moments, more closely, in order to
appreciate the particular elements of his genius, as manifested in the
form which is his style.

And first, his language. To be perfect, expression must be luminous yet
terse, vigorous, yet in taste and keeping. It must be without
mannerisms, without inadequacy, without flatness, without obscurity.
"Clear, but with distinction," is the brief definition of Aristotle.
Davidson has learned his lesson well from Shelley and Wordsworth and
Arnold. He cultivates all the virtues, and not without success. He has
not been tempted to leave the true path and court singularity, whether
in the shape of Browning's verbal puzzles or of Swinburne's luscious and
alliterative turgidness. His diction is of the simplest. Says one of his
personae--

  I love not brilliance; give me words
    Of meadow-growth and garden plot,
  Of larks and black-caps; gaudy birds,
    Gay flowers and jewels like me not.

It is astonishing how expressive the simple word can become in the
hands of a master. Dante's verb and noun are now proverbial. As for Mr.
Davidson, Gray's clear-cut lines in the _Elegy_ can supply no more
instances of perfect aptness than those which I quoted some time ago of
the lark. Notice the exactness of choice in--

  The patchwork sunshine _nets_ the lea,
    The flitting shadows _halt and pass_
  Forlorn, the mossy humble-bee
    _Lounges_ along the flowerless grass,

and in "I heard the _husky_ whisper of the corn." Yet I am disposed to
think that, like many another finished artist, he has passed through
stages of various practice, and has exercised much self-restraint before
attaining to that naturalness which, as Goethe reiterates, is the last
crown of art-discipline. From sundry indications I conclude that
passages of his _Fleet-street Eclogues_ were written independently at
different dates, and have been fitted later into the dialogue form.
However that may be, it is possible to detect instances in which he
falls below his own maturer ideal of natural language. The diction, that
is to say the choice of mere vocables, is eminently natural, except for
the odd words "muted," "writhen," "watchet-hued," "dup," "swound,"
which I have collected with a rather laborious captiousness. But diction
is only part of expression, and, as I have just hinted, it would seem as
if, before his lesson in pure style was fully learned, he had passed
under the fascination of the mannerists, and particularly of Pope.
Otherwise it is hard to account for such entirely eighteenth century
lines as--

  And brimming echoes spill the pleasant din,

or--

  The sloping shores that fringe the velvet tides;

and (speaking of steamers)--

  Or, fiery-hearted, cleave with iron limbs
    And brows precipitous the pliant sea.

How different are these mechanical constructions from that expression of
the birds

        hid in the white warm cloud
  Mantling the thorn.

Whether I am right or wrong as to the process of his development, the
fact remains that he can be, if he chooses, a master in language of
poetic simplicity. Even a fire of garden rubbish can be expressed
without becoming altogether unpoetical when one speaks of

          the spicy smoke
  Of withered weeds that burn where gardens be.

Perhaps there do exist some things which cannot be made poetical in any
diction whatsoever. Tennyson could only express "tea" by "and on the
board the fluttering urn," and if Mr. Davidson has to speak of whisky
and calls it

        amber spirit that enshrines the heart
  Of an old Lothian summer,

we have to recognise that he has come very well out of a difficulty. If
at another time he refers to it as

  things which journalists require,

we must remember that the context implies a certain humour.

"Clear, but not flat," is an easy maxim to utter, but, as Wordsworth too
often shows, the danger of falling from studied simplicity into bald
prose is always present; and for that reason do smaller artists rather
choose to trick their thoughts in verbal jewellery. We cannot say that
Davidson, who undertakes to run the risk, never makes the fatal step. In
the address to the daisy--

  Oh, little brave adventurer!
  We human beings love you _so_,

the last word, and indeed the whole line, verges on the infantile. So it
is a shock when, after a passage of some pretensions, we come upon the
lines--

  My way of life led me to London town,
  And difficulties, which I overcame;

or--

  But yet my waking intuition,
  That longed to execute its mission.

It is extremely difficult to realise that the same man wrote these sorry
lines who, in another place, adopts this for his style--

  ... Here spring appears
  Caught in a leafless brake, her garland torn,
  Breathless with wonder, and the tears half dried
  Upon her rosy cheek.

For our comfort and his let us remember that it was the same Wordsworth
who wrote both the _Ode on the Intimations of Immortality_ and also the
lines--

  I've measured it from side to side:
  It's three feet long and two feet wide!

Nevertheless flaws of this kind are few, and it is almost unfair for me
to be the means perhaps of conveying even thus much impression of
faultiness about verses which sustain so high a general level of
excellence of language.

In point of melody and harmony and flow of verse there can be no doubt
that our poet is, for instance, an excellent writer of songs, in which a
vigorous simplicity is the prime requisite. They lilt along with great
vivacity and ease. But elsewhere I could wish that here and there he
would amend his rhymes. "Reviewer" and "literature," "pierced" and
"athirst," "noise" and "voice," "inquisition" and "division," "trees"
and "palaces," "shade is" and "ladies," "giftless" and "swiftness," are
far from pleasing; and though I am almost ashamed to play the detective
in work which is mostly full of charm, I find myself distressed by such
cacophonies as--

  Hid in its hoard of haws,

and--

  Pierces a rushlight's ray's length into it.

John Davidson, then, is a genuine son of his age; free in his thought,
wide in his sympathies, eager for the amelioration of man's estate,
divided between the hopes of science and the regret for a lost religion,
compelled to fall back on the everlasting consolations of love and
nature, an ardent lover of the country and its sights and sounds,
constrained to draw word-pictures of the things which thus delight him,
and drawing them with the consummate skill of the man who keeps his eye
on the essentials of the thing he draws. His charm lies in his frank
sincerity, and in the clear healthy sweetness of his utterance. That he
is a poet none can doubt; if he is comparatively young, as I surmise he
is, and if he pursues his true development, he may, I believe, easily
take his place in the first rank, not only as a successor, but as the
successor, of Tennyson.

On William Watson I shall dwell less long. To begin with, he is already
better known. Moreover, his special virtues as a poet are more easy to
apprehend, for they lie somewhat prominently upon the surface. Better
still, he apparently apprehends them himself, and is in that unusually
happy position for an artist, of knowing exactly where his own strength
lies. And undoubtedly in those departments his strength is great. We
need not hold the mention of them in reserve. I have already quoted a
passage of admirable rhetorical and musical skill and taste from the
_Lachrymae Musarum_. That was sufficient to illustrate one of this
poet's great gifts--the gift of writing splendid verse, as harmonious as
Milton's and as choice in expression as Tennyson's. His other chief
endowment is that of literary critic. On Burns, Shelley, and Wordsworth
he has said almost the final saying, and assuredly in almost the final
language. We may pick faults now and again in his expression, and we may
suspect a mannerism here and there, especially when we read large
quantities of his verse at one time; nevertheless, each individual piece
which fairly represents him is very nearly perfect in its way.

The works of his with which I am acquainted are the volumes entitled
_Wordsworth's Grave and Other Poems_, _The Father of the Forest and
Other Poems_, _Lachrymae Musarum_, and the series of sonnets upon
Armenia, called _The Purple East_. There is in Watson nothing of the
dramatist or of the epic writer. He is a lyrist and a sonneteer. He is
also a critic, and might very conceivably be a satirist. But, whatever
he is in writing, he is mainly and before all things an intellectual
rather than an emotional poet; he is an artist rather than a seer. His
poems are constructions of taste and intellectual judgment. Let me take,
as an example, his poem upon the _Father of the Forest_. A yew tree,
which may be fifteen centuries old, is addressed by him; and, musing on
the historical scenes it must have lived through, he gives us a series
of verses which touch musically upon salient epochs and characteristic
figures in the history of England. To this the yew practically replies
that the so-called historical events amount to nothing, and that "wars
and tears" will repeat themselves, until men are some day civilized into
pursuing but one object, which shall be Beauty. The piece itself reveals
nothing profound, awakes no particular emotion. Given the first idea of
the plot, so to speak--an idea which is not far to seek for any
reflective man--the rest of the material follows as a matter of course.
But where is the man besides Mr. Watson who will give us such lines as--

  The South shall bless, the East shall blight,
    The red rose of the Dawn shall blow;
  The million-lilied stream of night,
    Wide in ethereal meadows flow.

I do not say that the poet is without his measure of feeling; but it is
rather the pensive feeling of a Jaques, the dainty interest of a Matthew
Arnold, than any surge of emotion. The poet seems to me to encourage his
brain to feel--to give it that passing luxury with a certain amount of
deliberation.

The _Hymn to the Sea_ is the only real poem written in the English
language in hexameters and pentameters. There have been many attempts at
these metres, but they have been failures, one and all. And nothing
shows Mr. Watson's skill, nay genius, more than the fact that his
attempt is a great and conspicuous success. The sea, confined within its
shores, never resting, yet never able to pass its bounds, at war with
the winds, and serving the moon with its tides, is compared to man, with
his unrest, his limitations, his aspirations. As before, when the clue
is once given, the thread is easily followed to the end. The result is
simply an intellectual operation done into verbal music. Yet who but
William Watson, having to speak of the moon as mistress of the sea,
could express his fancy in words like these:--

  When, as yonder, thy mistress, at height of her mutable glories,
  Wise from the magical East, comes like a sorceress pale.
  Ah, she comes, she arises--impassive, emotionless, bloodless,
  Wasted and ashen of cheek, zoning her ruins with pearl.
  Once she was warm, she was joyous, desire in her pulses abounding:
  Surely thou lovedst her well, then, in her conquering youth!
  Surely not all unimpassioned, at sound of thy rough serenading,
  She from the balconied night unto her melodist leaned,--
  Leaned unto thee, her bondsman, who keepest to-day her commandments,
  All for the sake of old love, dead at thy heart though it lie.

Surely such verse would have a claim to endurance, even if the thought
were less of a thought than it is.

_Autumn_, again, is a short piece upon the suggestions of that season.
What would those suggestions naturally be? Obviously, the passing and
perishing of all things that are. True; but to express those
suggestions, obvious as they are, as Watson expresses them, requires a
rhetorical power and a taste in melodious words such as would make their
possessor eminent in the judgment of men who care anything for beauty.
There may be no particular depth in the work; it may be less passionate,
less full of thought, than the _Ode to the West Wind_, but we could ill
afford to spare such combinations of sound as--

  Elusive notes in wandering wafture borne
  From undiscoverable lips, that blow
  An immaterial horn.

In _Liberty Rejected_ we meet once more with the similitude of the moon
and the tide. Mr. Watson's range of purely intellectual imagination is,
like that of his emotion, limited. But we do not mind meeting the
comparison again, when the lover who refuses to be free expresses
himself thus--


  The ocean would as soon
  Entreat the moon
  Unsay the magic verse
  That seals him hers
  From silver noon to noon.

When he touches upon nature, we feel again that Watson is not "letting
himself go." When he escapes from town it is not to revel and to make us
revel in the sheer delight of rural sights and sounds. He feels as
before, with the eye and the understanding, not with the buoyant blood
of the full heart. No matter, he feels enough to give us this quatrain--

  In stainless daylight saw the pure seas roll;
    Saw mountains pillaring the perfect sky:
  Then journeyed home to carry in his soul
    The torment of the difference till he die.

Why should I go on to quote such lines as--

  That thousand-memoried unimpulsive sea,

or,

  Curls the labyrinthine sea
  Duteous to the lunar will.

Enough that, thanks to a study of Spenser, Milton, Shelley, Keats,
Wordsworth, Tennyson, and therefore a delicate taste in word and phrase,
and thanks also to an innate genius for verbal music, restrained from
Swinburnian riot by a true artistic instinct, Mr. Watson is a poet most
delightful to the physical and the mental ear. That he has taken pains
with his study is avowed by himself. Beginning with Shelley and passing
through Keats to Wordsworth, he says--

  In my young days of fervid poesy
  He drew me to him with his strange far light,--
  He held me in a world all clouds and gleams,
  And vasty phantoms, where ev'n Man himself
  Moved like a phantom 'mid the clouds and gleams.
  Anon the Earth recalled me; and a voice
  Murmuring of dethroned divinities
  And dead times, deathless upon sculptured urn--
  And Philomela's long-descended pain
  Flooding the night--and maidens of romance
  To whom asleep St. Agnes' love-dreams come--
  Awhile constrained me to a sweet duresse
  And thraldom, lapping me in high content,
  Soft as the bondage of white amorous arms.
  And then a third voice, long unheeded--held
  Claustral and cold, and dissonant and tame--Found
  me at last with ears to hear. It sang
  Of lowly sorrows and familiar joys,
  Of simple manhood, artless womanhood,
  And childhood fragrant as the limpid morn;
  And from the homely matter nigh at hand,
  Ascending and dilating, it disclosed
  Spaces and avenues, calm heights and breadths
  Of vision, whence I saw each blade of grass
  With roots that groped about eternity,
  And in each drop of dew upon each blade
  The mirror of the inseparable All.

It is also clear from such reminiscences as--

  The laurel glorious from that wintry hair,

which is practically Tennyson, or

  The maker of this verse, which shall endure
  By splendour of its theme, that cannot die,

which, if I mistake not, is echoed Spenser, or--

  And ghostly as remembered mirth,

which is largely Tennyson again.

I do not call these plagiarisms, I call them reflections of wide and
retentive reading.

William Watson has thus formed a style which is almost perfect. I say
"almost," not quite. There are some few mannerisms which we might wish
away. He speaks of "greatly inert," "greatly lost in thee," "greatly
slain," "doomed splendidly to die," "loudly weak," "immutably prevail,"
and "vainly great," till we are forced to recognize what looks very
much like a trick. He has occasional moments of tautology, which may
possibly be deliberate, but is none the better for that, as when he
says:--

  Not mine the rich and showering hand, that strews
  The facile largess of a stintless muse.

And

  The retrospect in Time's reverted eyes.

And worst of all--

  "Fair clouds of gulls that _wheel_ and _swerve_
  In unanimity divine,
  With _undulation serpentine_,
  And wondrous consentaneous _curve_."

He sometimes falls into lines which ring of the mint of Pope--

  No guile may capture and no force surprise.

Or--

  Defames the sunlight and deflowers the morn.

Or--

  Towers to a lily, reddens to a rose.

In one passage only do I find him falling, falling, falling into the
flattest style of the _Excursion_:--

  "I overheard a kind-eyed girl relate
  To her companions how a favouring chance
  By some few shillings weekly had increased
  The earnings of her household."

But as I read this, I murmur to myself those lines from Wordsworth--

  "And I have travelled far as Hull to see
  What clothes he might have left, or other property,"

and wonder how it is that such aberrations can befal even the very man
who seems most determined to avoid them.

Watson's second endowment is still one of taste and intellect. It is the
gift of literary criticism. The special charm of the great poets is so
subtly apprehended by him, and so exquisitely expressed, that it will be
a source of much surprise if many of his concise verdicts do not become
the household words of students of literature. Let me quote a passage
from his poem on _Wordsworth's Grave_:--

  You who have loved, like me, his simple themes,
    Loved his sincere large accent nobly plain,
  And loved the land whose mountains and whose streams
    Are lovelier for his strain.

  It may be that his manly chant, beside
    More dainty numbers, seems a rustic tune;
  It may be, thought has broadened, since he died,
    Upon the century's noon;
  It may be that we can no longer share
    The faith which from his fathers he received;
  It may be that our doom is to despair
    Where he with joy believed;--

  Enough that there is none since risen who sings
    A song so gotten of the immediate soul,
  So instant from the vital fount of things
    Which is our source and goal;

  And though at touch of later hands there float
    More artful tones than from his lyre he drew,
  Ages may pass e'er trills another note
    So sweet, so great, so true.

Take again--

  Not Milton's keen, translunar music thine;
    Not Shakespeare's cloudless, boundless, human view;
  Not Shelley's flush of rose on peaks divine;
    Nor yet the wizard twilight Coleridge knew.

And these:--

  Shelley, the hectic flamelight rose of verse,
  All colour and all odour and all bloom.

And on Burns--

  But as, when thunder crashes nigh,
  All darkness opes one flaming eye,
  And the world leaps against the sky,
    So fiery clear
  Did the old truths that we pass by
    To him appear.

These, then, are the prominent poetical virtues of William Watson,
virtues which none can avoid observing--his magnificent power of
expression and his literary acumen. He is an intellectual poet, and
therefore not devoid of substance. Yet his substance alone would never
make him a _vates_. I can imagine that in prose criticisms and in satire
he would make a distinguished figure. Here is his answer to Mr. Alfred
Austin when the laureate advised him to be patient with the Armenian
question:--

"The poet laureate assured me--first, that whosoever in any
circumstances arraigns this country for anything that she may do or
leave undone thereby covers himself with shame; secondly, that although
the continued torture, rape, and massacre of a Christian people, under
the eyes of a Christian continent, may be a lamentable thing, it is best
to be patient, seeing that the patience of God Himself can never be
exhausted; and, thirdly, that if I were but with him in his pretty
country house, were but comfortably seated 'by the yule log's blaze,'
and joining with him in seasonable conviviality, the enigmas of
Providence and the whole mystery of things would presently become
transparent to me, and more especially after 'drinking to England' I
should be enabled to understand that 'she bides her hour behind the
bastioned brine.'"

It would be hard to better that.

But though I call him intellectual, and more artistic than inspired, I
have no wish to underrate the intrinsic poetry in such lines as these,
on the _Great Misgiving_:--

  Ah, but the apparition--the dumb sign--
    The beckoning finger bidding me forego
  The fellowship, the converse, and the wine,
    The songs, the festal glow!
  And, ah, to know not, while with friends I sit,
    And while the purple joy is passed about,
  Whether 'tis ampler day divinelier lit
    Or homeless night without.

Nor the graceful fancy in these, from _Beauty's Metempsychosis_:--

  From wave and star and flower,
      Some effluence rare
  Was lent thee; a divine but transient dower;
  Thou yield'st it back from eyes and lips and hair
      To wave and star and flower.
  Should'st thou to-morrow die,
      Thou still shalt be
  Found in the rose, and met in all the sky;
  And from the ocean's heart shalt sing to me,
      Should'st thou to-morrow die.

I have also said that Mr. Watson knows his own strength and his
limitations. Let me conclude by quoting a passage from his _Apologia_,
the very style of which will be in itself the justification of the man
whom it argues to justify:--

  ... Because I have full oft
  In singers' selves found me a theme of song,
  Holding these also to be very part
  Of Nature's greatness....

         *       *       *       *       *

  And though I be to these but as a knoll
  About the feet of the high mountains, scarce
  Remarked at all, save when a valley cloud
  Holds the high mountains hidden, and the knoll
  Against the clouds shows briefly eminent;
  Yet, ev'n as they, I, too, with constant heart,
  And with no light or careless ministry,
  Have served what seemed the voice; and unprofane
  Have dedicated to melodious ends
  All of myself that least ignoble was.
  For though of faulty and of erring walk,
  I have not suffered aught in me of frail
  To blur my song; I have not paid the world
  The evil and the insolent courtesy
  Of offering it my baseness for a gift.
  And unto such as think all Art is cold,
  All music unimpassioned, if it breathe
  An ardour not of Eros' lips, and glow
  With fire not caught from Aphrodite's breast,
  Be it enough to say, that in Man's life
  Is room for great emotions unbegot
  Of dalliance and embracement, unbegot
  Even of the purer nuptials of the soul;
  And one not pale of blood, to human touch
  Not tardily responsive, yet may know
  A deeper transport and a mightier thrill
  Than comes of commerce with mortality,
  When, rapt from all relation with his kind,
  All temporal and immediate circumstance,
  In silence, in the visionary mood
  That, flashing light on the dark deep, perceives
  Order beyond this coil and errancy;
  Isled from the fretful hour he stands alone,
  And hears the eternal movement, and beholds
  Above him and around and at his feet,
  In million-billowed consentaneousness,
  The flowing, flowing, flowing of the world.




  The
  Making of a Shakespeare


There is nothing both wholly new and wholly true to be said concerning
Shakespeare. Eckermann, who played Boswell to Goethe's Johnson, was once
disposed to discuss Shakespeare with that great master. Alone of modern
poets Goethe has revealed a capacity in some degree comparable with that
of the myriad-minded Englishman. Yet Goethe replied to Eckermann, "We
cannot talk about Shakespeare; everything is inadequate." If the German
intellectual colossus, whose conversation bestrode the narrow world from
comparative anatomy and scientific optics to the principles of art,
could not talk of Shakespeare; if a poet whose writings, next to those
of our own unrivalled bard, are most thickly studded with great stars of
thought, could not talk of Shakespeare, what is to be said by us punier
men who are compelled to peep about for matter of discourse? "Everything
is inadequate." That perhaps is the reason why talk about Shakespeare,
even from the sanest of men, is apt to convert itself into perfervid
rhapsody. Meanwhile, from those whose sanity is less assured, it runs to
the delirium of some harebrained cipher of Shakespeare-Geheimnis, and an
amused world is asked to listen while some female Dogberry asserts that
the truth, too long concealed, has been proved, and it will soon go near
to be thought, that _Romeo and Juliet_ was written by none other than
Anne Hathaway.

I do not come before you to-night with either a rhapsody or a
mare's-nest. Nor do I come with criticism of that marvellous creator,
who, to use the bold expression of the Frenchman, _apres Dieu crea le
plus_. When, with the progress of the years, a supreme writer is read
more and more over all the world; when his plays are translated from
English into Hebrew and Japanese, and performed in Roumanian and
Hindustani, criticism should become simply a humble endeavour to realize
the various powers and beauties which constitute such triumphant
greatness.

That is my attitude to-night. To me Shakespeare--though not flawless,
because human--is the crown and consummation of literature. Ardently and
reverently as I admire Homer, AEschylus, Dante and Goethe, my mind places
even these on somewhat lower seats than the creator of _Hamlet_ and
_Othello_. My object is to review--however imperfectly--what went to his
making, what elements of gift and character, circumstance, training and
experience were so mixed in him that nature could stand up and say:
"This is a man." This is not the same idle performance as to descant
rapturously upon his purely inborn genius. It is no purpose of mine to
attempt a definition or dissection of genius. It is only in our youth or
ignorance that we possess the confidence to define such abstractions as
beauty, goodness, genius, and art. Still less do I propound a recipe for
its manufacture. If I knew the secret of its attainment I should first
try it upon myself.

Shakespeare was made by the right native genius, by the right
environment, and by the right training. We will take these factors in
that order.

Genius, like every other good gift and every perfect gift, "is from
above, and cometh down from the Father of Lights." We feel its presence
when we are fortunate enough to meet with it. In our hearts we know that
it is some strange and incommunicable faculty for performing with a
divine ease those achievements which are the despair of other men, or to
which they can only make some approach by "infinite pains."

Brains have been classified as brains of one, two and three storeys. As
you cannot, by thinking, add a cubit to your stature, so can you not, by
thinking, add a storey to your brain. You may furnish and brighten the
one storey or the two storeys with which your mental house was built
before your birth. You may open the windows and let in the sun and air.
By the best education and habit you may fill that house with art and
beauty and light and comfort, or, by the worst, you may render it ugly,
foul, bleak and dark; but you can never add a new floor. Shakespeare's
brain was not only built by mother Nature in three storeys, but those
storeys were lofty and roomy in an astonishing degree. They were also
full of windows.

His natural gifts were vast. No writer ever possessed such a
manifoldness, or rather, totality of them. In a different branch of
art, one cannot but think of Michael Angelo, who could carve the Moses,
paint the Sistine ceiling, or build St. Peter's, with equal grasp and
mastery over conceptions each too sublime for ordinary men.

If we analyse and enumerate the endowments lavished by Nature on her
"darling" of the Avon, we shall find, as in the case of Angelo, that he
not only displays each separate gift, but that he displays each in its
highest form and fullest measure. His own modesty may be permitted to
envy this man's art or that man's scope, but never was envy more
misplaced.

This is no rhapsody. Longinus tells us that an unassailable verdict upon
the sublime must be the consensus of different ages, pursuits, tastes
and walks in life. Concerning Shakespeare's gifts there is no discord
among the competent--the Hazlitts, Coleridges, Emersons, Carlyles. Some
of those gifts can be cultivated in considerable measure, some in a
less; some lie beyond all training and all art. But no art or
cultivation whatever can bring any one of them to the Shakespearean
height and fulness, if Nature herself has been less kind than she was
to the child of John Shakespeare, that unsuspecting burgess of Stratford
town.

If, before we attempt to realise the supremacy of Shakespeare in any
particular attribute, we have recognised how miserably we ourselves have
managed, at some time or other, to fail in every one of them; if, before
we approach an appreciation of Shakespeare, we have applied to other
great creators the same analysis which we are about to apply to him; if
we have learned from the most instructive examples what is meant by
creation, by imagination, by insight, by wisdom, by wit, by humour, by
eloquence, and by verbal music; then we cannot fail to acknowledge that
here is the all-round, the all-comprehensive genius, superlatively
dowered with each and all of them; that here is the entire mind, where
others are partial; that here, as I believe some one has put it, is the
man who, when others have said, or depicted, or argued, or pleaded,
seems to come along and say, "let me show you how this should be done,"
and so does it once and for ever.

It is but few, one may believe, who are fully conscious of the reasons
why Shakespeare could fill the Elizabethan pit with the rough London
apprentices and the Elizabethan boxes with superfine gallants and
courtiers; why he has been a delight equally to the worldling, to whom
always "the play's the thing," and to the sedate scholar, who has
perchance never set foot in a theatre, and to whom a play is a dramatic
poem printed in a book. Yet the reason is simple. It is because
Shakespeare's gifts are numerous and varied enough to appeal to populace
and gallant, to worldling and student; they meet to the full each and
every demand that can be made upon a work of dramatic art.

To begin with, he possesses the true constructive power, the first
secret of the playwright's craft. He can visualise an extensive or
complicated passage of human life, with its cross streams of action, its
moving world of persons, its intricate motives and passions--whether it
surround Julius Caesar in ancient Rome or Othello in Cyprus or one of his
kings of English history--whether he find it recorded in Holinshed, or
in Plutarch, or in some novel of Italy--and, with the swift intuition of
the master craftsman, he grasps the essentials, arranges and links them,
and renders them organic and compact. With sure judgment of effect he
adds to his original or subtracts from it, and he rounds off the whole
into an absorbing and unflagging story to be told in action during but
"two hours traffic of the stage." No one can fully realise this immense
selective and constructive power until he has analysed the action of
_Macbeth_, and observed the marvellous skill which has compressed into
those five short acts a whole world of great and little things done and
said and thought.

But greater and rarer still than this architectural gift is the creative
power which lies in imagination. And by imagination I do not mean merely
the play of fancy in Mercutio's famous speech, nor simply the conjuring
up of pictures as in Clarence's dream, nor the invention of those
perfect similitudes which meet us everywhere. In these, it is true,
Shakespeare is consummate. But I mean that deeper and more pervasive
power, which beholds beings of the imagination as if they were flesh and
blood realities, and presents men and women of the past or of nowhere as
if they were breathing in the living present before our eyes; the
shaping power which--to make a quotation that never stales--

           gives to airy nothing
  A local habitation and a name--

so that to us Elsinore for ever means Hamlet, Verona means Juliet, and
we think of Shylock and Jessica as historical beings who veritably once
trod the Piazza and the Merceria of Venice. The great novelist who wrote
_Vanity Fair_ possessed a rare measure of this power; but in him it was
limited by the limitations of his sympathies and by his less amiable
view of men. So was it with Carlyle. In Shakespeare it is boundless. To
him all ages, all sorts and conditions of men and women, are
understandable and worthy of interest. Intuitively he knows them, walks
with them, talks with them, feels with them. They may be heroes, sages,
fools, villains: they may be witty or stupid, refined or gross. Their
characters may be direct and plain as those of Lear and Kent, or they
may be as subtly shaded as that of Hamlet or of the melancholy
soliloquist of Arden. He can in imagination traverse the whole gamut of
feeling. He can be what or whom he will. This is the imagination in
which Shakespeare is unsurpassable. This more than all powers, unless it
be that of humour, is the one which Nature must bestow, and which
nothing but Nature can bestow. And this is the power which alone can
make drama convincing and immortal. Compare with the living and
breathing reality of the characters in even the poorest of the
Shakespearean plays, the wordy automata of Swinburne's _Faliero_ or the
frigid figures who talk through Tennyson's _Cup_. There are those who
compare Scott with Shakespeare in the gift of visualising and vitalising
the past. We Englishmen may leave it to the Scotchman Carlyle to settle
with that comparison. For my own part, as a student of antiquity, I
would maintain that, despite all petty anachronism, Shakespeare in his
Roman plays comes nearer to the essential truth than any merely
professional student can ever come. What he gives us is not archaeology,
not the exact Forum nor the precise etiquette of the toga, but the man,
the Caesar, the Coriolanus, the greasy populace, their heart and
mind--these he sees with the penetrating eye of an imagination which
never fails.

Of imagination, in this sense, wit and humour are a vital part. Without
them you may imagine an Othello or a Lear, but you cannot imagine a
Falstaff, a Touchstone, a Mercutio, or a Bottom. In this domain
Shakespeare is sometimes thought to be rivalled by Aristophanes and
Moliere. Yet one who read all three will find that these are his rivals
rather in broad strokes of humour and flashes of wit than in the
subtler virtues of his humour. His humour is all-pervading, it is colour
woven into the whole tissue of thinking, speaking, and action. Nay, true
humour is like the colour of a flower or leaf. It belongs to the nature
of the plant, and is carried in the sap of its life. To talk like
Falstaff, you must in imagination become Falstaff, feel as he would do,
think as he would think. You cannot lay on the Falstaffian humour by a
reasoning process from the outside. The result may be clever, but it
will lack just that subtle and evasive quality which the modern cant
seeks to describe by the word "inevitable." A merely brilliant man--a
Sheridan, for instance--might make the endeavour, and gain some
considerable applause. But Shakespeare for the moment lived the part,
the humour came to him with the part, whether the humour of clowns and
gravediggers, of Jaques, or of the moody prince of Denmark.

Essential also to such humour is the broad and tolerant temper which can
not only suffer fools gladly, as being a large and representative class
of God's creatures, but can actually rejoice in their folly as a thing
delectable to a healthy contemplation.

But when the piece has been thus constructed with a master hand, and
when the characters have been informed by imagination with all the
convincingness of infinitely varied life, with humour, with sound and
healthy and impartial understanding, much is still left. There is still
to be considered the language or expression in which all is clothed. And
in this respect the writer who has written best in any tongue, falls,
when compared with Shakespeare, a step into the rear. Not Milton, for
all his organ flood of noble phrase; not Shelley, for all his burning
and rapturous utterance, can vie with the actor-playwright of the Globe
in his gift of eloquence. It is entirely marvellous and beyond all
explanation. No mere study or scholarship could attain to that
inexhaustible fund, not merely of words, but of the right words. Orators
and writers there are a many who never fail to find a word, and a good
word, for the rounding of their sentences. But Shakespeare's words are
not merely good words; they are the best words. Even the bare vocabulary
of Burke or Macaulay would seem second-rate beside the vocabulary of
Shakespeare. It is a commonplace to dilate upon the fact that
Shakespeare has used 15,000 words, while Milton, our poet of widest
reading and erudition, has but 8,000. I do not attach so much importance
to that enumeration. The subjects, the sides of life, the classes of
persons of whom Shakespeare treats, are so comprehensive of high and
low, serious and jocose, while Milton's are confined to a range of such
seriousness and dignity, that the comparison is but fallacious.
Nevertheless this vast repertoire of words is in itself an amazing
phenomenon. Still more amazing is the consummate tact with which he
makes use of them, in sentences so terse and clear that they
increasingly pass into the proverbs of everyday. And most amazing is
that, with all his characters, and all their speeches, he never repeats
himself. No better proof could be given that the speaker is for the
moment not Shakespeare, but the character in which he has sunk himself.
We need not pretend that he does not sometimes run riot in his power;
yet, how seldom, in the day of his maturity, is that "sometimes," when
we rightly understand his meanings.

Let critics, observing always who speaks and in what spirit he speaks,
try to improve a word in a typical passage of Shakespeare. They speedily
realise the error of their ways.

Take at random the very simplest line, say: "How sweet the moonlight
sleeps upon this bank"; substitute some other word for "sweet" or
"sleeps," and examine the result. The very sound of the line possesses
the tone of the moonlight and the hour, the mood of Lorenzo and Jessica.
Try an easy-looking similitude:--

  How like a younker or a prodigal
  The scarfed bark puts from her native bay,
  Hugg'd and embraced by the strumpet wind!
  How like a prodigal doth she return,
  With over-weather'd ribs and ragged sails,
  Lean, rent, and beggared by the strumpet wind!

And, if the man who writes this nervous Saxon, writes elsewhere--

           No, this my hand will rather
  The multitudinous seas incarnadine,

that also is a lesson to those who have any notion of what is meant by
the right word in the right place.

To me Shakespeare is the most stupendously eloquent man who ever set pen
to paper. Shakespeare, says Goethe, offers us golden apples in silver
dishes. But Goethe was a foreigner, he perhaps hardly realised that the
dishes of English expression are, to the English reader who responds to
the niceties of his own tongue, not less golden than the apples.

To these perfections let us add another, his superb sense of rhythm.
Properly speaking, this is but an integral part of perfect eloquence. It
is the concern of the poet, not only to make the words express the
meaning, but to make the cadence express the tone and mood; to make it,
in fact, answer to those rhythmic vibrations of the brain which go with
all states of mental exaltation. It is Emerson who observes that
"Shakespeare's sonnets are like the tone of voice of some incomparable
person." He was doubtless thinking of their general effect upon our mood
and spirit, but his remark is true of the mere movement of Shakespeare's
lyric lines:--

  Full many a glorious morning have I seen
  Flatter the mountain-tops with sovereign eye,
  Kissing with golden face the meadows green,
  Gilding pale streams with heavenly alchemy.

Or--

  When in the chronicle of wasted time
  I see descriptions of the fairest wights,
  And beauty making beautiful old rhyme
  In praise of ladies dead, and lovely knights,

and so on.

Here, as in the dramas, are no mechanical tricks, no obvious compassing
of sickly sweetnesses. The accent falls where it should, unstrained. The
disguised alliteration comes, as almost always in Milton also, not from
set and conscious purpose, but from the promptings of a mind vibrating
with harmonious suggestion.

This catalogue of virtues has been long, but it has required some
self-command to prevent it from being longer. It justifies the
exclamation with which Mr. Sidney Lee closes his life of Shakespeare, an
exclamation which he deftly borrows from Hamlet: "How noble in reason!
how infinite in faculty! in apprehension how like a God!"

So much for Nature's making. With such lavish powers, or at least
potentialities, was Shakespeare born. It is appalling to reflect that
their fruit might all have been lost to the world if John Shakespeare,
the father, had been but a little poorer than he actually was; if
William, the son, had been sent to the plough-tail without the
rudiments of education, and so had been banished for ever from contact
with bright spirits and all the brilliant motley of London life. His
fate would have been that of Gray's rural "mute inglorious Milton" and
the headstone with "Here lies William Shakespeare" would have meant
nothing outside the parish, and very little inside it. It is an alarming
thought also that, had he been born half a century later, though with
every educational advantage, his manhood would have fallen under the
grim Puritan tyranny, and he would never have written a play. It is a
peculiarly happy combination of circumstances which we must thank for
the making of Shakespeare as he is.

Nature produced the wonderful plant, but, for its perfect development, a
plant requires a congenial soil and atmosphere; it needs light and
water; it needs protection from early destruction, or stunting, or
starvation. It may seem heterodox, but I would maintain stubbornly,
against all the phalanx of Baconians and Bedlamites, that, for the
cultivation of Shakespeare's peculiar genius, circumstances were almost
wholly propitious. His very poverty was his stimulus. Even that school
education of his, which is made by misunderstanding to appear so scant
and pitiful, was, I doubt not, better adapted to his career than if he
had been filled with all the learning of Verulam or Ben Jonson. But of
that anon.

The first happy circumstance was the epoch at which he saw the light.
In modern times two forms of poetry contend for the supremacy. The third
kind, the epic, is dead. No Homer or Virgil can ever more arise, unless
as a novelist in prose. Of the two perennial kinds, one is the
lyric--the consummate blending of language and music which utters the
cry of individual passion from the individual heart. The other is the
drama, the presentation of human life in visible form, realised in all
its complexity of motives, characters and moods. Both of these
flourished mightily in Shakespeare's generation. Lyric poets were
innumerable. The whole country rang with songs. The Elizabethan
Miscellanies and Rhapsodies and Dainty Devices are testimony stronger
even than the great names of Spenser and the sonneteers. No less did
drama appeal to high and low, the Puritan always excepted. But the day
of the Puritan had not yet dawned. The taste of society of every grade
was for the theatre, but a theatre without scenery, in which it was
required of the drama that it should be rich in high poetry. Poetry was
just then both a fashion and a passion of the nation, as it never was
before and never has been since. To a man born, like Shakespeare, with
both the lyric and the dramatic gift, the age was full of example and
stimulus, and, better still, full of challenge and exacting poetic
standards. There is an immense difference between writing an artistic
sonnet for a wide public which desires to read artistic sonnets, or
composing a poetic drama for a wide public which desires to see poetic
dramas, and doing these things for a narrow public which, after all,
rather tolerates your efforts than demands them.

We are not concerned with the question what Shakespeare might have been
if he had lived in his prime to-day. He might perhaps have become a
superlative novel-writer, since that is the field in which creation
appears to be playing its chief part. But our concern is to perceive
what causes helped to fashion him to that which he in fact became.

Let us first glance for a few moments at those spacious times of great
Elizabeth. Why so wondrously prolific in song and play? Why so
provocative of genius?

First, we may lay down the proposition that it is not times of national
misery and poverty, not times of insecurity and fear, not times of weak
convictions and cynicism, that produce a wealth of either great poets or
great art. There is not one distinguished literary or artistic period
of any country at which the national spirit was not full of the
animation, enterprise, and confidence of a general well-being, or at
which it was not possessed by high ideas and strong aims or strong
convictions. I am speaking in broad summary. Whatever qualifications may
be made for unique phenomena, this statement in the main is true. At
such periods the mental vitality of a community is high; the air is
charged with intellectual and artistic electricity, and great talents
everywhere become the receivers and gathering-points of those electric
currents. Hence poets, artists, and other creators appear simultaneously
in clusters; production is abundant both in matter and in kind. At such
times there is nothing withdrawn or particularly refined about the
creations which pour forth. There is no room for the dilettante or
_petit maitre_, and not much for the professional critic; it is the age
of strong men; writing, painting, sculpture are full of vigour,
inspiration, earnestness.

It was so at Athens in that glorious age of Pericles and the succeeding
generation, the age of the great tragedians, of Thucydides, of
Aristophanes and of Phidias. It was so--though with men of less
original genius--in the Augustan Rome of Virgil, Horace and Livy. It was
so in the rich and ardent cities of Renaissance Italy, where Da Vinci,
Raphael, Michel Angelo, and Titian flourished in the same space of
thirty years. It was so in the France of Louis Quatorze, when Corneille,
Racine, Moliere, Pascal, and numbers of others of hardly smaller note,
were writing side by side. And it was so in the times of great
Elizabeth. According to Emerson there is a mental zymosis or contagion
prevailing in society at such epochs. Some one has said that "No member
of either house of the British Parliament will be ranked among the
orators whom Lord North did not see or who did not see Lord North." If
so, the cause will be found to lie in the encouragement which noble
oratory then received, whereas at a later day it has "fallen into
abatement and low price."

The age of Elizabeth was one of material prosperity and comfort. It was,
in the main, well with men's bodies and well with their minds. They
possessed not only the leisure, not only the means, but also the
disposition to enjoy. It is not for the artist in any field to scorn the
material prosperity of the community in which he works. After all, as
history will show, it is that prosperity which makes him possible.
"Plain living and high thinking" is good for himself; it is good for a
nation; but plain living does not mean poverty, squalor or starvation,
while high thinking cannot be done without leisure and resource. You
cannot build glorious Gothic cathedrals or order sublime Madonnas out of
nothing.

Elizabethan England lived in comfort. It lived also in the security of
at least internal peace. The Civil Wars, which had unsettled men of all
ranks and distracted their thoughts and energies, were over. Those
thoughts and energies now sought another outlet. On the whole it was
also an age of tolerance. England had not entered upon its phase of
Puritan bigotry, nor on its licentious Anti-Puritan vengeance. Religion
was in less degree a battle-ground. There were, of course, hostilities
of Protestants, Catholics, and Brownists, but the two hundred and odd
sects of the twentieth century were still far off, and men's time and
intellectual energies--of which there is but a limited amount--were not
wasted in futile discussion of sectarian minutiae.

At ease in mind, body and estate, it was natural that the age should be
one of frank enjoyment--enjoyment of all that gladdens mind or eye or
ear, enjoyment of rich clothes, fine houses, shows, pageantries, music,
song, stories, and plays. In the revels which Scott in his _Kenilworth_
makes Leicester prepare for the reception of Elizabeth, he is drawing
upon his study of the times. Above all entertainments the play was the
thing, and whether performed before the mixed auditory of the new
theatres of Shoreditch or on the Southwark side, or before the Benchers
of the Inns of Court, or before the Queen's Majesty herself, the drama
received a welcome compared with which its appreciation in our midst is
as cold as it is stinted.

And yet all this might have produced in literature and art nothing but
pomp and show, or amusement more or less vulgar. In the theatre it might
have ended in farce or melodrama. But happily, along with prosperity and
the feeling for enjoyment, conditions were at work which made for the
keenest activity of mind and every form of intellectual expansion. It
would be to enlarge upon a trite theme indeed, if one dwelt upon the
enterprise and discovery of bold spirits like Francis Drake, and upon
the eager curiosity, the ready imagination, the universal
open-mindedness, which ran through the nation, as new worlds were opened
or looked for in the western or southern seas.

More important, all-important in truth, was the avid mastery of new
knowledge which had followed the Renaissance and the invention of
printing. The ancient writers of Greece and Rome were all recovered, and
were being greedily absorbed. Old thoughts, ideas, fancies,
knowledge--long buried and shamefully forgotten--had become new again.
The curiosity which followed the voyages of Drake or Raleigh to America,
followed also the explorations of the scholar in the ever-opening seas
of ancient literature. The age became one of wide and plenteous reading.
Moreover men read then, as they ought to read, for the matter. They tore
the heart out of books, from Homer to Seneca; they were greedy for the
substance, the thoughts, the imaginations, the fancies. If they could
not read the originals, they insisted on the translations. Nor did they
stay at the classics. They devoured books in Italian and French. Never
has England been so cosmopolitan, at least so European, in its
absorption of ideas and knowledge. It is only since the icebound
Puritan days that England has become insular, self-contained, in part
hugely conceited, and in part absurdly diffident, concerning itself. The
best work of Byron and Shelley aimed at breaking down this attitude, and
if we are again growing out of our insularity--which is open to much
doubt--it is in no small measure due to writers of their kind.

I do not offer all these commonplaces as information. I offer them
simply as reminders, and as a necessary introduction to the remark which
I have next to make--that the enlightenment, the education, above all
the spirit, derived from this wealth of reading were precisely that sort
of enlightenment and education and spirit which make for splendid
poetry. The learning of the day was in no wise scientific in the
narrower modern sense. It was not of the material and utilitarian, still
less of the sordid, kind. The age was the least Philistine of all epochs
of English history. We were not yet a nation of shopkeepers. It is
inevitable that nowadays an immense proportion of our study and reading
should run to social and economic questions, to applied sciences, to the
investigation of germs and gases, political problems, electric forces,
and manures. There is, I have often maintained, no necessary antagonism
whatever between these intellectual pursuits and the pursuit of art and
literature. One should be but the complement of the other. Goethe and
Shelley could combine the love of both science and poetry. If the
physicist and the artistic creator quarrel, then each is blind in one
mental eye.

Be that as it may, the fact for us just now is that the reading and
learning of those spacious Elizabethan days were such that, with the
brightening of the intellect, there was no dimming of the imagination.
On the contrary, the effect of the recovery and the spread of all the
rich, warm, many-coloured creations of the world's best minds, was to
steep the English nation in enthusiasm for great lyrics, great dramas,
any great production which carried with it the warmth and brightness and
exhilarating breath of noble poetry.

There was no weakening of character in this, no loss of practical
efficiency. A Sidney or a Raleigh could fight as well as turn a verse; a
Shakespeare could prove as sound a man of business as he was a poet.
Elizabethan men were all-round men, like the best men in Periclean
Athens.

Moreover, the recovered classics imparted not only enthusiasm, but
standards. An ambitious writer of the Elizabethan age must do his best
to live up to Homer and Plato, to Virgil and Catullus, just as he must
live up to Petrarch.

And one thing more. When Spenser or Shakespeare or their contemporaries
took up their pens, there was ready to their use the magnificent
Elizabethan English tongue--a store inexhaustibly rich, and all the
richer for being free from huge piles of needless rubbish, called
vocabulary, which modern times have heaped into the long-suffering
dictionary. The speech of the English Bible, which rightly seems to us
so inimitably noble in its simplicity, was but the contemporary speech
of educated England. Fine expressive words had not yet been soiled with
all ignoble use. They had not been debauched by slang or vulgarized by
affectation. The Elizabethan language possessed the noble solid grandeur
of a statue of Phidias or Angelo. At its best now it is apt to pose like
the enervated Apollo Belvedere or an over-refined production of Canova.
Says that vigorous writer, Lowell: "In reading Hakluyt's Voyages, we are
almost startled now and then to find that even common sailors could not
tell the story of their wanderings without rising to an almost Odyssean
strain, and habitually used a diction that we should be glad to buy back
from desuetude at any cost."

Here, then, is an epoch of history, prosperous, high-spirited, tolerant,
enterprising, joyous, alert for knowledge, enamoured of high fancies and
imagination. Here also is a language of ample scope and noble powers.
And into the midst of a London like this there comes up from Stratford,
we know not how, a man marvellously dowered with all those supreme gifts
which I have endeavoured to describe.

Towards the making of Shakespeare, Nature has contributed her utmost.
For the full encouragement of his genius the environment is most apt. It
remains briefly to see what experience did for him, or what he did for
himself. What was his preparation?

His origin was lowly, and, as with Robert Burns, we may be glad of it.
He thus saw intimately certain sides of life and conditions of men which
otherwise he might never have touched so closely. He learned to know all
their strange and naive humours, their ignorance and muddlement. From
them he realised those strong and elemental passions which finer folk
attenuate or disguise. He acquired a stock of sinewy and home-coming
Saxon phrase, which often stood him in good stead, and which forms no
small factor in his vast eloquence. He is manifestly a man who forgot
nothing. In after days he mingled with wits and players, with poets and
peers, but, while ever acquiring diction of wider range and choicer
degree, he kept always ready to hand the language of peasant and clown.
No man ever enjoyed more full instruction in the speech, the thoughts,
or the manners, of all degrees of men.

Of women toward the social summits he perhaps never knew so much, but he
had not studied their humbler sisters in vain, and beneath all the width
of ruff and opulence of silk, he knew well enough what primal feelings
lurked, what affections, what jealousies, what caprices of the eternal
feminine. As for the mere externals of their behaviour, he had abundant
opportunities of noting them.

When modern readers censure Shakespeare for dubious things which he
makes his gentlewomen say and do, they are apt to forget how surprising
were the canons of behaviour and decorum for gentlewomen under good
Queen Bess. For my part I am prepared in all such cases to give their
keen-eyed and marvellous contemporary the benefit of the doubt. He would
not represent ladies as any coarser than they were.

Of his education, in the narrower sense, we can really make sure of
little; but, like that of Burns, it was indisputably far more liberal
than the devotees of miracle are wishful to suppose. To-day no competent
inquirer doubts that, with the grammar-school at Stratford opening its
doors free to the son of John Shakespeare, burgess and alderman, the
opportunity was grasped by that struggling but ambitious person. Nor is
it doubted that there, under some Holofernes or Sir Hugh Evans, the boy
learned his Lyly's grammar, and read his share of Latin authors--his
Terence, Ovid, and Seneca, together with Baptista "the old Mantuan." In
French he assuredly did more than dabble, if his _Henry V_ be taken as
any proof. The other day Mr. Churton Collins essayed to prove, by an
array of quotations, that he was tolerably read in Greek. For my own
part I confess that I find, in the passages of AEschylus cited with
passages of Shakespeare, no more than happy coincidences in the
thinking of two kindred original minds. Yet some Greek at least he had.
Our witness is Ben Jonson. Rare Ben was himself a monument of learning,
and to him the ordinary mortal's modicum was but a trifle. When he
observes "and though thou hadst small Latin and less Greek," we should
do well to take him as meaning precisely what he says. If he had meant
"no Latin and no Greek," he would have written it so; the line would
have scanned as easily, and the desired point would have been made still
more effective. Add to these studies of Shakespeare his early study in
the Bible; early familiarity with that book, apart from all questions of
character and religion, will always shoot a rich woof of word and
thought through all the warp of writing.

Remember that Shakespeare at school was not distracted by hours of
mathematics and other agreeable but alien pursuits. Remember also--what
is so strangely forgotten--that he was a genius, whose capacious mind
would grasp and retain with unique facility. Remember that at school
there are boys and boys, and that, while some of them waste time in
laboriously endeavouring to assimilate the shells of knowledge along
with the oysters, others instinctively use their powers of secretion to
better purpose. Remember also that in Elizabethan times school-boy study
was a far more strenuous matter than it is in these degenerate days, and
that it was not chiefly directed towards examinations.

Be assured that Shakespeare's school education was as good as your own;
or, if you are not convinced of that, be at least assured that an
illiterate man never did, and never will, write even tolerable poetry.

It may seem as if I were acting the traitor to my own profession when I
rejoice that Shakespeare was never turned into what is technically
called a learned man. He was something better, he was an educated man.
You do not need erudition to be a creator of great works of imagination,
whether it be erudition concerning Latin syntax or concerning the Origin
of the Concept or concerning the life-history of the worm. What you
chiefly require to know is the human heart; and the best books for that
knowledge are human beings. Learning is after all but the milch-cow of
education. If Shakespeare had been as learned as Ben Jonson, or the
so-called University Wits, he might perchance have come to view mankind
too much through the medium of books, as Jonson himself did, instead of
through his own keen natural orbs of vision.

  His soul proud science never taught to stray
  Far as the Solar walk or Milky Way.

No! but he had soared otherwise to the Solar walk and the Galaxy, he had
gladdened at the sight of the sun flattering all Nature with his
sovereign eye, and he had felt the full sense of the nocturnal heavens,
thick inlaid with patines of bright gold. A learned man, says Bagehot,
may study butterflies till he forgets that they are beautiful. On the
other hand, it is only fair to say that he need forget nothing of the
kind. So a man may study Aristotle till he forgets that Aristotle
derived his psychology from men and not men from Aristotle.

The real scandalum to Greene and the scholar playwrights was not that
Shakespeare was illiterate, but that, not having studied by Cam or Isis,
he had no business to be literate. He was an "upstart crow," and what
right had he to be "as well able to bumbast out a blank verse as the
best of you?" The attitude was perhaps natural to jealous rivals, but it
should never have been used to show that Shakespeare was destitute of a
decent school education. Perhaps the most regrettable outcome of this
notion is that Milton should have written the amazing line which tells
how Shakespeare

  Warbled his native woodnotes wild.

Like the famous description of the crab as the little red fish which
walks backwards, it contains only three demonstrable errors. Shakespeare
does not warble, his notes are not woodnotes, and they are not wild.

He was, moreover, a man of the sort whose education--even book
education--never ceases. At a later date in London he manifestly
absorbed numerous translations. He knew his way about his Golding's Ovid
and North's Plutarch. Before he attempted those splendid poetical
exercises the _Venus and Adonis_, the _Lucrece_, and the early sonnets,
he had studied, like every one else, the models for sonneteers and
lyrists which came from Italy and France, from Petrarch or Du Bellay. It
is clear that he was familiar with the Essays of Montaigne. Earlier
English literature was no sealed book to him. He also read his own
contemporaries. Hence his _Lucrece_ is part Ovid, part Chaucer, part
Daniel or Watson; his _Venus and Adonis_ is part Ovid, part Lodge.

Better still than reading is conversation, the rubbing of wits and
furbishing of knowledge amid well-informed and bright-minded company.
Tradition tells us that Shakespeare was a member of that brilliant
coterie of the Mermaid Tavern, where rare Ben presided, as glorious John
presided at a later day in his favoured Coffee-house. Fuller describes
the wit-combats between Shakespeare and his learned confrere, and there
is no reason to doubt that the nimble man-of-war and the heavy galleon
fought many a bout. Of that coterie Beaumont writes to Jonson:--

          What things have we seen
  Done at the Mermaid! Heard words that have been
  So nimble and so full of subtle flame,
  As if that every one from whence they came
  Had meant to put his whole wit in a jest.

The classical quotation, the apt allusion, would fly freely in that
society. The matter of books new and old would be talked of and
discussed. For the purpose of Shakespeare, here was learning to be
picked up of the most telling sort. For, let us repeat, reading was then
pursued on high levels, and intellectual curiosity was eager. And let
us remember always that Shakespeare must have possessed an astonishing
instinct for seizing the essentials, which he shaped for himself "in the
quick forge and working-house of thought."

Also among the actors into whose company he was perpetually thrown there
were men who had, as we should call it, toured through England and
Scotland, and sometimes abroad to France, Germany, or Denmark. Scores of
his acquaintances must have travelled in Italy, even if they did not
return _diavoli incarnati_. Each man brought back description,
information, story, which the vivid imagination of Shakespeare, as he
listened, turned into abiding picture; and this, after he had chosen his
theme from Cinthio or Bandello or elsewhere, he would employ for the
background in his Verona or his Venice. How powerfully this can be done
by the imagination of genius is well exemplified in _Wilhelm Tell_,
which, from its opening verses of _Es laechelt der See_, carries in it
the whole sense of Swiss landscape and Swiss air, although Schiller had
never set foot in Switzerland.

Over and above all this, a man whose heart and whose interests are alike
engaged in a particular profession, be he physician, or inventor, or
artist, and who is ambitious to excel and prosper in that profession,
will be for ever alert to every hint or lesson which will make for
success. Shakespeare was from his heart a playwright; he was at the same
time a shrewd business man as partner in a theatre. Not only did he love
his work with all the passion of a creator, he was also concerned to
outvie his professional rivals. The plays of the Globe must be better
than the plays of the Fortune. He therefore studied existing dramas, in
order to surpass them, if possible, at every point. He began by
recasting or improving the plays of feebler writers, and so learned to
distinguish what was effective from what was not. He then went on in the
effort--an easy effort it proved to him--to transcend the plays of
writers of strength; to transcend them in construction, in
characterisation, in intellectual matter, in humour, and in diction; and
this means that his aim was, by compulsion, high.

The standard already set was a lofty one. Marlowe's mighty line was not
easy to surpass. There is nothing which provokes the best efforts of
genius so powerfully as formidable predecessors and rivals. It is as
with the forest trees; if some grow tall, the rest will struggle to
grow taller, so that they may escape from the shade into the sun. The
University Wits and scholar poets, who had "climbed to the height of
Seneca his style," deserve no little thanks for the making of our
Shakespeare. If his pieces were to be performed before the Queen's
Majesty, or the King's Majesty, and all that cultivated court, or if
they were to receive the applause of the learned Benchers of Gray's Inn,
they must attain a distinguished level both of living interest and of
admirable poetry. Shakespeare's precursors had rendered this high
perfection indispensable.

Let me insist also on another consideration, too often overlooked. The
Elizabethan stage was without scenery. The bare boards, a curtain at the
back, a table and inkstand to represent a court of justice, two or three
ragged foils to disgrace the name of Agincourt, and the imagination of
the audience did the rest. All the gorgeousness of the modern
_mise-en-scene_; all the painting, mechanical contrivances, and
elaborate furnishing, were wanting. There was none of that modern
realism, which consists in driving a real train across a painted country
or eating real sandwiches under a property tree. To a great extent all
this elaborate staging has been the death of dramatic art. Among the
Elizabethans, the interest depended solely on the action and the acting,
on the piece and its language. All these must be excellent. They were
not yet considered inferior to those of optical effect. The Elizabethans
listened with their minds, not solely with their eyes.

Thus, from his teaching at school, from his wide reading, from bright
and varied conversation, from assiduous exercise, Shakespeare derived
perpetual education. If, as Bacon declares, "reading maketh a full man,
conference a ready man, and writing an exact man," then Shakespeare was
trebly well equipped.

But there was another element in his training, which, for the dramatist,
was worth all the rest. This was his habit of observation, an
observation shrewd but sympathetic, of all sorts and conditions of men.
The experience lying between his youthful escapades at Stratford and his
sober retirement thither was doubtless a wonderful polychrome. He had
plodded his way among many peculiar folk as he passed from Warwickshire
to London by way of Banbury or Oxford. He had stopped at inns in strange
company of fools and knaves, pedlars, roisterers and swashbucklers. He
had hobnobbed with dull-pated village constables. He had consorted with

  Stephen Sly and old John Naps of Greece,
  And Peter Turf and Henry Pimpernel.

In London he had foregathered with Mrs. Quickly and haply with Doll
Tearsheet. All the whimsical miscellany of the Bohemians must have been
known to him. We need not doubt that he had sowed wild oats. Doubtless,
if he lived the same life now, he would be looked upon askance by good
people who knew nothing of his temptations. But he was no neurotic; no
genius of the first rank ever is or was. He never lost control of
himself, and so did not, like some of his brilliant contemporaries,
tread the primrose path which leads down to futility and death. He was
always pre-eminently sane. While composing his transcendent _Lear_ and
_Othello_, he was suing Philip Rogers for L1 15s. 10d. While his fancy
roamed in the fairyland of _Midsummer Night's Dream_, his investments
were in the highest degree judicious.

Elizabethan life, whether in town or country, whether among earls or
tapsters, was infinitely more frank, varied, and picturesque than it can
ever be again. Men and women displayed more freely their natural
idiosyncrasies. Nor did the traveller rush at fifty miles an hour
through all this variegated world. He saw it lingeringly and intimately,
as Chaucer saw his Pilgrims, or Goldsmith his Village, or Scott his
Border peasants.

Bagehot says truly that, to have experiences, one must have the
experiencing nature. To make observations, one must have an observing
nature, and that nature Shakespeare possessed as no other man has
possessed it. He noted everything. So might another, but the superlative
merit of Shakespeare's observation is that he noted all and always with
humorous and universal sympathy, with an eye absolutely free from the
jaundice of Carlyle, as it was free from the bookish astigmatism of Ben
Jonson. His mental retina formed a perfect mirror to hold up to nature.
Whether it be true or not that he had seen a veritable Dogberry at
Grendon, Bucks, it is certain that he had seen the type somewhere. Best
of all, he had not seen it in irritation or contempt. If we are told
that Shakespeare presents "no entire and perfect hero, no entire and
perfect villain," it is simply because he had--like ourselves--never set
eyes on either of those monsters. He also never made the mistake of
reading himself into other men, any more than he made the artistic
mistake of unlocking his heart and taking a hundred and fifty sonnets to
do it. His clear objective picture is never vitiated by the desire to
preach. He has no system of ethics, politics, or anything else to teach.
Doubtless Shakespeare had his own views on all important matters of life
and death; but in the drama the artist's business is to present us with
the kaleidoscope of life, not to insist upon our interpreting it to
certain ends, of which he is to be the arbiter. You cannot, perhaps,
read _Lear_ without being a better man, or _Hamlet_ without being a
wiser; but you are permitted to be better and wiser in your own way, and
not in some way ready mapped out for you. Do not let us talk of the
ethical purpose of Shakespeare's plays. Let us only speak of their
ethical effect. What that effect is has been expressed by Shelley thus:
"The gentleness and elevation of mind connected with sacred emotions
render men more amiable, more generous and wise, and lift them out of
the dull vapours of the little world of self."

Last element in the making of our Shakespeare was one which I dare
hardly name, in fear of the deluge of contempt which the minor prophets
of artistry will pour upon my head. Well, I take my Philistine courage
in my hands, and say that he was thus great because he never wrote for
any special class of the illuminati; he never troubled his soul with any
other theory of art than that it should present interesting and
universal truth, truth so manifestly true that it should appeal to all
the world of men and women. When Angelo was asked by a sculptor in what
light a certain statue should be viewed, his answer was, "in the light
of the public square." A statue which will not bear the criticism of
that place is assuredly untrue. Shakespeare wrote for the public square,
not for exhibition in the gallery of some ephemeral school of taste, nor
for the private collection of some self-elected critic, who holds a
pouncet-box while he applies his little artificial canons of
correctness.

Doubtless a man who writes in this large massive spirit, overlooks some
trifling blemishes. "Nice customs curtesy to great kings." "Great men,"
says Landor, "often have greater faults than smaller men can find room
for." Shakespeare has his, but, of all wise things that Ruskin has said
of art, this--which describes our Shakespeare--is perhaps the truest:
"There are two characters in which all greatness of art consists--first,
the earnest and intense seizing of natural facts; then the ordering
those facts by strength of human intellect, so as to make them, for all
who look upon them, to the utmost serviceable, memorable and
beautiful."




Literature and Life


The Literature Society of Melbourne meets monthly in order to assimilate
true literature and to study its principles. If its President is
entitled to speak its corporate mind, it approaches this task in a
grateful and docile spirit.

There is, I believe, no necessity to defend the existence and aims of a
Literature Society. It would be enough if we simply confessed that we
meet for the enjoyment of a rational and not unelevating pleasure. It
would be enough if we said that literature, like pictorial art and
music, is one of the recognized resources for the gladdening of life,
and that we meet in order to get as much of that high refreshment as
possible in each other's company. And this, indeed, we do so far frankly
acknowledge and confess.

But we also claim that there is a more serious aspect of our
association. We believe that great literature and its zealous study
produce most powerful effects, both upon our inner selves and upon the
value and happiness of our lives; that they supply us with a rich
equipment, both for our private thinking and feeling and also for social
action and social intercourse; that from great literature we derive
indefeasible resources, which form glorious company in the midst of
solitude, abundant wealth in the midst of poverty, and an unfailing
refuge from the too frequent harshness of circumstance.

Our objects are not those of mere dilettanti, although for my part I
should blame no association which boldly inscribed "dilettanti" on its
breezy flag. Our "literature" is not mere elegant trifling--although men
who do choose to spend an occasional evening in trifling with elegance
are men whom we can still afford to respect and perhaps to envy. But
literature, as we understand it, is no trifling, however elegant. By
literature we mean what Milton has called the "seasoned life of man
preserved and stored up in books"; and the seasoned life of man is no
trifle. We mean something of which the influence--or the effluence--may
profoundly determine the quality of our lives, both as they affect
others and as they affect ourselves.

       *       *       *       *       *

We do not mean simply printed books. The vaster proportion of what is
printed is not literature. It may be statements of fact and items of
information; it may be sound science and unimpeachable record; it may be
truism; it may be platitude; it is often sheer bathos or doggerel. We do
not count these things as literature. A good deal of singing,
piano-beating and tin-whistling is not music. It is only in virtue of a
certain fine quality that books are literature. According to Emerson,
literature is "a record of the best thoughts." According to Matthew
Arnold it is "the best that has been thought and said in the world." If
literature is a collection of great books, then we may recall Milton's
description of a great book, as "the precious life-blood of a
master-spirit, embalmed and treasured up on purpose to a life beyond
life." And so literature becomes a store of inexhaustible vials, filled
with the most generous elixir decanted from the world's master-spirits.
Listen again to Vauvenargues: "Good literature is the essence of the
best minds, the abstract of their knowledge, the fruit of their long
vigils." Or let us drop metaphor, and accept, as entirely satisfying and
luminous, the account given by Mr. John Morley, that "literature
consists of all books ... where moral truth and human passion are
touched with a certain largeness, sanity, and attraction of form."

       *       *       *       *       *

Such is the sense in which we interpret the term "literature."

The range and variety of such true literature are as wide and varied as
human genius. It includes, for instance, the novel, whenever the novel,
as in Balzac, Thackeray, and Fielding, shows this fine, large, sane,
attractive touch; it includes verse, when, and only when, moral truth
and human passion are touched finely or nobly in this way. Its forms are
manifold, and its themes include--

  All thoughts, all passions, all delights
  Whatever stirs this mortal frame.

In its shape and form literature may be a hard-headed essay of Bacon or
an impassioned lyric of Shelley; its sound may be the majestic
organ-peal of Milton or the sumptuous flute music of Keats; its mood may
be the scathing fervour of Carlyle or the genial humour of Lamb; its
manner may be the rugged strength of Browning or the fastidious grace of
Arnold; but, whatever it be, it everywhere contains this high
distinction; it touches some vital truth or human passion with "a
certain largeness and sanity and attraction of form." What is not sane
and large and expressive is not the literature which we meet to study
and absorb.

Literature, then, is no mere "elegant trifling." It is no mere _belles
lettres_. We do not, indeed, pretend, and none but a human machine will
pretend, to despise the graces and charms of _belles lettres_. That
would be as ridiculous and inhuman as to despise the delights of music
or architecture. But literature is more than _belles lettres_; it is
something of far superior intellectual weight and dignity, of far
superior moral force and energy. In its contents it is a body of the
wisest, most suggestive, most impressive utterance of the world's best
minds, at their best moments, from the Psalmist to Wordsworth, from the
_Iliad_ to _The Ring and the Book_. Meanwhile its outward vesture is
full of art and beauty.

And without going further we ask, how can one stand in habitual
communion with wise, seminal and impressive speech; how can one
saturate oneself with its wisdom and energy, without being the better
equipped for the demands of both the life within and the life without?
"Consider," says Emerson, "what you have in the smallest chosen library.
A company of the wisest and wittiest men that could be picked out of all
civil countries have set in their best order the results of their wisdom
and learning." Well, let us keep company like that, and what is the
result? The value of great literature is that it conveys an endless
number of eternal truths for the use and enrichment of human life:
moreover it conveys them by a medium of language of such peculiar power
and beauty that those truths penetrate keenly into the heart and brain,
and, at least in some measure, and often in very large measure, they
find a fixed and perennial lodgment there. They enter the blood which
reddens our whole mental complexion.

       *       *       *       *       *

This is true of literature in general, but, though the wisdom and the
wit and the passion are found in both prose and verse, the crowning form
of literature--and that which all literary societies inevitably study
most--is great poetry. The supreme mastery and our supreme interest lie
with Dante or Shakespeare or Goethe. It is astounding how commonly the
function and the brain power of the great poet are misconceived and
underrated. The supreme poets are no dainty or fragile sentimentalists;
in reality they are the very flower of human penetration. Not because
they write in splendid verse. That, indeed, is the appropriate vehicle
of their power; the harmonies and melodies of verse represent and
reproduce the tone and colour vibrations of their singularly rich
natures; but verse is only their vehicle. These great writers are
supreme, not for this versification, however magnificent, but because
that utterance of theirs is the voice of the seer, the voice of a
marvellous insight into vital truths, of a sane and ripe philosophy of
life, of a wide and profound sympathy with the myriad thoughts and
emotions of mankind. They write in verse simply because, as Hazlitt
describes it, poetry is "the most vivid form of expression that can be
given to our conception of anything." They write in verse because Nature
herself insists on having--

  High and passionate thoughts
  To their own music chanted.

Their verse alone is a charm and a joy. But their primary value to us
is that they are among the rare beings who have possessed "the vision
and the faculty divine," who, to quote Ruskin, can "startle our lethargy
with the deep and pure agitation of astonishment." There is about them
nothing incomprehensibly transcendental, nothing "unpractical," nothing
aloof from the life we live--if we live it fully--but wholly the
contrary. Those who say otherwise are but exposing their own short
sight, their own creeping imagination, their own narrowness of sympathy.

Take Shakespeare. What he possesses is not only the most stupendous
eloquence ever owned by man. It is profound knowledge of humanity,
gathered by a keen and open-eyed Olympian contemplation of all sorts and
conditions of men, from the egregious Bottom, and Dogberry the muddled,
up to Hamlet and Imogen; it is the broad myriad-minded understanding
which feels with every class, and, withal, suffers even fools gladly.
His prime value is that he saw--saw life steadily and saw it whole--saw
clearly into and round that thought, that sentiment, that passion, that
apparent contradiction, which commoner minds have only perceived as a
vague nebula. It is so that Carlyle describes the poet: "An inspired
soul, once more vouchsafed to us direct from Nature's own fire heat, to
see the truth and speak it." The sovereign poets do this with such
godlike ease that we seldom realize their vast achievement.

It is not the greatest masters who surround their expression with a
haze, even with a glory haze. It is not the greatest masters who express
things vaguely because they see them dimly. They see the thing and speak
it.

But the supreme poet not only sees thus with his intellect; he
experiences with his feelings. He possesses "the experiencing nature."
Emerson declares that "among partial men he stands for the complete man,
the representative of man, in virtue of having the largest power to
receive and impart." This is, of course, said of the best; it is not to
be said of the scribblers and the poetasters in their thousands; it is
not to be said of the innumerable warblers whose feeble songs "grate on
their scrannel pipes of wretched straw"; it is not true even of a
canorous rhetorician, such as Swinburne, or a dreamy teller of tales
like William Morris; but it is beyond question true of a Shakespeare or
a Goethe. These were men of three-storied brain and also of thrice
capacious soul.

Says Coleridge: "No man was ever yet a great poet without being a
profound philosopher." For poetry is the blossom and the fragrance of
all human knowledge, human thoughts, human passions, emotions, language;
and Carlyle tells us of Goethe, "His resources have been accumulated
from nearly all the provinces of human intellect and activity," while
his culture was learned "not from art and literature alone, but also by
action and passion in the rugged school of experience."

It is, therefore, not for nothing that Lowell declares--

  I believe the poets; it is they
  Who utter wisdom from the central deep.

Nor is it for nothing that Wordsworth declares poetry to be "the breath
and finer spirit of all knowledge." The student of poetry may doubtless
be studying aesthetics, but he is not merely dallying with aesthetics. If
he is communing thoughtfully with mighty spirits like these--the
penetrators to the central deep--is he not gaining, by the most royal
road known to humanity, the most liberal education for the fullest life?

       *       *       *       *       *

But we are not, it is true, always with the greatest poets. We are not
always breathing the keen air of the very mountain tops. There is
permanent value to be drawn also from writers in a rank below these
greatest seers and creators. A Pope or a Dryden has packed into clear,
rememberable, and serviceable shape considerable masses of wisdom and
good sense--shrewd and enlightening, if not always lofty or original.
The terse and pregnant essays of Bacon, the brusque, cant-hating wit and
wisdom of Samuel Johnson, the critical sagacities of Hazlitt, the
remorseless searchings of Carlyle, the brilliant expositions of
Macaulay--to listen to these, to ponder and assimilate their best, is
both to train the mind and to furnish it. Nay, even if a Plato or a
Ruskin leave not one single dogma consciously grasped by the student's
faith, they have, nevertheless, been in the highest degree invigorating
and ennobling company. To associate with a Scott is to associate with
high and wholesome character.

       *       *       *       *       *

Such are the great writers of the first rank and second rank who form
great literature; and to them the student has recourse when in quest of
"the best that has been thought and said in the world." If what he
gathers is not applied by him to life, then the fault is his own. If he
does apply it, what then? Is there any such application, practical and
living?

This is said to be a "practical" age. If I know anything whatever of
history, I maintain that this age is no more "practical" than any other.
All sensible ages are practical. The present age, it is true, possesses
more ingenious and labour-increasing machinery, and, when it is minded
to do what it euphoniously describes as "hustle," it can doubtless
"hustle" with a more deplorable rapidity than in times ancient. But it
is not one whit more "practical." If we ask for a practical application
of literature to life, so did the Greeks and so did the Romans. The
object of their literary study was to fit a man to play his part in
affairs, to know his world, to know both himself and other men, and to
train him for a distinguished social place. They knew that literary
study did this; if it had not, they would have called it a pastime, and
left it to provide for itself as such. A training for the living of a
life--is that object not sufficiently practical for the modern man? Is,
after all, the final cause of society to be simply manufacturing and
underselling, eating, drinking, and sleeping? None of us really believe
that. We cannot glance at our public libraries, our art-galleries and
museums, and seriously assert that society even looks like believing it.
Any one who maintains that there actually and consciously prevails such
a basely materialistic meaning of "practical" is but a poor cynic
maligning the world which tolerates him. When the world calls for a
"practical" outcome of literary study, we mean what the Greeks meant,
and what the Romans meant--some discoverable adaptation of the results
of literary study to the various activities of human life--human life in
its fulness--life of the helpful citizen, life of the partner in social
intercourse, life in the silence of oneself.

Go and fetch in the first respectable-looking man from the street, and
prove to him that literary study tends, as Bacon requires, "to civilize
the life of man"; prove to him that, as Montesquieu requires, it
"increases the excellence of our nature, and makes an understanding
being yet more understanding," and the man--type though he may be of the
modern practical age--will admit your claim and applaud your effort.

       *       *       *       *       *

Well, literary study, to be worth anything beyond entertainment, ends in
application to life, and to that end it is admirably fitted. I am not
intending to compare in detail the value of one study with that of
another. I make no pretence at estimating their relative potentialities.
That proceeding may be left to the ignorance or the intolerance of the
man of one idea. He will settle it for us, and we will duly disregard
him. It is, for example, not the cultivated scientist, not the wise
scientist, who urges those huge and exorbitant claims which are
sometimes advanced for physical science in these days--for electricity
and chemistry and _ologies_. The true scientist may perhaps prefer that
his kine should be the fat kine--for he is but human--but he does not
desire them to be the only kine and to eat up all the rest.

But, though we are not to compare all the possibilities of this and that
study, we can appeal to one unquestionable fact. When it comes to the
tasks of citizenship, to settling human questions for legislation and
the arguments of justice, to intelligent voting and the like, the
student of those human documents which we call literature is found more
often to the front than the student of anything else whatsoever. It
would be worth while, if we had the time, to make a list of the great
statesmen and great initiators who have been men of letters or of
literary culture. Not physical science, not the region of mathematics,
seem to have equipped the mind so fully for this complex, this
motive-determined department of life.

Literature deals with man and the mind of man, and, whether it be right
or no to hold that "the proper study of mankind is man," we must
acknowledge that man, and the workings of his mind and spirit, play the
preponderating part in the region of social order and social happiness.
It is literature and no other study which embraces the wide, the
all-round, the long-practised survey "of man, of nature, and of human
life" necessary for a luminous intelligence.

A Huxley will remind us that, in any case, what we are bound to study is
"not merely things and their forces, but men and their ways, and the
fashioning of the affections and the will." Doubtless we must observe as
well as read. But our own observation of life, however shrewd, is
insufficient; it is narrow and partial. We see but the minutest fraction
of time and the minutest fraction of humanity. It is from literature
that we learn most vividly and most efficaciously all that can really be
known "of men and their ways, the affections and the will."

There are, of course, self-complacent human beings who cannot realize
that past literature has in this domain anything to teach them. They
imagine that the world was born when they were born. These persons we
must perhaps leave to the error of their ways. In earnest truth, there
is no real literature too foreign or too old--nor, for the matter of
that, too near or too young--to enlighten us concerning human feeling,
human thought, and human motive. In these things the world did not have
to wait for wisdom and insight until the modern scientific epoch. Age
cannot wither the essential truth nor stale the potency of great
literature in this respect. Aristophanes, Thucydides, Plato, Tacitus,
Dante, or Shakespeare would have nothing to learn of the human mind and
heart from Haeckel or from Herbert Spencer.

Nor, again, has human capacity--thinking capacity--appreciably advanced
since great literature first arose. "Telephones," says Mr. Frederic
Harrison, "microphones, pantoscopes, steam presses, and ubiquity
engines in general may, after all, leave the poor human brain no bigger
and no stronger than the brains of men who heard Moses speak and saw
Aristotle pondering over a few worn rolls of crabbed manuscript." One
assuredly cannot say of the twentieth-century man with more truth than
Shakespeare's Hamlet said it of man three centuries ago--certainly not
with more truth than it might have been said of Shakespeare
himself--"How noble in reason! How infinite in faculty! In apprehension
how like a god!" There was, indeed, none of the modern scientific
terminology in Thucydides, or AEschylus, or Aristotle, but, in respect of
sheer brain power and sanity, literature is at least as lofty in
AEschylus as in Browning, in Aristotle as in Spencer. That is why the
classics--classics of all languages, classics of Greece, of Italy, of
England--are for ever fresh, and can never die.

       *       *       *       *       *

Literature, therefore, is a mass of written enlightenment concerning
human beings, human hearts, and human thought. Name, if you will, any
other study which could better fit a man for grappling with the problems
of humanity in that portion of his life which we call public.

But man is something more than a public instrument. We cannot separate
the man of citizen life, playing his part in the practical world, from
the man of private intercourse, and the man of inward culture and
resource. There is a sufficiently "practical" outcome of literary study
if it makes the man wiser in himself, if it makes him truer in his
judgment, richer and broader in his feelings, makes him put forth
antennae of tact and sympathy, if also it supplies him with such inward
resources that he can dispense with unattainable luxuries or with vulgar
methods of passing his time. Such results are surely a profoundly useful
application of the results of study to life.

Take a human being in the loneliness--the absolute isolation or the
intellectual isolation--of the bush; take one who is disabled by illness
or disease; take one who is perforce environed all his days by company
which is ignoble and dull; take one who can ill afford any of the
distractions of the wealthy. How shall he keep alive his higher part, or
fill his leisure with contentment and delight, except by constant
intercourse with the mightiest minds in the history of the thinking
world? Said Rousseau: "Let one destine my pupil to the army, to the
church, the bar, or anything else; yet, before his parents have chosen
his vocation, nature has called him to the vocation of human life;
living is the trade I want to teach him." All the rest is but means to
an end. "We live," asserts the poet, "by admiration, hope, and love."
And nothing can stimulate these sensations like great literature.

       *       *       *       *       *

In this connexion I must insist for a few minutes upon the relations of
literature to the intellectual idol of to-day--to wit science--science
in the popular, if inaccurate, sense. I have to maintain that
literature--and particularly poetry--is the indispensable ally and
complement of science; that it is, in the end, the means by which the
essential truths of science will reach their application to life; that
it supplies the force by which the great facts of science are made to
operate for good upon our thinking and our feeling. Literature supplies
that which science alone cannot supply.

I am aware there are those who fancy that science itself is sufficient
guide and equipment for human existence. Huxley, if I remember rightly,
asserted in his nonage that science would even afford us a newer and
more enlightened morality. But I have never heard any scientist repeat
that doctrine; I have never heard any scientist claim that the altruism
of the Sermon on the Mount or of Buddha had been superseded by the dry
light of scientific conclusions. Physical science and its inventions
have not obviously advanced the delicacy of sentiments or of ethical
ideas. Chaucer's notion of a "parfit gentil knight," and his "poure
parsoun of a toun" could not be bettered for anything discovered in all
the five centuries since. It is not easy to see how science can
stimulate us to warm-hearted charity, to self-sacrificing love and
loyalty, to patriotism, and other manifestations of qualities which we
universally recognize as virtues, and as things without which human life
would be a dreary and intolerable waste. Without them suicide were
almost best. And the cultivation of the emotions belongs to literature,
not to objective science.

Will you pardon me if I repeat an illustration which has been used
before, though I forget where? There are two ways of regarding tears.
They may be the infinitely appealing outward and visible signs of some
great inward troubling of the spirit. They may "rise in the heart and
gather to the eyes" from "the depths of some divine despair." On the
other hand they may be what they were to a certain character in Balzac.
The physicist Baltazar retorts in answer to an outburst of tears, "Ah!
tears! I have analysed them; they contain a little phosphate of lime,
chloride of sodium, mucin, and water!" I do not happen to know if that
is a correct analysis, but I do know that both these aspects of tears
are true aspects. There is nothing contradictory about them. The one is
the aspect of objective science; the other--the human and moral
aspect--is that of literature. Is there any doubt which aspect
ultimately concerns us the more as human beings, livers of human lives?

There is no conflict between science and literature, especially between
science and poetry.

The astronomer tells us the immense distances and immense sizes of the
stars--great facts, most interesting facts; but the imagination of
literature gets hold of all the vastness and wonder and suggestion of
such a universe, and by the gift of expression it makes us realize them,
makes us feel an awe and admiration, which may at least lend some
chastening to minds which sorely need it. I believe that all true men
of science recognise this power of literature, and that they are no more
satisfied than the veriest poet with the mere facts of nature without
the beauty and marvel and moral stimulation. They do not wish that a
flower should be rendered less beautiful because they dissect it and
classify it under a hard dog-Latin name. "A primrose by the river's brim
a dicotyledon was to him, and it was nothing more." That is not their
attitude.

There is not much influence on the higher side of life to be got from a
study of nothing else but metals, or nothing else but triangles, or
nothing else but germs. But literature exerts a most potent influence on
this higher side of life; for it not only supplies thoughts and
expresses feelings, but it is in itself--thanks to its expression--a
force to make them felt and to give them effective life. It not only
instructs--it moves. For, remember, great literature was never produced
by cynicism nor by affectation: men of weak convictions or feelings have
never been supreme writers. As at Athens, at Rome, or in Elizabethan
England, great literature belongs to periods full of animation, of
enterprise, of high ideals, of strong aims or strong beliefs. In that
prevailing spirit the great writers share, and they impart it forever to
us who read. There exhales from what they write an inspiring power of
earnestness. As Longinus phrases it, we seem to be possessed by a divine
effluence from those mighty minds.

It is often complained, in regard to our schools, that moral teaching
without religious stimulation is futile. The reason assents, but the
will is unmoved. "We want," says Shelley, "the generous impulse to act
that which we perceive." Great literature lends this impulse. Let us
have plenty of great literature in our schools.

I do not, indeed, claim that literature always and completely conveys
the requisite impulsion, but I claim that, in its impressiveness or its
charm, by its appeal to the imagination and the sensibilities, it can go
far, as Heine thought of Schiller's poetry, to "beget deeds." "Let me,"
said Fletcher, "make the songs of a people, and let who will make its
laws." "Certainly," declares that flower of chivalry, Sir Philip Sidney,
"I must confess ... I never heard the old song of Percy and Douglas that
I found not my heart moved more than with a trumpet." Bare psychology
teaches us; bare history teaches us; but great literature both teaches
and inspires; it gives not only light, but warmth. "Reading good books
of morality," Bacon sadly confesses, "is a little flat and dead." Great
literature puts the breath of life into this deadness. Not merely to
peruse, but to assimilate, the _King Lear_ of Shakespeare or the _Vita
Nuova_ of Dante cannot fail to turn the current of our minds strongly
towards right feeling--in the one case of duty and compassion, in the
other of purest loyalty in love.

The most vivid conception of high conduct--the one which we can least
shake off--is hardly to be gathered from the didactic moral treatise; it
is hardly ever derived from set sermons, unless the preacher impose it
upon us by some magnetism of his personality; it is more often impressed
by some literary embodiment which has been made to live and move and
have a being--by a Cordelia or a Jeanie Deans, by a Galahad or a Parson
Adams. Such embodiments as these are instruments for that which Matthew
Arnold holds to be the object of poetry, namely, the powerful and
beautiful application of "ideas to life."

But, it may be objected, the influence of a writer may indeed thus
stimulate, but what if it stimulates irrationally and amiss? Yet
herein, precisely, lies one great superiority of the study of
literature. It is the best means known to humanity of encouraging
breadth of mind, many-sidedness of comprehension. That is, of course,
with the proviso that your literary worship is not a monotheism. The
genuine literary student is not a student of one author, much less of
one book. It is true that Shakespeare is in himself almost a compendium
of humanity, and that to study Shakespeare alone is as profitable as to
study a score of less comprehensive mortals. Nevertheless, even
Shakespeare has his limitations. He could not wholly escape the
limitations of his times, spacious though these were.

Literary study in the proper sense is as wide as time and opportunity
can make it. It includes alike the _Divine Comedy_ and the human comedy.
As far as possible it ignores differences of nationality, of language,
of date. It seeks to know the best that has been thought and said in the
world, wherever and whenever. It ransacks the Hebrew mind, the Greek
mind, the Roman mind, the Italian, French, German and English mind. It
gathers opinions, suggestions, points of view, elements of culture from
all sources. If Shakespeare holds the mirror up to nature as she shows
herself in human actions and passions, Wordsworth reflects the
manifestations of her spirit as seen in her physical works. If Homer
gives us the naive and simple grandeur of pagan life, Dante gives us the
mystic grandeur of the Catholic conception, Milton the severer grandeur
of the semi-Puritan. The literary student thus approaches truth from
every side. He approaches it variously with Bacon, with Johnson, with
Voltaire, with Goethe, with Wordsworth, with Carlyle, with Newman. He
feels the various emotions of a hundred lyrists. Led by a score of
dramatists and novelists he sees into the complexities of human
character, motive and mood. Getting away from the narrow and biassed
bickerings, gropings, and caprices of the day, he associates with
hundreds of the best minds of the past, whose interests were altogether
outside the temporary prejudices and passions which now surround us. And
what preparation for life could surpass that of the student who has thus
taken all literature for his province? He is in reality better equipped
with practical psychology than many a professed psychologist.

The professional student of history studies history from books in which
long series of facts and their possible relations are presented in the
light in which they are seen by Mommsen or Gibbon or Macaulay or Froude.
Meanwhile the student of literature sees incidentally, but, so far as he
goes, more vividly, into the actual life of breathing men through the
legend of _Beowulf_ or the _Vision of Piers Plowman_, through Chaucer or
the _Spectator_, through Ben Jonson's _Humours_ or Horace Walpole's
Letters, through _Clarissa Harlowe_ or _Pride and Prejudice_.

I know, of course, full well one frequent consequence of the
broad-mindedness which results. I realize how promptly the unread man,
filled to the lips with the frothy spirit of his own infallibility, will
condemn him whose knowledge of men and motives makes him pause and
suspend his judgment. But what of that? Some one has said that thinking
makes you wise but weak, while action makes you narrow but strong. A
terse sentence, but one which will not bear inspection. The man of
half-lights who acts with a promptitude often disastrous, is indeed
narrow, but I deny that he is strong. He is opinionated and audacious.
Far stronger, in a more reasonable world, is the man who can withhold
his yea or nay, when neither yea nor nay happens to be the one answer
of that truth which is great and will prevail.

       *       *       *       *       *

These, then, are the virtues which we claim for the study of literature.

Literature enlarges our imagination; it expands our judgment; it widens
our sympathies; it enriches the world to our eyes and minds, by
revealing to us the marvels, delights, tendernesses and suggestions
which are all around us in man and nature; it keeps alive our better
part in places and circumstances when that better part might perish with
disease and atrophy; it continually irrigates with benign influences the
mind which might grow arid and barren, and so it enables all the little
seeds and buds of our intellectual and moral nature to germinate and
produce some fruit.

And, therefore, this Society meets to study literature, and, as I said
at the beginning, it meets to study in a spirit which is open-minded,
grateful, and docile.




The Future of Poetry


A thoughtful friend of mine--but one who withal affects a philistinism
which I know to be only skin-deep--is fond of assuring me that "poetry"
can no longer justify its existence, that the world of the future will
regard it as a trifling and artificial thing, and that therefore serious
men will cease to devote themselves either to producing it or to reading
it. In our discussions upon the subject, I have asked him whether he
merely means that men will cease to compose verses, or whether he
believes that "the poetry" is actually going out of life and literature,
and that the imaginative and emotional way of looking at things, which
belongs to "poetry," will give place to the rigidly philosophical and
practical. He answers, of course, that men will continue to have
ardours, aspirations, joys, sorrows, and sympathies, which they will and
must express as vividly as they can, to their own relief and to the
solace or encouragement of their fellow-men; but he asserts that all
this can be done in prose, and will be done in prose, seeing that rhymes
and regular numbers of syllables are a sort of primitive barbarian
device, mechanical, cramping, and, in a certain way, productive of
untruth. When we press this latter point, it is admitted that prose
itself is capable of inexhaustible rhythms and magnificent melodies, and
that these qualities show signs of being more and more developed, more
and more adapted to the mood and sentiment of that which is to be
expressed. When we get thus far, it appears that we have been very much
in agreement all along. To me--and by this time, I hope, to him--poetry
is nothing else but this same impassioned expression of ardour and
emotion, sensibility and imagination, no matter whether the form it
takes be obviously regulated verse or subtly rhythmic "prose."

But, when we have reached our agreement, there are others who confront
us with that too well-known sentence from Macaulay: "In an enlightened
age there will be much intelligence, much science, much philosophy,
abundance of just classification and subtle analysis, abundance of wit
and eloquence, abundance of verses and even of good ones; but little
poetry. Men will judge and compare, but they will not create." It is a
fashion nowadays to make little of Macaulay as a thinker, to damn him
with faint praise as a brilliant rhetorician. It is not to join
unreservedly in that censure, if we remark that Macaulay pronounced his
dictum on poetry when he was very young. But, young or not, he utterly
misses a sound view of the nature and scope of poetry. He asserts that
"men will judge and compare, but they will not create"; and
particularly, he meant, create epics and romances. If Macaulay is to be
taken literally, poetry is to him mainly the creation of stories; it is
summed up in _Iliads_, _AEneids_, _Orlandos_, _Faerie Queenes_. Let us
for the moment suppose--what, however, there is no ground in fact or
reason for supposing--that creations such as these, at least in verse,
will engage enlightened men no more. Is there no room for lyrics and for
the poetical expression of great truths? "But little poetry!" What else
should this imply, except that there will be but little feeling or
emotion, but little ecstasy, hope, grief, loveliness, awe, or mystery in
all the "wide gray lampless deep unpeopled world" of the future? It is
these things which are the most copious and most stimulating
subject-matter of poetry, and Macaulay surely never meant to say, and
never did say, that these would some day fail.

The poets of the last generation are dead--Tennyson, Browning, Arnold,
Morris, Swinburne. The great "makers" have passed away, and there remain
to us but certain highly dexterous word-artificers and melodists, a
varied chorus of dainty, musical, scholarly, but mostly uninspired,
writers of verse. We have passed the crest of the poetical wave, and are
sunk into its trough. It is not unnatural, therefore, that we should, at
this particular juncture, feel some misgivings. Finding no immediate
successor worthy to fill the place of those great departed, we cry out
in our haste that "science" is killing poetry, or that "democracy" is
crushing out poetry, or that we are "living too fast" for poetry. Poetry
was dead in England for a century and three-quarters between Chaucer and
Spenser; in a large sense it was dead for four generations between
Milton and Burns. In Italy there was almost no real poetry for the
thirteen hundred years between Virgil and Dante. In France nearly two
centuries before Victor Hugo may be treated as a blank. Yet the revival
came, and came with strength. We forget, or do not know, that the
complaint of the decay of poetry is a hackneyed tale, familiar to
Addison as to Macaulay. We do not, in fact, look the question frankly in
the face. When one assures us of the decline of poetry as a fact and as
inevitable, we have a right to ask him two questions. One is: "What
signs of weakening and degeneracy in poetic genius, or of failing
interest in its creations, do you actually discover in the course of
history?" the other: "From what arguments are we to conclude that the
future must of necessity prove barren of poetry?" Is there evidence in
fact? Is there in theory?

We can imagine some champion of the Muses pointing to the mass and
excellence of the poetry which has been created during the last hundred
years; to the work of Goethe, Schiller, Heine, Wordsworth, Shelley,
Byron, Keats, Coleridge, Scott, Beranger, Victor Hugo, De Musset,
Leopardi, Longfellow, Browning, Arnold, Tennyson, Morris; to the immense
and varied fertility, to the creative and emotional power, of makers
like these, displayed during the most "enlightened"--that is to say, we
presume, the most rationalistic and scientific--century the world has
yet passed through. We can imagine him asking whether, in all the past
history of the human race, so great a zeal for poetry, romantic,
lyrical-descriptive, speculative, has ever been manifested at once in
such force and width in England, Germany, France, America. And we can
fancy him completely satisfied with that single phenomenon. We can also
imagine him setting opinion against opinion, outweighing Macaulay with
the greater name of Wordsworth and Macaulay's disciples with the name of
Matthew Arnold. We can hear him answering the assertion that in "the
advance of civilization" poetry must necessarily decline, with the
declaration of the most single-hearted poet of our century, that "poetry
is the first and last of all knowledge--it is immortal as the heart of
man. If the labours of men of science should ever create any material
revolution, direct or indirect, in our condition, and in the impressions
which we habitually receive, the poet will sleep then no more than at
present; he will be ready to follow the steps of the man of science ...
carrying the sensation into the midst of the objects of the science
itself." And we can suppose our champion willing to abide in that faith,
because "the master hath said it."

But it is our present concern to go somewhat more closely to the heart
of the question, to consider without bias how much truth there really is
in this prediction that poetry must of necessity decline with the
advance of science and the "progress" of society.

Of the preliminary question what _is_ poetry, we may spare the
discussion. If there are those who are misled by words and who will
insist that poetry is simply identical with good expression in verse, it
will be impossible to say anything helpful to the sect. Nor, indeed,
will anything be needed, for they will entertain no apprehensions about
the future. Does not even Macaulay tell them that there will be
"abundance of verses, even of good ones"? With those, again, who accept
Macaulay's unspeakably miserable definition of poetry as "the art of
employing words in such a manner as to produce an illusion on the
imagination" we shall find no common footing. Nor need we dispute with
those who follow the thin dry criticism of Addison or Johnson, and who
imagine the poetical elements in poetry to consist of figures of speech,
images, and technical devices. It may well be, as Macaulay predicts,
that the enlightened world will indeed resent and cease to practise
"illusions" on the imagination, or on any other faculty. It may be the
case also that the stock poetical diction and mechanism of Addison's
time, with the "Delias" and "Phyllises," "nymphs," "swains," "lyres,"
and other tinsel elegancies in which it delights, will be--nay, are
already--the abomination of a discerning world. But if by "poetry" is
meant what should be meant--the vivid, impassioned and rhythmical
expression of rare emotions and exquisite thoughts, the revelation by
genius of the ideal and spiritual side of things, the crystallizing of
the floating and fugitive sentiments and aspirations of the contemporary
mind into clear aim and purpose by words of luminous beauty; if there is
meant a power which seizes and utters subtle truths "of man, of nature,
and of human life"; if there is meant the urgent desire and the power to
body forth by the imagination in exquisite language the shapes of things
unknown, things of beauty, glamour, pathos, or refreshment; if, as
Wordsworth once more puts it, "the objects of the poet's thoughts are
everywhere"; then, with those who maintain that poetry in this sense
must inevitably wither before the blighting touch of science and
democracy, we may join issue with a light heart. Assuredly the men of
science would be the first to rise in remonstrance at the charge that
the beauty, wonder and moral effluence of nature must all be from the
earth "with sighing sent" because contempt for them has been bred by the
familiarity of scientific knowledge.

And, first, is there any basis whatever in _history_ for the notion that
poetry flourishes best where enlightenment is least; that it is some
sort of noxious weed which cannot bear the intellectual sunshine? Do we
find the most consummate poets in a semi-barbarian world? Do we find our
Anglo-Saxon fore-fathers in this respect superior to Chaucer, Chaucer
superior to Shakespeare? Is Goethe the inferior of Hans Sachs in any
poetic quality, or still more the inferior of the nameless author of the
_Nibelungen Lied_? Is the verse of Caedmon of imagination more compact
than _Paradise Lost_? Or is the _Roman de la Rose_ more poetical, in any
sense ever attributed to the term, than _La Legende des Siecles_? No
one, however bold, will say "yes" to questions put with this undisguised
directness.

The poetical pessimists will not dispassionately examine plain facts.
They take English literature and point to the now remote date of
Shakespeare; they take Italian literature and remind us that Dante has
been dead nearly six centuries; they take the literature of Greece and
triumphantly observe that its greatest poet, Homer, was its earliest.
They ignore the essential fact that transcendent genius is the
phenomenon of a thousand years; that we must not demand a recurrence
even of second-rate genius in every generation or even in every century.
Without the altogether extraordinary genius of Shakespeare, English
poetry culminates, not in the age of Elizabeth, but in the nineteenth
century. Without the unique marvel of the mind of Dante, the poetry of
Italy is at its highest in the sixteenth century of Tasso and Ariosto,
not in the fourteenth century of the subtle amorist Petrarch. Remove the
one name of Homer, and you bring the crowning glory of Grecian poetry at
least three or four centuries later, to the era of Pindar, AEschylus, and
Sophocles. We cannot judge the laws of general progress by unique
instances of individual genius. These are the comets and meteors of the
literary heavens. To judge of a generation's capacity for poetry, we
must compare, not a Shakespeare with a Shelley or a Wordsworth, but the
_average_ spirit, the average power of insight and expression, of
Sidney, Spenser, Shakespeare, Marlowe and Jonson, with those of
Coleridge, Wordsworth, Shelley, Byron and Keats. And who will maintain,
that in force of imagination, in truth of vision, in grasp of the ideal
side of things, in beautiful expression of elusive thoughts, in lyric
rapture, the Elizabethans are equal to the Georgian and Victorian poets?

Our own day is, we boast, the age of light and reason. The days of
Chaucer were times of childlike ignorance, credulity, _naivete_. Yet who
will tell us that Tennyson looks out on nature or on man with a colder,
less imaginative, eye than Chaucer? That the advances of science have
made him gaze less lovingly, less wonderingly, upon any created thing?
That the progress of philosophy has hardened Browning's heart to
accesses of passion, or cramped his creative imagination? And yet it
should be so, if enlightenment means decay of poetry.

Science, we are told, and philosophy are but an inclement atmosphere for
poetry to thrive in. Their spiteful frost nips the young buds and tender
shoots of imagination, of fancy, of "sentiment." Well, at what date was
modern science born? At what date philosophy? Does philosophy date from
Kant, or from Bacon, or from Plato? Does modern science begin with
Darwin, with Newton, with Copernicus, or with Aristotle? Let us, for
argument's sake, accept the common account that the age _par excellence_
of science and philosophy began in England, in France, in Germany,
somewhere about the end of the seventeenth century. Since that time we
have doubtless discovered and elaborated many a detail. None the less
the air of all the eighteenth century was full of scientific inquiry and
mechanical invention, full of philosophical discussion, full of
religious and moral scepticism. If ever there was an age when it looked
to the pessimist as if science and philosophy would change the aspect of
nature and the heart of man, it was that eighteenth century. Now note
that, if some holder of Macaulay's view had risen up in the year 1770
or thereabouts, he might have addressed his contemporaries to great
effect in words like these: "The age of philosophy and science is upon
us all, and poetry is dead. See how in Germany not a single worthy note
of a poet's singing is heard amid the din of critics, philosophers,
jurists, scientists. See how in France we find historians,
letter-writers, philosophers, moralists, but not a verse worth hearing
since the dry-light prose-versicles of Voltaire. Observe how in England
our so-called poetry is but prose sawed into lines of five feet each,
and contains not one drop of the sap of nature, unless it be some
suggestion in Thomson and a half-ashamed trace in Collins or in Gray. As
for the last really great figure, Pope, and all his rhyming brood, they
are but arguers, critics, moralists, describers, satirists in verse.
They show no inspiration, and could show none, because science and
reasoning forbade it to them. The wings of their imaginations are
cropped close by the hard facts and knowledge of our time. Let us cry
_Ichabod_ over poetry, for its glory is departed, and departed for
ever."

It would scarcely have been an unnatural thing for an observant lover of
poetry at that date to make such a speech, and, without the light of
later experience, it would have been impossible to confute him. Yet had
that same man lived the length of another human life, seen still more
scientists make their steps forward in discovery, seen another crop of
even subtler philosophers at their analytic work, witnessed the "Triumph
of Reason and Democracy" in the shape of the French Revolution:--had he
lived to see all this, he would have beheld meanwhile something which
shows how fallible is prophecy. He would have seen, to wit, a most
marvellous, rich and widespread outburst of the strenuous natural poetry
he thought dead. From amid the critical rationalism of Germany would
come the fullest, most fervid voices of poetry with which that land had
ever echoed--voices full of vigour and passion, full of imagination and
music, singing of romance and story, of nature and man and human
life--the voices of Lessing, Schiller, Goethe, Heine, Wieland. From
France would be heard Beranger's stirring songs and the deepening
romantic notes of Lamartine and Victor Hugo. From Scotland would sound
the passionate song of Burns and later the romantic lays of Scott; and
soon would arise in England the graver tones of Wordsworth, Nature's
high-priest, the deep, half-romantic, half-religious music of the mystic
Coleridge, the fiery ecstasies of Shelley, the rebellious melancholies
of Byron, the sensuous raptures of Keats,--these and other tones of less
compass or less power.

And as our mistaken pessimist listens, what then becomes of his theory
that science and philosophy have killed the poet in mankind? Might not
some reasoner of the more cheerful school urge in triumph just the
contrary? Might he not say that it was precisely the new light shed by
the dawning Renaissance which elicited the poetry of Dante's day? That
it was precisely the flood of illumination on English thought in the
sixteenth century which called forth the Elizabethan outburst? That it
was precisely the eminent scientific and critical toiling of the
eighteenth century which led up to that pronounced and unanimous
romantic movement of recent times in England, Germany and France? We
need not at present strongly urge that argument. It is enough to have
shown the unsoundness of its contrary.

It may, however, be answered that science hitherto is only a preface to
what is to come, that even the last generation of discovery is nothing
in comparison with the expansion of our knowledge and the enslavement of
natural forces which must be looked for in the years on which we enter.
Well, we are not sure of that. It has been a foible of many an era to
think itself remarkable as a time when "the world's great age begins
anew." But let us grant, if you choose, that we are moving into an
incomparable age of scientific light and clearness, and at the same time
of unprecedented social change. Is it necessary that this clear light of
science should be dry and cold? And is it inevitable that the destined
social existence shall be arid and hard, cramping, drab, and dreary?
Will analysis destroy all wonder, or classification annihilate all
beauty? And will human nature be so transformed by some system of social
contract that a man will no longer feel love or grief, or any other of
those emotions which have been his, and increasingly his, since the days
of Adam?

There is, we have seen, no basis in history for assuming that poetry
will cease. Is there any ground in speculation? The assertion goes that
imagination will be shrivelled by the chill of scientific practicality,
that minds trained and informed by physical and mental science will
possess too overpowering a sense of logic, too habitual a consciousness
of the matter-of-fact, to indulge in the visions and imaginings which
are supposed to be the life of poetry. It is urged that, when every inch
of the world has rendered its hard statistics to the blue-books, and
when the variety of the nations has disappeared before common appliances
and familiar intercourse, there will be nothing to stimulate the
romantic fancy, nay, romance in any sort will but come into conflict
with man's ever-present realization of actual conditions.

Is this the just account? Is it just to the meaning of "poetry" or just
to the nature of mankind?

One might perhaps fall back on what a man of science declared to Mr.
Stedman: "The conquest of mystery leads to greater mystery: the more we
know, the greater the material for the imagination." Or one might assert
by right of intuition that, in face of the new world of science, we
shall feel as Shakespeare's Miranda felt in the presence of new
realities:--

          O wonder!
  How many goodly creatures are there here!
  How beauteous mankind is! O brave new world,
  That hath such people in't!

We too may expect to call it a "brave new world," to exclaim "how
beauteous"--and not only how beauteous, but how awesome--"Nature is!"
"how many goodly creatures are there here!" And in this goodliness,
beauty, and awesomeness poetry will find unfailing material, while it
seeks to express the emotions they evoke and to relate them with power
to man's inner life. The objects of poetry are everywhere; and
Wordsworth, who should know, if any one can know, will have it that "the
remotest discoveries of the chemist, the botanist or mineralogist will
be as proper objects of the poet's art as any upon which it can be
employed."

One might, then, simply fall back on statements such as these. But we
need a closer treatment. We require to see in what manner poetry and
science will work side by side as partners and not, as enemies, struggle
with each other until poetry is exterminated.

Whatever the future may be like, there are, and will be, two sides to
human life. There is the material, commonplace, and in a sense, vulgar
existence; there is also life's ideal side. Give a man, who is a man
and not a mere biped animal, all the comforts and enjoyments of physical
life, good food, good habitation, safety and health, even a clear
intellect, and give him nothing else. Would he not scorn and weary of
such a life as that, which merely adds empty day to empty day, so many
ciphers of existence, which, after all, amount to nothing? There is in
man, just in proportion as he rises above the beasts, a demand for
something which he holds more vital, for the things of the mind and
spirit. We live, not by bread alone, but "we live by admiration, hope
and love." Man must have ideals and aspirations and mental ecstasies.
And this, in other words, means that he must live the poetical as well
as the material half of life.

What is our own state of mind--yours and mine--when we contemplate the
threatened unpoetical future? Is it not one of alarm and disgust? Do we
not almost rejoice to think that we ourselves shall not live to shiver
in its bleakness? When we contemplate such a time, we say with
Wordsworth--

    Great God, I'd rather be
  A pagan, suckled in a creed outworn,
  So might I, standing on the pleasant lea,
  Have glimpses that would make me less forlorn

than the dull and melancholy prospect which is conjured up before us.
Even in this age of science, we entertain such feelings. And if we
ourselves feel so, it is simply because humanity is so constituted, and
no science, no democracy, no learning, invention or legislation can ever
drive out human nature from human beings. It is on grounds like these
that Matthew Arnold declares, "More and more mankind will discover that
we have to turn to poetry to interpret life for us, to console us, to
sustain us. Without Poetry our science will appear incomplete."
"Incomplete" is a right word, though a very weak one; "incomplete," not
untrue, not pernicious, but terribly inadequate. For there are two
manners of looking at the universe and at the life of men, and human
nature demands that we should exercise and enjoy them both. "The words
poetry, philosophy, art, science," says Renan, "betoken not so much
different objects proposed for the intellectual activity of man, as
different manners of looking at the same object--which object is
existence in all its manifestations," and, "if we understand by poetry
the faculty which the soul has of being touched in a certain manner, of
giving forth a certain sound of a particular and indefinable nature in
the face of the beauty of things, he who is not a poet is not a man."
True poetry does not imply fiction, unreality, misrepresentation. The
true poet is not a deluded dreamer and a visionary. The scientist tells
us certain facts about existing things, the poet draws forth the
beauties and suggestions of those facts, brings them into moral and
emotional connexion with ourselves, makes them, at his best, effective
on our conduct. Human nature can never be satisfied with the bare
objective facts. It must "disengage the elements of beauty" and goodness
from them.

It is too generally assumed that to know a thing scientifically is to
divest it of all touching beauty, of all romantic glamour, of all
spiritual suggestion,--to make it, in fact, incapable of yielding
poetry. We can, indeed, no longer call the sun a god and construct myths
of Phoebus, nor can we seriously picture the moon descending to dally
with Endymion. We can no longer see Hamadryads in the oaks or Naiads in
the streams. We do not hear Zeus or Thor in the thunderclap, nor
recognize in volcanic eruptions the struggles of imprisoned Titans
breathing flame. But what of that? Does the essence of poetry lie at all
in myths and superstitions? Because we know of what the sun is made, and
how many miles distant he is, do we find his risings and settings less
moving in their endless splendours? Do we less marvel at the stupendous
order of the solar and astral circles? Do we feel less awe before the
infinitude of space and the insignificance of our own selves? Do
waterfalls "haunt us like a passion" any the less because the water is
chemically known as H_2O and because we believe no longer in nymphs and
water-sprites? On the contrary, if there is one fact in the history of
literature more certain than another, it is the fact that the passion
for natural beauty and the emotions it evokes are things of very modern
date. In France Rousseau, in England Wordsworth, are practically the
first to give to them that loving rapture of expression into which we of
this scientific age enter so naturally.

It is true that Keats, in a moment of that petulance which is one of his
less happy characteristics, writes like this:--

          Do not all charms fly
  At the mere touch of cold philosophy?
  There was an awful rainbow once in heaven;
  We know her woof, her texture; she is given
  In the dull catalogue of common things.
  Philosophy will clip an angel's wings,
  Conquer all mysteries by rule and line,
  Empty the haunted air and gnomed mine,
  Unweave a rainbow.

But assuredly it was in his haste that Keats let slip those lines. To
him at least, loving as he did the "principle of beauty in all things,"
to him, to whom a "thing of beauty is a joy for ever," the rainbow was
not given in the dull catalogue of common things. Nor is it to us,
though we might render ever so scientifically accurate an account of the
origin of rainbows.

Shelley, who had dabbled in chemistry for the love of science, knew, as
well as we know, that a cloud is but moisture evaporated from the earth,
that there is no Valkyrie in it. But that does not hinder him from
making such a cloud a thing of life, and causing it to sing--

  I wield the flail of the lashing hail
  And whiten the green plains under;
  And then again I dissolve it in rain
  And laugh as I pass in thunder.
  I sift the snow on the mountains below,
  And their great pines groan aghast;
  And all the night 'tis my pillow white,
  While I sleep in the arms of the blast.

Neither his studies in natural science, nor his economic and moral
readings in Godwin and Condorcet could repress, or even tended to
repress, the flight of Shelley's imagination. Nor did Goethe's original
and almost professional scientific work in botany, anatomy, and optics
prevent the creation of his _Faust_ or the singing of his touching
ballads. And when we question the compatibility of historical knowledge
with the poetry of epic or romantic creations, do we suppose that
Tennyson, while writing the _Idylls of the King_, believed in the
stories of Arthur, of Lancelot, of Galahad, or of the Holy Grail? When
Morris composed the _Earthly Paradise_, had his imagination no freedom
of flight because stubborn facts of history and geography clipped its
pinions?

The truth is that there are two ways of looking at existing things, two
ways of handling them; and neither way is false. The scientist's way we
all understand. It is the way of the microscope and the crucible. It
arrives at definite physical facts. It sets forth the material
constitution and physical laws of objects. But to the poet, says Mrs.
Browning--

  Every natural flower which grows on earth
  Implies a flower on the spiritual side.

And what is true of flowers is true of suns and stars and living
creatures and all that science contemplates. Science is knowledge, while
poetry, asserts Wordsworth, is "the breath and finer spirit of all
knowledge"; it is "the impassioned expression which is in the
countenance of all science." There is a poetic truth, and there is a
scientific truth, compatible one with the other, complementary one to
the other. Perhaps the most prosaic mind that ever existed was that of
Jeremy Bentham, and "poetry," said that worthy, "is misrepresentation."
One may be pardoned for a passing impatience when the poetical side of
man is treated as a kind of amiable delusion; when one hears the shallow
argument, containing a begged question, that, inasmuch as the poet
imagines in things what is really not there at all, he is so far a
wanderer from the truth and an enemy of science. The answer is very
brief; the poet does not imagine something which is not there. A beauty
or a suggestion is a truth, and the poet sees a beauty or a suggestion.
He would indeed be false and an enemy to science if he said that a
primrose by the river's brim was a buttercup, or that it was red when it
is yellow, but it is no fiction when he declares that the primrose tells
him this or that of nature or of God. It may not tell the scientist
anything of the kind, but that is because the scientist does not look
for such a thing in it, does not understand or seek to understand its
language. "The eye of the intellect," says Carlyle, "sees in all objects
what it brings with it the means of seeing." Say, if you like, that it
is really the poet himself who puts the language, the message, into
flower or tree or waterfall. That only removes the argument a step
further back. How is he prompted to find such language there?

And who knows but that, by his exquisite sensibility and gift of
sympathy, the poet may be discovering truths more valuable to us in the
end than all the truths of science? The Newtons and Faradays and Lyells
perform their several tasks in the region of great literal physical
facts and laws; the Shakespeares and Wordsworths and Shelleys perform
theirs in the region of things ideal, in the expression of potent
suggestions and stimulations. We cannot afford to treat as weak
fantastic enthusiasts those to whom

  The meanest flower that blows can give
  Thoughts that do often lie too deep for tears.

Nor can we too soon recognize the fact that what the world requires is
the combined result of both forms of genius. It requires that the genius
of science and the genius of poetry should unite their powers and their
discoveries into one grand harmony of happiness in faith and hope and
love.

One can do no better than quote from Wordsworth a passage which shows
how the moral mood is transformed through the medium of the eye, when
the eye gazes with poetic sympathy on nature:--

  O then what soul was his, when on the top
  Of the high mountains he beheld the sun
  Rise up and bathe the world in light! He looked--
  Ocean and earth, the solid frame of earth,
  And ocean's liquid mass, beneath him lay
  In gladness and deep joy. The clouds were touched,
  And in their silent faces did he read
  Unutterable love. Sound needed none
  Nor any voice of joy. His spirit drank
  The spectacle; sensation, soul and form
  All melted into him; they swallowed up
  His animal being; in them did he live,
  And by them did he live; they were his life.

There are people who find little satisfaction in Wordsworth. His
reputation is a puzzle to them. They look for fine passages and too
rarely discover them. They judge him by the test of mere brilliance of
language, not by the higher and truer poetic gift, the power of seeing
"into the life of things," the power and exquisite feeling whereby
outward facts are brought to serve as inward forces.

And, quite apart from this function as the receiver of impressions and
the communicator of them; quite apart from the function of the poet as
moral and spiritual teacher working side by side with that teacher of
facts, the man of science, there is room, and will always be room, for
the artist-poet who simply refreshes and entertains. For poetry lies
also in epics and romances, in "feigned history" and descriptions, when
the poet, as Longinus says, "by a kind of enthusiasm or extraordinary
emotion of the soul," makes it seem to us that we behold those things
which he paints--a feat which he performs through his gift of
imagination, whereby he bodies forth the shapes of things unknown and
gives to airy nothings of beauty and delight and pathos a local
habitation and a name. The world of the future will find refreshment in
such creations no less than the world of the present. We know that
romantic novels are unreal, but we read them with keen enjoyment none
the less. So those romantic poems the _Idylls of the King_ and _The
Earthly Paradise_, like _The Tempest_, or the _Faerie Queene_, though
they cause us no real illusion as to fact, nevertheless absorb our
interest, and charm us with their unliteral beauties. We know in our
hearts that there is no magic and no fairyland. But it is a pitiably
dull and mollusc mind which finds no delight in peering through those

  Charm'd magic casements opening on the foam
  Of perilous seas in faery lands forlorn.

There remains, then, this function too of the poet who gives "exquisite
expression" to an "exquisite impression"--the function of entertaining
us nobly with tender thought and touching story, embodied in words of
beauty, and graced with melodious cadences. Of such sort is the writer
of the _Earthly Paradise_, who confesses his own modest aims in words
like these:--

  Of heaven or hell I have no power to sing;
  I cannot ease the burden of your fears,
  Or make quick-coming death a little thing,
  Or bring again the pleasure of past years,
  Nor for my words shall ye forget your tears,
  Or hope again for aught that I can say,
  The idle singer of an empty day.

  But rather, when aweary of your mirth,
  From full hearts still unsatisfied ye sigh,
  And, feeling kindly unto all the earth,
  Grudge every minute as it passes by,
  Made the more mindful that the sweet days die,
  Remember me a little then, I pray,
  The idle singer of an empty day.

  Dreamer of dreams, born out of my due time,
  Why should I strive to set the crooked straight?
  Let it suffice me that my murmuring rhyme
  Beat with light wing against the ivory gate,
  Telling a tale not too importunate
  To those who in the sleepy region stay,
  Lulled by the singer of an empty day.

We have dealt with the poet's place in the world of growing scientific
light. We might also treat of the poet's place in the world of social
progress. But he is a bold man who will prophesy whither society is
tending. To some of us, its evolution has no terrors. But, whatever be
the course of institutions, whatever the changing shapes of the social
organism, there is one conviction we may most firmly hold. It is that,
as ecstasies of love and grief, hope and fear, joy and suffering, must
still exist, so the poet will ever exist to give them utterance. The
drama, the lyric, the elegy, can never be effete so long as men have
hearts and feel with them.

But why, it may be asked, should all this exquisite expression of nature
and man and life take shape in verse? Why should we not, with Carlyle,
declare verse out of date, an artificial thing, which expresses under
crippling encumbrances what could be expressed in prose more clearly and
more truthfully? To this question we may reply that rhymes and
recurrences of equal syllables are indeed no essentials of true poetry.
Poetry has existed without them, and will exist without them. But, if
not rhymes and equal syllables, yet rhythm and melody, moving
concurrences of sounds, must for all time be elements of poetic
utterance. The reason should be manifest. There is an indefinable
sympathy between the spoken sound and the conceiving mood of the poet.
The poet conceives in moments of unusual sensibility, his mental part
is vibrating, and that sensibility lends a corresponding movement to his
language. When a poet says of himself--

  I do but sing because I must,
  And pipe but as the linnets sing,

he expresses the truth that rhythm and melody lend themselves
spontaneously to an inspiring thought. Poetry, like good music, comes of
the possession of the movement. The mood in which poetry is conceived is
the same mood in which men burst forth without premeditation into song.
The thoughts which come to the poet in his exaltation are, therefore,
naturally wedded to melody and cadence.

Moreover, not only is a rhythmic music the natural utterance of
impassioned thought for him who speaks. It is the necessary instrument
for inducing the proper, the receptive, mood in him who hears. We know
how it is with music, when all the air is vibrating and chanting with
some vast organ-swell. We know how we are stirred to our inmost depths
simply by mere harmony and sequence of sounds. We do not know why it is
so, why our mood should be attuned to sorrow, gaiety, enthusiasm,
heroism, meditation, by the hearing of music in its various kinds. We do
not know, either, why the mere shapes of the sublime architecture of
some great abbey or cathedral, or the blended colours of its
deep-damasked window-stains, should fill our hearts with devout or
poignant aspirations. Yet we know that the fact is so. And it is the
same with poetry. The rhythm and melody which come spontaneously from
the poet's mood dispose the hearer in the self-same way; they fit him to
receive what the other brings. Verse, as we now understand that term,
poetry need not be. But though it may look like prose because the lines
stretch all across the page and cannot be measured by so many iambics or
anapaests, yet, if it be real poetry, heart-felt and heart-moving, it
will be but a delusive prose, a prose of infinitely subtle rhythms and
harmonies. It will be as far removed as the Homeric hexameter from the
pedestrian motion of cold argument.

Poetry will never fail us until nature fails. We may miss the
transcendent voices now, but we have had during this century more than a
century's usual share, and with the first widespread rise of some new
moral fervour or lofty hope and aim the great poet cannot be wanting to
give it shape in thrilling verse.

Poetry will never fail us. The poetry of nature will not fail us. So
long as the sun shall each night and morning glorify the heavens with
his inexhaustible splendours, or the majestic moon ride in her
mysterious silence between the everchanging isles of cloud; so long as
innumerable starry worlds shine down their unspeakable peace into human
hearts; so long as the flower shall open out its loveliness, dance in
the breeze, shed its perfumes, and then close its petals in sleep and
drink in the refreshment of the unfailing dew; so long as the tree shall
put forth its tender greenery of leaf in the spring, blossom into gold
and fire in summer and in the autumn bow down with fruits; so long as
water shall leap and foam and thunder in cataracts down the
mountain-side, or ripple and smile over the pebble or under the fern--so
long shall the heart of man respond to sun and moon and stars, to flower
and tree and stream, and there shall be poetry.

And as man's vision, intensified by the lens of science, pierces deeper
and deeper into the universe of the ineffably great and the illimitably
small, and as his wonder and awe increase with what they feed upon, so
will the finer souls of humankind be thrilled and thrilled again with
rich new suggestions and exquisite emotions, and they shall express them
in poetry.

The poetry of man will not fail us. So long as man has a heart wherewith
to love another better than himself, to feel the joy of possession or
the pang of loss, to glow with pride at a nation's glories or mourn in
its dejection, so long shall the lyric and the elegy, in whatsoever
shape, create themselves ever afresh.

Till all our life, its institutions, and its beliefs are perfect: till
man has no doubts, no fears, no hopes: till he has analysed all his
emotions and despises them: till the heavens above and the earth beneath
can be read like a printed scroll: till nature has yielded up her last
mystery: till that day poetry will exist among men.

And we may dare to assert that the future of poetry is destined to be
greater than its past, that Tennyson's prayer will be fulfilled--

  Let knowledge grow from more to more,
  But more of reverence in us dwell,
  That mind and soul, according well,
  May make one music as before
  But vaster,

And the expression of that music will be poetry.


       *       *       *       *       *


  A SELECTION FROM THE
  CATALOGUE OF BOOKS

  PUBLISHED BY

  Thomas C. Lothian,

  100, FLINDERS STREET,

  MELBOURNE.




  INDEX OF TITLES.

                                                                    PAGE

  Australians Yet                                                      9

  Bush, The                                                            7

  Bushland Ballads                                                     9

  Dark Tower, The                                                     12

  Dawnward                                                             7

  Dominions of the Boundary                                            7

  Eating for Health                                                    8

  Ginger Talks on Business                                             6

  Guide to the Study of Australian Butterflies                         9

  House of Broken Dreams, The                                          5

  Keeyuga Cookery Book, The                                           11

  Later Litanies                                                       5

  Litanies of Life                                                     5

  Mateship                                                             9

  Mosquitoes: Their Habits and Distribution                            9

  No Breakfast; or, the Secret of Life                                12

  Peradventure                                                        12

  Poems by Jennings Carmichael                                         9

  Poems by Hubert Church                                              10

  Poems by Bernard O'Dowd                                              9

  Poems by William Gay                                                 9

  Poems of Henry C. Kendall                                            9

  Poems by Jessie Mackay                                               9

  Poetical Works of William Gay                                       10

  Poetry Militant                                                      7

  Rosemary                                                             6

  Satyrs and Sunlight                                                 10

  Sea and Sky                                                         10

  Sea Spray and Smoke Drift                                            9

  Seven Deadly Sins, The                                               7

  Silent Land and Other Verses, The                                    7

  Stranger's Friend, The                                               9

  Spirit of the Child                                                  3

  Things Worth Thinking About                                          4

  Told in the Dormitory                                                6

  Woman's Work                                                        11


       *       *       *       *       *


THE SPIRIT OF THE CHILD

BY TULLIE WOLLASTON.

  _Pott 4th._ _224 pages._      _Price_, 5/-; _posted_, 5/4

     _Every Home in Australia_ should possess a copy of "_The Spirit of
     the Child_"--and, in fact, _every teacher and child lover
     everywhere_.

This is a distinctly original book, with quaint gleams of humour and a
spiritual atmosphere, impossible to describe, but the very thing to
rejoice the hearts of fathers and mothers who know how to give good
gifts to their children. Also it is even more valuable for the parents
themselves.

A father, ordered abroad for his health, and realizing how precarious
life is, feels impelled to gather up in some interesting way the vital
points of his varied experience for the children he loves so well. He
feels, as so many fathers do, the veil of shyness between parent and
child, and recognizes how few are the opportunities, in the rough and
tumble of life, for the fitly spoken word to confirm "what has been
silently indrawn by contact of love." A passionate Nature lover himself,
he takes for unique treasures of Australia--a flower, a bird, a tree,
and a precious stone--and treats them in a way to quicken every earnest
heart, and foster the child spirit of bright interest and loving
humility.

Two of these subjects are illustrated by six fine three-colour
pictures--those of the _Black Opals_, probably being finer reproductions
of _Gems of Colour_ than any ever previously made anywhere.

A quaint love story linked to the rest of the subject matter by the same
mystic touch, lends variety to the Book and strengthens the one golden
thread of purpose, which is briefly summed up in the title.

       *       *       *       *       *

THINGS WORTH THINKING ABOUT

BY T. G. TUCKER, Litt. D.

PROFESSOR OF CLASSICAL LITERATURE IN UNIVERSITY, MELBOURNE.

_Crown 8vo. 288 pages. Bound in full cloth. Price, 3/6; posted, 3/9._

In this volume, Education, Science, Literature, Culture and Cant and
other kindred subjects are treated in a manner that is full of vitality
and attracts. This is a reprint of a book that has been out of print and
quite unprocurable for many years.

     CONTENTS.--Our Earliest Ancestors and their Beliefs. The
     Nature and Province of Poetry. Literature, Science and Education.
     Culture and Cant. The Teachings of History. The Teachings of
     Travel. Literary Judgment.

"This book is singularly well named. The last lecture of literary
judgment is particularly interesting and valuable. It is full of
suggestion as to young journalists, and all persons interested in the
study of 'that literature which maketh a full man,' and which must
spring from the real blood of the heart, and the real flame of the
thought."--_Otago Daily Times._

"These seven essays are distinctively worth while. We especially commend
his essay on the Teachings of History, which is packed with wisdom, to
every one who is seriously interested in the science of politics."

"In Australia he should be known as a public benefactor. The volume
before us being nothing less than a contribution to the
Commonwealth."--_The Athenaeum._

       *       *       *       *       *

LATER LITANIES

BY KATHLEEN WATSON.

AUTHOR OF "LITANIES OF LIFE."

_Bound in full cloth. Artistically blocked in gold. Price, 2/6; posted,
2/8._

This new book by Kathleen Watson is sure to receive a friendly welcome
from the hundreds of friends which she made with her previous books.
This volume is, perhaps, more mature, and will give greater pleasure
than any of her former books. All readers should secure a copy of this
new book.

       *       *       *       *       *

LITANIES OF LIFE

BY KATHLEEN WATSON.

AUTHOR OF "THE HOUSE OF BROKEN DREAMS," "THE GAIETY OF FATMA."

_Crown 8vo. Bound in full blue cloth, gold blocked. Price, 2/6; posted,
2/8._

This is the fifth edition of a remarkable volume. Already over 20,000
copies have been sold--and little wonder, for it is a book to read and
re-read. It will rivet the attention of the reader, and hold it right
through. It pulsates with human interest, with human feeling, love and
joy and sorrow.

"I read a few pages, and after that there was no laying down the book.
Fancy a woman with a powerful, perhaps somewhat morbid imagination, with
intense emotions, with a tendency to brood over all that is sad in the
human lot; and finally, with the power to concentrate a whole panorama
of suffering into a phrase--fancy a woman so gifted sitting down with
the resolve to crush into a few words the infinite tale of all the whole
race of her sex can suffer, and you have an idea of what this remarkable
book is like."--_T.P.'s Weekly._

"The reader will lay down the book as I did, with a feeling of profound
sympathy and gratitude to the unknown writer, in whose pages they can
hear the tremulous throb of an intense emotion, which, however, does not
obscure the finer and strongest note of heroic resolve."--_The late W.
T. Stead._

       *       *       *       *       *

THE HOUSE OF BROKEN DREAMS. A MEMORY

BY KATHLEEN WATSON.

_Second Edition, Crown 8vo, bound in full cloth. Price, 2/6; posted,
2/8._

_A Review_: "She who gave us the well-loved 'Litanies of Life' clothes
beautiful thoughts in beautiful language.... As a picture of idyllic
love and sympathy between mother and son, even unto death--and
beyond--it has rarely been surpassed, and helps us to realize the
wondrous truth that 'love is heaven, and heaven is love.'"--_The
Register._

       *       *       *       *       *

THE BEST BOYS' BOOK OF STORIES.

TOLD IN THE DORMITORY

BY R. G. JENNINGS.

_In Handsome Cloth Cover, and with Frontispiece in Colour. Price, 3/6;
posted, 3/9._

[Illustration]

Mr. R. G. Jennings is one of the best-known teachers in Melbourne.
Hundreds of boys belonging to the Church of England Grammar School have
listened with breathless interest to these stories, told them by their
master after lessons, "In the Dormitory." The boys all voted the stories
so good that the best twelve were collected and are now published.

The stories are clean, wholesome and exciting, and many an elder
brother, as well as the father, of a family, has picked up the volume to
give it a rapid glance, and has had to read story after story, only
putting the book reluctantly down when the last page was reached.

If you want to read a good school-boy book of adventuresome yarns, or
make some small youth happy, then get a copy of "Told in the Dormitory."
Just look at what the papers have said about it:--

"Entertaining yarns, well told, without a hint of padding or
affectation."--_The Athenaeum_.

"The sort of yarns boys love."--_The New Age._

"They are tersely presented, direct, and pointed.... The book will be
read with delight by boys at school and with interest by older
folk."--_Adelaide Register_.

"These wholesome and terse stories, 'Told in the Dormitory,' are just
what will delight elder boys--and such of their parents as still
remember school days."--_Geelong Advertiser._

       *       *       *       *       *

ROSEMARY

THAT'S FOR REMEMBRANCE.

BY ELEANOR MORDAUNT.

Author of "The Garden of Contentment," "A Ship of Solace," etc., etc.

_Crown 8vo. 204 Pages. Bound in Cloth. Gold Blocked. Price, 2/6; posted,
2/9._

More and more is Eleanor Mordaunt claiming the attention of the reading
public, but it is doubtful whether any of her other books have surpassed
"Rosemary" for sheer charm and attractiveness. It is a blue sky book,
full of cheerfulness and good nature. It tells of an Englishwoman who
spends a quiet year in Australia, and who describes the procession of
the seasons and how they appeal to her. The chapters are all
interesting, and cannot be exhausted by a single reading. This is a book
that is always fresh. Open it anywhere and it arrests you at once.

"It is a delightful book, written in a most refreshing style. It is so
full of sunny and happy thoughts, so suggestive of all that is best in
life that one lingers over its pages."--_Birmingham Daily Post._

       *       *       *       *       *

GINGER TALKS ON BUSINESS

BY W. C. HOLMAN.

_Price, 5/-; posted, 5/4._

Crown 8vo, extra cloth gilt, 235 pages, with 15 full-page cartoons,
illustrating the principles of Salesmanship, which the "Talks" explain.
In these days of commercial activity, business is becoming such a
profession that it needs preparation and study to cope successfully with
the problems of success.

"Ginger Talks" is as helpful a text-book as one could possibly get, but
it differs from many text-books in that it is fascinating reading. It
abounds in good humour, hopefulness and brilliant interesting talk; talk
that is practical, helpful and human.


       *       *       *       *       *


BERNARD O'DOWD'S WORKS.

This writer is quietly but surely coming to his own place, which is in
the forefront of Australian authors. Those competent to judge are
unanimous in their opinion regarding the unique and high quality of Mr.
O'Dowd's work.

       *       *       *       *       *

DAWNWARD

_Price, 2/6; posted, 2/7._

A few copies of the original limited First Edition, published by the
_Bulletin Company_, are still available. Price on application.

"The best book of verses yet produced in Australia."--T. G. Tucker,
Litt. D., Prof. of Classical Literature, University of Melbourne.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE SILENT LAND AND OTHER VERSES

_Price, 2/6; posted, 2/7. Bound in Half-cloth Boards, Gilt Tops. A few
copies of an Edition-de-Luxe (limited to 25), signed by the author, are
still available. Price, 7/6._

"The most arresting work of the younger generation is that of Mr.
Bernard O'Dowd."--_The Times_, London.

       *       *       *       *       *

DOMINIONS OF THE BOUNDARY

_64 Pages. Art Cover. Price, 1/-; posted, 1/1._

"Mr. Bernard O'Dowd stands alone among modern Australian poets."--_The
Spectator_ (London).

       *       *       *       *       *

POETRY MILITANT

An Australian plea for the Poetry of Purpose. An exceedingly fine,
sincere literary essay.

_Paper Cover, 1/1; postage, 1d._

       *       *       *       *       *

THE SEVEN DEADLY SINS

A Sonnet Series.

_Small 4to. 56pp., Deckle-edged, Antique Paper. Price, 3/6; postage,
1d._

"It is full of thought and vision. It embodies such a bold and luminous
re-valuation of the universe, as we have every right to expect from the
true poet."--_The Herald._

       *       *       *       *       *

THE BUSH

_Small Quarto. Art Paper Cover. Price, 2/6; posted, 2/7._

"It is the most significant of all the poems, of any considerable
length, that Australia has yet produced."--_The Argus._

"It takes rank at once as a great national poem. It should be bought and
read, and re-read, by every thoughtful Australian."--_A. T. Strong in
The Herald._

       *       *       *       *       *

EATING FOR HEALTH

BY O. L. M. ABRAMOWSKI, M.D., Ch.D. (Berlin).

_Cloth Bound. Price, 3/6; posted, 3/9. Third Edition, greatly increased
and edited by J. T. Huston._


This book is written from actual personal knowledge and experience. It
is as interesting as a novel. It is the evolution of a common sense idea
of disease, and a natural system for its prevention and cure.

"It is the most complete work on dietary experiment that we have
seen."--_T.P.'s Weekly._

"The value of this book lies in its perfect frankness."--_Stock and
Station Journal_, Sydney.

"The book contains a mass of information regarding many diseases, and
the effect of diet upon them, and emphasizes the importance of doing as
much thinking for oneself as one can, instead of trusting implicitly to
the medicine men, who are liable--even the best of them--to go wrong, at
all events, in matters of diet."--_The Advertiser_, Adelaide.

These are some of the subjects with which this most interesting book
deals:--

  Eating for Disease.
  The Influence of Fruit Diet.
  Influence of Natural Diet.
  Typhoid.
  Rheumatism.
  Cancer.
  Affections of the Lungs.
  Eating for Death.
  Eating for Life.
  What shall we Eat?
  When shall we Eat?
  What shall we Drink?
  Humanity v. Alcohol.
  Etc., etc.

       *       *       *       *       *

A GUIDE TO THE STUDY OF AUSTRALIAN BUTTERFLIES

BY W. J. RAINBOW, F.L.S., F.E.S.

Entomologist to the Australian Museum, Sydney.

_300 pages. Full cloth. Crown 8vo. Over 250 illustrations. Price, 3/6;
posted, 3/9._

A thoroughly scientific, yet popular work for all who desire a knowledge
of Australian Butterflies. It is quite indispensable to the modern
teacher.

"Illustrated on a truly liberal scale, it should prove an ideal aid
towards the purpose intended."--_Otago Witness._

"Mr. W. J. Rainbow's charming little book fills a want long felt by the
general naturalist, and will prove invaluable to the Lepidopterist, be
he beginner or expert."--_Herald._

"A model of arrangement and sound work."--_Publishers' Circular._

       *       *       *       *       *

MOSQUITOES: THEIR HABITS AND DISTRIBUTION

BY W. J. RAINBOW, F.L.S., F.E.S.

Entomologist to the Australian Museum, Sydney.

A neat booklet of 64 pp., well illustrated, dealing with this
interesting pest and its extermination.

_Price, 1/6; postage, 1d._

"A most interesting and useful little book."--_Sunday Times_.

"This little book is worthy of a place with 'The Study of Australian
Butterflies,' by the same careful writer."--_Ballarat Courier._

"A valuable contribution to Nature Study."--_The Herald._

"It gives within a small compass an astonishing amount of interesting
and well-arranged information. The book is very readably written, is
well illustrated with numerous clear figures, and should appeal to a
large body of readers."--_Australian Naturalist._

       *       *       *       *       *

AUSTRALIANS YET

BY GRANT HERVEY.

_Crown 8vo. 254 pages. Clearly printed on good white paper, and
attractively bound. Lettered in gold. Gilt top. Price, 3/6; post free,
3/8._

"This is a volume of vigorous ballads, chanting the praise of Australia,
a creed of hard work, and a love of women, in long, rollicking lines. He
sings manfully, with a good ear for a chorus."--_Times_.

"His verses are good reading."--_The Bookseller._

"This is jolly hearty Colonial stuff, by one who sees that Australia
needs an arch interpreter."--_The Daily Chronicle_, London.

       *       *       *       *       *

AUSTRALIAN BOOKLETS

_Bound in Velvet Calf. Price, 1/3; posted, 1/4._

  SEA SPRAY AND SMOKE DRIFT, BY ADAM LINDSAY GORDON.
  POEMS OF HENRY C. KENDALL.
  BUSHLAND BALLADS, BY E. J. BRADY.
  POEMS, BY BERNARD O'DOWD.
  POEMS, BY WILLIAM GAY.
  POEMS, BY JENNINGS CARMICHAEL.
  MATESHIP, BY HENRY LAWSON.
  THE STRANGER'S FRIEND, BY HENRY LAWSON.
  POEMS, BY JESSIE MACKAY.

The verses in these volumes are the very best, and wherever possible the
authors themselves have specially selected the verses they wish to be
printed. Therefore, these booklets contain only their living work--the
cream of these authors. The set should be purchased straight away by all
good Australians, and further copies sent to friends. No other books yet
published in Australia are at once so suitable for your reading, or make
such exquisite little gifts for friends. They make beautiful little
books for the pocket, and are able to be carried around and read during
leisure moments.

       *       *       *       *       *

SATYRS AND SUNLIGHT

BY HUGH McCRAE.

_2nd Edition, cloth bound, crown 8vo. Price, 3/6; posted, 3/8._

Readers of Australian verse will remember the sensation caused by the
appearance of the limited edition of these poems, illustrated by Norman
Lindsay. This second (unillustrated) edition brings, as the _Herald_
says, "one of the best books of recent Australian verse within the reach
of the general public."

"Mr. McCrae ... produces remarkable poems, which strike a note new to
Australia, and take a high place in our literature."--_Sydney Morning
Herald._

       *       *       *       *       *

POEMS

BY HUBERT CHURCH.

_Crown 8vo. Antique Paper. Bound in Full Cloth. Price, 3/6; posted,
3/9._

Those acquainted with this poet's "Egmont" will be glad to see this
announcement of a further collection of poems. The present volume
includes a few of the best poems in "Egmont," and a number of fine
additions, some published for the first time, make up a most attractive
volume.

"In Hubert Church we have a poet who worthily upholds the highest
traditions of Australasian poetry. Grandeur, simplicity, tenderness and
power are all reflected in this fine collection of poems."--_Dundee
Advertiser._

"The ripe work of a genuine poet ... a book that will live."--_The
Triad._

"He is a delightful writer, and has been well advised to bring together
in one volume the best of his work."--_Adelaide Register._

       *       *       *       *       *

SEA AND SKY

BY J. LE GAY BRERETON.

_Small Quarto. Edition limited to 500 copies. Price, 3/6; posted, 3/8._

Any lover of Australian verse unacquainted with Mr. J. Le Gay Brereton's
work has a real pleasure in store. The poems in this collection are
unique, and as the _Bulletin_ says, "Such careful work, so delicately
done, is a rare portent in our vague Australian sky."

The _Scotsman_ writes that "Sea and Sky" "reflects no little credit upon
the condition of poetical culture in Melbourne."

"In Mr. Le Gay Brereton's 'Sea and Sky,'" says the _Bookman_, "one has
some of the most delicate and essentially poetical work that has yet
been written in Australia."

       *       *       *       *       *

POETICAL WORKS OF WILLIAM GAY

With Biographical Sketch by J. Glen Oliphant.

_Bound in Full Cloth, Gold Blocked, Gilt Top. Crown 8vo. Price, 3/6;
posted, 3/9. The authentic and only complete edition._

This Scotch born poet, driven like so many, before and since, to seek
health across the sea, has left a rare memorial in the land of his
adoption. We cannot call him an Australian poet. "His poetry," says his
biographer, "was universal, not local, and might have been written
anywhere," but as his life was linked with Australia, we are glad to
count him among her sons, and to remember that he found under her skies
greater spiritual peace, and a measure of physical strength sufficient
to leave this legacy.

"Gay's finished achievement.... He held by clarity of thought and
expression above all things.... Gay's poetry ... will assuredly
endure."--_The Argus_, Melbourne.

"Many of the sonnets show an unusual command of language, and one at
least, 'To Triumphe,' leaves us wondering what we may not have lost by
the early death of their author."--_Birmingham Post._


       *       *       *       *       *


THE MOST PRACTICAL AUSTRALIAN COOKERY BOOK EVER PUBLISHED.

THE KEEYUGA COOKERY BOOK

BY HENRIETTA C. McGOWAN.

(Of _The Age_ and _The Leader_,)

_Price, 1/6; posted, 1/8._

Strongly Bound in Grease-proof Cloth.

[Illustration]

This is the long-looked-for Australian Cookery Book. Once used, you will
find it a practical necessity in your kitchen. Every recipe has been
tried, proved and found good. It is well printed, clearly written, and
the directions can easily be followed.

It can be claimed with confidence for the "Keeyuga" that it is the
cheapest and most practical cookery book ever sold. What is wanted in
these days of scarcity of domestic help is a cookery book that will
serve in an emergency, one that contains well-tried, reliable recipes
that can be depended upon; these are to be found in the "Keeyuga," as
well as all the recipes necessary for a full-course dinner.

Whatever the difficulty in the culinary department may be, one can turn
to the "Keeyuga" with absolute confidence; whether it is helpful recipes
that are needed, or how to vary the children's school lunches, or what
to take to the pleasant week-end camping out picnics, or how to make up
an Australian fruit luncheon, the "Keeyuga" will help every time.

These are some titles taken from its invaluable contents:--

  "Meals Make the Man"
  Emergency Meals
  Cookery for Children
  School Lunches
  Camp Life and Week-end Cookery
  Household Cookery--Joints
  Poultry
  Fish
  Spiced Meat, Sausages, etc.
  Curries
  Invalid Cookery
  Vegetables
  Fruit
  For Breakfast, Lunch, or Supper
  Soups
  Puddings
  Pastry
  Cold Puddings and Sweets
  Cakes
  Teacakes
  Sandwiches
  Jams, Jellies, Marmalades,
  Fruit Cheeses and Preserves
  Sauces, Pickles and Chutneys
  Salads
  Drinks
  Sweets
  Sundries
  Things Worth Knowing
  And many other interesting Chapters.

       *       *       *       *       *

A BOOK OF VITAL IMPORTANCE. WHAT TO DO WITH OUR GIRLS.

WOMAN'S WORK

  BY HENRIETTA C. McGOWAN.
  MARGARET C. CUTHBERTSON.

_Price, 1/-; posted, 1/1._

[Illustration]

The Publisher has pleasure in placing upon the market a book of such
eminent importance and usefulness as this book on Woman's Work.

The aim of the writers has been to set before the prospective worker the
ways and means by which she may secure the work best suited to her, and
some idea of the remuneration she may expect to receive as a return for
her investment of time, study, work and money.

The writers are probably the two most able women in Australia for the
subject in hand. Miss H. C. McGowan, by her long experience in
connection with the _Age_ and _Leader_, has been brought into close
practical touch with the conditions and possibilities of private women
workers, while Miss Cuthbertson, in her capacity of Inspectress of
Factories, is peculiarly fitted to speak with authority upon this
particular class of work.


       *       *       *       *       *


PERADVENTURE

BY ARCHIBALD T. STRONG.

_164 pages. Post 4to. Printed on art paper, with attractive paper cover.
Price, 3/6; posted, 3/9._

A book that is a pleasure to handle as it is an education and
inspiration to read. Mr. Strong does not belong to the School of
Dryasdust, he treats his books as human documents, and his literary
friends as beings of flesh and blood. The breadth of his range and the
freshness of this point of view are seen by a glance at the titles of
his Essays, which range from "The Devil" to "The Faith of Shelley," and
from "Rabelais" to "Nietzsche."

"Both in its grave and gay moods the book is one of unusual
charm."--_Literary World._

       *       *       *       *       *

THE DARK TOWER

BY ALAN D. MICKLE. AUTHOR OF "THE GREAT LONGING."

_Bound in Art Cloth. Crown 8vo. 152 pages. Price, 3/6; posted, 3/8_.

"The Dark Tower" is a new and original volume of short essays;
stimulating, good, attractive. All thoughtful people who are interested
in living thought should obtain a copy of this new book.

These essays deal with a variety of things and people, but the value of
this book lies in the author's forceful sincerity and his advocacy of
fearlessness in thought.

SOME OF THE BEST CHAPTERS: The Supreme Virtue; Tolstoy and Turgeneiff;
Don Quixote, Mr. Pickwick and Hamlet; Hedda Gabler; Nietzsche; William
Blake; Pontius Pilate; Gallio; Cleopatra; The Venus of Milo; The Sphinx.

" ... gives the impression of genuine sincerity."--_Athenaeum._

"A book worth buying and worth keeping."--_The Triad._

"Those who have read 'The Great Longing' will welcome Mr. Mickle's
latest work, as, indeed, anything that comes from his pen. He stands in
the front rank of philosophical essayists, and is doing more for
Australian literature than all the many poetasters and their kind who
yearly publish many books, but write little poetry. Regarded only for
their literary merit his essays have high place.... It is good for
Australian literature to have the books of Mr. Mickle, which will win
him permanence of position. He is making a very real and valuable
addition to the best in our literature."--_Hobart Daily Post._

"Certainly a striking little book."--_The Australasian._

       *       *       *       *       *

NO BREAKFAST; OR, THE SECRET OF LIFE

By "Gossip."

_Fifth Edition. Crown 8vo. 94 pp. Antique paper. Attractive cover in two
colours. Price, 1/-; posted, 1/1_.

When a book of this description goes into a Fifth Edition we realize
that the gospel it preaches is one that has been accepted and proved to
be true by thousands of readers. This is not surprising when one
considers that this is the actual story of a man's own experience.
Gossip writes of what he knows to be true, he has proved it--is proving
it every day.

"This little book," says the _Sydney Morning Herald_, "has been a
continuous success since its first appearance in 1905, and it deserved
to be so, for the argument is lively, sound and helpful throughout. It
is a vigorous expression of the philosophy of common sense. The plea is
for more simplicity, for moderation in all things."

How to live and how to get the most out of life: Those are the problems
that confront every one of us. This little volume helps to solve them.
You will be glad to read it.


THE ST. ABBS PRESS, LONDON.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Platform Monologues, by T. G. Tucker

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PLATFORM MONOLOGUES ***

***** This file should be named 18969.txt or 18969.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/8/9/6/18969/

Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Janet Blenkinship and the
Online Distributed Proofreaders Europe at
http://dp.rastko.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

*** END: FULL LICENSE ***

