The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Wiradyuri and Other Languages of New
South Wales, by Robert Hamilton Mathews

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Wiradyuri and Other Languages of New South Wales

Author: Robert Hamilton Mathews

Release Date: August 3, 2006 [EBook #18978]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE WIRADYURI AND OTHER ***










THE WIRADYURI AND OTHER LANGUAGES OF NEW SOUTH WALES.

By R. H. Mathews, L.S., Corres. Memb. Anthrop. Soc., Washington,
U.S.A.

Synposis.--Introductory.--Orthography.--The Wiradyuri Language.--The
Burreba-burreba Language.--The Ngunawal Language.--Vocabulary of
Wiradyuri Words.--Vocabulary of Ngunawal Words.

The native tribes speaking the Wiradyuri language occupy an immense
region in the central and southern portions of New South Wales. For
their eastern and northern boundaries the reader is referred to the
map accompanying my paper to the American Philosophical Society in
1898.[1] The western boundary is shown on the map with my article to
the Royal Society of New South Wales the same year.[2] Their southern
limit is represented on the map attached to a paper I transmitted to
the Anthropological Society at Washington in 1898.[3] The maps
referred to were prepared primarily to mark out the boundaries of the
social organisation and system of marriage and descent prevailing in
the Wiradyuri community, but will also serve to indicate the
geographic range of their language.

The Wiradyuri language is spoken over a greater extent of territory
than any other tongue in New South Wales, and the object of the
present monograph is to furnish a short outline of its grammatical
structure. I have included a brief notice of the Burreba-burreba
language, which adjoins the Wiradyuri on the west. A cursory outline
is also given of the language of the Ngunawal tribe, which bounds the
Wiradyuri on a portion of the east. The Kamilaroi tribes, whose
language I recently reported to this Institute,[4] adjoin the
Wiradyuri on the north.

In all the languages treated in this article, in every part of speech
subject to inflexion, there are double forms of the first person, of
the dual and plural, similar in character to what have been reported
from many islands in Polynesia and Melanesia, and the tribes of North
America. Separate forms for "we two," and "he and I," were observed by
Rev. James Guenther among the pronouns of the Wiradyuri natives at
Wellington,[5] but as he does not mention anything of the kind in the
plural, we may conclude that he did not observe it.

The materials from which this paper has been prepared have been
gathered by me while travelling through various parts of the Wiradyuri
country, for the purpose of visiting and interviewing the old native
men and women who still speak the native tongue, from whom I noted
down all the information herein reproduced. When the difficulties
encountered in obtaining the grammar of any language which is purely
colloquial are taken into consideration, I feel sure that all
necessary allowances will be made for the imperfections of my work.

The initiation ceremonies of the Wiradyuri tribes, which are of a
highly interesting character, have been fully described by me in
contributions to several societies and other learned institutions.[6]

It will be as well to state that in 1892, Dr. J. Fraser, from the MSS.
of the late Rev. James Guenther, published some gramatical rules and a
vocabulary of the Wiradyuri language. This forms part of a volume
entitled _An Australian Language_ (Sydney, 1892), Appendix, pp.
56-120.

Mr. E. M. Curr published several vocabularies collected in different
parts of the Wiradyuri territory.--_The Australian Race_, vol. iii, pp.
363-401.

Orthography.

The system of orthoepy adopted is that recommended by the Royal
Geographical Society, London, with the following qualifications:

_Ng_ at the beginning of a word or syllable has a peculiar sound,
which I have previously illustrated.[7] At the end of a syllable or
word, it has substantially the sound of _ng_ in "sing."

_Dh_ and _nh_ have nearly the sound of _th_ in "that," with a slight
initial sound of the _d_ or _n_ as the case may be.

_Ty_ and _dy_ at the commencement of a word or syllable, as _dyirril_
(a spear), has nearly the sound of _j_. At the end of a word, as
_gillaty_ (to-day), _ty_ or _dy_ is pronounced nearly as _tch_ in the
word "batch," but omitting the final hissing sound.

_w_ always commences a syllable or word, and has its ordinary sound.
_G_ is hard in all cases. _R_ has a rough trilled sound, as in
"hurrah!"

The sound of the Spanish _n_ is frequent. At the commencement of a
syllable or word I have given it as _ny_, but when terminating a word
I have used the Spanish letter.

_T_ is interchangeable with _d_; _p_ with _b_; and _g_ with _k_ in
most words where they are used.

As far as possible, vowels are unmarked, but in some instances, to
avoid ambiguity, the long sound of _a_, _e_ and _u_ are indicated
thus: a, e, u. In a few cases the short sound of _u_ is marked _u_.
_Y_ at the beginning of a word has its ordinary consonant value.

The Wiradyuri Language.

_Articles_.

There are no articles, properly so-called, in the language. The
demonstratives "this" and "that" do duty for our "a" and "the." If it
be desired to definitely say that only _one_ is meant, the numeral,
_ngunbai_, is employed.

In all the sentences illustrating the cases of nouns and other parts
of speech in this paper, the demonstratives are omitted. A native
would say, "Man [that over yonder] beat child [this in front]," the
proper demonstratives being inserted where illustrated by the
brackets.

_Nouns_.

_Number_.--There are three numbers, singular, dual and plural.
_Wamboin_, a kangaroo. _Wamboinbula_ a couple of kangaroos.
_Wamboingirbang_, several kangaroos.

_Gender._--In human family different words are used, as _men_ or
_gibir_, a man; _bulladyeru_ or _inar_, a woman; _birrengang_, a boy;
_ingargang_, a young girl; _yiramurung_, a youth; _megai_, a maiden;
_burai_, a child.

Among animals, word are used signifying "male" and "female"
respectively. _Wille bidyur_, a buck opossum; _wille gunal_, a doe
opossum. _Ngurun burramai_, hen emu; _ngurun bidyur_, a cock emu.

_Case_.--The cases are the nominative, nominative-agent, genitive,
accusative, instrumental dative and ablative.

The nominative simply names the person or thing under attention, as,
_mirri_ or _burumain_, a dog; _burrandang_, a native-bear; _wille_ or
_womburan_, an opossum; _wagan_, a crow; _bulgang_ or _burgan_, a
boomerang.

The nominative-agent requires a suffix to the noun, as, _gibirru
womburan dhe_, a man an opossume ate. _Bulladyerudu dhurung bume_, a
woman a snake struck (or killed). _Inarru wille dharalgiri_, a woman
an opossum will eat. _Burrandangu gurril dhara_, a native-bear leaves
is eating. _Mirridu wille buddhe_, a dog an opossum bit.

_Genitive_.--_Mengu bulgang_, a man's boomerang. _Bulladyerugu kunne_,
a woman's yamstick. _Burrandanggu bullung_, a native-bear's head.

_Dative_.--_Dhurrangu_, to the creek (_dhurrang_). _Ngurangu_, to the
camp (_ngurang_).

_Ablative_.--_Dhurrandyi_, from the creek; _ngurandyi_, from the camp.
In this case, and also in the dative, the final _g_ of both words is
omitted before applying the suffix.

The accusative is the same as the simple nominative, as will be seen
by the examples given under the nominative-agent.

_Instrumental_.--When an instrument is the remote object of the verb,
the accusative remains unchanged, but the instrumental case takes the
same suffix as the nominative-agent; thus, _mendu wagan burgandu
bume_, the man hit a crow with a boomerang. _Inarru burumain kunnedu
bangabe_, the woman cut a dog with a yamstick.

In the above examples, as well as in the sentences illustrating the
nominative-agent, it will be seen that the agent suffix has euphonic
changes according to the termination of the word it is attached to.
This may be said of the suffixes in all the cases of nouns and
adjectives.

_Adjectives_.

Adjectives take the same inflexions for number and case as the nouns
they qualify, and are placed after them. They are without gender.

_Womboin munun_, a kangaroo large. _Womboinbula mununbula_, a pair of
large kangaroos. _Womboinmuddu mununmuddu_, several large kangaroos.

_Burumaindu munundu womburan buddhe_, a dog large an opossum bit.
_Inarru bubadyallu burai bume_, a woman small a child beat.

_Womboingu munungu dhun_, a large kangaroo's tail.

A big waterhole, _dha-u munun_. _Dha-ugu munungu_, to a big waterhole.
_Dha-wadyi munundyi_, from a big waterhole.

_Comparison_.--_Nyila murrumbangbun-gan_, this is vey good. _Nyilangai
murrumbang wirrai_, that is not good. If the articles compared be
equal in quality, a native would say, This is good--that is good, and
so on.

_Pronouns_.

Pronouns are inflected for number and person, and comprise the
nominative, possessive and objective cases, a few examples in each of
which will be given. There are forms in the dual plural to express the
inclusion or exclusion of the person addressed.

_Singular_.

                      Nominative.               Possessive.              Objective.
 1st Person I         _Ngadhu_     Mine        _Ngadyi_        Me        _Ngunnhal_.
 2nd "      Thou      _Ngindu_     Thine       _Nginnu_        Thee      _Nginyal_.
 3rd "      He        _Ngagwa_     His         _Ngagwaiula_    Him       _Ngunnungga_.

_Dual_.

 1st Person We, incl. _Ngulli_     Ours, incl. _Ngulliging_    Us, incl. _Ngullinya_.
            We, excl. _Ngulliguna_ Ours, excl. _Ngulligingula_ Us, excl. _Ngullinyuggu_.
 2nd "      You       _Ngindubla_  Yours       _Nginnubulala_  You       _Nginyalbula_.
 3rd "      They    _Ngagwainbula_ Theirs      _Ngagwabulagu_  Them      _Ngunnainbula_.

_Plural_.

 1st Person We, incl. _Ngeani_     Ours, incl. _Ngeaniging_    Us, incl. _Ngeaninyagu_.
            We, excl. _Ngeaniguna_ Ours, excl. _Ngeaniginguna_ Us, excl. _Ngeaninyaguna_.
 2nd "      You       _Ngindugir_  Yours       _Nginnugir_     You       _Nginyalgir_.
 3rd "      They   _Ngagwainguler_ Theirs      _Ngagwagulaia_  Them      _Ngunnagulella_.

There are other forms of the objective case meaning "from me," "with
me," "towards me," etc., which have numerous modifications.

The extended forms of the pronouns given in the above table are not
much used as separate words, except in answer to interrogatives, or
assertively. _Ngulliguna_ might, for example, be given in answer to
the question, "Who killed the kangaroo?" "Whose boomerang is this?"
might elicit the reply, _Ngaddyi_.

In a common conversation, however, the pronominal affixes are
employed.

The third personal pronouns have several forms and are subject to much
variation, depending upon the position of the parties referred to.
Many of them are practically demonstratives.

_Interrogatives_.--Who, _ngandi?_ Who (agent), _nganduwa?_ Who (dual),
_nganduwanbula?_ Who (plural), _nganduwandugir?_ Who for,
_ngandigula?_ Whose is this, _ngangunginna?_ _Nganduga_ is equivalent
to "I wonder who?" or "I don't know who." Who from,
_ngangundiburrami?_ What, _minyang?_ What is that, _minyawanna?_ What
for, _minyangula?_ What from, _minyalli?_ How many (what number),
_minyanggulman?_

_Demonstratives_.--The following are a few examples:--This, _nginna_.
These (dual), _nginnabula_. This other one, _nginnagwal_. From this,
_nginnalidhi_. Belonging to this, _nginnagula_. With this,
_nginnadhurai_. That, _ngunnila_. That other one, _ngunniloagwal_.
That yonder, _ngunnainbirra_. A native will frequently state the
location of an article by its compass direction from a particular tree
or other well-known spot.

These demonstratives are very numerous--many of them being used as
pronouns of the third person, and are declined for number, person, and
case. They also vary according to the position of the object referred
to in regard to the speaker, and likewise change with the relative
position of the object to the person addressed.

In all parts of aboriginal speech, words are occasionally met with so
closely alike in pronunciation that it is almost impossible for any
one but a native to detect the difference.

_Verbs_.

The moods are the indicative, imperative, conditional, and infinitive.
The verb stem and a contraction of the necessary pronouns are
incorporated, and the words thus formed are used in the conjugation.
These are, however, modifications of the affixed particles in the past
and future tenses to express differences in time.

In the following conjugation of the verb "to beat" the present tense
is given in full. In the past and future tenses, one example in the
first person singular is thought sufficient, because any required
person and number in each tense can be obtained by following the
directions given in the text.

_Indicative Mood_--_Present Tense_.

 Singular 1st Person I beat          _Bumurradhu_.
          2nd "      Thou beatest    _Bumurrandu_.
          3rd "      He beats        _Bumurragwa_.
 Dual     1st Person We, incl., beat _Bumurrali_.
                     We, excl., beat _Bumurraliguna_.
          2nd "      You beat        _Bumurrandubla_.
          3rd "      They beat       _Bumurragwainbula_.
 Plural   1st "      We, incl., beat _Bumurrani_.
                     We, excl., beat _Bumurraniguna_.
          2nd "      You beat        _Bumurrandugir_.
          3rd "      They beat       _Bumurragwainguler_.

_Past Tense_.

 1st Person I beat just now     _Bumulbendhu_.
 Singular,  I beat this morning _Bumulngurrindhu_.
            I beat yesterday    _Bumulgwandhu_.
            I beat, indefinite  _Bumedhu_.
            I beat long ago     _Bumulgridyu_.

_Dhu_, softened to _dyu_ in some cases, is a contraction of _ngadhu_.

_Future Tense_.

 1st Person I will beat, indefinite    _Bumulgiridyu_.
 Singular,  I will beat, soon          _Bumulyawagiridyu_.
            I will beat in the morning _Bumulngurrigiridu_.

Owing to the several inflections of the verb in the past and future
tneses, for immediate, proximate, and more or less remote times of the
performance of the action,[8] it is often found convenient, especially
when speaking in the dual or plural, to prefix a complete pronoun from
the table of pronouns. Thus, instead of saying, _Bumulbenli_, a native
frequently expresses it, _Ngulli bumulben_. Again, instead of saying,
_Bumulgiriniguna_, he would use, _Ngeaniguna bumulgiri_. This leaves
the termination of the verb freer for the numerous inflexions.

_Imperative Mood_.

 Singular Beat thou          _Buma_.
 Dual     Beat you           _Bumandubla_.
 Plural   Beat you           _Bumandugir_.

_Conditional Mood_.

 Perhaps I will beat. _Yama bumulgiridyu_.

_Infinitive Mood_.

 To beat                        _Bumulli_.

_Reflexive_.

There is a reflex form of the verb, as when one does anything to
himself:

 I am beating myself            _Bumungadyillindyu_.

_Reciprocal_.

The dual and plural contain a reciprocal form of the verb, as where
two or more persons beat each other:

 We, (dual excl.,) are beating each other _Ngulliguna bumullen_.
 We, (pl. excl.,) are beating each other  _Ngeaniguna bumullen_.

There is no passive. The sentence, A woman was bitten by a dog, is
expressed by, A dog bit a woman.

The prohibitive or negative in all the moods, tenses, and numbers is
obtained by using the word _Kurria_ with the verb, thus: _Kurria
buma_, beat not. _Kurria bumulgiridyu_, I will not beat. Another form
is used where there is uncertainty, as, _Wirraigurra bumulgiridyu_,
which expressed the meaning "I don't think I will beat," or, "Perhaps
I will not."

_Murrung nginyadhu_ has the meaning of "I am well," and may be called
a substitute for our verb "to be." By incorporating _yalu_ with this
expression, it makes it more emphatic, as, _Yalu murrung nginyadhu_,
"Really I am well." Any adjective describing a human attribute may be
taken as a predicate, as, good, bad, strong, sleepy, and employed with
the modifications of the word _nginya_.

_Prepositions_.

A number of prepositions are independent words, as: Behind,
_yabbungura_. In front, _willidya_. Across, _dargin_. Around,
_waiangadha_. Outside, or, on the other side, _ngunningura_. Inside,
_muguma_. This side, _nginnungaradha_. _Billaga ngunningura_, the
other side of the creek. On the right, _bumalgala_. On the left,
_mirrangur_. Ahead, _banganan_. In the rear, _ngunnagangura_.

Frequently the verb includes the meaning of a preposition, as in the
following examples:

_Ngadhu ngadyen dyirramuddyi gullegiri_, I that hill go-up-will.
_Ngadhu dyila dyirramuddyi birrawagiri_, I that hill go-down-will.
_Ngadhu ngidyi gigulle waiangugiri_, I that tree go-round-will.
_Ngeani birgudyi wurungiri_, We (pl. incl.) the scrub through-will-go.
_Ngulliguna billadyi errugiri_, We (dual excl.,) the creek will-cross.
_Ngadhu dyirramudyi ngagungurgu gulleamurrigiri_, I will climb over
the hill.

_Adverbs_.

The following are a few of the adverbs, some of which are inflected
for number, case, and tense: _Wirrai_, no. _Ngaiin_, yes. _Yandhal_,
now. _Dhallan_, soon. _Yere_, to-day. _Ngurrungal_, the morning.
_Yeregwala_, yesterday. _Ngunnigunala_, day before yesterday.
_Ngunnungalagal_, day after to-morrow. _Murradhulbul_, long ago.
_Buruandhangga_, night-time.

Here (now), _nginna_. Here (was), _nginni_. This way, _dhain_. Farther
away, _ngunna_. Still farther, _ngunneng_. A good way off,
_ngunnagunalla_. There in the rear, _ngunnagangura_. These pronominal
adverbs, like the demonstrative pronouns, are very numerous and also
include the points of the compass.

How, _widdyallangalu?_ How thou, _widdyawandu?_ How you (dual),
_widdyawandubla?_ How you (plural), _widdyawandugir?_ How obtained,
_widdyunggurrunda burramai?_ _Widdyunggawa has the meaning of "when?"

Where is it, _dhagawana?_ Where (having the meaning of "which one,")
_dhagala?_ Where are thou, _dhagawandu?_ Where are you (dual),
_dhagawandubla?_ Where are you (plural), _dhagawandugir?_ From where,
_dhadyindaburramai?_ Where art thou from, _dhadyigalliwandu?_ Where is
the camp, _dhagawa ngurung?_

_Interjections_.

_Yah!_ calling attention. _Wai!_ look out. _Wah! ngarrarbang! Ah!_
poor fellow! Listen, _winnangga!_ Any vocative can be inflexed for
number.

_Numerals_.

_Ngunbai_, one; _bulla_, two.

The Burreba-Burreba Language.

The Burreba-burreba is spoken from about Deniliquin to Moulamein, and
from the latter southerly towards the Murray river. The following is a
sketch of its grammatical structure. A dialect of this language,
called Bureba, is spoken on the Murray river, near Swan Hill.

_Number_.--There are the singular, dual, and plural numbers. _Wille_,
an opossum; _willebulet_, a pair of opossums; _willebarak_, or
_willeguli_, several opossums.

_Gender_.--_Wuthu_, a man; _leurk_, a woman; _bangga_, a boy;
_kurregurk_, a girl; _buban_, a child of either sex; _wuthuginbal_,
means a man and his wife. The gender of mammals and birds is marked by
adding _mamuk_ for male, and _babuk_ for female; thus, _gure mamuk_, a
buck kangaroo; _gure babuk_, a doe kangaroo.

_Case_.--The language has the nominative, nominative-agent, genitive,
accusative, instrumental, dative and ablative cases. In the
nominative, there is no change in the noun, except when it is the
subject of a transitive verb, and then it requires the agent-suffix;
as, _Wuthung wirrungan burdumin_, a man a dog beat; _leuru wirringal
kurgin_, a woman a perch caught; _wirrunganu gure bundin_, a dog a
kangaroo bit.

In the possessive case, the name of the proprietor and of the property
each take a suffix, as, _Wuthunggety wanuk_, a man's boomerang;
_leurgety larnuk_, a woman's camp; _wirrungangety birkuk_, a dog's
tail.

_Instrumental_.--This is the same as the nominative-agent, thus, _Ngaty
gure duggin wanu_, I a kangaroo hit with a boomerang.

_Dative_.--_larngak_, to a camp. _Ablative_.--_wuthunyu_, from a man.
The accusative is the same as the nominative.

_Adjectives_.

Adjectives follow the nouns and take similar declensions.

_Number_.--_Wuthu kurumbirt_, a man large. _Wuthubulet kurumbirtbulet_,
a couple of big men. _Wuthubarak kurumbirtbarak_, several big men.

_Nominative-agent_.--_Wuthung kurumbirru wille burdumin_, a large man
an opossum killed.

_Possessive_.--_Wuthunggety kurumbirungety wanuk_, a big man's
boomerang.

_Ablative_.--Wuthunyung kurumbirung_, from a big man.

The comparison of adjectives follows rule similar to those explained
in my article on "The Gundungurra Language."[9]

It will be observed that there are modifications in the case-endings
of nouns and adjectives, depending upon the termination of the word
declined. Moreover, these suffixes for number and case are applied to
the simple nominative--not the nominative-agent.

_Pronouns_.

Pronouns take inflexion for number, person and case. There are two
forms in the first person of the dual and plural--one in which the
person or persons addressed are included with the speaker, and another
in which they are exclusive of the speaker; these are marked "incl."
and "excl." in the following table:

_Singular_.

 1st Person I         _Ngaty_     Mine        _yekaiuk_.
 2nd "      Thou      _Ngin_      Thine       _Ngindaiuk_.
 3rd "      He        _Malu_      His         _Maigungety_.

_Dual_.

 1st Person We, incl. _Ngal_      Ours, incl. _Ngallaiuk_.
            We, excl. _Ngalung_   Ours, excl. _Ngallunguk_.
 2nd "      You       _Ngluen_    Yours       _Ngulaiuk_.
 3rd "      They      _Malubulak_ Theirs      _Magaty-bulagaty_.

_Plural_.

 1st Person We, incl. _Yangur_    Ours, incl. _Yangureuk_.
            We, excl. _Yandang_   Ours, excl. _Yandeuk_.
 2nd "      You       _Ngut_      Yours       _Nguteuk_.
 3rd "      They      _Malugulik_ THeirs      _Ngugaty-guligaty_.

_Interrogatives_.--Who, _winyar?_ (singular)--_winyarbula_ (dual) and
_winyartukuli_ (plural). What, _nganyu?_ which also has a dual and
plural form.

_Demonstratives_.--This, _ginga_, which has a dual and plural suffix.
_Malu_, that; _kila_, that near you. _Munya_, that farther away.
_Kigety_, belonging to that. _Kigety-bulugety_, belonging to those
two. _Kigety-guligety_, belonging to all those.

_Verbs_.

Verbs have the same tenses and moods as those of the Wiradyuri, as
will be demonstrated in the conjugation of the verb "to beat." In the
Burreba-burreba verb there are, however, no regular modifications of
the past and future tenses, such meanings being expressed by separate
words.

_Active Voice_--_Indicative Mood_.

_Present Tense_.

 1st Person I beat       _Ngaty tyilba_.
 2nd "      Thou beatest _Ngin tyilba_.
 3rd "      He beats     _Malu tyilba_.

_Past Tense_.

 1st Person I beat       _Ngaty tyilbin_.

_Future Tense_.

 1st Person I will beat  _Ngaty tyilben_.

_Imperative Mood_.

 Beat, _tyilbak_. Beat not, _burreba tyilbak_.

_Conditional Mood_.

 Perhaps I will beat, _Ngaty tyilben mumbun_.

In all the foregoing examples, the remaining persons and numbers of
the verb can be supplied by the table of pronouns.

_Middle Voice_--_Indicative Mood_.

_Present Tense_.

 Singular. I am beating myself. _Tyilbanyungbenggat_.

The conjugation can be continued through all the moods, tenses, etc.,
the same as in the indicative mood.

_Reciprocal_.

 We two (incl.) are beating each other, _Tyilptyerrungal_.
 We all (incl.) are beating each other, _Tyilptyerrungungur_.

There are forms for all the persons and tenses.

_Adverbs_.

Yes, _ngungui_. No, _burreba_. To-day, _gillaty_. To-morrow, _perbur_.
Yesterday, _dyelli-dyellik_. By and bye, _gillandam_. Some time ago,
_gillenadya_. Long ago, _yagaluk-wanda_. Where, _windyella_?
(singular); _windyellaubul?_ (dual); _windyellat?_ (plural). How many,
_nyabur?_ Here, _kingga_. There, _nyua_.

_Numerals_.

One, _kaiapmin_. Two, _buletya_.

Initiation Ceremonies and Marriage Laws.

The initiation ceremonies of the Burreba-burreba are the same in all
essential respects as those of the Wiradyuri tribes, which I have
described in detail elsewhere.[10] The social organisation is also
similar to the Wiradyuri, comprising two phratries, each of which is
subdivided into two sections, as exemplified in the following
synopsis:--

 Phratry. A man.  Marries    Sons    and Daughters.
 A        _Murri_ _Ippatha_  _Umbi_  and _Butha_.
          _Kubbi_ _Butha_    _Ippai_ and _Ippatha_.
 B        _Ippai_ _Matha_    _Kubbi_ and _Kubbitha_.
          _Umbi_  _Kubbitha_ _Murri_ and _Matha_.

Although marriages generally follow the above rules, yet in certain
cases Murri can marry Butha, and Kubbi may take Ippatha as his spouse--
a similar liberty being allowed the men of phratry B. Again, where
there is no objection arising from nearness of kin, a Murri man may
marry a Matha woman, but her totem must be different from his, and she
must belong to a distant family. This applies to the men of every
section. By the strict letters of the foregoing table, it would appear
that the child of a brother can marry the child of a sister, but this
is rigorously forbidden--the table being construed to mean that a
brother's child's child marries a sister's child's child.

Each phratry has attached to it a group of _totems_, consisting of
animals and inanimate objects. Every man, woman, and child in the
community has his particular totem, which is inherited from birth. For
further information on this subject the reader is referred to numerous
papers contributed by me to different scientific societies.

The Ngunawal Language.

The native tribes speaking the Ngunawal tongue occupy the country from
Goulburn to Yass and Burrowa, extending southerly to Lake George and
Goodradigbee.

In a contribution to the Anthropological Society at Washington in
1896, described the Bunan ceremony,[11] an elaborate type of
initiation practised by the Ngunawal in common with other communities.
In 1900 I published an account of the Kudsha[12] or Kuddya, an
abridged form of inaugural ceremony which is likewise in force among
the same people. The social organisation regulating marriage and
descent, which I described in the last mentioned article,[13] also
applies to the Ngunawal.

The Ngunawal is one of an aggregate of tribes whose sacred songs I
have learnt and published, with the accompanying music, in an article
I communicated to the Royal Geographical Society of Queensland in
1901.[14] These are the first sacred songs of the Australian
Aborigines which have ever been set to music.

_Nouns_.

_Number_.--Nouns have three numbers. _Mirri_, a dog; _mirribula_, a
couple of dogs; _mirridyimma_, several dogs.

_Gender_.--_Baual_, a man; _bullan_, a woman. Words for "male" and
"female" distinguish the gender of animals, as, _gurabun muddun_, a
bear, male; _gurabun dhuruk_, a bear, female.

_Case_.--The principal cases are the nominative, causative,
instrumental, genitive, accusative, dative and ablative.

The nominative is the name of the sbuject at rest, and is without
flexion.

The causative, or nominative-agent, represents the subject in action,
as, _bullanga gudha ngubumuin_, a woman a child beat.

_Instrumental_.--_Baualga burraingu nguburin dyuinga_, a man a wallaby
killed with a spear. Here the instrument, a spear, takes the same
suffix as the causative. The wallaby, _burrai_, takes the genitive
affix, as being the possessor or recipient of the killing.

_Accusative_.--Except in such instances as the wallaby in the last
example, the accusative is the same as the nominative.

The genitive case is represented by an affix to the name of the
property as well as to that of the owner, a peculiarity which I was
the first to report[15] in Australian languages. _Baualngu mirriwung_,
a man's dog.

Every object over which ownership may be exercised can be declined for
number and person, as under:--
 Singular 1st Person My dog (dog my) _Mirridya_.
          2nd "      Thy dog         _Mirridyi_.
          3rd "      His dog         _MIrriwung_.
and so on through all the persons of the dual and plural.

If a couple or more articles be claimed, an infix is inserted between
the noun root and the possessive affix, thus: _Mirribuladya_, dogs
both mine; _mirridyimmadya_, dogs several mine.

_Dative_.--_Ngurani munnagai_, to the camp come.

_Ablative_.--_Ngurawurradyi yerribiwurri_, from the camp go away.

_Adjectives_.

Adjectives follow the qualified nouns, and are inflected in the same
manner for number and case. _Buru mununmang_, a kangaroo large;
_burubula mununbula_, a couple of large kangaroos; _burudyimma
munundyimma_, several large kangaroos.

_Casuative._--_Baualga mununga mirri ngubuningga_, a man large a dog
will beat. The other cases are also declined like the nouns.
Frequently one of the affixes, both in number and case, is omitted
sometimes the affix of the noun, and in other instances that of the
adjective, being thus eliminated, according to the euphony of the
expression.

A predicative adjective becomes an intransitive verb, and is
conjugated accordingly. An example in the singular will be sufficient:

 Singular 1st Person I am large     _Mununmangga_.
          2nd "      Thou art large _Mununmandyi_.
          3rd "      He is large    _Mununman_.

Comparison of adjecitves is effected by such expressions as, _Gudba
ngunu, yeddhung nin_, bad this, good that. _Yeddhung madi ngunu_, this
is very good.

_Pronouns_.

These are declined for number, person and case, but are without
gender. They contain the inclusive and exclusive forms in the first
person of the dual and plural:

 Singular 1st Person I    _Gulangga_.
          2nd "      Thou _Gulandyi_.
          3rd "      He   _Dhanu_.

Examples in the dual and plural are omitted, as their terminations
will appear in the conjugation of the verbs. The foregoing full forms
of the pronouns are used chiefly in answer to a question. In ordinary
conversation the pronominal suffixes to verbs, nouns and other parts
of speech, supply their place.

Towards, or with, me, _gulangguria_. Away from me, _gulangguridyia_.
Belonging to me, _gulangguia_. Myself, _mittimbaldya_, and so on. All
these can be inflected for number and person.

_Demonstratives_.--These may be classed under different heads, of which
the following are a few examples:

_Position_.--_Ngunu_, this, close. _Ngunubun_, this also. _Nin_, that.
_Ninwulu_, that only. _Wurranaguddha_, that, a little way off.
_Warranandiwang_, that, farther still. _Mudhamaguwarri_, a long way
off.

_Direction_.--_Ngunaga_, that (in rear of speaker). _Barunggo_, that
(in front of speaker). _Ngunainbil_, that this side (of something).
_Nguna-au_, that on other side (of something). _Gagurwarru_, that in
the hollow. _Warrugunnawang_, that on the rising ground, or hill.

_Size_.--_Warranalang_, that large one. _Warranuggada_, that small one.

_Possessive_.--_Ningulangu_, belonging to that. _Warranalangu_,
belonging to that large one. _Nidyulangu_, belonging to those two
persons.

_Number_.--_Warranungulu_, those two. _Warradyimmilan_, those several
animals or things.

_Person_.--_Ngunadya_, this mine. _Ngunadyi_, this thine. _Ngunawung_,
this his.

"This" and "that" in all the foregoing examples can also
mean "here" and "there" according to the context.

_Interrogatives_.--Who, _ngunnaga?_ Whose, _ngunnagangu?_ Who from,
_ngunnaganguridyi?_ What, _minya?_ What (did something), _minyaga?_

_Verbs_.

The verb has the usual moods and tenses, and is inflected throughout
for number and person. In the first person of the dual and plural
there is a variation in the affix to the verb to indicate the
inclusion or exclusion of the person spoken to.

_Indicative Mood_--_Present Tense_.

 Singular 1st Person I beat          _Ngubumangga_.
          2nd "      Thou beatest    _Ngubumandyi_.
          3rd "      He beats        _Ngubuman_.
 Dual     1st Person We, incl., beat _Ngubumanga_.
                     We, excl., beat _Ngubumangalu_.
          2nd "      You beat        _Ngubumanbu_.
          3rd "      They beat       _Ngubumanbula_.
 Plural   1st Person We, incl. beat, _Ngubumanyin_.
                     We, excl. beat, _Ngubumanyilla_.
          2nd "      You beat        _Ngubumanhu_.
          3rd "      They beat       _Ngubumandyula_.

_Past Tense_.

 1st Person I beat, indefinite      _Nguburingga_.
 Singular,  I beat recently         _Ngubumuingga_.
            I beat going along      _Ngubunyirringga_.
            I beat long ago         _Nguburiangga_.

_Future_.

            I will beat, indefinite _Ngubuningga_.
            I will beat soon        _Ngubumunningga_.

The inflections extend through all the persons and numbers of the past
and future tenses by means of the suffixed particles shown in the
present tense.

_Imperative_.

 Singular Beat thou               _Ngubi_.
 Dual     Beat you                _Ngubidyaiau_.
 Plural   Beat you                _Ngubidyaianhu_.
 Negative or prohibitive Beat not _Ngubimuga_.

_Conditional Mood_.

 Perhaps I will beat              _Ngubuninggawundu_.

_Reflexive_.

 I am beating myself               _Ngubuwillimangga_.
 I was beating myself              _Ngubuwilliringga_.
 I will beat myself                _Ngubuwilliningga_.
and so on for the other persons and numbers.
 Imperative.--Beat thyself          _Ngubuwilli_.

_Reciprocal_.

 Dual   We, excl., beat each other _Ngubuwillaringalung_.
 Plural We, excl., beat each other _Ngubuwillarinyilla_.

_Imperative reciprocal_.

 Dual   Beat each other            _Ngubilliau_.
 Plural Beat each other            _Ngubillianhu_.

An infix, _muga_, between the stem of the verb and the termination,
gives a negative meaning, as, _Ngubumugamangalu_, we, dual exclusive,
did not beat.

There is no passive form of the verb, all sentences being in the
active voice, thus, instead of saying, "A boomerang was thrown by the
man," the phrase would be, "The man threw a boomerang."

The verb is inflected for the same number as the noun.
 A kangaroo saw I, _buru nangurringga_.
 A pair of kangaroos saw I, _burumbla nangurringbla_.
 Several kangaroos saw I, _burulula nangurringdyula_.

Different shades of meaning are imparted to verbs by additions to the
affixes:
 I was eating going along, _dhaimballinyirrimuingga_.
 I beat before (some event), _ngubururingawung_.
 I beat after (some event), _ngubullaringawung_.
 I threw frequently, _yerrimbillidyingga_.
 I was throwing alone, _yerrilimuingga_.
 I am always beating, _ngubadyingga_.

_Adverbs_.

Yes, _ngi_. No, _gurragan_. Now, _yanggu_. Yesterday, _burranda_. By
and by, _gaugau_. Long ago, _nudyina_. Always, _bulu_.

How, _ngindyin_. How many, or what number, _wunnamalan_. Where,
_wunda_. Certainly, _ganni_. Then, _yanbi_. Very or really, _madi_.
Perhaps, _wundu_. Not, _muga_. When, _wundin_.

Certain adverbs can be inflected for person and number, thus:
 Where shall I go? _Wundayerrabunningga?_
 Where shalt thou go? _Wundayerrabunnindyi?_
 Where shall he go? _Wundayerrabunnin?_
and so on for all persons and numbers.

_Prepositions_.

On top, _gunna_. Down, _dhugga_. Between, _dhuri_. Behind me,
_bengalwarria_. Outside, _bunnungga_. Out of that, _barridyi_. In rear
of me, _wullingaia_. In here, _ngunna_. In or under there, _ngunnin_.

Words meaning "is here," "was here," "will be here," also exist in
this language.

Many prepositions can be inflected for number and person:
 Singular 1st Person In front of me   _Ngunalundya_.
          2nd "      In front of thee _Ngunalundyi_.
          3rd "      In front of him  _Ngunalung_.
and so on through the dual and plural.

_Exclamations_.

_Ya!_ calling attention.--_Bungamugi_, cease!

_Numerals_.

One, _meddhung_. Two, _bullala_.

Vocabulary of Wiradyuri Words.

This vocabulary contains about 430 words collected personally among
the Wiradyuri natives on the Lachlan, Macquarie, and Murrumbidgee
rivers. Instead of arranging the words alphabetically they are placed
together under separate headings:--Family terms--Parts of the body--
Natural objects--Animals--Trees--Weapons--Adjectives--Verbs. As the
equivalents of English terms will most frequently be required they are
put first.[16]

FAMILY TERMS.

A man                      _gibir_ or _men_.
Old man                    _bidyar_.
Husband                    _nguban_.
Clever man                 _wiardhuri_.
Young man                  _walwi_.
Small boy                  _gibirgang_.
Woman                      _inar_ or _buladyeru_.
Old woman                  _buddung_.
Girl                       _gunnadhurai_.
Child, either sex          _burai_.
Father                     _bubbin_.
Mother                     _guni_.
Elder brother              _gagang_.
Younger brother            _galbuman_.
Elder sister               _min-gan_.
Younger sister             _barrigan_.
Infirm old person          _gugun_.

PARTS OF THE BODY.

Head                        _bullang_.
Forehead                    _ngulung_.
Hair of head                _wuran_.
Beard                       _yerran_.
Eye                         _mill_.
Eyebrow                     _nyer_.
Eyelid                      _milk-kuruganna_.
Eyelash                     _dyirmir_.
Nose                        _murudha_.
Nostrils                    _mirral-mirril_.
Cheek                       _dhuggal_.
Lower jaw                   _nhami_.
Back of neck                _nhun_.
Throat                      _guddhe_.
Ear                         _wudha_.
Mouth                       _ngun_.
Lips                        _willin_.
Tongue                      _thallun_.
Teeth                       _irang_.
Liver                       _guralu_.
Kidneys                     _munggar_.
Breasts, female             _ngammung_.
Heart                       _gen_.
Navel                       _birran_.
Navel-string                _gural_.
Belly                       _burbing_.
Ribs                        _dhur_.
Middle of back              _wangan_.
Back                        _birra_.
Shoulder                    _wulgar_.
Arm                         _buggur_.
Elbow                       _nyuna_.
Armpit                      _gilgin_.
Hand                        _murra_.
Wrist                       _dhummal_.
Little finger               _budyen_.
Thumb                       _gunin_.
Finger nail                 _yulu_.
Calf of leg                 _wuluma_.
Thigh                       _dhurrang_.
Knee                        _bungang_.
Kneecap                     _gurigurer_.
Shin                        _buyu_.
Foot                        _dyinnang_.
Big toe                     _gunin_.
Heel                        _dhungang_.
Intestines                  _burbin_.
Blood                       _go-an_.
Fat                         _wammo_.
Skin                        _yulun_.
Bone                        _dhubbul_.
Buttocks                    _mugun_.
Anus                        _bubul_.
Groin                       _gulin_.
Penis                       _dhun_.
Glans penis                 _nyiren_.
Testicles                   _biddha_.
Sexual desire               _wurrunha_.
Fornication                 _yungurrang_.
Vulva                       _thundu_.
Nymphae                      _dyurun_.
Meatus urinarius            _munil_.
Pubic hair                  _bui_.
Copulation                  _tharralabena_.
Semen                       _gubbung_.
Masturbation                _kuddiguddimunna_.
Urine                       _kil_.
Excrement                   _kuna_.
Venereal                    _buggin_.

NATURAL OBJECTS.

Sun                         _yere_.
Moon                        _gyu-wong_.
Stars, collectively         _mimma_.
Pleiades                    _inar-inharr_.
Venus                       _gibirgun_.
Rainbow                     _yulubirgin_.
Clouds                      _yuru_.
Sky                         _gununggullung_.
Thunder                     _muruburrai_.
Lightning                   _maru_.
Rain                        _yurung_.
Dew                         _gunggil_.
Mist                        _guddhalbar_.
Fog                         _guang_.
Snow                        _gunama_.
Frost                       _dyuggar_.
Hail                        _ilwurrai_.
Cloud                       _yurong_.
Water                       _gulling_.
Ground                      _dhuggun_.
Mud                         _bingan_.
Stones                      _wallung_.
High hill                   _dyirrama_.
Sand-hill                   _gurrai_.
Light                       _ngullan_.
Sunshine                    _iradadhuna_.
Darkness                    _buruandhang_.
Heat                        _wugil_.
Cold                        _bulludhai_.
Fire                        _wi_.
Smoke                       _guddhal_.
Camp                        _ngurung_.
Hut                         _gundyi_.
Food                        _dhungang_.
Flesh                       _dhin_.
Watercourse                 _dhurrang_.
Grass, collectively         _bogarru_.
Trees, collectively         _gigil_.
Bark of trees               _dhurang_.
Firewood                    _gigil_.
Ashes                       _bunun_.
Charcoal                    _ngurra_.
Leaves of trees             _gurril_.
Eggs                        _kubbuga_.
Honey                       _ngurru_.
Edible grub                 _dhumun_.
Pathway                     _muru_.
Shadow                      _guramun_.
Tail of animal              _dhun_.
Echo                        _warrul_.
Fur of opossum, etc.        _gidyung_.
Spines of porcupine         _girrigul_.
Scales of fish              _yirin_.

ANIMALS--_Mammals_.

Native bear                 _burrandang_.
Wombat                      _bunggada_.
Dog                         _burumain_ or _mirri_.
Wild dog                    _yuke_.
Opossum                     _womboran_ or _wille_.
Water rat                   _biggun_.
Kangaroo rat                _gulbo_.
Native cat (black & white)  _mabi_.
Native cat (yellow & white_ _dhalbirrang_.
Porcupine                   _gunyi_.
Wallaby                     _murriwan_
Flying fox                  _bullauir_.
Platypus                    _dhumbirrity_.
Bandicoot                   _gudyun_.
Flying squirrel, small      _budharung_.
Ringtail opossum            _gindang_.
Kangaroo                    _womboin_.
Wallaroo                    _gundharwar_.
Red kangaroo                _murri_.

ANIMALS--_Birds_.

Birds, collectively         _dyibbin_.
Crow                        _wagan_.
Laughing jackass            _guguburra_.
Curlew                      _gurebun_.
Plain turkey                _gumbal_.
Mallee hen                  _yunggai_.
Quail                       _gunama_.
Plain lark                  _dyilburi_.
Lark                        _buraigarama_.
Eaglehawk                   _mullian_.
Emu                         _ngurun_.
Native companion            _burolgang_.
Common magpie               _gurruba_.
Black magpie                _wibu_.
Peewee                      _guliridyi_.
Black duck                  _budhanbang_.
Pelican                     _gulaiguli_.
Ibis                        _bururgen_.
Swan                        _dhundhu_.
Mopoke                      _ngugung_.
Pigeon (bronze wing)        _yammar_ or _wubba_.
Rosella parrot              _bulanbulangang_.
Ground parrot               _buran_.
Green parrot                _gunungburdyang_.
Parrokeet                   _dhungan_.
Common hawk                 _walga_.
Fish hawk                   _bibbidya_.
Kingfisher                  _dhalir_.
White cockatoo              _muran_.
Plover                      _bullaradyara_.
Blue crane                  _murgu_.
Grey crane                  _burragang_ or _gungarung_.

ANIMALS--_Fishes_.

Perch                       _gagalen_.
Black bream                 _gubir_.

ANIMALS--_Reptiles_.

Tree iguana                 _gugar_.
Ground iguana               _guda_ or _dhuli_.
Jew lizard                  _nhurran_.
Sleepy lizard               _burrendhar_.
Shingle-back lizard         _buggai_.
Death adder                 _dhummin_.
Frog                        _gulangga_.
Turtle                      _gudumang_.
Carpet snake                _yubba_.
Black snake                 _Kullendyulin_ or _budhang_.
Brown snake                 _warraleng_.
Common grey lizard          _guddhan_.

ANIMALS--_Invertebrates_.

Locust, large               _kalangkalang_
Locust, small               _inggal_.
Blowfly                     _buga_.
Louse                       _munhu_.
Nit of louse                _thundin_.
Jumper ant                  _yalgo_.
Bulldog ant                 _burungang_.
Centipede                   _gen_.
Mosquito                    _kummun_.
Scorpion                    _dhunbun_.
Greenheaded ant             _gunama_.
Mussel                      _bindugan_.

TREES AND PLANTS.

A "squeaking-tree"          _maburan_.
Leaning tree                _dhalgang_.
Dead tree                   _yalgu_.
Hollow tree                 _ngarl_.
Apple tree                  _gubbut_.
Stringy bark                _gundai_.
Wattle                      _yanagang_.
Ironbark                    _muggar_.
Yellow-box                  _bargang_.
White-box                   _biri_.
Cherry-tree                 _bumborean_.
White gum                   _yarra_.
Jeebung                     _bumbadhulla_.

WEAPONS.

Tomahawk                    _dhauain_.
Koolamin                    _marin_.
Yamstick                    _kunnai_.
Spear, wood                 _thuli_.
Spear, reed                 _dyirril_.
Spear-thrower               _wommar_.
Spear, shield               _girran-girran_.
Waddy shield                _ngummal_.
Fighting club               _bundi_.
Hunting club                _birrang_.
Boomerang                   _burgan_, _bulgang_.
Net bag                     _kalbon_.
Fish net                    _mia_.
Nose-peg                    _bun-gal_.

ADJECTIVES.

Alive                       _murun_.
Dead                        _bullu_.
Large                       _munun_ or _binnal_.
Small                       _bubadyul_.
Long                        _bamirr_.
Short                       _bumbandhul_.
Good, right                 _murrumbang_.
Bad, wrong                  _nunnaibiddi_.
Hungry                      _ngurran_.
Thirsty                     _gullinginda_.
Red                         _girri-girri_.
White                       _burra-burra_.
Black                       _budhang_.
Green, as grass             _gidyen-gidyen_.
Quick                       _burrai_.
Slow                        _indang-yunne_.
Bilnd                       _mugin_.
Deaf                        _mugudha_.
Strong                      _yurdhura_.
Weak or light               _wura_.
Heavy                       _bunggawal_.
Valiant                     _mirringan_.
Afraid                      _gelgel_.
Sweet                       _nguddhai_.
Bitter                      _burradyung_.
Straight                    _dhulu_.
Crooked                     _wulliwulli_.
Tired                       _birrabumain_.
Silent                      _dyilmung_.
Ripe                        _yigi_.
Unripe                      _gumba_.
Blunt edge                  _mugu_.
Sharp edge                  _yunggalli_.
Fat                         _wammu_.
Lean                        _nunnaigan_.
Hot                         _wogil_.
Cold                        _balludhai_.
Clear                       _ngullar_.
Dirty                       _dhuggungir_.
Angry                       _dhullai_.
Sleepy                      _yurai_.
Glad                        _guddhang_.
Sorry                       _ngurrar_.
Greedy                      _miral_.
Grey-headed                 _yiribang_.
Sick                        _yinggal_.
Stinking                    _buga_.
Wide                        _munnar_.
Narrow                      _kurbandul_.
Baldheaded                  _gumbu_.
Many                        _muddu_.
Few                         _gulbir_.
Some                        _bubadyul_.
Jealous                     _ngulbuldhai_.
Lame                        _wirgannha_.
Near                        _kuginda_.
Far                         _birrungga_.
Deep                        _ngurambul_.
Shallow                     _gunnan_.
Pregnant                    _burbimbal_.
Hard                        _wallan_.
Soft                        _bunya_.
Dry                         _burung_.
Wet                         _giddha_.
Scarce                      _burambe_.
Plentiful                   _muddu_.
Easy                        _yeddung_.
Difficult                   _nhunnai_.

VERBS.

Die                         _bullung_.
Eat                         _dhurra_.
Drink                       _widyara_.
Sleep                       _yurai_.
Stand                       _wurrannha_.
Sit                         _winya_.
Lie                         _wirrinya_.
Come                        _dhanyana_.
Go                          _yunyunna_.
Talk                        _yerra_.
Walk                        _yanninna_.
Run                         _bunbunna_.
Bring                       _dhangangga_.
Take                        _gangga_.
Carry                       _dyirramurra_.
Make                        _dhurburra_.
Break                       _bungamurra_.
Beat                        _bumulli_.
Fight                       _bumullinnha_.
Kill                        _bullubuni_.
Arise                       _burrangga_.
Fall                        _bundinya_.
See                         _ngaga_.
Stare at                    _muramia_.
Hear                        _winnunga_.
Know                        _winnungumma_.
Think                       _ngunnulla_.
Grow                        _yurunnha_.
Give                        _ngungga_.
Love                        _guraimurra-dhunganang_.
Hate                        _widdabu-dyingandulla_.
Sing                        _bubbilli_.
Weep                        _yungga_.
Play                        _wagagi_.
Cook                        _gyu-walli_.
Marry                       _burramullina_.
Cough                       _kurra_.
Steal                       _mundubang_.
Burn                        _gunnannha_.
Beg                         _ngundadha_.
Barter                      _ngungiladha_.
Bite                        _buddha_.
Blow with breath            _bumbe_.
Catch                       _burrama_.
Climb                       _kulliana_.
Conceal                     _kurugunber_.
Cut                         _bangadya_.
Frighten                    _gelgel_.
Fly (as a bird)             _burrannha_.
Hang up                     _bielgumbirra_.
Hold                        _murama_.
Jump                        _burubidya_.
Keep                        _wirrimbir_.
Laugh                       _gindadha_.
Scratch                     _wunyadha_.
Leave off                   _yalu_.
Lose                        _nhunnainmi_.
Pinch                       _nyimma_.
Praise                      _murrambambungan_.
Rejoice                     _guddhabungan_.
Remember                    _winungadhunnal_.
Forget                      _wangganyi_.
Go ahead                    _muramuddha_.
Turn off                    _waiambiddya_.
Turn back                   _ngulungguggi_.
Send                        _wannamumbia_.
Shake                       _dyllinga_.
Shine                       _gudhara_.
Spread                      _billaima_.
Suck                        _widyarra_.
Swim                        _yawidya_.
Taste                       _nguddha_.
Touch                       _yude_.
Twist                       _waiama_.
Rub                         _nanma_.
Seek                        _wurrabinya_.
Spit                        _dyumber_.
Smell                       _budadha_.
Throw                       _birrumba_.
Pitch                       _wannungga_.
Help                        _yamma_.
Sweat                       _ngulwai_.
Roast                       _giwa_.
Whistle                     _wilbuddha_.
Avenge                      _dhullaibungando_.
Pretend _or_ lie            _yambulyala_.
Kiss                        _wiumbannhal_.
Vomit                       _mulama_.
Dance                       _wuggama_.
Dive                        _wubunginya_.
Sting                       _dhni_.
Dream                       _yeddharmurra_.

Vocabulary of Ngunawal Words.

The following vocabulary contains 290 of the most commonly used words
in the Ngunawal language, with their English equivalents. Every word
has been noted down carefully by myself from the lips of old men and
women in the native camps.

A man                 _murrin_.
Husband               _ma-ung_.
Clever man            _muyulung_.
Youth                 _warrumbul_.
Boy                   _bubal_.
Elder brother         _dyiddyang_.
Younger brother       _gugan_.
Elder sister          _dhaddung_.
Younger sister        _gulwan_.
A woman               _bullan_.
Wife                  _man_.
Girl                  _mullangan_.
Child (neuter)        _gudha_.
Children              _gudhaiar_.

THE HUMAN BODY.

Head                  _guddagang_.
Hair of head          _dherrung_.
Eye                   _migalaity_.
Nose                  _nyigity_.
Back of neck          _nhun_.
Throat                _guddity_.
Ear                   _guri_.
Mouth                 _dhambir_.
Teeth                 _yerra_.
Breast, female        _ngumminyang_.
Navel                 _nyurra_.
Belly                 _bindhi_.
Back                  _bengal_.
Arm                   _nhurung_.
Hand                  _murrangga_.
Fingers               _yulu_.
Finger-nails          _birril_.
Thigh                 _dhurra_.
Knee                  _ngumung_.
Foot                  _dyunna_.
Heart                 _gauar_.
Blood                 _dyinggi_.
Fat                   _bewan_.
Bone                  _wiak_.
Penis                 _dhun_.
Testicles             _gurra_.
Pubic Hair            _buruwarri_.
Sexual desire         _burundunnung_.
Copulation            _yangiliri_.
Masturbation          _natymiliri_.
Semen                 _burung_.
Vulva                 _binnan_.
Anus                  _dhula_.
Excrement             _gunung_.
Urine                 _dyungur_.
Venereal              _middyung_.

INANIMATE NATURE.

Sun                   _winyu_.
Moon                  _kubbadang_.
Stars                 _dyurra_.
Pleiades              _dyin-ding-gang_.
Clouds                _gurrang_.
Sky                   _mindyigari_.
Thunder               _murungul_.
Lightning             _meup-meup_.
Rain                  _garrit_.
Dew                   _dyingidyirrang_.
Frost                 _dhugguru_.
Water                 _ngadyung_.
Ground                _dhaura_.
Dust                  _dhungul_.
Mud                   _murung_.
Stone                 _gurbung_.
Sand                  _dyardyar_.
Charcoal              _murrungga_.
Light                 _dhurrawang_.
Darkness              _buranya_.
Heat                  _gunnama_.
Cold                  _gurrita_.
Dawn                  _birrimbigang_.
East wind             _bulyanggang_.
West wind             _guraguma_.
Whirlwind             _wingguraminya_.
Pipeclay              _gubbity_.
Red ochre             _gubur_.
Fire                  _kanbi_.
Smoke                 _muril_.
Food, flesh           _ngulli_.
Food, vegetable       _dyaraban_.
Flowers               _gamburra_.
Day                   _bural_.
Night                 _kagu_.
Dusk                  _dyirranggan_.
Grass                 _gurwai_.
Leaves                _dyirrang_.
Eggs                  _kubbugang_.
Honey                 _kauanggal_.
A liar                _kwigarak_.
Grubs, collectively   _gauin_.
Grubs, gum tree       _burrung_.
Grub, river oak       _dyigung_.
Pathway               _mura_.
Camp                  _nguru_.
Shadow of tree        _kumburu_.
Shadow of man         _buak_.
Summer                _winyuwangga_.
Winter                _magarawangga_.

MAMMALS.

Native bear           _gurabun_ or _gula_.
Dog                   _mirri_.
Opossum               _wille_.
Kangaroo rat          _balbu_.
Native cat            _murugun_.
Bandicoot             _mundawari_.
Small rat             _gunnimang_.
Rock wallaby          _burrai_.
Porcupine             _burugun_.
Kangaroo              _buru_.
Platypus              _malunggang_.
Flying squirrel       _banggu_.
Ringtail opossum      _dyindan_.
Bat                   _nguddya-nguddyan_.

BIRDS.

Birds, collectively   _budyan_.
Crow                  _wagulan_.
Laughing jackass      _guginyal_.
Curlew                _warabin_.
Swan                  _dyinyuk_.
Eaglehawk             _mulleun_.
Common magpie         _karrugang_.
Black magpie          _dyirrigang_.
Mopoke                _yuyu_.
Night owl             _binit-binit_.
Rosella parrot        _bunduluk_.
Common hawk           _walga_.
Kingfisher            _diktigang_.
Peewee                _giliruk_.
Plover                _bindirradirrik_.
Crane                 _galu_.
Pheasant              _dyagula_.
Black cockatoo, small _gang-gang_.
Black cockatoo, large _wamburung_.
Bower-bird            _dyara_.

FISHES.

Perch                 _dhinngur_.
Herring               _berrumbunnung_.
Eel                   _yumba_.
Gudgeon               _budang_.
Black-fish            _wuggar_.

REPTILES.

Water iguana          _dhurrawarri_.
Frog                  _dyirrigurat_.
River lizard          _biddyiwang_.
Tree iguana           _wirria_.
Sleepy lizard         _muggadhang_.
Small lizard          _bunburung_.
Death adder           _muddyawit_.
Turtle                _gudamang_.
Carpet snake          _wagur_.
Any snake             _mugga_.
Brown snake           _wurungal_.
Black snake           _dyirrabity_.
Tiger snake           _berragundhang_.
Jew lizard            _nurrung_.
Tree snake            _mulundyulung_.

INVERTEBRATES.

Locust, large         _gulan-gulan_.
Locust, small         _dyirribrit_.
Mother louse          _gunggal_.
Nit of louse          _dyanding_.
Young lice            _maiadi_.
House fly             _menga_.
Bulldog ant           _bulbul_.
Jumper ant            _dyambity_.
Maggot                _dhurraunda_.
Centipede             _gururigang_.
Mussel                _bindugan_.

TREES AND PLANTS.

Any tree              _ngulla_.
Ti-tree               _mudda_.
Wattle                _nummerak_.
Pine                  _buggumbul_.
Oak                   _dulwa_.
Cherry-tree           _mummadya_.
Gum-tree              _yerradhang_.
Yellow-box            _bargang_.
Honeysuckle           _dhulwa_.
Ironbark              _thirriwirri_.
Stringybark           _burin_.
Yam                   _dharaban_.
Bulrushes             _gummiuk_.

WEAPONS, UTENSILS, ETC.

Tomahawk              _mundubang_.
Koolamin              _gungun_.
Yamstick              _gaualang_.
Spear                 _dyuin_.
Spear lever           _womur_.
Spear shield          _bimbiang_.
Waddy shield          _murga_.
Fighting club         _kudyeru_.
Hunting club          _bundi_.
Boomerang             _berra_.
Net bag               _goan_.
Canoe                 _mundang_.
Headband              _gamban_.
Kilt                  _burran_.

ADJECTIVES.

Alive                 _mulanggari_.
Dead                  _burrakbang_.
Large                 _buggarabaug_.
Small                 _nyerrigurang_.
Tall or long          _bamir_.
Low or short          _gungur_.
Good                  _yeddung_.
Bad                   _gudba_.
Red                   _dhirrum dhirrum_.
White                 _duggurugurak_.
Black                 _buru-bura_.
Mad                   _gauang_.
Crazy                 _yugi-yugang_.
Stubborn              _wambarung_.
Valiant               _gurumbul_.
Quick                 _burrai_.
Slow                  _gunyan_.
Strong                _yurwang_.
Afraid                _dyaui-dyauty_.
Tired                 _yurrity_.
Sharp                 _midyir-midyir_.
Fat                   _bewanbang_.
Lean                  _ngauatyba_.
Hot                   _winyudha_.
Cold                  _gurrit_.
Angry                 _yugo_.
Sleepy                _gung-gung_.
Glad                  _waddhir_.
Sorry                 _ngaralda_.
Greedy                _merradhin_.
Sick                  _ger_.
Stinking              _bugung_.
Much                  _gurung_.
Little                _muinggang_.
Pregnant              _malingilimang_.
True                  _gundyaina_.

VERBS.

Die                   _berak_.
Eat                   _dhaimbaliri_.
Drink                 _wimbaliri_.
Sleep                 _ngambori_.
Stand                 _dharri-iri_.
Sit                   _ngulla-iri_.
Talk                  _dhuniai_.
Tell                  _dhuniung_.
Walk                  _yerrabi_.
Run                   _munni_.
Bring                 _munnagali_.
Take                  _mali_.
Make                  _bungi_.
Break                 _mudyat_.
Chastise              _millai_.
Beat                  _ngubi_.
Arise                 _badyi_.
Fall down             _buggali_.
See                   _nangi_.
Look                  _naii_.
Hear                  _ngurrambai_.
Listen                _wanggirrali_.
Give                  _yunggi_.
Cook                  _dyandai_.
Steal                 _gurrangi_.
Request               _dyunggadyai_.
Sing                  _yunggaballi_.
Weep                  _nyimali_.
Blow, with breath     _bumbi_.
Blow, as wind         _bunima_.
Climb                 _bui-i_.
Conceal               _buddai_.
Jump                  _dyutbi_.
Laugh                 _birrigai_.
Scratch               _birradilli_.
Tear                  _bunggur_.
Forget                _walagi_.
Do                    _bungi_.
Send                  _iddyi_.
Suck                  _bindi_.
Swim                  _yerra_.
Fly                   _yerra_.
Bathe                 _ngaugi_.
Search for            _gadi_.
Spit                  _dyugai_.
Smell                 _billai_.
Bite                  _burri_.
Play                  _woggabaliri_.
Touch or catch        _mungga-iri_.
Throw                 _yerrambi_.
Pitch                 _wadhi_.
Whistle               _windi_.
Pretend               _kwigai_.
Vomit                 _garrugi_.
Dance                 _wagi_.
Dive                  _burugi_.
Sting                 _dyandi_.
Hunt                  _gadali_.
To scent, as a dog    _gundali_.
Drive                 _dhurali_.
Go                    _yerrabi_.
Come                  _munnagai_.
Burn                  _gunnami_.
Chop                  _gudbaiiri_.
Feel                  _burrangiri_.

[1] "Initiation Ceremonies of Australian Tribes," _Proc. Amer. Philos.
Soc._, vol. xxxvi, pp. 54-73, map.

[2] "The Group Divisions and Initiation Ceremonies of the Bar-Kunjee
Tribes," _Journ. Roy. Soc. N.S. Wales_, vol. xxxii, pp. 240-250, map.
That map includes with the Wiradyuri, the territory of the
Burreba-burreba tribe, because their initiation ceremonies and
marriage laws are the same.

[3] "The Victorian Aborigines: their Initiation Ceremonies and
Division Systems," _American Anthropologist_, vol. xi, pp. 325-343,
map.

[4] "Languages of the Kamilaroi and Other Tribes of New South Wales,"
_Journ. Anthrop. Inst._, vol. xxxiii, p. 259.

[5] "An Australian Language" (Sydney, 1892), _Appendix_, p. 60.

[6] "The Burbung of the Wiradyuri Tribes," _Journ. Anthrop. Inst._,
vol. xxv, pp. 295-318. _Ibid._, vol. xxvi, pp. 272-285. "The
Initiation Ceremonies of the Aborigines of the Upper Lachlan," _Proc.
Roy. Geog. Soc. Austr._, _Queensland Bch._, vol. xi, pp. 167-169.

"The Burbung or Initiation Ceremonies of the Murrumbidgee Tribes,"
_Journ. Roy Soc. N.S. Wales_, vol. xxxi, pp. 111-153.

"The Burbung of the Wiradhuri Tribes," _Proc. Roy. Soc. Queensland_,
vol. xvi, pp. 35-38.

[7] "The Aboriginal Languages of Victoria," _Journ. Roy. Soc. N.S.
Wales_, vol. xxxvi, p. 76.

[8] Compare with my "Yookumbil Language," _Queensland Geog. Journ._,
vol. xvii, pp. 63-67.

[9] _Proc. Amer. Philos. Soc._, Philadelphia, vol. xl, No. 167.

[10] "The Burbung, etc., of the Murrumbidgee Tribes," _Journ. Roy.
Soc. N.S. Wales_, vol. xxxi, pp. 111-153.

[11] _American Anthropologist_, vol. ix, pp. 327-334, Plate VI.

[12] _Journ. Roy. Soc. N.S. Wales_, vol. xxxiv, pp. 276-281.

[13] _Ibid._, pp. 263-364.

[14] "Aboriginal Songs at Initiation Ceremonies," _Queensland
Geographical Journal_, vol. xvii. pp. 61-63.

[15] See my "Thurrawal Language," _Journ. Roy. Soc. N.S. Wales_, vol.
xxxv, p. 131.

[16] Compare with my "Dharruk Language and Vocabulary," _Journ. Roy.
Soc. N.S. Wales_, vol. xxxv, pp. 155-160.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Wiradyuri and Other Languages of
New South Wales, by Robert Hamilton Mathews

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE WIRADYURI AND OTHER ***

***** This file should be named 18978.txt or 18978.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/8/9/7/18978/



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
