The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Great Round World and What Is Going On
In It, Vol. 2, No. 11, March 17, 1898, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Great Round World and What Is Going On In It, Vol. 2, No. 11, March 17, 1898
       A Weekly Magazine for Boys and Girls

Author: Various

Editor: Julia Truitt Bishop

Release Date: August 19, 2006 [EBook #19081]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GREAT ROUND WORLD AND ***




Produced by Emmy, Juliet Sutherland and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net








  _FIVE CENTS._

  THE GREAT ROUND WORLD
  AND WHAT IS GOING ON IN IT

    Vol. 2--No. 11.              March 17, 1898.             No. 71.
  [Entered at Post Office, New York City, as second class matter]

  [Illustration: A
  WEEKLY
  NEWSPAPER
  FOR
  BOYS AND
  GIRLS]

  Subscription
  $1.50 per year
    .75 6 months


      THE GREAT ROUND WORLD PUBL. CO.
      NO. 3 AND 5 WEST 18TH ST. NEW YORK CITY

  =Copyright, 1898, by THE GREAT ROUND WORLD Publishing Company.=

       *       *       *       *       *


The Great Round World

Published Every Thursday Throughout the Year

=Single Numbers, 5c. Each=

       *       *       *       *       *

SUBSCRIPTION RATES:

          One year, - 52 numbers   $1.50
          Six months, 26  "          .75
          Foreign subscriptions     2.25

Numbers are bound up into four parts each year. Charge for binding, 35
cents a part.

Remittances should be by registered letter, or by check, express-order,
or postal-order, payable to THE GREAT ROUND WORLD PUBLISHING CO.

No receipts are sent for remittances unless requested. The number on the
address label represents the number of the paper with which subscription
will expire.

Ten days' notice should be given of any change of address.

          ADVERTISING RATES ON APPLICATION

          =ADDRESS:=

          Great Round World Publishing Co.
          =3 and 5 West 18th Street, New York City=

       *       *       *       *       *

At any of the following stores copies and bound volumes of THE GREAT
ROUND WORLD will be found on sale, and subscribers may exchange their
numbers for bound volumes:

          JOHN WANAMAKER, Philadelphia, Pa.
          W. B. CLARKE & CO., Boston, Mass.
          J. & R. SIMMS, 123 22d St., Chicago, Ill.
          WOODWARD & LOTHROP, Washington, D. C.
          PETER PAUL BOOK CO., Buffalo, N. Y.
          BURROWS BROS. CO., Cleveland, Ohio.
          PRESTON & ROUNDS CO., Providence, R. I.
          H. H. CARTER & CO., Boston, Mass.
          WHITAKER & RAY CO., San Francisco, Cal.
          THE ROBERT CLARKE CO., Cincinnati, O.
          THE MARTIN & HOYT CO., Atlanta, Ga.
          ST. PAUL BOOK & STATIONERY CO., St. Paul, Minn.

       *       *       *       *       *



=American Flags=

       *       *       *       *       *

_=Lowest Prices in the United States=_

[Illustration: American Flag]

Flags made of the best all-wool double-warped U. S. government standard
bunting, 45 stars sewn in the field, both sides, with canvas headings,
best lacquered brass grummets, and all double stitched.

=NET PRICES=

  2x3    feet  $0.75    5x8    feet  $2.80   7x14 feet      $6.00
  2-1/2x4  "    1.00    6x6-1/2  "    3.00   8x12   "        5.60
  3x5      "    1.45    5x10     "    3.40   8x15   "        6.70
  3x6      "    1.75    6x9      "    3.50   8x16   "        7.15
  4x6      "    2.00    6x10     "    3.85   9x15   "        7.75
  4x7      "    2.25    6x12     "    4.50   9x18   "        8.75
  4x8      "    2.50    7x12     "    5.25   10x15  "        8.25

=Cotton bunting, printed muslin, and printed silk flags, flagpoles,
etc., at proportionately cheap prices. Send for complete catalogue.=

=Caps, Guns, Swords, Uniforms and all Equipments for "AMERICAN GUARD"=
boys at favorable prices. Send for catalogue, mentioning "The Great
Round World."

       *       *       *       *       *

=J. A. JOEL & CO., 86 Nassau St., New York=

       *       *       *       *       *

ANNOUNCEMENT ...

          OUR NEW

          Premium Catalogue

          WILL BE READY

          =MARCH 31st, 1898=

          And will be issued with Number 73 of

          The Great Round World

All of our regular subscribers will receive copies on that date, but if
those who have friends who might take advantage of the premiums offered,
will forward us their names and addresses at once, we will send them
copies of the premium list _postpaid free of charge_.

This catalogue will contain 32 pages filled with premiums offered for
new subscriptions, ranging all the way from paper-covered novels offered
for one new subscriber each, to bicycles which can be had free for one
hundred new subscriptions.

Almost anything you want can be earned without cost to you by getting
new subscribers. Send for one of our new catalogues, and if you don't
find what you want, ask for it.




King's.Historical.Chart

OF UNITED STATES.

=Cloth covers with metal supports (size 36x40). Price $15 net. Sent upon
receipt of $3.00 (see offer below).=

       *       *       *       *       *

This chart is arranged in three plates and is so planned that the
history of any State may be traced from date of discovery to the present
time. Or the important items of history in any period may be quickly
ascertained.

For example, the question is asked, "Name the divisions of this country
in the year 1600 in order of size?" Turning to the circle for this
period the answer is easily ascertained, and is "Province of Louisiana,
New Spain, Virginia, Florida."

"What State was named first; give its history?" Answer, "Florida,
discovered in 1512 by De Leon; ceded to England by Spain in 1763; ceded
back to Spain 1783; ceded to United States 1819."

To obtain an answer to such questions from any history would necessitate
a waste of much time. This chart is in itself an

=Encyclopedia of U. S. History=

and will prove invaluable to a school. It furnishes material for study,
for composition, for examinations and reviews, for topical work, and an
unlimited amount of other work.

PLATE I.--Contains Discoveries, Settlements, People, Cessions of
Territory, Wars.

PLATE II.--States East of Mississippi, Governments, Governors,
Presidents, Wars, Battles, Massacres, Rebellions, Population, Capitols,
Indian Wars, Religious Denominations, Universities, Colleges, Births and
Deaths of Statesmen, Soldiers, Poets, Historians, Philosophers,
Theologians, and Events.

PLATE III.--Contains the same information in regard to States west of
the Mississippi; also an outline showing the political changes, the
origin, growth, and changes in the great political parties.

It is not always possible for a school to invest this amount of money at
one time; the chart will therefore be sold on terms that will place it
within the reach of every one. Fill out the blank below, enclose $3.00,
and chart will be forwarded at once to your address.

       *       *       *       *       *

          =To William Beverley Harison:=    3 & 5 West 18th Street,
                                           NEW YORK.

_Send to address below King's Historical Chart. Enclosed find
.................... for $3.00. I agree to pay balance, $1.00 per month
for twelve months, or until full price ($15.00) is paid._


          _Name_.......................................
    _Date_.................    _Address_............................




          =NOW READY=        =Special Price to Teachers=

Rational Home Gymnastics

By

HARTVIG NISSEN

Acting director of Physical Training, Boston Public Schools; author of
_A B C of Swedish Educational Gymnastics, etc., etc._

=CONTENTS=

  =Chapter 1. The "Why" and "How."=
  =Chapter 2. Description of Movements and their Effects.=
  =Chapter 3. Health Points on Walking and Bicycling.=
  =Chapter 4. The Use of Water and Massage.=
  =Chapter 5. Prescription of Exercise for the "Well" and the "Sick."=

       *       *       *       *       *

With More Than Forty Full-page Illustrations and a Very Complete Index

       *       *       *       *       *

No one is better qualified to prepare a work of this nature than
Professor Nissen, and he has condensed the knowledge gained during his
twenty years' experience as a teacher of physical culture and medical
gymnastics into a concise, convenient, and comprehensive manual of
_rational_ home gymnastics. The unusually complete series of
illustrations, all of which are reproduced from photographs, make the
book of exceptional value. For the teacher of gymnastics and physical
culture, the athlete, and the man or woman, boy or girl, who is
sufficiently wise to see the benefits of sensible and reasonable
exercise, no better guide and hand-book has been published.

       *       *       *       *       *

="SCHOOL" might with equal truth and propriety be substituted for "HOME"
in the title.=

       *       *       *       *       *

_Printed in a beautiful clear type on heavy coated paper, stoutly and
artistically bound in cloth. Price $1.00 postpaid._

       *       *       *       *       *

Correspondence with regard to the examination and introduction of
Nissen's "Rational Home Gymnastics" is cordially invited. Specimen pages
free on application.

       *       *       *       *       *

          =Richard G. Badger & Co.,=  _157 Fremont Street_
                                         _Boston_

In writing mention THE GREAT ROUND WORLD.




          =Something New
          for the .. ..
          CHILDREN=

[Illustration: Patent applied for.]

"DOLL'S FURNITURE PATTERNS"

          A Supplementary Work
          to the
          Industrial Side
          of the .. ..
          =KINDERGARTEN=

Printed on Muslin, in beautiful designs marked where to cut out, and sew
together. Use pasteboard for the backs, and cotton for the filling. A
pleasant and beneficial employment for the LITTLE ONES AT HOME.......

For the practibility of the many ideas, viz.: Design, Cutting out,
Drawing, Sewing, Form, and Color. The result is an indestructible and
BEAUTIFUL TOY. For sale at Dry-Goods Stores, or sent on receipt
of..............

12 Cents in Stamps.

=Palmer Manufacturing Co., 43 and 45 Leonard St., New York=

       *       *       *       *       *

The Everett Piano.

          =Highest Grade
          Uprights, Baby and Concert
          Grands....=

          WE
          INVITE
          INSPECTION

          =Pianos....=
          RENTED AND SOLD
          ON EASY
          MONTHLY PAYMENTS

          =WAREROOMS=

          =141-143 Fifth Ave., near 21st St.,=
          =NEW YORK=

          =... Also BOSTON, CHICAGO, CINCINNATI, and ATLANTA ...=




The Great Round World

And What Is Going On In It

       *       *       *       *       *

Vol. II., No. 11.   MARCH 17, 1898   Whole No. 70

       *       *       *       *       *



[Sidenote: =With the Editor=]

Spain and the Cuban situation continue to form the great centres of
interest in this week's news. With the continuation of active
preparations on the part of the United States and Spain, the crisis
seems to be rapidly approaching. It is to be hoped that each will
succeed in making itself so strong that war may be averted because of
its probable magnitude. The presence of two strong fleets, opposed to
each other, on the high seas could not but prove a menace to the
interests of other nations; the prospect of this may of itself lead to a
peaceful conclusion through the intervention of some one of the great
powers. War seems a glorious thing to those who have not known its
horrors; to experience it is quite another thing. In any event it would
mean to many loss of fathers or brothers, destruction of property,
paralysis of business--and all for what? That some point might be
attained, some pride gratified, some enemy humbled--results as easily
accomplished by arbitration the great blessing of the century. We may
not ourselves be able to do anything to avert war. Each of us, however,
can do his share toward creating a sentiment in favor of peace, and
thus overcome the effect of the mischief-makers who, crying war at the
top of their lungs now, will be the first to shirk duty if we have to
fight.

       *       *       *       *       *

We take pleasure in announcing that the publication of "The Great Round
World, and the People Who Lived on It," by Mme. Z. A. Ragozin, the first
numbers of which appeared in THE GREAT ROUND WORLD some months ago, will
be continued shortly. Serious illness of the author has until this time
interfered with its continuation.

       *       *       *       *       *

Our new premium catalogue which was announced several weeks ago will be
mailed with No. 73 of THE GREAT ROUND WORLD, for March 31st. Every
subscriber will get a copy. Others can have it on application.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Answers to Correspondents=

We have received the following very interesting letter from the City of
Mexico:

          DEAR EDITOR:

          I read in one of last July's numbers of THE GREAT
          ROUND WORLD a request for further information
          about the Empress Carlotta or the Emperor
          Maximilian.

          We have a little summer home in the same town of
          Cuernavaca where they had their residence.

          I don't wonder that they chose it for a summer
          home, it is such a beautiful spot and the climate
          perfection. It is fifty miles in air-line from the
          City of Mexico.

          Their residence in Cuernavaca was an old place
          called "Jardin de la Borda." The house is of no
          importance, but the garden is one of the beautiful
          sights of Mexico; though now in a state of ruin,
          it is all fountains, terraces, lakes, flowers, and
          trees.

          The Emperor also had his shooting-lodge about
          three miles out, with a small house on the
          grounds. Madame D---- (who was maid of honor to
          the Empress) told my mother that it was used
          simply as a resting-place for the huntsmen and a
          place of picnicking by the court. It is called
          "Casa del Campo." It is also in a ruinous state,
          is rented for $100 per year silver, and is used as
          a kind of beer-garden.

          About ten miles from the town of Cuernavaca there
          is the magnificent hacienda of Atlascomulco,
          originally owned by Hernan Cortez. The greater
          portion of the building stands as Cortez left it,
          the walls being in many places five feet thick.

          In the orchard attached is a small one-story house
          where Maximilian spent many hours of his stay at
          Cuernavaca; and there in a small room he signed
          the famous "Banda Negra" (Black Decree) which
          caused him to be so hated and which hastened his
          fall.

          There are still to be seen the table, chair, and
          pen said to have been used by Maximilian when he
          signed the Black Decree.         JOHN R. D., JR.

       *       *       *       *       *

=New Books=

From Germany we have received a most interesting little publication for
our girls, and also a most valuable chart which will interest their
elders.

"Fuer fleissige Kinderhaende. Anleitung und Muster fuer Bekleidung einer
Puppe. Von Julie Lutz, Lehrerin der Frauenarbeitsschule, Heilbronn," is
the title of the former. We hope to see an English edition of this some
time soon, for many of our readers may not find German so easy to
understand. However, even though this has the directions in German, it
will be very much appreciated by all.

It consists of a good strong portfolio, or case, containing a number of
patterns for doll clothes, printed on heavy strong paper, so that they
may be cut out and used over and over again. Each pattern is in a strong
envelope, so that it may be kept separate, and on each envelope is a
picture of the garment, to aid in putting it together. With the pattern
is a pamphlet giving (in German) full and careful directions.

The chart is the 1897 edition of Dr. Berghaus' celebrated "Chart of the
World," published by Justus Perthes, Gotha. Size is about 40x62 inches,
mounted on linen, and folded in a case; or as a wall-map with rollers.

In Europe, this chart is to be found in almost every railroad or
steamship office, as well as in schools, business offices, and private
houses, where it is used for general reference. Besides being the latest
and most complete map of the world, with the very latest information as
to boundaries, it contains ocean currents, direction of trade-winds,
steamship and sailing vessel routes, coaling-stations, and railroads
(even the new trans-Siberian railroad, about which we wrote in a recent
number) of all countries; and much other valuable information.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Current History=

       *       *       *       *       *

The _Maine_ affair is still the most important item of current history.

The Board of Inquiry has returned to Havana and is still carrying on its
investigation, and until this body makes an official report to the
United States Government, we should, as Captain Sigsbee telegraphed the
night of the explosion, suspend judgment.

There has been no way of ascertaining the results of the Board's
inquiries. The testimony of eye-witnesses of the disaster, sailors and
divers, was heard on board the _Mangrove_, anchored near the wreck. A
number of photographs of the _Maine_ have been taken under water, by a
man employed by the Board. These photographs are deemed very important,
as the Board can get a much clearer idea of the position of the debris
than they could from the descriptions of the divers. The belief is
widely entertained that the Board will report that the disaster was
caused by an explosion from the outside. How the two countries will act
after such a report is delivered, can only be surmised. Of course, Spain
will make her own thorough investigation; the divers have already been
permitted to examine the wreck to a certain extent. It is very hard to
believe that the Spanish Government had anything to do with the
explosion. Individuals, acting for themselves and not in touch with the
Government, probably "assassinated" the boat--if she was "assassinated."
In that case, the United States can with justice claim an indemnity.

If, however, it can be proved that Spanish officers knew that there was
a mine under the _Maine_, and did not take the trouble to tell Captain
Sigsbee, the United States would undoubtedly consider it a _casus belli_
(that is, a cause of war), unless Spain promptly agrees to make good the
loss.

As we told you last week, it is said that no dead fish were found in
Havana harbor after the explosion. Another significant report is, that
there was no large wave directly after the explosion took place. If
these reports are true, they would almost preclude the possibility of
its having been an outside explosion.

It was reported that Weyler, while Captain-General of Cuba, had caused
Havana harbor to be filled with mines and torpedoes, and that he alone
had the plans.

In a letter to a New York paper, however, General Weyler absolutely
denies this, and he writes that he has had nothing to do with the mines
and torpedoes in Havana harbor.

One sensational report printed in a New York paper was that, shortly
before the explosion took place, the guard on the _Maine_ noticed a very
distinct ripple on the water, as if a small boat was being propelled
close to the vessel.

Many similar reports have reached the United States, and it is hard to
know what to believe. One of the New York papers has been telling so
many lies that the Government was compelled to stop this particular
journal from sending any messages at all over the cable from Havana to
Key West. This paper then sent its news to Europe, and from there cabled
to New York. Over this circuitous route came most marvellous tales, and
it is needless to say that most of them were lies pure and simple. The
editor of one enterprising journal is reported to have wagered $50,000
that he will cause war between the United States and Spain.

       *       *       *       *       *

The wounded sailors from the _Maine_ have all been transferred from
Havana to Dry Tortugas. Dry Tortugas is an island east of Key West.
These sailors say that the Spaniards treated them with the utmost
kindness.

The first body from the _Maine_ was brought to Key West last Thursday.
All flags in the city were at half-mast, and although the body was that
of an unidentified seaman, it was given the burial of a naval hero.
Captain McCalla, of the _Marblehead_, with Fleet Chaplain Lee Boyce and
a guard of honor of forty sailors, received the body, and it was borne
in state through the quiet streets of the city to the graveyard on the
outskirts. The sailors were drawn up facing the grave; the chaplain read
the service, and the body was lowered to its resting-place. The simple
ceremony was then ended by the ship's bugler sounding the recall, and
the guard at "shoulder arms" marched back to the pier.

It is reported that the uninjured survivors of the _Maine_ feel very
much distressed over orders they are said to have received from the Navy
Department. All but five of the men are ordered to report for service
on the ships of the fleet at Key West. Naturally, they are desirous to
get to their friends in the North, and an effort will be made to induce
the Navy Department to allow them to do so.

It seems that, of the men killed on the _Maine_, a great number were
natives of foreign countries. The governments of these countries have
demanded an explanation of the disaster, and in case it is found that
the explosion was due to faults of construction or carelessness, an
indemnity will undoubtedly be demanded; or, if Spain is responsible for
the disaster, she will be called upon to pay this indemnity.

       *       *       *       *       *

March 7th it was reported that Senor Gullon, Spanish Minister of Foreign
Affairs, had intimated to Minister Woodford that the Spanish Government
desired the recall of Consul-General Lee from Havana.

This news created great excitement. Our Government promptly cabled to
Minister Woodford, refusing to recall General Lee, and Spain officially
retracted the request, and the incident was practically closed.

A minister exercises his functions only by permission of the country to
which he is sent. If at any time that country has reason to object to
his presence, it can demand his recall, or, by withdrawing his
_exequatur_, make him at once a private American citizen, and nothing
more.

An _exequatur_ is the written official recognition of a consul or
minister, which is issued by the government to which he is accredited,
authorizing him to exercise his powers in the place to which he is
sent. We have already explained, in connection with the De Lome
incident, how a country may dismiss a diplomatic representative.

If Spain had demanded Lee's recall, or dismissed him for any reason
which she considered sufficient, there would have been no just ground
for offence. It would not even have been necessary for her to explain
her reasons.

Spain's action in intimating that she desired the recall was a courteous
way of putting the matter. President McKinley, in refusing to consider
it, took a wise course, for the recall of General Lee at this critical
time might have added to the strained relations existing between the
countries; besides, General Lee is so thoroughly acquainted with the
situation in Cuba that it is to the best interest of this country to
retain him.

       *       *       *       *       *

Reports from Cuba as to the insurgents' cause have this week been
perceptibly fewer. It is known that a number of filibustering
expeditions have landed, and the Cubans feel very much elated. They say
that the _Maine_ disaster has helped them in this country, for it has
increased the feeling against Spain.

The condition of the reconcentrados is terrible. You will remember that
General Weyler issued a decree that the farmers with their families, and
the people who lived out in the country, should leave their homes and
come into the towns. This was done because it was believed that these
people were supplying the insurgents with food and aiding them in other
ways. Of course, when these poor people were herded together in and
around the cities and towns, a great many of them had no possible way of
making a living. Starvation has resulted, and thousands of these
reconcentrados, as they are called, are dying. It is estimated that
there are very nearly 300,000 of them, and what food and clothing they
need must be given to them. The Spaniards, as can be imagined, have not
been very charitably disposed toward these poor people, and the United
States has generously come to the rescue. Tons of food and clothing have
already been sent to the island, and almost every day we read of some
vessel starting for Cuba with supplies for these unfortunate people.

The United States Government has deemed the matter important enough to
despatch two gunboats, the _Montgomery_ and _Nashville_, with provisions
to Matanzas and Sagua la Grande, Cuba.

The supplies have been sent to Key West, to be forwarded from there in
the vessels selected.

Spain, through her representative at Washington, Senor du Bosc, objected
to the use of war-vessels for this purpose, and it was at first decided
to send the supplies in the despatch-boat _Fern_, in many respects
better fitted for such a purpose. Finally, however, orders were sent to
Key West to carry out the original plan.

That Spain objects to the visits of our war-ships to these Cuban ports
may lead to further complications, for with equal reason she can exclude
our ships from Havana harbor, and this would prevent us from protecting
our own citizens who are in Havana.

The fact that relief expeditions are sent by us is in itself an
acknowledgment on our part that we either do not consider Spain able to
care for these poor people, or that we think that she wilfully refuses
to do so. Spain could settle the question at once by properly providing
for them. This, however, she has not attempted to do.

       *       *       *       *       *

March 7th a bill was introduced by Chairman Cannon, of the
Appropriations Committee, entitled, "Making Appropriations for the
National Defence."

It was as follows: "That there is hereby appropriated out of any money
in the treasury, not otherwise appropriated for the national defence,
and for each and every purpose connected therewith, to be expended at
the discretion of the President, and to remain available until June 30,
1899, fifty million dollars."

This bill, it was reported, was the outcome of a conference held at the
White House. The situation was considered so serious that it was
necessary that an immense appropriation should be made for national
defence.

       *       *       *       *       *

Talk of the United States buying Cuba has revived during the last week.
The Spaniards seem to think better of this than they did some months
ago, and it is reported that one paper in Madrid has come out in favor
of selling the island to this country.

It is a question whether it would be wise for this country to buy Cuba.
It would involve the expenditure of $300,000,000 or $400,000,000; and,
again, the people who live on the island might not be a desirable
addition to the voting population of the United States. Spain has
misunderstood this country in regard to the purpose of our proposed
intervention in Cuba. She believes that we would intervene in order to
obtain possession of the island. The truth is, that the only reason for
our stopping the war would be for the sake of mercy, for the war that is
going on in Cuba is uncivilized and horrible.

About twenty-five hundred men have been sent to Cuba recently as
reinforcements to the Spanish army, and Spain is putting forth the
greatest efforts to stop the revolution before the rainy season sets in.
Five torpedo-boats are to be towed from Madrid to Havana. It will be
unfortunate for Spain if she has no better luck towing these boats than
she had with her immense dry-dock, which we told you about several weeks
ago.

       *       *       *       *       *

The _Vizcaya_, which left New York on February 25th, arrived in Havana
safely. The _Almirante Oquendo_, a sister ship of the _Vizcaya_, has
also reached Havana.

The _Oquendo_ is a very powerful vessel, 340 feet long, 65 feet wide,
and can steam 20 knots an hour. She is said to have cost $3,000,000. She
left the Canary Islands on February 15th, the day the _Maine_ blew up.

The men on board, of course, had not heard of the catastrophe, and when
they saw the wreck they could not imagine what it meant. With these
vessels and the _Alphonso XII._ in Havana harbor, it is said the war
fever has attacked the city, and the Spaniards there are anxious to
fight the United States.

       *       *       *       *       *

Conflicting reports have reached us as to whether Spain has bought
war-ships in England or not during the last week. It is, however,
reported on good authority that Spain has negotiated a large loan in
London; the amount is not known. Several vessels have been in course of
construction for Brazil and Chile, and now that they are almost
completed, it is said that the Spanish Government, by agreeing to pay
immense sums, is attempting to secure them. It does not seem likely that
Chile would give up a battle-ship just now, as the relations between
that country and the Argentine Republic are very strained. There is no
doubt, however, but that Spain is increasing the efficiency of her navy,
which is beginning to assume very formidable proportions.

The United States is also busy putting the older ships in good order,
and rushing the work on those being constructed. The Government, it is
reported, has the details of construction of many boats now building on
the other side. One report was that the United States had an option on
every ship being built in Europe, except, of course, vessels being built
for Spain. This report, however, has not been confirmed. For the United
States to have the option on a ship means that no other nation will be
allowed to buy that ship unless the United States decides that she does
not wish to have it herself.

The Spaniards are disturbed at the news of an American squadron at
Hongkong, on the coast of China. If you will look on your map, you will
find that the Philippine Islands are not very far from Hongkong. These
islands belong to Spain, and in the event of a war between the United
States and Spain, great damage could be done by this fleet.

       *       *       *       *       *

The monitor _Terror_ has arrived in New York harbor from Hampton Roads.
This boat is 249 feet long, 56 feet wide, and can steam 12 knots an
hour. The _Puritan_ and _Miantonomoh_ are two boats in the same class as
the _Terror_, and for harbor defence they are unsurpassed. Very little
surface is exposed to the fire of the enemy, as they are very low in the
water; so low, that often, when in a sea-way, the waves wash over
everything but the smoke-stacks and the turrets, so you can see how very
difficult it is to do any damage to these formidable boats. They are all
provided with rams. A ram is a very heavily reinforced projecting bow.
Many war-vessels are built this way, so that they may run down and sink
their antagonists in time of war. You will remember that the famous
Confederate ram _Merrimac_ employed this mode of attack as a last
resort, in her famous fight with the _Monitor_ during the Civil War. She
was not successful, for she did not strike the _Monitor_ squarely. With
their immense weight these monitors could pierce with their rams the
armor of almost any ship and sink it.

       *       *       *       *       *

On Wednesday, February 23d, M. Zola was found guilty of publishing a
letter criticising the Government for its conduct in the Esterhazy
court-martial and declaring the innocence of Albert Dreyfus. This letter
was published in the Paris _Aurore_, whose editor is M. Perreux. M. Zola
was sentenced to one year's imprisonment, and was also fined 3,000
francs, or about $600. As we told you in our last number, M. Perreux was
condemned to serve four months in prison and pay 4,000 francs. In
summing up--that is, in making his final address to the court--M.
Labori, counsel of M. Zola, made touching references to the unhappiness
of the Dreyfus family, the courage of the wife of the prisoner, and the
letter from the disgraced man in September, 1897, protesting his
innocence. The remarks made a great sensation in the court-room, many
people weeping.

The jury was out but a very short time, and returned with the sentence
as stated above, which is the maximum penalty for the crime for which
Zola was arrested. Civilized nations feel very sorry for France, for she
has lowered herself in the eyes of the world. It is almost universally
believed that Zola proved his charges, and outside of France Dreyfus is
believed to be innocent.

It would seem that the French Government is bound to uphold the decision
of the court-martial at any cost, so as not to be compelled to recall
Dreyfus and have a new trial. It is deemed necessary to suppress the
Dreyfus agitation.

Four newspapers in Paris, including the _Aurore_, have been notified
that unless they cease their attacks they will be prosecuted by the
Government. Many correspondents have been warned to write in different
vein about the case. Colonel Picquart, as we told you last week, has
been obliged to leave the army, and the Government has dismissed M. Le
Blois, Perreux's counsel, and one of Zola's witnesses, who was a deputy
mayor in Paris.

We think you would like to hear something about Devil's Island, the
place where Albert Dreyfus is confined. This island is one of a group,
twenty-seven miles northwest of Cayenne in French Guiana. Get your map
of South America, and you will be able to put your finger on the spot.
In 1852 the French Government established a penal colony on these
islands. A penal colony is one formed of convicts sent out from the
mother country. Many of these colonies have proved successful,
particularly the ones where the prisoners are allowed to work and build
up their own homes for themselves. Australia was settled in this way,
and it has developed wonderfully.

From reports, Dreyfus is having a very hard time on Devil's Island. He
is not allowed to speak to any one, and lives in absolute solitude. It
is said that his hair has turned grey, and his confinement in other ways
is aging him rapidly. He is allowed to write, but his letters simply
declare his innocence over and over again. It was rumored some time ago
that Dreyfus had escaped, and since then the French Government has
ordered the officials of the convict settlement to telegraph every day
to Paris the fact that the prisoner is safely under guard.

Political prisoners are usually allowed to have their wives with them,
but, although Mme. Dreyfus has made strong efforts, France will not
allow her to be with her husband.

There is a man living in Rome who is said to have been imprisoned on
Devil's Island for several years. His name is Gen. Paolo Tibaldi, who
was sentenced to life imprisonment on the island for conspiring against
Napoleon III. He says that when he was there the island was a bare rock
without a tree or a blade of grass, and the heat of the sun was
terrible. The provisions supplied daily by the Government were a pound
and a half of the worst kind of bread, for each convict, a piece of old
meat or salt fat, beans or rice, a little oil, and also a kind of
spirits called tafla. The general claims that the treatment to which the
captives were subjected was most severe. They were chained by the
keepers, fed on bread and water for months, and beaten with ropes. Five
thousand dollars was raised in France to rescue General Tibaldi, but
that only made matters worse, and he suffered added torments. Finally,
public opinion in France combined with the press in his behalf, and the
General was freed.

       *       *       *       *       *

The trouble in West Africa promises to become such an important item of
current history that it might be well to look into it more deeply, and
try and get a clear idea of the difficulty.

France undoubtedly wishes to have dominion over the countries lying
between her western and eastern possessions in Africa. On the west coast
she owns the Senegal River and the town of St. Louis. The Central Soudan
also belongs to France, and on the east coast, opposite Aden, the two
towns of Obok and Tanjurrah fly the French flag. The problem has been to
acquire the lands intervening, so as to make one unbroken line. You can
see what an advantage this would be; for, with the Nile on one side and
the Niger on the other, it would be comparatively easy to ship valuable
products from the interior to the markets of the world.

Since 1880, France has spent great sums of money in trying to bridge
over the space lying between her possessions, and step by step her
empire has pushed its way from the Senegal to the Niger.

England had been confined to the coast. She owned Sierra Leone, the
Gambia Settlements, the Colony of Lagos, and the Niger Protectorate. The
Royal Niger Company owned the hinterland of Lagos, which means the
country back of Lagos, and this is the only hinterland that England did
own. France, owning the country back of the English Colonies,
effectually checks their development.

Until 1890 there was a dispute between England and France about their
West African possessions. In 1890 there was a difficulty about territory
on the Lower Niger, and this was settled for a little while by a treaty
which marked out the British "spheres of influence" by a line drawn from
Say on the Niger to Lake Chad. Say is directly west of Sokoto, and you
can easily find Lake Chad on your map, for it is a very large lake. To
the south, the British were supposed to control "all that properly
belongs to the kingdom of Sokoto."

If France has invaded this kingdom they have broken the treaty, and they
are in the wrong.

On the other bank of the Niger, England, through the Royal Niger
Company, has made treaties with the native chiefs, and thus gained a
good foothold.

In 1893, France conquered and annexed Dahomey, which is on the coast;
but England controlled the hinterland of Dahomey through the treaties
her company had made with the chiefs. France chose to set aside these
treaties, and said that, having been made with savages, they were not
valid. During the last three years she has sent out expeditious from St.
Louis and Dahomey, and gained a great deal of territory which England
believes _she_ ought to control.

So that is the way the matter is at present. France has the possession
of countries for which England can show her treaties.

For the benefit of commerce, it would be well that victory should lie
with England, for she would open the country to the commerce of the
world, while France alone would benefit should she control this rich
land.

       *       *       *       *       *

We told you two weeks ago of the change of Presidents in the Republic of
Venezuela.

The new President, Gen. Ignacio Andrade, starts his administration with
the prospect of serious trouble in his country.

The State Department at Washington was notified, shortly after General
Andrade's election, that a revolution had broken out at Valencia. This
is a town two hundred miles west of Caracas, and situated in the
mountains, which, starting here, extend down the whole western coast of
South America.

The cause of the revolution is not known, but it is supposed to be on
account of the succession of General Andrade.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Chinese puzzle still remains unsolved.

Mr. Labouchere, the editor of London _Truth_, has some very good ideas
to offer; he says: "What, in the name of goodness, have we got to
quarrel about in China? Russia is striving to get an access to the
Pacific which will not be ice-bound in winter. It is a reasonable
desire, and will not hurt us. Russia is not our commercial rival, and is
not likely to be. Germany has obtained a _pied-a-terre_ (foothold) in
China. On the part of a great commercial power this, also, is not
unreasonable. It may not suit us, but it is considerably less than we
have got, and we have no right to object. Considering the position which
we have so long occupied, and still occupy, in China, this snarling and
blustering at the first appearance of a stranger on the scene is more
offensive and contemptible than the conduct of the dog in the manger."

Commenting on what Sir Michael Hicks-Beach said in reference to keeping
treaty ports open in case of war, Labouchere says: "Having heard a cock
crow on a neighboring dunghill, he thought it necessary that the
majestic voice of Britain should be heard also."

It was reported in our last number that England and Germany have agreed
to combine and lend China the $80,000,000 which she is to pay to Japan.

It is not known whether Japan will release her hold on Wei-Hai-Wei even
if she gets this money.

England, in consideration of this loan, would certainly expect favors
from China as regards the Yangtse-kiang Valley, and Germany would
undoubtedly expect to have no more trouble with China because of her
seizure of Kiao-Chou. Many other concessions will undoubtedly be
demanded, and we may be sure that Russia will have something to say.

It is also reported that the Government at Pekin will try and settle its
difficulties by allotting "spheres of influence" to the great powers.
This was done in West Africa, where it is causing much trouble between
France and England. The Chinese evidently do not realize how elastic
these "spheres" are.

       *       *       *       *       *

It is to be wondered whether or not Emperor Kuang Hsu, of China,
realizes the danger that threatens his kingdom. He is known as the Son
of Heaven and Brother of the Sun. These titles would seem to indicate
that he is a person of great character and capable of ruling the Empire.
The truth is, he is a very weak young man, and the country is really
ruled by the Empress Dowager. She is sixty-three years old, and for many
years has controlled every action of the Emperor. She has supervised his
education, selected his wives, and really held the Emperor squarely
under her thumb.

The Emperor is securely hidden away behind the thick walls of his
palace, and his private quarters are known as the Purple Forbidden City.
Very few people have set eyes upon the monarch; and among Europeans and
Americans, only ambassadors are permitted to see him.

He is said to have a very ugly temper, and to do foolish things when he
cannot have his own way. This must happen very often, for the Empress
Dowager sees that his way is made hers.

       *       *       *       *       *

Russia has followed Germany's example, and demanded from China a lease
of Port Arthur and Talien-Wan, granting to her all sovereign rights over
these ports for the same period and on the same conditions as in the
case of Germany at Kiao-Chou Bay.

At first, China was disposed to refuse this demand; but Russia
threatened to move troops into Manchuria if the demand was not acceded
to, and China, making a virtue of necessity, yielded.

This lease gives to Russia what she has so long wanted--that is, a port
on the Asiatic coast which is not frozen up in winter. She now has her
"sphere of influence" located in a way most satisfactory to herself.

If China leases many more ports to the great powers she may secure the
materials for a "concert of powers" which will prove as useful to her as
it has been to the Sultan of Turkey.

       *       *       *       *       *

It is reported that there are 10,000 men on the trail between Skaguay
and Dyea in Alaska.

The rush is now at its height, for now that the warmer weather is
coming, the perils of the Klondike will be fewer for some months.

Some very thrilling tales have reached us from the Pacific coast,
although the newspapers are very reticent about publishing reports of
accidents. It would seem that some agency is suppressing accounts of
ill-starred ventures. Certainly, the papers hold out the golden
possibilities of the trip, while the dangers and privations are kept
well in the background.

Thousands of men are setting out for the gold country to-day. Every
small town and village of the United States has its quota of Argonauts,
and they are pouring west to take ship for the Klondike. In Greek
mythology there is a story about a man named Jason, who set out to find
the Golden Fleece. The ship he sailed in was named the _Argo_. In 1849,
when the people of the United States had the gold fever so badly, and
the rush to California was very much like that to the Klondike to-day,
the men who started from the East to go to the Pacific coast by ship
were called Argonauts. Afterward it became a common term, and all people
setting out for the gold-mines were designated by this title.

       *       *       *       *       *

The reindeer which were bought in Scandinavia by the United States for
use in Alaska, and shipped to New York, are to be sold. They were to
have been used for relief expeditions, but it has been found out that
supplies are more abundant in the Klondike than was first reported.

There are five hundred and thirty-seven of these reindeer, and it is to
be doubted whether they will sell for as much money as they have cost.
To buy them in Lapland, Norway, and Sweden involved an expenditure of
$50,000, and to bring them to this country was a very expensive
undertaking.

       *       *       *       *       *

There are more rumors of trouble in India. In and about Bombay there is
a strong feeling of discontent among the natives because of the plague
measures. You will remember what was written in July last in THE GREAT
ROUND WORLD about the curious customs of the different races in India;
how they refuse to depart from these customs for fear of losing caste,
which they hold more dear than life itself.

[Illustration: AN INDIAN SOLDIER.]

The great Sepoy Mutiny was partly occasioned by the use of cartridges
which were thought to have lard on them; from these cartridges the
native soldiers had to remove the ends before putting them in the
muskets, and they said that it was intended that they should bite off
this larded end and thus lose caste.

Many of these natives will not drink milk, others will not touch lard,
and none of them must eat food prepared or handled by certain persons.

In order to stop the spread of the plague, certain rules had to be made,
and it is these rules which cause so many outbreaks among the natives.

The population of India is enormous, and a general outbreak would
necessarily be a very serious matter.

       *       *       *       *       *

The re-election of Paul Krueger as President of the South African
Republic, while fortunate for the citizens of that country, is thought
to be detrimental to British interests in South Africa, for since the
Jameson Raid, about which we told you in No. 20 of THE GREAT ROUND
WORLD, Oom Paul has not held the English in high favor.

President Krueger received three-quarters of the votes in the late
election. His rivals were General Joubert, Vice-President of the
Republic, and Schalk Burger, a member of the Executive Council. The
President's term is five years.

       *       *       *       *       *

A VERY important event in South Africa is the completion of the railway
between Cape Town and Buluwayo. Look on your map and see what a great
distance this is. It is just about as far as New York is from New
Orleans. The road is to be continued to Lake Tanganyika (Buluwayo lies
about mid-way between Cape Town and the southern extremity of this
Lake). It is reported that this extension will cost $15,000,000. England
controls this railway, and it will probably be the source of great
revenue to her, for the natural treasures of this part of Africa are
almost unlimited.

       *       *       *       *       *

There is a very interesting article in _McClure's Magazine_ for March
about Andree and his expedition. The finding of the carrier-pigeon is
described. It seems that the captain of the sealer _Aiken_, which was
cruising near Spitzbergen, saw this bird in the rigging of his boat. It
was very tired, had its head under its wing, and was fast asleep. The
captain shot the bird, and it fell into the sea. He did not think
anything more of the matter until he happened to remember hearing about
the pigeons Andree had taken with him. He turned his vessel, and steered
back to try and find the bird. Fortunately he was successful, and
attached to a tail-feather of the carrier-pigeon was found a small tube
with this message in it:

          "July 13th, 12:30 P.M.

          "Latitude 82 deg. 2'; longitude 15 deg. 5' east. Good
          progress eastward, 10 deg. south. All well on board.
          This is the third pigeon despatch.

                                                  "ANDREE."


It has been proved that this dispatch really was from Andree, and it is
the only word that has been received from him since he started on his
perilous trip.

       *       *       *       *       *

England seems to be determined to keep her hold in Egypt, and, if
possible, to strengthen it. Her troops there have been ordered to
proceed to Khartoum and thence to Uganda, with the plan of sending them
on to Fashoda in order to make it a British post.

England realizes the immense importance to her commerce of keeping the
White Nile Valley open and safe. It is reported that she is now
conducting negotiations at Brussels and at Berlin to secure control of
the territory connecting Uganda with South Africa, which she tried
unsuccessfully to secure several years ago when Lord Rosebery was in
power.

       *       *       *       *       *

The news that the French liner _La Champagne_ was overdue last month in
New York, caused considerable anxiety. This increased as several days
passed without bringing any news of her.

Then the steamer _Rotterdam_, which arrived in New York on February
27th, brought an officer and six men belonging to _La Champagne_. They
had been picked up in an open boat in which they had been tossed about
on a rough sea for six days and nights, suffering great hardships.

They announced that _La Champagne_ had broken her shaft and was
anchored, safe but helpless, off the banks of Newfoundland. They had put
out in the open boat in order to seek for assistance in the regular
track of the steamers, from which _La Champagne_ had been driven.

Assistance was sent to the disabled ship, and a few days later she was
brought into the harbor of Halifax.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Cubans are keeping up an astonishingly vigorous campaign. The
hardest fighting of late has taken place in the eastern part of the
island.

A severe battle was fought on February 18th and 19th, at Puerto
Principe, in which the insurgents were worsted by Gen. Jiminez
Castellanos, losing in all one hundred and eighty-one men, and being
obliged to abandon more than eighty men who lay dead on the field. It is
reported that included among those killed were Colonel Rodriguez,
Commandant Angel Rocio, and other officers.

The losses of the Spanish were much smaller, but it is said that
Lieutenant Porajo was killed. The Spaniards captured a number of horses
and considerable ammunition.

In the province of Santiago de Cuba, General Pardo has been fighting
with the insurgent forces under General Garcia and General Rabi. The
engagements lasted through six days, resulting, it is said, in the loss
of eighty men on the Spanish side. In this province the Cubans have
succeeded in fortifying themselves very strongly.

A cablegram from Madrid has stated that of late there has been a great
increase in the number of Spanish troops mentioned in the official news
as having been killed in Cuba.




ARCTIC EXPLORATION.


Arctic exploration may be said to have begun in the sixteenth century,
and since that time daring sailors of all nations have gone into the icy
regions, many of them never to return.

At that time the search for "The Indies" was so diligently pushed that
mariners tried every way of getting to the West. Failing to find any
short route to the South, their attention was turned to the idea of
passing around north of the new continent which we now call America, and
this desired route was spoken of as the Northwest Passage. Expeditions
have passed westward a long way in open water north of the continent,
and, coming through to the Pacific, have reached the far East, but there
still remains a largely unexplored and almost impassable icy barrier.

As an instance of the aim of the early expeditions, the following
quotation from the old records may be interesting. It describes the
object of an expedition which left England in 1553 as being "For the
search and discovery of the Northern parts of the world, to open a way
and passage to our men for travel to new and unknown kingdoms."

All the nations that had shipping interests were active in this search,
the English especially. The Dutch sought the short cut for their
merchantmen because the voyage around the Cape of Good Hope was very
dangerous, being controlled by Spanish and Portuguese, who
unhesitatingly preyed upon the merchant vessels that tried to pass that
way. The result of the Dutch expeditions into the North was the
discovery of the possibilities of the whaling industry, which they may
be said to have originated, and which was a source of great profit to
them for a very long period. They established a number of settlements,
and explored much that had been unknown before.

Among the English expeditions, those of most importance to us in America
were Henry Hudson's. He made his first voyage in 1607, representing the
Muscovy Company of England. He explored the coast of Greenland on this
voyage, and again in 1608; while on his third voyage he explored the
coasts of North America and discovered the Hudson River. At this time he
was in the employ of the Dutch East India Company. Again, in 1610, his
efforts were crowned with success, and he discovered what is known as
Hudson Bay.

From that time voyage after voyage was made, largely by Englishmen, and
the knowledge of geography grew every year, each captain bringing back
some new items of information.

Meanwhile the Russians, who had acquired Siberia, sought a Northeast
Passage and explored the northern coast of their vast new territory,
which reaches into the Polar regions. Although many efforts were made to
pass through to China in this way, it was not accomplished until 1879,
when a Russian explorer reached Bering Strait and the Pacific from the
West.

Search for "the Indies" was carried on with wonderful perseverance and
nerve. It is very difficult for us in these days to imagine the
obstacles that these old sailors had to overcome, or the dangers their
tiny craft encountered. Their little boats would now be considered
absolutely impracticable for long and arduous trips; and that they
should have explored all they did, shows how sturdiness and courage have
caused the growth of the world's known territory.

As time went on, the idea of securing the passage to the fabled lands of
the riches gave place to search in the Arctic regions for the scientific
knowledge that could be obtained from such expeditious. "The Indies" and
their fabulous riches had become known countries which were readily
reached through other routes, and the saving in time by going to them by
way of the North had been found to be more than offset by the rigor and
perils of an Arctic voyage, even if it could by any possibility be made.

In 1818 Sir John Barrow, who did much for scientific Arctic exploration,
secured the passage of a law in England offering $100,000 to any one who
would find the Northwest Passage, and $25,000 to any one who should
reach the 89th parallel of latitude. This stimulated the search. The
expeditions of Ross, Parry, and Franklin made trips which, although not
successful to the degree of winning the reward, added much to the
knowledge of the Arctic regions.

The Hudson Bay Company, incorporated in 1670, had all this time been
actively at work investigating the new territory in the northern part of
the American continent, and all this district became fairly well mapped
out.

Modern ingenuity has not succeeded in accomplishing very much more than
was done by the ill-equipped mariners of centuries ago. American
expeditions and English expeditions have gone farther into the North,
but they have cost more lives. They have been more venturesome and have
obtained considerable scientific data, but their gain is not in
proportion to the advance in their facilities, and it seems to be
established that the contest against the great icy fields of the Polar
regions is one that will be waged a long time before man is the
conqueror.

The expeditions of our own naval engineer, Peary, are well known to us;
and the trip of Greely was an interesting one. This last was undertaken
by the United States after agreement among the various nations of the
world as to the wisdom of pushing a series of stations in the Arctic
regions for observation. A number of these stations were established,
and Greely had charge of the American one.

Of recent expeditions, that of Nansen has attracted most attention
because he succeeded in reaching farther North than any one before him
had ever been and returned to tell the tale. The case of Andree, who
sailed away last July in his great balloon, expecting to pass over the
North Pole, is interesting for its novelty of plan. He was equipped with
provisions to last him at least two years, and accompanied by only two
comrades on his long voyage.

The question is often raised whether Arctic exploration pays. Probably
by itself, that is, if it would have no bearing upon anything else, it
would not pay for the lives that are lost by it and the money that is
spent upon it. But when we consider that every scientific fact is an
addition to our knowledge, and may influence for great good some other
line of work which would seem to be in no way connected with it, it is
undoubtedly true that the explorations should continue on scientific
lines until no part of the globe which can be reached is unknown to
man.




  =Gordy's History of the United States.=    =Crown 8vo, 480 pages,=
                                                   =$1.00 net.=

_Among the many features which contribute to the general excellence of
the book a few may be briefly mentioned as follows:_

=More and better Illustrations and Maps than have ever appeared in any
text-book on the subject.

Carefully selected lists of books for supplementary reading.

Suggestive questions for pupils to discuss.

Introductory chapter of hints to teachers, illuminating the author's
method of treatment.

Notes throughout the text explanatory of general statements.

Special stress laid upon the industrial and social development, with a
lucid presentation of the powerful influence exerted by routes and modes
of travel, soil, and climate.

Prominence given to the characteristics of our great national leaders.

Emphasis of the importance of the West and South in our national
development.

Pupils are led throughout to form high ideals of social duty.=

=TO THE TEACHER.= (_Extract._)

_The Recitation._--The purposes of the recitation should include more
than a test of memory; they should include a _comparison_ and
_discussion_ of facts acquired in the preparation of the lesson. At the
beginning of the recitation a topic should be named and the pupil
required to recite upon it without question or comment from the teacher.
Such a method, _if persisted_ in, will inevitably develop fluency and
readiness of expression. The best work lies in helping the pupil to get
definite ideas and then to give these ideas clear expression in well
connected sentences.

=TO THE PUPIL.= (_Specimen_.)

1. What complaints did we make against England about searching American
vessels and impressing American seamen? What complaints did England
enter against us?

2. How did England and France injure American commerce? What was
Jefferson's purpose in securing the passage of the Embargo Act? What was
the Embargo? How did it affect American commerce?

3. Learn well the story of the Star Spangled Banner's origin and then
memorize the poem. Read again and again Drake's American Flag and
Holmes's Old Ironsides.

 =CHARLES SCRIBNER'S SONS, 153-155 Fifth Avenue, New York.
                           Western Office: 334 Dearborn St., Chicago.=


       *       *       *       *       *

=Scott Stamp & Coin Co., Ld.=

=18 EAST 23d STREET, NEW YORK, N. Y.=

       *       *       *       *       *

=A FEW BARGAINS IN SETS FOR THE READERS OF THE "GREAT ROUND WORLD"=

                                                         CENTS
  Argentine Republic, 1892, 1/2, 1, 2, 3, 5, 10, 12c        8
  Cuba, 1875, 12-1/2, 25, 50c., 1 peso, unused             20
      " 1896, 1/2, 1, 2, 3, 4, 8 mils., unused              6
      " 1898, 1, 2, 3, 5 mils., unused                      4
  Jamaica, 8 varieties, including official stamps           8
  Japan, 13 varieties                                       8
          The six sets for 50 cents, postfree.

       *       *       *       *       *

=_Our regular list of sets contains hundreds of other bargains, and our
packets are the best in the world for the money_=

=Full lists of sets and packets and many other items in our 80-page
price-list, which will be sent free on application:: :: :: :: ::=

MENTION "GREAT ROUND WORLD" IN ANSWERING ADVERTISEMENT




  =Manhattan Oil Light=
  =Magic Lantern=

PRICE $18.00

[Illustration: Magic Lantern]

Accommodates standard lantern slides and makes a good disc on the
screen. We make other lanterns for use with any light, also

LANTERN SLIDES

and Scientific Accessories of the highest grade

       *       *       *       *       *

J. B. COLT & CO., Dept. 14

Manufacturers of Apparatus for the Production and Projection of Light.

          _PRINCIPAL OFFICES: 115-117 NASSAU ST., NEW YORK_

          BRANCHES:
          189 La Salle St., Chicago, Ill.
          131 Post St., San Francisco, Cal.

          =Send for
          Catalogues=

Acetylene House Lighting Show Rooms, 125 W. 37th St., Cor. B'way, New
York

_Please mention "The Great Round World."_




=COMPLETE SCHOOL SERIES=

Wall Maps and Charts

          =Price, net, $5.00 until first hundred sets are sold.=
          =Thereafter price will be $7.50 net. .. .. .. .. .. ..=

       *       *       *       *       *

This is the most complete set ever offered at so low a price; it is
printed in handsome colors, on heavy, coated lithograph, double-faced,
cloth-lined material, especially prepared for this purpose.

Among other unique features of great value are the following:

In place of names, numbers are printed on these maps; this makes it
possible to do an infinite variety of work.

On the margin of the maps are indicated countries in similar latitude;
this feature can be best appreciated when one considers the difficulty
of making a child appreciate the comparative sizes of the different
countries. For instance, as the maps on which North America, Asia,
Australia appear are necessarily on different scales, the child cannot
understand, indeed never does understand, that India, Australia, and the
United States are of approximately the same size. In this series of
maps, on North America for instance, the pupil sees at a glance that
China and Chinese Tartary correspond almost exactly in latitude with the
United States and Mexico. That the British Isles and Labrador
correspond. That the southern part of Florida and Cuba are in the same
latitude as the Desert of Sahara, and other points of the same kind are
made clear to the student.

The set consists of the following:

  NORTH AMERICA                                    28x40 INS.
  CANADA AND BRITISH NORTH AMERICA                 28x40 INS.
  SOUTH AMERICA                                    28x40 INS.
  EUROPE                                           28x40 INS.
  ASIA                                             28x40 INS.
  AFRICA                                           28x40 INS.
  AUSTRALIA                                        28x40 INS.
  EASTERN HEMISPHERE                               28x40 INS.
  WESTERN HEMISPHERE                               28x40 INS.

In addition to these, a physical and astronomical chart--this for the
purpose of teaching geography--is in itself worth the price of the set.
It contains in picture the different geographical definitions: ocean,
bay, river, town, city, mountain, volcano, cape, promontory, etc., etc.,
etc.

Animal life in different zones is shown in beautiful colored pictures;
life in the ocean in different latitudes is also shown, and also plant
life. The chart of the Solar System also appears on this same sheet.

Schools desiring to examine the set can obtain them for examination by
remitting the amount. If the maps are returned, the charge will be $1.00
covering the expressage both ways; this $1.00, however, will not be lost
to purchaser, but will be credited on other maps, charts, or globes that
may be purchased.

                    =WILLIAM BEVERLEY HARISON=
          =3 and 5 West 18th St.,           NEW YORK.=


FLOWERS.                   PLANTS.

       FREE, For the Postage

=Vicks Illustrated Monthly Magazine=

The Famous Gardening Authority

Is a veritable mine of information about Flowers, Vegetables, and
Fruits, and how to grow and care for them successfully, whether in a
limited city lot or larger village garden. A farm home may be brightened
at a slight expense, and the grounds made attractive instead of bare and
forbidding. The price of =Vicks Illustrated Monthly Magazine= is Fifty
Cents per year, but if you will

          =RETURN THIS COUPON WITH SIX TWO-CENT STAMPS=

the magazine will be mailed to you regularly for six months, for trial.
Here is a chance to get a first-class, bright monthly magazine for
simply the postage. Write at once to

              VICK PUBLISHING CO., Rochester, N. Y.
          VEGETABLES.                           FRUITS.

       *       *       *       *       *


=Stearns Bicycles=

[Illustration]

LIKE COINS OF ANCIENT GREECE

          are works of art and represent the highest
          possible value. The 23-inch frame "Yellow Fellow"
          and 21-inch drop frame are just the proper sizes
          for growing boys and girls. If you write E. C.
          Stearns & Company, asking them to send you their
          new illustrated catalogue, and will enclose two
          2-cent stamps, they will send you an exact
          reproduction of the famous ten-drachm piece of
          Dionysius, the Tyrant of Syracuse. Dionysius went
          over to Syracuse with his four-horse chariot,
          called the quadriga, and, much to the surprise of
          the Greeks, won the coveted laurel wreath at the
          Olympian games. The Greeks refused Dionysius his
          trophy, however, and, in his rage, he caused to be
          struck off in commemoration of his victory the
          most magnificent coin the world has ever known.
          The coin was made by the greatest sculptor of
          Athens, Simon. The coin is about as large as the
          American silver dollar, and is carved in high
          relief, on one side showing Dionysius in the
          quadriga being crowned by winged Victory and on
          the reverse, Arethusa, the tutelary goddess of the
          sea, surrounded by her dolphins.

          Send two 2-cent stamps for this beautiful
          ten-drachm piece, mentioning "The Great Round
          World."




CLUB RATES

"The Great Round World"

       *       *       *       *       *

          _Subscription
          Price..
          52 numbers.._

          $1.50

          _per year_

          _Address_

          _The Great
          Round World
          Publishing Co._

          _3 and 5 West
          18th Street_

          _New York City_

                                       PRICE          WITH
                                     SEPARATELY    "G. R. W."
          Atlantic                   $4.00            $5.00
          Book Buyer                  1.00             2.25
          Bookman                     2.00             3.25
          Chap-Book                   2.00             3.00
          Century Magazine            4.00             5.00
          Cosmopolitan                1.00             2.25
          Critic                      3.00             4.25
          Current Literature          3.00             4.00
          Forum                       3.00             4.00
          Harper's Bazaar             4.00             4.75
          Harper's Monthly            4.00             4.75
          Harper's Weekly             4.00             4.75
          Illustrated American        4.00             4.75
          Independent                 3.00             4.00
          Judge                       5.00             6.00
          Leisure Hour                1.00             2.25
          Life                        5.00             6.00
          Lippincott's                3.00             3.75
          Literary Digest             3.00             4.25
          McClure's                   1.00             2.25
          Munsey's                    1.00             2.25
          New England Magazine        3.00             4.00
          North American Review       5.00             5.75
          Our Little Ones and Nursery 1.00             2.25
          Outing                      3.00             3.75
          Outlook                     3.00             4.25
          Puck                        5.00             6.00
          Review of Reviews           2.50             3.50
          Saint Nicholas              3.00             4.00
          Scientific American         3.00             4.25
          Scribner's                  3.00             4.00
          Short Stories               2.50             3.75
          Truth (New York)            2.50             3.50


          ="The Great Round World"=
                will make club rates on any magazines



_=The Great Round World=_

          A Weekly Newspaper For Boys
          and Girls--and Others. . . .

       *       *       *       *       *


=THE GREAT ROUND WORLD.=

ALBERT ROSS PARSONS, _President American College of Musicians_: "For the
purpose of eliciting a free expression of opinion from my son Richard
Percival Parsons, aged 10, I bought a copy of THE GREAT ROUND WORLD for
three or four weeks in succession, and simply left it lying where he
would be likely to see it. In about four weeks he had interested himself
so deeply in its contents that he voluntarily asked if he might
subscribe for it, a wish which I was only too glad to gratify. The bound
volume of the first fifteen numbers has remained his daily mental food
and amusement ever since it arrived. I thank you for your great service
both to our young people and to their elders."


=THE GREAT ROUND WORLD.=

E. A. CARLETON, _State Superintendent of Public Instruction_, Helena,
Mont.: "I have been a constant and eager reader of THE GREAT ROUND WORLD
since my accession to this office, the first of this year. I regard it
as unique, and of almost incomparable value, and I should be pleased to
aid in its general use in all the schools of our State. You are
authorized to use this letter and to quote me as strongly in favor of
it."


=THE GREAT ROUND WORLD.=

WILLIAM N. SHEATS, _State Superintendent of Public Instruction_,
Tallahassee, Fla.: "I have received for several months past copies of
THE GREAT ROUND WORLD. I think it is an ideal paper for children."


=THE GREAT ROUND WORLD.=

T. W. HARRIS, _Superintendent of Schools_, Keene, N. H.: "I find it
excellent for the use we have made of it, and would heartily commend it
to all schools as an aid in the study of current events."

       *       *       *       *       *

=FIVE CENTS A COPY.=

       *       *       *       *       *

                        Address
            The Great Round World Publ. Co.,
          3 and 5 West 18th Street, New York City.

       *       *       *       *       *

Transcriber's notes:

Obvious punctuation errors repaired.

Page 322, "crying" was printed with the "c" backward. (crying for war)

"Club Rates" table, "Bazar" changed to "Bazaar". (Harper's Bazaar)






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Great Round World and What Is
Going On In It, Vol. 2, No. 11, March 17, 1898, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GREAT ROUND WORLD AND ***

***** This file should be named 19081.txt or 19081.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/9/0/8/19081/

Produced by Emmy, Juliet Sutherland and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

*** END: FULL LICENSE ***

