The Project Gutenberg EBook of Banbury Chap Books, by Edwin Pearson

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Banbury Chap Books
       And Nursery Toy Book Literature

Author: Edwin Pearson

Release Date: August 28, 2006 [EBook #19132]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BANBURY CHAP BOOKS ***




Produced by Louise Hope, Malcolm Farmer and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net





[Transcriber's Note:

This book has over 800 small black-and-white illustrations. They can
be found in the "images" directory associated with the html version of
this file, in two forms:

  thumbnails, named in the form "thumb_NN_NN.png" numbered sequentially
    within each page (without leading 0's)
  larger images, named "pic_NN_NN.png"

For this plain-text file, each illustration or group of illustrations
is identified by number, omitting the "pic_" or "thumb_" component
and the "png" extension.

Misspellings have generally been left uncorrected. They are listed at
the end of the text.]


       *       *       *       *       *
           *       *       *       *
       *       *       *       *       *


  [Illustrations: frontis_1 - frontis_5

  _The "White Lion," Banbury, early John Bewick._

  _Early cuts used to illustrate "Tommy Two Shoes." York and Hull
  editions._

  _Early cut from "A New Year's Gift."_

  _"Jack and the Giants," early York edition._]




              _BANBURY CHAP BOOKS_

                      and

          NURSERY TOY BOOK LITERATURE

    [of the XVIII. and Early XIX. Centuries]

                      with
        Impressions from Several Hundred
           ORIGINAL WOOD-CUT BLOCKS,

By T. & J. Bewick, Blake, Cruikshank, Craig, Lee,
              Austin, and Others.

    Illustrating Favourite Nursery Classics,
  with their Antiquarian, Historical, Literary
           and Artistic Associations:

   FAITHFULLY GLEANED FROM THE ORIGINAL WORKS
  IN THE BODLEIAN LIBRARY, OXFORD, THE BRITISH
       AND SOUTH KENSINGTON MUSEUMS, &c.

With very much that is Interesting and Valuable
     appertaining to the early Typography
       and Topography of Children's Books
     relating to Great Britain and America.

                   INCLUDING

 Jack the Giant Killer, Cock Robin, Tom Thumb,
  Whittington, Goody Two Shoes, Philip Quarll,
      Tommy Trip, York and Banbury Cries,
  Children in the Wood, Dame Trot, Horn Books,
           Battledores, Primers, etc.

               By EDWIN PEARSON.

                   LONDON:
Arthur Reader, 1, Orange Street, Bloomsbury, W.C.
                     1890.




         _Only 50 copies Large Paper,_
             _500 "    Small._




[Decoration]

INTRODUCTION.


"Banbury Cakes," and "Banbury Cross," with its favourite juvenile
associations, with the Lady with bells on her toes, having music
wherever she goes, are indissolubly connected with the early years not
only of ourselves but many prior generations. In fact, the Ancient Cross
has been rebuilt since the days, when in Drunken Barnaby's Journal, we
are made familiar with the puritan "who hanged his cat on a Monday for
killing of a mouse on a Sunday." The quaint old town and its people are
rapidly modernizing; but they cling to the old traditions. Both in
pictorial and legendary lore we have some Banburies of another kind
altogether, viz., Banbury Blocks, or in plain English, Engraved Woodcut
Blocks, associated with the Local Chap Books, Toy Books, and other
Histories, for which this quaint old Oxfordshire town is celebrated. The
faithful description of the Blocks illustrating this volume has led to
numerous descriptive digressions, apparently irrelevant to the subject;
it was found however that in tracing out the former history and use of
some of the "Bewick" and other cuts contained in this volume, that the
Literary, Artistic, Historical, Topographical, Typographical, and
Antiquarian Reminiscences connected with the early Printing and
Engraving of Banbury involved that of many other important towns and
counties of Great Britain, and also America. A provincial publisher
about the beginning of the present century would reflect more or less
the modus operandi of each of his contemporaries in abridging or
reproducing verbatim the immortal little chap books issued from the
press of John Newbury's "Toy Book Manufactory," at the Bible and Sun
(a sign lately restored), 65, Saint Paul's Church Yard, near the Bar.

This again leads to the subject as to who wrote these clever little
tomes. In my "Angler's Garland," printed at the Dryden Press, 1870 and
1871, I fully announced my intention of issuing a reprint of the first
edition of "Goody Two Shoes," but the intended volume was published by
the firm at the corner, "Griffith, Farren, Okenden, and Welsh," now in
the direct line of business descent from worthy and industrious John
Newbery: Carman, Harris, Grant and Griffith. Mr. Charles Welsh of the
present firm has taken a warm interest in the Antiquarian and Historical
Associations of the Newbery firm. The premises have been lately rebuilt,
the Sign and Emblems adopted by Newbery restored, and C. Welsh has
reprinted "Goody Two Shoes" in facsimile, since which there has been
added to it a Standard edition of Goldsmith's Works, edited by Mr.
Gibbs. I had the pleasure of making many researches respecting the old
London publisher (Goldsmith's friend), John Newbery, respecting his
Lilliputian Classics, and I have been enabled to introduce several of
the Quarto early editions to the firm, and have had great pleasure in
writing and placing on record numerous facts and data, since utilized in
the very interesting "Life of John Newbery, a last century bookseller."
The connection of Oliver Goldsmith's name is indissolubly associated
with the juvenile classics industriously issued by Newbery. Dr. Johnson
himself edited and prefaced several children's books which I have seen
in the Jupp and Hugo Collections. The weary hours of adversity, through
which "Goldie" passed at Green Arbour Court, top of Break Neck Steps and
Turn Again Lane--I remember them all well, and the Fleet prison walls
too, when I was a boy--and in refuge at Canonbury Tower, near the
village of Islington, these are the places where Goldsmith wrote for
children. Sir Joshua Reynolds tells how, when he called on the poet at
Green Arbour Court, he found the couplet:--

 "By sports like these are all their cares beguiled,
  The sports of children satisfy the child."

see "The Traveller." He was surrounded by children in this unsavoury
neighbourhood, where he had his humble domicile: a woodcut in Lumburd's
Mirror depicts it very correctly. Bishop Percy, author of the
"Reliques," called on him, and during the interview the oft repeated
incident occurred of a little child of an adjacent neighbour, "Would Mr.
Goldsmith oblige her mother with a chamber pot full of coals!" Truly
these were hours of ill-at-ease. The largest collection of the various
relics of woodcuts used in the chap book literature, "printed for the
Company of Flying Stationers, also Walking Stationers,"--for such is a
portion of the imprint to be found on several of the early Chap Books
printed at Banbury--is to be seen in the Library of the British Museum;
but the richest collection of these celebrated little rarities of Toy
Books is in the venerable Bodleian Library. Among the very interesting
block relics of the past are the pretty cuts to Mrs. Trimmer's "Fabulous
Histories, or The Robins:" these were designed by Thomas Bewick, and
engraved by John Thompson, his pupil, who enriched Whittingham's
celebrated Chiswick Press with his fine and tasteful work. A numerous
series of little fable cuts by the same artist are to be found in this
volume. One of the quaintest sets engraved at an early period by John
Bewick (the Hogarth of Newcastle), are to "The Hermit, or Adventures of
Edward Dorrington," or "Philip Quarll," as it was most popularly known
by that title a century ago. The earliest edition I have seen of Philip
Quarll is as follows: "The Hermit, or the unparalleled sufferings and
surprising adventures of Mr. Philip Quarll, an Englishman who was lately
discovered by Mr. Dorrington, a Bristol merchant, upon an uninhabited
island in the South Sea, where he lived above fifty years without any
human assistance, still continues to reside, and will not come away,"
etc. Westminster: Printed by J. Cluer and A. Campbell, for T. Warner in
Paternoster Row, and B. Creape at The Bible in Jermyn Street, St.
James's, 1727. 8vo, xii pp., map and explanation, 2 pp., and 1 to 26
appendix, with full page copper plate engravings. He was born in St.
Giles', left his master a locksmith, went to sea, married a famous
w----e, listed for a soldier, married three wives, condemned at the Old
Bailey, pardoned by King Charles II., turned merchant, and was
shipwrecked on a desolate island on the coast of Mexico, etc. Other
editions in the British Museum are 1750; 1759 (third); 1780 (twelfth);
1786 (first American edition, from the 6th English edition, Boston,
U.S.A.); 1787 (in French); 1795 (seventeenth); 1807; and also in a
"Storehouse of Stories," edited by Miss C. M. Yonge, 2 vols, 8vo
(Macmillan, 1870-2), Philip Quarll (also Perambulations of a Mouse,
Little Jack, Goody Two Shoes, Blossoms of Morality, Puzzle for a curious
Girl), and others are given. The text is useful to refer to, as the
originals are rare: the woodcuts of several of them are in this volume.
"Philip Quarll," Miss Yonge says, "comes to us with the reputation of
being by Daniel Defoe; but we have never found anything to warrant the
supposition. It must have been written during the period preceding the
first French Revolution." There is also in the Museum an edition printed
in Dutch in 1805.

In 1869, Mr. Wm. Tegg reprinted the Surprising Adventures of Philip
Quarll, entirely re-edited and modernized, with only a frontispiece and
vignette on title as illustrations. The quaint old cuts on next page
probably illustrated an early Newcastle, then York, and finally Banbury,
edition of this oft published work.


  _The Blocks designed and engraved by John Bewick, for "The Hermit;
  or Philip Quarll,"_ (_circa 1785._)

  [Illustrations: iv_1 - iv_6]


Tegg's edition of 356 pages, 12mo, is to be seen in the Reading Room of
the British Museum, and gives the full text and history of these. This
curious book would well bear representing with the original Bewick cuts,
after the manner of the present Newbery firm, who have revived
Butterfly's Ball, Grasshopper's Feast, Goody Two Shoes, Looking Glass
for the Mind, and contemplate others in the immediate future. Tegg in
his reprint of the Book on Philip Quarll, states that he was born in St.
Giles' Parish, London, 1647, voyaged to Brazil, Mexico, and other parts
of America, was left on an island, nourished by a goat, and other
surprising adventures. Edward Dorrington communicates an account (see p.
1 to 94 inclusive) of how the hermit Philip Quarll was discovered, with
his (E. D.'s) return to Bristol from Mexico, Jan. 3, 1724-5; but is
about returning to Peru and Mexico again (p. 94). This is of both
American and Bewick interest. Besides these representatives of this Chap
Book, we are enabled to give in this collection impressions from the
blocks of other editions fortunately rescued from oblivion and
destruction.

  [Illustrations: v_1, v_2]


  [Illustrations: vi_1, vi_2]




  [Illustration: 1_1]


BANBURY CHAP BOOKS.

 "Old Story Books! Old Story Books!
        we owe ye much old friends,
  Bright coloured threads in memory's wrap,
        of which Death holds the ends,
  Who can forget ye? Who can spurn the ministers of joy
  That waited on the lisping girl and petticoated boy?
  Talk of your vellum, gold emboss'd morocco, roan, and calf,
  The blue and yellow wraps of old were prettier by half."

                                     --Eliza Cook's Poems.


In 1708 John White, a Citizen of York, established himself as a printer
in Newcastle-on-Tyne, bringing with him a stock of quaint old cuts,
formerly his father's, at York, where he was Sole Printer to King
William, for the five Northern Counties of England. He entered into
partnership with Thomas Saint, who on the death of John White, at their
Printing Office in Pilgrim Street, succeeded in 1796 to his extensive
business as Printer, Bookseller, and Publisher. In this stock of
woodcuts were some of the veritable pieces of wood engraved, or cut for
Caxton, Wynken de Worde, Pynson, and others down to Tommy Gent--the
curious genius, historian, author, poet, woodcuter and engraver, binder
and printer, of York. We give some early examples out of this stock.
Thomas Saint, about 1770, had the honour of introducing to the public,
the brothers Thomas and John Bewick's first efforts in wood-engravings,
early and crude as they undoubtedly were. They are to be found in Hutton
"On Mensuration," and also in various children's and juvenile works,
such as AEsop's and Gay's Fables. We give some of the earliest known of
their work in this very interesting collection of woodcuts.

Some years ago a collection was formed of Newbury and Marshall's
Children's Gift Toy Books, and early educational works, which were
placed in the South Kensington Museum, in several glass cases. These
attracted other collections of rare little volumes, adorned with similar
cuts, many of which are from the identical blocks here impressed,
notably the "Cries of York," "Goody Two Shoes," etc. They are still on
view, near the George Cruikshank collection, and during the twenty years
they have been exhibited, such literature has steadily gone up to fancy
prices.

Charles Knight in his Shadows of the Old Booksellers, says of Newbury,
(pp. 233), "This old bookseller is a very old friend of mine. He wound
himself round my heart some seventy years ago, when I became possessed
of an immortal volume, entitled the history of 'Little Goody Shoes.'
I felt myself personally honoured in the dedication." He then refers to
Dr. Primrose, Thomas Trip, etc., and adds further on, "my father had a
drawer full of them [Newbury's little books] very smartly bound in gilt
paper." Priceless now would this collection be, mixed up with
horn-books--a single copy of which is one of the rarest relics of the
olden time.

Chalmer's in his preface to "Idler," regards Mr. Newbury as the reputed
author of many little chap books for masters and misses.

Mr. John Nichols brings forward other candidates for the honour of
projecting and writing the "Lilliputian histories, of Goody Two Shoes,
etc.;" and refers to Griffith Jones and Giles Jones, in conjunction with
Mr. John Newbury, as those to whom the public are indebted for the
origin of those numerous and popular little books for the amusement and
instruction of children, which have ever since been received with
universal approbation.

The following are two of the identical cuts engraved by John Bewick, and
used in the Newbury editions of Goody Two Shoes, London, 1769 to 1771.

  [Illustrations: 2_1, 2_2]

It will be seen on contrasting these cuts with the other two, on the
following page, from early York editions, how wonderfully even in his
early years Bewick improved the illustrated juvenile literature of his
day. No wonder when Goldsmith the poet had an interview with Bewick,
that delighted with his cuts, he confessed to writing Goody Two Shoes,
Tommy Trip, etc. Bewick's daughter supplied this information.

  [Illustrations: 3_1 - 3_3

  _Early cuts to Goody Two Shoes._
  _Bewick's frontispiece to Goody Two Shoes._]

Here are two early examples of Thomas Bewick. They were used in a York
edition of "A Pretty Book of Pictures for little Masters and Misses,
or History of Beasts and Birds by Tommy Trip," etc.

  [Illustrations: 4_1, 4_2

  _Miss Polly Riding in a Coach, from Tommy Trip._
  _The Student, from Tommy Trip._]

There was an American edition of Goody Two Shoes, and is very
interesting indeed, having a woodcut frontispiece engraved by Thomas
Bewick, and was printed at Worcester, Mass., U.S.A., by Isaiah Thomas,
and sold wholesale and retail at his book-store, 1787. A copy of this
little book sold in London for L1 16s.

We also give two other specimens from the J. Newbery editions of Tommy
Trip and Goody Two Shoes, both engraved by John Bewick.

  [Illustrations: 4_3, 4_4

  _The Student, from Tommy Trip._
  _Margery, from Goody Two Shoes._]

The packmen of the past [see frontispiece of a pack-horse in First
Edition only of Bewick's Quadrupeds, 1790] carried in their packs the
ephemeral literature of the day, Calendars, Almanacks, and Chep-Books.
The Leicestershire pronunciation to this day at markets is "Buy Chep"
for Cheap, hence the Chep-side, or Cheape-or Cheapside; otherwise
derivation of Chap Men, or Running, Flying, and other mercurial
stationers, peripatetic booksellers, pedlers, packmen, and again
chepmen, these visited the villages and small towns from the large
printers of the supply towns, as London, Banbury, Newcastle, Edinburgh,
Glasgow, etc. The "History of John Cheap, the Chapman," "Parley the
Porter," "Stephen of Salisbury Plain," and other favourite tracts, with
John Bewick's and Lee's square woodcuts were written by the quaker lady,
Hannah More, about 1777, and were first published in broadsheet folio.
Some were done by Hazzard, of Bath, others by Marshall, of Bow Lane,
Aldermary Church Yard. A most curious collection of chap books did they
print, reviving the quaint old "Blind Beggar of Bethnal Green," "Guy,
Earl of Warwick," "Seven Champions," "Mother Shipton's Life and
Prophecies," "Wise Men of Gothan," "Adam Bell," "Robin Hood's Garland,"
"Jane Shore," "Joaks upon Joaks," "Strapho, or Roger the Clown,"
"Whetstone for dull Wits," "St. George and the Dragon," "Jack Horner:"
and hundreds of ballads, garlands, carols, broadsheets, songs, etc.,
were in the collection.

The "Great A and bouncing B Toy Book Factory," was somewhere near Little
Britain, the proprietor being John Marshall, who published the famous
"Life of a Fly."

  [Illustration: 5_1

  _Block by Thomas Bewick._]

The "Memoirs of a Peg Top," "Perambulations of a Mouse," 2 volumes with
cuts by John Bewick, and a number of other works, some by Mrs. Trimmer,
under various pseudonyms, were published in Bow Lane, also many quaint
broadsheets, the cuts of which are in this volume.

Hazzard, printer of Bath, who published many works for Dr. J. Trusler,
with woodcuts by John Bewick, Lee, and others, also published the cheap
repository tracts.

All the following little wood blocks were used in several toy books,
sometimes with Bewick's name on the titles, and done from 1787 to 1814,
in Dutch flowery and gingerbread gilt paper binding, just like Newbery
series.


Early John Bewick Cuts.

  [Illustrations: 6_1 - 6_6

  _Tommy Two Shoes._
  _Robin Hood and Little John, pub. Wilson and Spence, York._
  _York Story Books, by Wilson and Spence, circa 1797._
  _Used in the Fables._
  _Used in the Fables_]

  [Illustrations: 7_1 - 7_5

  _Cut by Lee, on the covers of Rusher's Penny "Banbury's."_
  _Two Blocks from Valentine's Gift. 1797._
  _Used by Wilson and Spence, York._
  _Patty Primrose._]

  [Illustrations: 8_1 - 8_6

  _From Primrose Prettyface and her Scholars._
  _Two Ballad Cuts, by Green, of Knaresborough._
  _Mrs. Winlove's Rise of Learning._
  _The Concert of Birds, from Tommy Tag._]

  [Illustrations: 9_1, 9_2

  _Frontispiece to Tommy Playlove and Joseph Lovebook._
  _Whitfield's Tabernacle, Moorfields, or Spa Fields Chapel. (?)_]

In Blade's Life of Caxton, the reader will find interesting examples of
the earliest woodcut blocks illustrating the quaint and rare tomes
issued by the Almonry, Westminster, also at Oxford. The Robin Hood
Garland blocks (circa 1680 or earlier), is one of the earliest
provincial blocks with a distinct history. We can trace them in varied
collections used by early London and Provincial printers, and in the
London Bridge printed Chap Book Literature.

Sutton, printer of Nottingham, issued a curious quarto volume of old
woodcuts. He was descended from the celebrated T. Sutton, who founded
the Charterhouse. Some twenty-five years ago I went over the very quaint
collection with the proprietor, and suggested a volume being issued, but
the idea had already been matured by him.

Robert White, the poet and local historian of Newcastle upon Tyne--by
whose favour I reprinted Tommy Trip in 1867--has one of the choicest,
most comprehensive, and rarest libraries of local stories, garlands,
ballads, and chap books, and North country folk-lore children's books,
almanacks, primers, "A. B. C.," horn books, battledores, etc., that were
ever gathered together. I am glad to place on record, that by his will,
his collection will remain intact. The special opportunities afforded
him at the time for collecting them have entirely passed away.

I believe he was descended from John White, printer for the five
northern counties of England to King William. This is referred to by Mr.
Dodd in his preface to a quarto volume of woodcut impressions. William
Dodd fully appreciated the local interest, by producing a limited
impression of the quaint blocks in his possession.

The Rev. Mr. Hugo had a very large and important collection of blocks
and books, and at his death I arranged and catalogued them for Messrs.
Sotheby, according to the wish of his widow. The Rev. gentleman had
wished his collection to be purchased by the trustees of the British
Museum, but some little hitch occurred and this was not accomplished.
In his collection the Robin Hood block, perforated with worm holes,
realized quite a fancy price.

Among the relics of ancient woodcutting, are some so early and crude in
their execution--quaint as the period they illustrate--as to really
entitle them to the literal name and meaning of _woodcuts_, rather than
wood-engravings, which they really became in the hands of the two
Bewicks and their numerous school of pupils. Other provincial publishers
were not so favoured as those at Newcastle-on-Tyne, as to have a Bewick
trying his prentice hand on similar series, as used by J. Bell and
others.

The Cock Robin blocks in this collection are certainly the earliest
series I have seen among the thousands I have examined. The York Cries,
Tom Hickethrift, Jack the Giant Killer, and many kindred cuts, are
evidently from the collection of John White, the early printer, and are
as quaint, as funny and droll in crudity of execution, as any of Thomas
Gent's, the unique York engraver and bookseller.

The rarity and interest of a collection like the present, with their
varied associations, may be fairly estimated when we consider that the
country printers in those days were not particular in making the same
woodcut do duty in most incongrous and inapplicable positions and
subjects.

We have met with a block in a child's book, then the identical woodcut
on a ballad, catchpenny, or last dying speech and confession, setting at
defiance any suitability of illustration, or adaptability to the text
matter. Of course now, some of these examples are exceedingly ludicrous,
and do not fail to excite merriment, and often add to the intrinsic
value of the article, as may be judged by numerous examples that have
occurred in our literary auction marts during the last half century.

Besides it must be taken fair notice of that a genuine wood-engraving,
or woodcut block may soon become a curiosity of the past, owing to the
improved methods of illustrating children's books. Many of Bewick's
blocks are veritable paintings on boxwood, and are as much classical
works of art as work by Josiah Wedgwood, and his able coadjutor,
J. Flaxman are in Fine Art. These early crude, quaint, droll little
pioneer wood blocks will ever remain of great and even historical
interest as showing the progress and influence on the illustrated
literature of the civilized world.

Many of our readers have heard of Banbury Cross and Banbury cakes, and
other famous juvenile associations, as the lady with bells on her toes,
but it was also connected with the production of books for juvenile
readers. A great portion of the blocks in this volume are Banbury blocks
used for illustrating the toy books, children's histories, etc., for
which this quaint old Oxfordshire town was famous. Many of them are
connected with the early printing and engraving carried on in this and
other towns of England. A quantity of the blocks were used in the books
printed by John White of York, who established himself, as before
mentioned, as a printer in Newcastle-on-Tyne, bringing with him a stock
of quaint old blocks formerly his father's [at York], where he was sole
printer to King William, for the five northern counties of England.

Boswell has recorded several conversations of Oliver Goldsmith with Dr.
Johnson, in which the warm-hearted poet expressed a wish, "to make
fishes, animals, birds, etc., _talk_, or appear so to do, for the
amusement and instruction of children." In the National Collection is
"The Valentine's Gift, or a Plan to enable children of all sizes and
denomination to behave with honour, integrity, and humanity, very
necessary to a trading nation: to which is added some account of Old
Zigzag, and of the Horn with which he used to understand the language of
birds, beasts, fishes and insects," etc., "Printed for Francis Power,
(grandson to the late Mr. J. Newbery) and Co., No. 65, St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1790, price sixpence, bound in gilt dutch paper binding, 105
and iii pages".

Numerous books were sold by Francis Power, No. 65, _near the Bar_, in
St. Paul's Churchyard, London; his list comprises "Giles Gingerbread,"
"Tom Thumb's Folio," "The London Cries, taken from the Life," "The
Lilliputian Auction," by Charley Chatter, "Nurse Truelove's Christmas
Box," "New Year's Gift," "The History of Little Goody Two Shoes," new
edition, "Adventures of a Bee," "The Little Lottery Book," "A Pretty
Plaything for Children," "The Lilliputian Magazine," "The Picture
Exhibition," "Lilliputian Masquerade," "Juvenile Trials for Robbing
Orchards and Telling Fibs," "Pretty Poems by Tommy Tagg, for children
three feet high," "A Pretty Book of Pictures, or Tommy Tripp's History,"
"The Drawing School by Master Angelo," "Poetical Flower Garden," "Tommy
Trapwit's Be Merry and Wise," "Lecture upon Toys," 2 vols; "Pretty Poems
for children six feet high," "The Museum," "Polite Academy," "Poetical
Flower Basket," "Mother Goose's Fairy Tales," "A Spelling Dictionary,
Rhetoric; Logic; Arithmetic; History; Chronology; Geography;" "Vicar of
Wakefield." Most of the latter except "Vicar" formed a circle of the
sciences licensed by approval of the King, each dedicated to a youthful
nobleman, by "John Newbery." The size was "snuffbox," or waistcoat
pocket (capacious in 1790, see "School for Scandal," etc., Costume,
etc.) Documentary evidence and receipts in Goldsmith's handwriting,
acknowledging various sums for writing the "Rhetorick," and others of
the above exist. Goldsmith also did numerous Abridgements of the Old and
New Testaments, Robinson Crusoe, Pamela, Clarissa Harlow, Sir Chas.
Grandison, all in this juvenile series for J. Newbery.

  [Illustration: 12_1
  _The Spider, from Bunyan's Divine Emblems._]

This was a most popular juvenile brochure, at end of eighteenth century.
The early editions of J. Bunyan's Works, 2 vols, folio, had the Divine
Emblems at end of vol 2, with quaint old woodcuts. These were
industriously copied in reduced sizes, and published from 1d. to 6d., by
various London and Provincial "toy book" manufacturers. The above is a
solitary representative of the illustrations of one of these rare
editions of "Bunyan."

  [Illustrations: 12_2, 12_3

  _From Evans's Cock Robin._
  _Frontispiece to Farthing Cinderella._]


  [Illustrations: 13_1, 13_2

  _Tobacco Paper Cut and Tavern Sign._
  _Very Early Ballad, D----l cut, etc._]

John Evans, 42, Long Lane, West Smithfield, circa 1791, brought out some
singular little farthing children's books, printed on coarse sugar
paper, also ballads, single-sheet songs, and "patters." One, "The
tragical death of an Apple Pye, cut in pieces and eat, by twenty-five
gentlemen, with whom all little people ought to be very well
acquainted."

J. Drewey, Irongate, Derby, brought out some entertaining fables,
in which the following woodcuts were used again.


_Blocks used in Red Riding Hood._

  [Illustrations: 14_1 - 14_6]


_Blocks used in "Jack and the Giants" and "Tom, Tom, the Piper's son,"
etc. From John White's stock, at York._

  [Illustrations: 15_1 - 15_15]


_Cuts used for "Tom, Tom, the Piper's Son," etc._

  [Illustrations: 16_1 - 16_6]


_Cuts to "Whittington and his Cat."_

  [Illustrations: 16_7 - 16_10]


John Evans issued "Cock Robin, a pretty gilded toy for either girl or
boy," in which the early cut on page 12 was used. This rare edition has
the following comical variation from the orthodox version:

 "Little Robin Redbreast sat upon a pole,
  Wiggle-waggle went its tail, and p--p went its hole."


_Very Early Cock Robin Set, from John White's York Stock._

  [Illustrations: 17_1 - 17_10]


That quaint divine Dean Swift of St. Patricks, Dublin, edited some
curious poetry for "A Royal Primer," sqr. 32mo, published in the Seven
Dials, of Dublin ("Rainbow Court").

 "Ech, ech, my dear'y, and
       Ach, ach, my love.
 "There was a little man who had a little gun, and
 "There was a little maid who was very much afraid
         To get wed, wed, wed," etc.

This is long and curious, and was greatly altered and abreviated in
early 19th Century Editions.


_"The Royal Primer," from John White's York and Newcastle Stock._

  [Illustrations: 18_1 - 18_12]


_From Dean Swift's Royal Primer, Dublin, circa 1770._

  [Illustrations: 19_1 - 19_7]


_From Evans's edition of Cinderella._

  [Illustrations: 19_8 - 19_11]


_Very Early "Cock Robin" Series, "Postboy" by Bewick for a Newcastle
Newspaper, "Wife Joan," etc., from J. White's Stock._

  [Illustrations: 20_1 - 20_15]


_Early "Mother Hubbard:" J. Evans, Long Lane, circa 1770._

  [Illustrations: 21_1 - 21_10]


_Early "Goody Two Shoes," "Jack and Jill," "Cock Robin," The Fables,
early Bewick School._

  [Illustrations: 22_1 - 22_14]


_All Evans's style of woodcut, Catnach, etc., all used at Rushers
Banbury Press._

  [Illustrations: 23_1 - 23_11

  _Babes in the Wood._
  _Blue Beard._]


Providing ourselves with a variety of pens and ink, we select two of the
best and proceed to describe the Banbury Printer's old stock of cuts.

Banbury, Oxfordshire, was one of the chief provincial towns noted for
its Children's Books, Chap Books, Battledoes, Reading Easies, etc., also
for locally printed works, notably for two, viz., Dr. Johnson's
_Rasselas_, and White and Beesley's workon _Bees_, thin 12mo volumes,
boards, printed in a curious phonetic character, called "Rusher's
Types." Rusher, printer of this town, had some ingenuity and originality
of his own, and was not such a plagiarist and imitator as some of his
contemporaries. Many of the tales he cleverly adapted to the locality,
which have become very valuable. His edition of the Rasselas realized L5
5s. This book was written by Johnson in a week to defray his mother's
funeral expenses.

We give several extracts from some of Rusher's Penny Books which will
show how well he adapted them to his town.


  [Illustrations: 24_1 - 24_4]

  _[Early John Bewick,] Rusher's Lilliputian Library, Banbury,
  circa. 1810._

  At Rusher's fam'd Warehouse,
  Books, Pictures and Toys
  Are selling to please all
  The good girls and boys.

  For youth of all ages
  There's plenty in store,
  Amusement, instruction,
  For rich and the poor.


  _From the New House that Jack Built._

  See Jack in his study,
  Is writting a book,
  As pretty as this is
  In which you may look;

  The price is one penny,
  For girls or for boys,
  There's more too at Rusher's,
  And Pictures and Toys.


  _Poetic Trifles._

  Sing see-saw, Jack thatching the ridge,
  Which is the way to Banbury-bridge?
  One foot up and t'other foot down,
  And that's the way to Banbury town.


  As I was going to Banbury
  Upon a summer's day,
  My dame had butter, eggs and fruit,
  And I had corn and hay,
  Joe drove the ox and Tom the swine,
  Dick took the foal and mare:
  I sold them all--then home to dine
  From famous Banbury Fair.


  Here's something new
  Dear child for you,
  I will please you in a trice
  A halfp'ny chuse,
  Now don't refuse,
  A penny is the price.


  Tho' basely born
  Pray do not scorn
  A Tale no worse than many
  For I'm afraid
  More say in trade,
  A halfp'ny's made a penny.


  Good things to engross,
  Near Banbury cross
    Where Tommy shall go on the nag,
  He makes no mistake,
  Buy a Banbury Cake,
    Books, Pictures, and Banbury Shag.


  Little Robin Redbreast
  Sat upon a tree
  He sang merrily
  As merrily could be.

  He nodded with his head
  And his tail waggled he
  As little Robin Redbreast
  Sat upon a tree.


  Now each lad and each lass
  Both sister and brother
  May have books for each class
  For Father or Mother.

  And when with much pleasure
  You've read them all o'er,
  Then hasten to Rusher's,
  He's printing some more.

  Where each daughter and son
  And each nephew and niece,
  Each good child may have one,
  For a penny a piece.


BLACK YOUR SHOES, YOUR HONOUR?

  Here's Finiky Hawkes,
  As busy as any,
  Will well black your shoes,
  And charge but a penny.


The following little "Banbury Cake" Book is so excessively rare, we give
the text verbatim.


       *       *       *       *       *

                  THE HISTORY
                      of a
                 BANBURY CAKE.

       An Entertaining Book For Children.

                   _BANBURY:_
       Printed and Sold by J. G. RUSHER,
                 Bridge Street.

               _Price One Penny._


PREFACE.

It will be thought very odd, I doubt not, by each little boy and girl
into whose hands this book shall fall, that a Banbury Cake should be
able to write (as it were) its own life; but as they advance in years,
they will find that many strange things happen every day--I shall
therefore without more words to the bargain proceed with my story.


HISTORY OF A BANBURY CAKE.

I was born or made (whichever you please, my little reader) at Banbury
in the county of Oxford, as you can plainly conceive by my title, where
great numbers of Cakes are brought into being daily; and from whence
they travel by coach, chaise, waggon, cart horse and foot into all parts
of this Kingdom: nay and beyond the seas, as I heard my maker declare
that he had, more then once sent some of them into France.

Soon after I was made, and while I was yet warm from the oven, I was
sold by my maker's fair daughter to a person on horseback for twopence.

With this person I took my first journey to Oxford; he rode a very fine
Black Horse. As soon as he came home, he gave me to his son a lovely
little boy, about seven years of age, and one as I found to my comfort
not only lovely in person but in temper also. His name was Tommy, and he
was praised and loved by all that knew him, and had often presents of
cakes, toys and little books, and other things that are proper for
children of his age; the books he kept with great care as things of
value and worthy of his notice, but other trinkets he seemed to despise.

Tommy and his cousin were taken to see Mr. Polito's collection of wild
beasts and birds, which were then exhibiting at Oxford, among which were
a large lion, an eagle, and many other natural curiosities, which sight
was very entertaining, as Tommy and his cousin had never seen such
before. They afterwards walked into the Colleges, round Christ Church
College Meadow, and indeed saw all the curiosities about Oxford.

                                        (The Banbury Cake).

       *       *       *       *       *


We give a Bibliographical List, as perfect as is possible to date,
of the "Halfpenny Series" of little History and Story Books issued at
Rusher's Banbury Press, some even with the same titles as the "Penny
Series," yet totally different in arrangement and woodcuts, used, as
comparison in the Bodleian Library will readily show: Mother Hubbard and
her Dog; Nursery Rymmes from the Royal Collections; Poetic Trifles for
young Gentlemen and Ladies; The Cries of Banbury, London, and Celebrated
Stories; Children in the Wood, Historical Ballad (Norfolk?); Children in
the Wood, Restored by Honestus; Hermit of the Forest (Cumberland); Jack
the Giant Killer, a Hero, celebrated by Ancient Historians (Cornwall);
Robinson Crusoe; Nursery Poems from the Ancient and Modern Poets; Jack
and Gill and Old Dame Gill; Read who will, They'll laugh their fill;
Dick Whittington and his Cat; The History of Tom Thumb (Middlesex);
Death and Burial of Cock Robin; Renowned History of Dame Trot and her
Cat; London Jingles and Country Tales for Young People; Tom, Tom, the
Piper' Son; Cinderella and her Glass Slipper; Jack Spratt and his Wife
Joan, etc. etc.


  [Illustrations: 27_1, 27_2]


_Bewick School, used in Rusher's Banbury Toy Books._

  [Illustrations: 28_1, 28_2]


_Used by Rusher in his Banbury Horn Books, Battledores, Galloping
Guide to A, B, C, Primers, Reading Made Easy, Spelling Books, etc._

  [Illustration: 28_3]


  [Illustration: 29_1

  _From Evans's, Long Lane, West Smithfield, used afterwards at
  Banbury._]


Rusher's Banbury _Battledore_ and _Reading Made Easy_ blocks, show the
next improvement on the old _Horn Books_. Then Rusher published a
_Galloping Guide to the A B C._, for which see next page.

  [Illustrations: 29_2, 29_3]


  [Transcriber's Note:

  Beginning with D, each letter has its own illustration, printed in
  sets of three. The alphabet is printed continuously down the left
  and right margins. A page break separates the "Judge" illustration
  from its line of text. The complete pages can be seen as
  "pic_30_all.png" - "pic_32_all.png"]

  [Illustration: 30_1]

  A was an Acorn, that grew on the oak;
  B is a Boy, who delights in his book.
  C is a Canister, holds mamma's teas;
  D is a Drum, you may sound if you please.

  [Illustration {D, E, F}: 30_2]

  E is an Eagle, that soars very high;
  F is a Fox, that is crafty and sly.

  [Illustration {G, H, J}: 30_3]

  G is a Griffin, of him pray take heed;
  H is a Hare, that can run with great speed.

  [Illustration {K, L, M}: 31_1]

  J is a Judge, that the law oft obeys;
  K is a Key, that no secret betrays.
  L is a Lamb, often freaks o'er the lea;
  M is a Mermaid, that sings in the sea.

  [Illustration {N, O, P}: 31_2]

  N is a Nightingale, dwells in the wood;
  O is an Ox, whose beef roasted is good.
  P is a Peach, that did grow very high;
  Q is a Quince, makes a savoury pie.

  [Illustration {Q, R, S}: 31_3]

  R is a Raven, rapacity charms;
  S shining Sun, is the Banbury Arms.

  [Illustration {T, V, W}: 31_4]

  T is a Trumpet, your merit to raise;
  V is a Vulture, on other birds preys.
  W a Wren, that was perch'd on a spray;

  [Illustration {X, Y, Z}: 32_1]

  X was King Xerxes, well known in his day.
  Y is a Yew Tree, both slender and tall;
  Z Zacaariah, the last of them all.


  [Illustration: 32_2
  _Reading made Easie, copy of Bewick._]

  [Illustration: 32_3
  _You are Old Father William, by Green._]


  [Illustration: 33_1
  The History of Jack the Giant-killer.]

The above woodcut of a Fugitive Soldier (designed by Craig, and engraved
by Lee) was used on the back of the cover of this little book, as issued
by J. G. Rusher at Banbury.

  [Illustrations: 33_2 - 33_7

  Jack's Artfulness.
  Jack shows the Giant a trick.
  The Giant and his Prisoners.
  Jack slices off the Giant's nose.
  Jack kills Blunderbore.
  Jack strangles the Giants.]


DEATH AND BURIAL OF COCK ROBIN.

  [Illustrations: 34_1 - 34_8, 35_1 - 35_7

  Who killed Cock Robin?

  I, said the sparrow,
  With my bow and arrow,
  I killed Cock Robin!

  This is the pie
  That saw him die.

  Who caught his blood?
  I said the fish,
  With my little dish,
  I caught his blood!

  Who made his shroud?
  I, said the Eagle,
  With my thread and needle!

  This is the Owl so brave
  That dug Cock Robin's grave.

  Who'll be the parson?
  I, said the Rook.

  Who'll be the clerk?
  I, said the lark.

  Who'll carry him to his grave?
  I, said the kite.

  Who'll be the chief mourner?
  I, said the swan.

  Who'll bear his Pall?
  We, said the wrens.

  Who'll toll the bell?
  I, said the Bull.

  Who'll lead the way?
  I, said the martin.

  The birds of the air fell a sighing and sobbing,
  When they heard the bell toll for poor Cock Robin.]


  [Illustrations: 36_1 - 36_7

  The History of Tom Thumb.

  The cow took Tom Thumb
  With a mouthful of grass.

  His butterfly mounted,
  And rode o'er the stream.

  He climbed up the edge,
  And fell in the bowl.

  Tom soused in the firmity,
  And had a great fall.

  The breath of the spider
  In the midst of the strife
  Was too much for Sir Thomas,
  And cost him his life.

  {Alas! Sir Thomas}]


  [Illustrations: 37_1 - 37_7

  Children in the Wood.
  With clay-cold lips the babes they kissed.
  He bargained with two ruffians strong.
  Away the little babes were sent.
  To fight they go right suddenly.
  Then hand in hand they took their way.
  Till death did end their grief.]


Mother Hubbard and her Dog.

Designed by George Cruikshank (early work), and engraved by Branston.

  [Illustrations: 38_1 - 38_8]


Dame Trot and her Cat.

Early Cruikshank School.

  [Illustrations: 39_1 - 39_8

  Dame Trot.
  Dame Trot's Cat.
  Dame teaches the Cat.
  Dame takes her to market.
  Riding.
  The Cat smells a Rat.
  Dressing.
  The Cat fights Dog Ball.]


The History of Robinson Crusoe.

  [Illustrations: 40_1 - 40_7

 "Robinson Crusoe, he
  Was determined to go to sea"
  The Raft.
  At Home.
  The Tame Goat.
  The Footprints.
  Shooting Savages.
  Traversing the Island.]

_Designed by Cruikshank, engraved by Dranston._


The Life of Jack Sprat and his Wife Joan.

Cruikshank School.

  [Illustrations: 41_1 - 41_12

  Jack and his Wife.
  Jack Sprat goes courting.
  Joan goes for a walk.
  Jack's Marriage.
  Jack wheeling his Wife.
  Joan sits in her chair.
  Jack takes his gun.
  But the birds don't care.
  Jack buys a cow.
  Jack buys a mare.
  Jack rests.
  And grows fat.]


Cinderella and her Glass Slipper.

Published by Rusher, circa 1814. Designed by Cruikshank, and engraved
by Branstone. A copy is in the Bodleian Library.

  [Illustrations: 42_1 - 42_7

  Cinderella.
  Cinderella dressing for the Ball.
  Cinderella going to the Ball in a fine coach.
  Cinderella dancing with the King's Son.
  Cinderella drops one of her glass slippers.
  Cinderella marries the Prince.]


Jack and Jill.

  [Illustrations: 43_1 - 43_13

  Jack and Jill
  Went up the hill.

  Then up Jack got,
  And home did trot.

  Then Jill came in,
  And she did grin.

  They rode dog Ball,
  And Jill did fall.

  Says Jill, I'll tell
  You how Jack fell.

  I'll try, says Jack,
  Upon his back.

  Now Jill did laugh,
  And Jack did cry.

  They first rode high,
  And then rode low.

  The very next thing
  They made a swing.

  Camel came by.
  Says Jack, I'll try.

  The pig he squalled,
  While Jack he bawled.

  Hearing the rout,
  The dame came out.

  Read it who will,
  They'll laugh they fill.]


Dick Whittington and his Cat.

Designed by Cruikshank, and engraved by Branstone; published by Rusher
about 1814. An original copy is in the Bodleian Library.

  [Illustrations: 44_1 - 44_6

  Dick goes on his travels.
  And meets with a kind Merchant.
  A penny for your cat, Dame!
  Bow Bells ringing "Turn again Whittington!"
  Pussy clears the King's table,
  And makes Whittington's fortune.]


  [Illustration: 45_1

  The Cries of York.]

"The Cries of York, for the amusement of Young Children, decorated with
cuts printed by T. Kendrew, Collier Gate, York." These York Cries have
not been mentioned by any writer on juvenile literature and the same may
be said of the Banbury Cries. T. Kendrew of York, brought out many
interesting penny and other children's books. He published "Giles
Gingerbread, a little boy who lived upon learning, by Tom Trip," this
was an abbreviation of Newberry's Edition of the "Silver Penny." The
series was illustrated with the early and prentice work of the Bewick
School. One of the rarest is "The Cries of York," the cuts of which
afterwards travelled to Banbury and appeared in "Banbury Cries." The
series we are enabled to give complete.

  [Illustrations: 45_2 - 45_4]


_Cuts belonging to York Cries._

  [Illustrations: 46_1 - 46_9]

  [Illustrations: 47_1 - 47_9]

  [Illustrations: 48_1 - 48_3]


Appended are the words to many of the foregoing Cries.

THE ITALIAN BASKET SELLER.

  Ventured across the main behold,
  "Buy Baskets," solemn Face,
  He sells for Lust of Naughty Gold,
  Which is a Common Case.

MEND OLD PANS AND KETTLES, O!

  (_Peaseholme Green Postern_)
  Hark! who is this, the Tinker Bold,
  To mend or spoil you Kettle,
  Whose wife, I'm certain is a Scold,
  Made up of base metal.

  Buy my Clocks and Weather Glasses!
  Buy Shirt Hand Buttons!
  (_Walmgate Bar_)

 "If I'd as much money as I could tell;
  I never would cry young lambs to sell."
  (_Thursday Market_)

 "Buy my Anchovies.
  Buy my nice Anchovies."

SWEEP YOUR CHIMNEY CLEAN, O!

  With drawling tone, Brush under arm,
  And Bag slung o'er his shoulder,
  Behold the Sweep, the Streets alarm,
  With Stentor's voice and louder.

COME BUY MY NICE MUFFINS.

  Hot Muffins and Crumpets too,
  For Breakfast and for Tea;
  I've only a very few left,
  In Basket as you may see.

  Buy Banbury Cakes! By fortune's frown,
  You see this needy man,
  Along the street and up and down
  Is selling all he can.

COCKLES ALIVE, ALIVE, O!

  Behold Poor James at York again,
  His Cockles all alive, O!
  Alive, Alive, he cries amain,
  Come buy that he may thrive, O!

 "Buy my fine Larks."
    (_Catching Larks_)

 "Sixpence a Score Oysters."
    (_Ouse Bridge_)

 "Come Buy my Roasting Spits."

 "Rabbits! Rabbits!"

 "Buy my fine Writing Ink."

 "The City Bellman."
    (_Hay Weigh_)

 "Buy my Cranberries, fine Cranberries."

 "Sweet China Oranges."
    (_Pavement_)

 "Buy my Capers.
  Buy my nice Capers, Capers."

 "Buy my nice Banbury Cakes."

 "Buy my Windmills, a halfpenny-a-piece."
    (_Monk Bar_)

 "Fine Kidney Potatoes."

 "Threepence a Mart Ripe Gooseberries."

 "Come buy a true Calendar."
    (_Castle Gates_)

 "Razors, Knives, and Scissors to grind."

 "Acomb Sand."

 "Race Lists."


The Cries of York is distinctly different from The Cries of London
issued by Kendrew though the same set of Cuts are utilized.

London Street Cries have always had a fascination peculiarly their own.
Madame Vestris used to bring down the house with "Cherry Ripe," and
where are happier efforts of the favourite home Artists than "London
Cries" by A. Morland, Wheatley, Stodhard, and others, which are so
eagerly sought after by connoiseurs? The pretty plaintive Cries too,
would we had the 'music' to them, so familiar in the streets in those
charming old English days.

  [Illustration: 49_1

  "_Nothing like leather._"]

A most interesting and quaint old relic is the one from which annexed
impression is given, from Dyche's Spelling Book: an exceedingly clean,
choice and crisp copy of this book, in the original sheep covers,--a
veritable "old shopkeeper," which for nearly a century had escaped its
intended destiny in Rusher's varied stores, at length found a resting
place in Sir Thomas Bodley's venerable receptacle for bibliographical
treasures in the Bodelian, Oxford. The present example--a portion of
which was broken away many years ago,--is probably the sole surviving
one of the quaint series of cuts, doubtless admired by our
great-grand-parents over 100 years ago.


The following are curious examples of Fable Cuts, which were used in
Dilworth, Cocker, Fisher, and others.

  [Illustrations: 50_1 - 50_4]


_Early Fable Cuts, used at Banbury in Spelling Books._

  [Illustrations: 51_1 - 51_5]


_History of Joseph, designed by Isaac Cruikshank._

  [Illustrations: 52_1 - 52_7]


_Clever little vignettes, by Thomas and John Bewick and Pupils, used
first at Nicholson's, Ludlow, circa 1787, and afterwards, circa 1814,
used in Rusher's Banbury Books._

  [Illustrations: 53_1 - 53_10]


_Woodcuts of the Bewick and Cruikshank Schools, from Ludlow and
Ploughwill, afterwards used at Banbury._

  [Illustrations: 54_1 - 54_14]


_Used in various Rusher's Penny Banbury Children's Books._

  [Illustrations: 55_1 - 55_10]


_By Bewick's Pupils, used in Children's Books at Banbury by Rusher._

  [Illustrations: 56_1 - 56_13]


_By Bewick and Pupils, from Ludlow, all used at Banbury._

  [Illustrations: 57_1 - 57_10]


  [Illustration: 58_1

  _Close copy of Bewick, by a pupil._]

  DRUNKEN BARNABY.

  To Banbury came I,
  Prophane one,
  Where I saw a Puritan
  Hanging of his cat on Monday
  For killing of a mouse on Sunday.

  [Illustrations: 58_2 - 58_6

  _Bewick playing the Northumbrian Pipes, a very early
    J. Bewick._
  _Jack and the Giants, from the early York edition._
  _Raree, or Peep Show, R. Cruikshank's design, engraved by Sears._
  _Chapman, or Running Stationer, designed by Cruikshank and engraved
    by Branston. (Used in York Cries)._]


  [Illustrations: 59_1, 59_2

  _Banbury Old Church._]

A Gentleman wrote to one of the newspapers some time ago, detailing a
curious incident that happened to himself, showing how these very
interesting prints and blocks are being scattered and destroyed. He says
"In the old days when Catnach was King of the ballad world, boys used to
steal the woodblocks of Mr. Bewick the wood-cutter, and sell them to the
great song singer. Yesterday, for a halfpenny, I picked up in a bye
street in London one of the prints of a very beautiful block of this
kind heading a song called 'The Wealthy Farmer's Son.' I wonder whether
anybody has ever thought it worth while to collect these pictures." This
interesting pursuit of collecting and illustrating with extra cuts,
pages of child book literature of the 17th, 18th, and early 19th
century, would indeed be a charming recreation. On this subject there
appeared a long article in the Graphic, where the writer says, under the
initials 'C. H.,' "There are few more agreeable occupations for anyone
who has sufficient leisure at his disposal, than that of embellishing a
favourite book with illustrations appropriate to the subject, and
thereby endowing it with additional interest and value. To those who
cultivate this fascinating pursuit with taste and intelligence, there
are two indispensible conditions of success. The task of collecting the
materials is a labour of love, and every fresh discovery in some
out-of-the-way corner, of a long-sought desideratum, a delight which the
patience and industrious enthusiast alone can appreciate." Then follows
much genial advice on tasteful and judicious collecting, and how to
illustrate. In the present case the interest and value could only be
realized or conceived on the completion of a choice collection of extra
cuts, and cuttings of articles, portraits, views, autograph letters,
etc., carefully mounted on cartridge paper, paged to correspond with the
text, and then handed to a judicious binder--this is a very important
item--who would carefully encase it, and make it form a select and an
exceptionibly valuable addition to the library.


  [Illustration: 60_1

  _The Banbury Bellman._]

  [Illustrations: 60_2, 60_3

  _Tradesmen' Shops in Banbury, used on their bill-heads._]


  [Illustrations: 61_1 - 61_5

  _Used in various tradesmen's Billheads, etc., printed at Rusher's
    Press, Banbury._]


That this interesting idea may not be considered unworthy of
adoption--which by the way the few large paper copies of this book are
admirably adopted--we give a short list of those who have collected and
treasured with care these little brochures. In the South Kensington
Museum on exhibition, is a collection of Horn Books and Battledores,
exhibited by Kenneth, R. H. Mackenzie, Esq., _F.S.A.,_ who read a paper
on this subject before the Society of Antiquaries. There is another
collection which includes many curious Horn Books or Battledores, from
circa 1750, 1784, 1800 to 1810, including photo and facsimiles of one of
the Middleton Horn Books now in the Bateman Museum. There is also a
curious poem on the Horn Book by a Gent. suffering from the gout,
printed at Dublin by T. Cowan, 1728, small 4to, only a few leaves.
Another very neat Horn Book with the Horn in front, hence its name, is
also on view. The scarcity of these quaint early educational books may
be understood from the fact that Mr. Hone, author of the Every Day Book,
etc., sought for an original Horn Book for years without success. Mr.
Coleridge had one or two cases on exhibition, with numerous examples of
Newbury and Marshall's little books, but we believe these are withdrawn.
There is also a selection of early educational books; but the largest
collection formed is still on exhibition. In conclusion, it may be said
that the present volume contains many precious relics of the Bewick,
Newbury, Goldsmith, Newcastle York, Banbury, Coventry, and Catnach
presses, and a representative collection of the stock of workable
woodcuts of a provincial printer in the latter part of the 18th century,
and to those who would like to inspect the rentable copies of those
valuable and interesting little books, and some of the original Horn
Books, etc., let them see the Coleridge, Kenneth Mackenzie, and Pearson
collections in the South Kensington Museum.

  [Illustrations: 62_1, 62_2

  _Rustic Cottages near Banbury._]

Since writing the above, there appeared in the catalogue of books
belonging to William Bell Scott, Esq., recently sold at Messrs. Sotheby,
a small 4to Album containing a collection of wood engravings by Bewick,
Clennell, and others, which with some newspaper cuttings made quite a
dainty extra illustrated volume.

If so eminent an artist could find pleasure and recreation in this
pursuit, others may certainly rely upon finding it equally attractive,
but he would have found his task much easier if he had had a large paper
copy of this work interleaved. This is recommended to any person
desiring to take up this charming recreation.

  [Illustrations: 62_3, 62_4]


_Illustrations of Children's Books, used by Rusher at Banbury._

  [Illustrations: 63_1 - 63_15]


_All used by Rusher in his Children's Books, Banbury._

  [Illustrations: 64_1 - 64_11]


_All used in Rusher's Banbury Books._

  [Illustrations: 65_1 - 65_10]


_Used by Rusher._

  [Illustrations: 66_1 - 66_12]


_All used in Rusher's Books._

  [Illustrations: 67_1 - 67_13]


_Bewick School, all used in Rusher's Banbury Toy Books._

  [Illustrations: 68_1 - 68_11]


_Used on Local Tracts and afterwards, issued at Rusher's Press,
Bridge St., Banbury._

  [Illustrations: 69_1 - 69_11]


_Used by Rusher._

  [Illustrations: 70_1 - 70_13]


_All used in the Banbury Juvenile Series._

  [Illustrations: 71_1 - 71_11]


_Engraved by Bewick School, used in the Children's Books._

  [Illustrations: 72_1 - 72_12]


_All used in Rusher's Banbury Toy Books._

  [Illustrations: 73_1 - 73_12]


_On Early Tract Society Publications._

  [Illustrations: 74_1 - 74_10]


_Used for illustrating early Tracts._

  [Illustrations: 75_1 - 75_9]


_All used in Educational Tracts, Banbury._

  [Illustrations: 76_1 - 76_9]


_Used in Early Tracts, Banbury._

  [Illustrations: 77_1 - 77_8]


  [Illustration: 78_1

  BANBURY FAIR.]

About 1820, many curious Tracts were issued by various Societies with
the illustrations which follow. Some of these Tracts relating to Social
and Religious questions of that day had been edited by Hannah More and
her sister--at "Barley Wood," near Bath--also by Rowland Hill, the
eccentric divine of old Surrey Chapel, and others; these are now quite
ephemeral literary productions, notably some on the "Sunday Question."
Several of the following cuts were used contemporary with Timothy
Spagg's (Charles Dickens's) Sunday Under Three Heads. One of these,
an 8vo pamphlet, has on the title, a large woodcut by Thomas Bewick,
commencing;--_Here we have Bewick, I declare_, etc. Many of the original
cuts to the Bristol series of Tracts issued from 1805 to 1820 are in
this volume.

  [Illustrations: 78_2, 78_3]


Cuts used in Educational Tracts written by Hannah More and Mrs.
Trimmer, circa 1810. Engraved by Anderson, Thompson, Williams, and
others.

  [Illustrations: 79_1 - 79_5]


Used on Local Tracts and Juvenile Literature, by Rusher.

  [Illustrations: 80_1 - 80_8]


Used on Tracts by Hannah More and Rev. Rowland Hill, circa 1814, and
afterwards in Rusher's Books.

  [Illustrations: 81_1 - 81_5]


Vignettes by Sears, engraved after Williams and others, and used on
cheap Repository Tracts, etc., and books issued from Rusher's press.

  [Illustrations: 82_1 - 82_6]


These cuts were used in a series of Tracts published by Chilcott of
Bristol. Afterwards by Rusher at Banbury.

  [Illustrations: 83_1 - 83_6]


Cuts by Sears after Williams, used on Cheap Repository Tracts, and on
Local Banbury Ephemeral Literature.

  [Illustrations: 84_1 - 84_6]


Used on Rusher's Educational and other Local Pamphlets.

  [Illustrations: 85_1 - 85_5

  "Distaff."]


Engraved by Lee--used by Rusher.

  [Illustrations: 86_1 - 86_5]


THE LILLIPUTIAN MAGAZINE.

  [Illustrations: 87_1 - 87_6

  From Catnach.
  Norwood Gipsy.
  Catnach Spelling Book Cuts.]


  [Illustrations: 88_1 - 88_9

  Engravings used by Evans in his Ballad Singers.
  Early Newbery block by J. Bell.
  Very early 'Cock Robin' cut.
  A Tradesman's Shop at Banbury.
  The Marriage Ceremony.]


"Billy Buttons" ride to Brentford, and other Catnach 'Catches,' used
by Rusher.

  [Illustrations: 89_1 - 89_6]


Used by Rusher at Banbury.

  [Illustrations: 90_1 - 90_2

  Bible Cut.
  Frontispiece to Banbury Local Biography.]


Used by Rusher.

  [Illustrations: 91_1 - 91_8]


  [Illustrations: 92_1 - 92_5

  Used on Banbury 'Catch-pennies.'
  Mr. Doubleface, a man not to be trusted.]


  [Illustrations: 93_1, 93_2

  Battle of the Nile.
  Battle of Trafalgar.]


  [Illustrations: 94_1 - 94_6

  Lamenting the Great Fire, engraved by Austin.
  Christian and Hopeful escaping from Doubting Castle.]


  [Illustrations: 95_1 - 95_3

  Vignette by Green, of Knaresborough.
  Knaresborough Tragedy, engraved by Lee.]


Cuts used by Rusher at Banbury.

  [Illustrations: 96_1 - 96_4]


Newspaper and Heraldic cuts, 18th Century.

  [Illustrations: 97_1 - 97_5]


EARLY TAVERN SIGNS AT BANBURY.

  [Illustrations: 98_1 - 98_6

  The Boar's Head.
  The White Hart.
  The Sportsman's Arms.
  The Bull's Head.
  Vignettes to 'Vicar of Wakefield,' by Craig and Sears.]

"Children's Games," and other Toy Books published by Darton and Harvey,
Gracechurch Street, and afterwards by Rusher, Banbury.

  [Illustrations: 99_1 - 99_8]


Published by Darton and Harvey, afterwards by Rusher.

  [Illustrations: 100_1 - 100_8]

  [Illustrations: 101_1 - 101_8]

  [Illustrations: 102_1 - 102_10]


  [Illustrations: 103_1 - 103_4

  Cyclops, from 'Thorton's Virgil,' circa 1810.
    In the Preface it is stated, Wm. Blake designed, and Branstone
    engraved the above.
  Bewick Tailpieces.]


  [Illustrations: 104_1 - 104_5

  Banbury Horse "to travel" cuts, used by Rusher.
  Children's Book Cuts, used by Rusher.]


Cuts used on Mrs. Trimmer's Educational Works; engraved by Thomson
and Branston.

  [Illustrations: 105_1 - 105_7]


Choice Vignette wood-engravings to Goldsmith's 'Vicar,' 'Poems,' etc.,
published by Nicholson in his "Literary Miscellany," at Ludlow and
Ploughmill, circa 1798.

Engraved by Craig, Bewick's Pupil.

  [Illustrations: 106_1 - 106_5]


  [Illustrations: 107_1 - 107_3

  The Newcastle Collier on his "homeway way."
  Portrait of a Shrew.
  Engraving by Thomson.]


DROLLERIES OF THE STEAM ENGINE.

When Steam was first introduced it naturally called forth much 'text'
and illustration. The above we believe to be designed by 'Cromek.' Miss
Bewick spoke highly of him; he was one of the 'Boys' or pupils in
Bewick's School. He executed some choice vignettes for 'Burns's Poems,'
much in Luke Clennell's style, Bewick's favourite pupil.

  [Illustrations: 108_1 - 108_9]

  [Illustrations: 109_1 - 109_3]


  [Illustrations: 109_4 - 109_7]


VIGNETTES AND TAILPIECES TO GAY'S FABLES.

Engraved by John Thomson, Branstone, and Williams; used at Chiswick
Press.

  [Illustrations: 110_1 - 110_12]

  [Illustrations: 111_1 - 111_12]

  [Illustrations: 112_1 - 112_12]

  [Illustrations: 113_1 - 113_12]


  [Illustrations: 114_1 - 114_12]


  [Illustrations: 115_1 - 115_6]


  [Illustrations: 116_1 - 116_3

  This woodcut did duty for "Arabian Nights," "Bluebeard," etc.;
  probably designed by Cruikshank, engraved by Branstone.]


FINIS.


       *       *       *       *       *

Errors and Anomalies Noted by Transcriber:

Branston : Branstone
  _variant spelling as in the original_
these celebrated little rarities of Toy Books
  _text reads "of // of" at page break_
the curious genius, historian, author, poet, woodcuter and engraver
  _spelling as in original_
Calendars, Almanacks, and Chep-Books
  _spelling as in original_
"Wise Men of Gothan,"
  _spelling as in original_
_Whitfield's Tabernacle, Moorfields, or Spa Fields Chapel. (?)_
  _(?) in original_
most incongrous and inapplicable positions and subjects
  _spelling as in original_
This is long and curious, and was greatly altered and abreviated
  _spelling as in original_
Children's Books, Chap Books, Battledoes, Reading Easies, etc.
  _spelling as in original_
White and Beesley's work on _Bees_
  _text reads "workon"_
See Jack in his study, / Is writting a book,
  _spelling as in original_
as comparison in the Bodleian Library will readily show
  _text reads "Bodilean"_
an abbreviation of Newberry's Edition
  _spelling as in original_
adoption--which by the way the few large paper copies of this book are
admirably adopted--
  _so in original: possible corrected reading:_
    adoption--to which by the way the few large paper copies of this
    book are admirably adapted--
The above we believe to be designed by 'Cromek.'
  _so in original: the illustrations were actually printed below
  the text_


Punctuation (unchanged except as noted):

... Philip Quarll (also Perambulations of a Mouse, / Little Jack, Goody
    Two Shoes, Blossoms of Morality, Puzzle for a curious / Girl), and
    others are given.
  _close parenthesis missing: may belong at end of sentence_
Chalmer's in his preface to "Idler,"
circa. 1810.
Tom, Tom, the Piper' Son
I, said the Eagle, / With my thread and needle!
  _text has ? for !_
Who'll be the parson?
  _? missing_
"Razors, Knives, and Scissors to grind."
  _text has , for final ._
Tradesmen' Shops in Banbury, used on their bill-heads.


Quotation Marks (corrected by transcriber):

missing open quote:
  "Children's Games," and other Toy Books
missing close quote:
  ... bound in gilt dutch paper binding, 105 and iii pages".
  "A Spelling Dictionary, Rhetoric; Logic; Arithmetic; History;
    Chronology; Geography;"
  "Buy my nice Banbury Cakes."
extra open quote:
  Buy my nice Anchovies." (second line of two)
  Buy my nice Capers, Capers." (second line of two)
single for double open quote:
  "Wife Joan," etc., from J. White's Stock.
  the "Silver Penny."
single for double close quote:
  "Buy Chep"
  "Adam Bell,"





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Banbury Chap Books, by Edwin Pearson

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BANBURY CHAP BOOKS ***

***** This file should be named 19132.txt or 19132.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/9/1/3/19132/

Produced by Louise Hope, Malcolm Farmer and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
