The Project Gutenberg EBook of General Instructions For The Guidance Of
Post Office Inspectors In The Dominion Of Canada, by Alexander Campbell

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: General Instructions For The Guidance Of Post Office Inspectors In The Dominion Of Canada

Author: Alexander Campbell

Release Date: October 1, 2006 [EBook #19414]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK POST OFFICE ***




Produced by Jeannie Howse, Adrian Mastronardi, The
Philatelic Digital Library Project at http://www.tpdlp.net
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
generously made available by The Internet Archive/Canadian
Libraries)






       *       *       *       *       *

    +--------------------------------------------------------------+
    | Transcriber's Note:                                          |
    |                                                              |
    | Inconsistent hyphenation in the original document has been   |
    | preserved.                                                   |
    |                                                              |
    | Obvious typographical errors have been corrected in this     |
    | text. For a complete list, please see the end of this        |
    | document.                                                    |
    |                                                              |
    +--------------------------------------------------------------+

       *       *       *       *       *




GENERAL INSTRUCTIONS

FOR THE GUIDANCE OF

POST OFFICE INSPECTORS

IN THE

DOMINION OF CANADA.




CONTENTS.


                                                         PAGE.
1. General Instructions,                                   3

2. Arrangement of Papers,                                  9

3. Books and Records,                                     10

4. Returns to the Department at Ottawa,                   12

5. Salaries and Allowances,                               15

6. New Post Offices,                                      18

7. Mail Arrangements,                                     19

8. Mail Service,                                          19

9. Establishment of New Routes or Alteration in Routes
already in operation,                                     20

10. Contracts for Mail Service,                           21

11. Bonds,                                                23

12. Railway Mail Service,                                 24

13. Circulation or Distribution,                          26

14. Travelling,                                           27

15. Cases of Loss or Abstraction,                         28

16. Arrears and Outstanding Accounts,                     32

17. Conclusion,                                           33




I.

GENERAL INSTRUCTIONS.


1. You are required personally to superintend the performance of the
routine work of your office and see that it is properly done.

2. This routine work should be suitably and fairly apportioned amongst
your clerks--each clerk (under your superintendence) being responsible
for the duty assigned to him. You will, after fair warning, report to
the Postmaster General any clerk who fails correctly and efficiently
to perform this duty.

3. Carefully superintend the working of the Department in all its
branches within the limits of your Division. As however, it is
important, that the operations of the Department should be carried on
under one uniform plan throughout the Dominion, do not make any
alterations in the system of doing the work without the permission
first obtained of the Postmaster General.

4. Endeavor to instil into all persons connected with the Department
in your Division the importance of a harmonious working together for
the good of the Service, and of each, in his own sphere, performing
the duties assigned to him in an intelligent and thorough manner.

5. All letters received on official business should be carefully and
promptly attended to.

6. All matters referred to you from the Department at Ottawa should be
disposed of with the least possible delay.

7. Provision should be made for the performance of the ordinary
routine work of your office when you are absent, under the
superintendence of your senior clerk.

8. No portion of your work should be allowed to fall into arrear; If
it should do so, however, from circumstances beyond your control, you
will at once report the fact to the Postmaster General.

9. See that the Time Bills and Mail Transfer Receipts are properly
examined and fyled away every day. A separate pigeon hole should be
provided for each set of Time Bills and Transfer Receipts, the pigeon
holes being arranged and labelled in alphabetical order.

10. When fines should, in your opinion, be imposed upon Railway Mail
Clerks, Clerks in City Offices, and other officers in the employ of
the Department--full particulars of each case should be communicated
to the Postmaster General, and his authority for the imposition of the
fine obtained.

11. Make once in every three months a regular and thorough inspection
of all the details of account and general business in each City Post
Office in your Division--without any pre-arranged date or notice of
the time at which such inspection will be made.

The inspection should, however, take place on the 1st of a month, so
that the Accountant may be able to verify from your report the entries
in the accounts of the Postmaster for the month preceding.

In making these inspections you must verify the Stamp Account of the
office--personally count the stock on hand, and see that it agrees
with the amount stated in the Postmasters' Stamp Account, made up to
the last day of the month, to which account you should attach your
signature.

Satisfy yourself that all other items of revenue, such as postage on
unpaid matter, on insufficiently paid matter and on newspapers, also
rent of boxes, and drawers, &c, are duly brought to account.

Certify to the numbers of both boxes and drawers rented at the time of
your inspection.

Investigate the state of the Money Order and Savings Bank business,
and see that the regulations and instructions are closely adhered to.

Enquire into the conduct and efficiency of each person employed.

See that all the work of the Letter Carrier's Branch is promptly and
accurately performed. That all the Carriers are supplied with and wear
uniforms. That an account is kept by the Postmaster of the cost
thereof, and that the outlay incurred does not exceed the amount
allowed by the Postmaster General.

Forward to the Postmaster General the result of your inspection as
promptly as possible, giving clear and full information on the several
points enquired into.

12. See that all errors and irregularities are reported to you by the
Postmaster or Railway Mail Clerk by whom observed, and that prompt
steps are taken for their correction.

Irregularities of whatever kind should be promptly enquired into and
corrected; if overlooked they have always a tendency to increase.

13. Investigate thoroughly all cases of complaint. Obtain a clear
statement of the charges made, and of the facts which can be proved in
support of these charges, and from these facts draw your conclusions.

In cases where the evidence is conflicting, the characters and
antecedents of the parties concerned may probably be important
elements for consideration.

14. In making investigations bear in mind that any person who haw been
detected in one dishonest act may probably have been guilty of other
dishonest acts, and that your enquiry should therefore cover, not only
the particular case under investigation, but other irregular or
fraudulent proceedings, which it is possible may have been committed
by the party suspected. This point should be particularly remembered
in regard to offices transacting Money Order and Savings Bank
business.

15. You have authority, for the purpose of any official enquiry or
investigation it may be your duty to make, to apply to any Judge of
the Superior or Exchequer Court of Canada, or of the Superior Court of
the Province of Quebec, or of any one of the Superior Courts of either
of the Provinces, or to any Judge or Stipendiary Magistrate in and for
the Territories, for an order that a subpoena be issued from the Court
or Magistrate, commanding any person therein named to appear before
you at the time and place mentioned in the subpoena, and then and
there to testify to all matters within his knowledge, and (if so
required) to produce any document or thing he may have in his
possession relative to such enquiry or investigation. And any witness
may be summoned from any part of Canada, within or without the
ordinary jurisdiction of the Court. Judge, or Magistrate issuing the
subpoena,--any reasonable travelling expenses being tendered to any
witness so subpoened at the time of such service. And any person thus
summoned who may neglect or refuse to appear, or refuse to give
evidence or to produce the papers demanded of him, may, by order of
the Court, Judge or Magistrate who issued the subpoena, be taken into
custody and imprisoned in the common gaol of the locality, as for
contempt of Court, for a period not exceeding fourteen (14) days.

16. You have also authority to examine any person on oath or
affirmation on any matter pertinent to any investigation you may make;
and such oath or affirmation may be administered by you to any person
you may so desire to examine.

17. You and any officer under you having the rank of Assistant P.O.
Inspector, have authority to require any Postmaster or Assistant
Postmaster in any Post Offices, Mail Contractor or other person in the
employment or service of, or undertaking to perform any duty or work
for the Post Office Department, to make and sign an oath or
declaration in the following form, or to a like effect.--

I (_insert the name of the person and the capacity in which he is
employed in or by the Post Office_) do solemnly and sincerely promise
and swear, (or declare _if the person is one entitled to declare
instead of_ taking an oath in civil cases), that I will faithfully
perform all the duties required of me by my employment in the service
of the Post Office, and will abstain from everything forbidden by the
laws for the establishment and government of the Post Office
Department in Canada, so help me God.

                   _______________________________________________
                   Signature of person taking oath or declaration.

The oath (_or_ declaration) was ___________ (sworn _or_ made)
and subscribed before me, the ____________ day of ____________
187__.

______________________________________________________
Signature of P.O. Inspector, or Asst. P.O. Inspector,
as the case may be.

18. When a formal investigation is necessary, always give due notice
to the complainant or complainants, and the party or parties
complained against, of the time and place at which the investigation
will be held.

19. In your reports to the Postmaster General of the result of an
investigation, state whether the enquiry made was personal or _by_
correspondence. State also clearly in the proper order all the facts
bearing on the case, and the conclusions which these facts appear to
justify.

20. In reporting on cases of a confidential character, in which it is
not desirable that the facts should be made public, mark the word
"confidential" both on the report and on the cover in which it is
transmitted.

21. In all reports in which a previous report is referred to, state in
addition to the number and date of the report referred to, its general
purport.

22. In all reports Post Offices should be called by their official
names, and not by the name by which they may be known in the locality.
This rule applies especially to the Maritime Provinces.

23. It is desirable that you should make yourself acquainted, as far
as may be practicable, with the general character and financial
standing of each Postmaster in your Division who has charge of Money
Order or Savings Bank duties; and in any case where you have reason
for suspecting the possibility of irregular practices, or a
disposition to withhold--even for short periods--Post Office monies, a
confidential report should be made to the Postmaster General, in order
that a close supervision may be kept by the Superintendent on the
returns and remittances received from such Postmasters.

24. In cases of doubt always ask for instructions from the Postmaster
General--by letter, if time permits; if not, by telegraph.

25. When absolutely necessary, make use of the telegraph, compressing
your message into as few words as are consistent with clearness of
meaning. Do not, however, use the telegraph in cases where a letter
will answer all the purposes required.

26. Observe in all matters connected with the Department as strict an
economy as is consistent with the efficient performance of the
Service. Do not in any case recommend additional expenditure unless
the circumstances appear fully to justify it.

27. No outlay, whether for alteration in a Mail Service, or for
repairs, improvements or fittings, must be incurred without the
specific authority first obtained of the Postmaster General.

In every case application for this authority must be accompanied by a
full description of the work to be done, and an estimate of the
probable expenditure involved.

28. No person must be employed, even in a temporary capacity, without
the sanction of the Postmaster General previously obtained.

29. Furnish full particulars of any changes, especially of
distribution, to the Inspectors of other Divisions which may be
affected in any way by these changes, and cordially co-operate with
them in the consideration and carrying out of any improvements which
may generally benefit the Service.

30. Make yourself thoroughly conversant with all Acts of the Dominion
Parliament relating in any way to the Post Office Service, and with
all regulations relating to the Post Office Department, as well as
with all details connected with its operation.

31. You have authority when you find it necessary to suspend a
Postmaster, Clerk, or any other employe in your Division.

All the circumstances, however, should be at once reported to the
Postmaster General.

32. When it is noticed that Postage Stamps attached to letters or
other postal matter frequently fall off, or if it should be found that
the stamps are insufficiently gummed or badly perforated, the fact
should be reported to the Postmaster General, the name of the office
at which the posting took place being given.

33. In closing a Post Office, or in transferring a Post Office to a
newly appointed Postmaster, always see that the accounts are made up
to the day of closing or transfer; and that the balance due thereon is
paid and _deposited in the Bank to the credit of the Postmaster
General_. The assumption by an incoming Postmaster of a balance due by
his predecessor is objectionable. The amount due from the out-going
Postmaster should, in all cases, be deposited as above, to the credit
of the Postmaster General.

34. Except in very special cases, the opening and closing of offices
should take effect on the first day of each month.

35. In the case of the transfer of a Money Order Office, the Transfer
Receipt should be sent to the Superintendent of the Money Order
Branch, at Ottawa, by the first mail after the transfer takes effect.

36. Immoral publications and other articles, the transmission of which
through the mail are prohibited--and which are sent to you by the
Railway Mail Clerks in your Division--should be at once forwarded to
the Postmaster General.

37. All forms, books, stationery, &c., required for your office must
be applied for by requisition to the Postmaster General in accordance
with the Instructions contained in the Catalogue of articles in stock
in the Printing and Supply Branch of the Department, a copy of which
has been furnished to you.

38. If any of the Regulations laid down in these instructions cannot
be carried out in your Division, you will make a confidential report
to the Postmaster General, stating the reasons why this cannot be
done.




II.

ARRANGEMENT OF PAPERS.


1. All papers and correspondence referring to the same case should be
kept together.

2. No letters or papers should be put away until the matter to which
they refer is finally disposed of.

3. Separate pigeon-holes should be provided for all papers and letters
according to their classification, so that when required they can be
readily found.

4. The following classification is recommended:


_For Papers not finally disposed of._

   1. Papers in reference to applications for new Post Offices.
   2.    do.    Postmasters' Bonds for execution.
   3.    do.    Applications for alterations in Mail Routes.
   4.    do.    Railway Mail Service.
   5.    do.    Advertisement of Mail Contracts.
   6.    do.    Execution of Mail Contracts.
   7.    do.    Arrears due from Postmasters and ex-Postmasters.
   8.    do.    Cases of supposed loss of or abstractions from
                 Letters.
   9.    do.    Distribution.
  10.    do.    Matters requiring personal enquiry.
  11. Letters from Secretary awaiting answers.
  12.    do.    Postmasters, Contractors and the Public awaiting
                 answers.

_For Papers finally disposed of._

   1. Mail Contracts in force alphabetically arranged.
   2. Mails Contracts terminated alphabetically arranged.
   3. Postmasters' Bonds in force        do.
   4.     do.            terminated      do.
   5. Letters from Secretary arranged according to number.
   6. Letters from Post Office Department not numbered.
   7.      do.     Post Office Inspectors.
   8.      do.     Postmasters, Contractors and the Public
                   alphabetically arranged, there being a separate
                   pigeon-hole for each letter of the alphabet.
   9.  Papers in reference to cases of actual losses of or
                   abstractions from letters.
  10.    do.       Cases of supposed losses of or abstractions,
                   in which the enquiry instituted shows that
                   no actual loss or abstraction occurred.
  11.    do.       Accounts included in monthly requisitions.
  12.    do.       Arrears due from Postmasters.
  13.    do.       Railway Mail Service.
  14.    do.       Distribution.




III.

BOOKS AND RECORDS.


1. The books to be kept are as follows:--

  1. Book for press copies of reports to the Postmaster General.

  2. Book for press copies of such other letters, &c., as it may be
  necessary to copy.

  3. Record of letters and references from the Secretary.

  4. Record of applications for lost letters, &c.

  5. Record of actual losses of letters and abstractions of articles
  of value from letters.

  6. Journal of travel and proceedings (forms bound up.)

  7. Conduct Return Book (press copies).

  8. Order Book for instructions to Railway Mail Clerks, in which
  should be entered the address of each clerk.

  9. Book for recording number of miles travelled by Railway Mail
  Clerks.

  10. Record of errors made by Railway Mail Clerks, as shown by
  labels on packages which they have made up, and which should be
  forwarded to you by the Mail Clerks or Postmasters by whom opened,
  as also of other errors made by Railway Mail Clerks reported to you.

  11. Record of Mail Contracts.

  12. Record of Postmaster's Bonds.

  13. Record of dates of expiration of Contract.

  14. Variation of Expenditure Book.

  15. Record of transfer of offices.

  16. Salary Pay List Book.

  17. Contractors Pay Book.

  18. Book for the Record of Requisitions to the Postmaster General
  for payment of travelling charges and all other official expenses,
  with the exception of salaries and Mail Services.

  19. Arrears Book.

  20. Register of Employes attached to your office, including
  Railway Mail Clerks in your Division, or under your
  superintendence. In the book a page should be devoted to each
  employe, in which should be recorded name, date, and place of
  birth, religion, class, salary, date of promotion, increase of
  salary, transfer, suspension, cases in which the employe has
  received special commendation or censure, date of resignation or
  removal, or any other particular of which it is desirable a
  memorandum should be kept.

  21. Cash Book for entry of all monies received on P.O. account,
  with manner of disposal thereof.

  22. Money Order Cheque Book.

  23. Pass Book in which to record all Registered Letters
  despatched.

  24. Order Book with margin to be used in all cases when an order
  is given for any article required for official use.

  25. Telegraph Books with margin, on which should be recorded
  copies of all telegraphs sent on official business.

  26. Corresponding Offices Book shewing name of Office with which
  each Office in your Division exchanges direct mails.

  27. Book for recording changes in distribution.

  28. Book for daily entry of Time Bills on ordinary mail routes.

  29. Record of new offices established, of old offices closed, and
  changes in names of offices.

  30. Book for requisitions for printing and stationery, (blank
  forms bound up.)

  31. Guard Book for copies of notices inviting tenders for
  contracts.

  32. Guard Book for Department orders and circulars.

  33. Guard Book for Time Bills of Railways, &c.

2. It is very necessary that entries of all transactions should be
promptly made in the books provided for their record. The keeping of
memoranda on pieces of paper, or trusting to memory in such matters is
very objectionable.

3. All printing and binding required both by your own office and city
or other offices must be done on requisition to the Department, at
Ottawa.

4. Further, all stationery required, both by your own and city or
other offices, must be obtained by requisition in the proper form to
the Postmaster General. The number of the articles, as shown by the
official catalogue, being in all cases given.




IV.

RETURNS TO BE MADE TO THE DEPARTMENT AT OTTAWA.


1. _The Returns required_ by the Department at Ottawa should be
rendered punctually, as follows:

2. _Pay Lists for salaries_ to be forwarded so as to reach Ottawa not
later than the 23rd of each month. Should any fines be imposed or
stoppage of pay take place after the list has been despatched, the
fact should be communicated to the Postmaster General by telegraph.

In every case in which a new name appears on the pay list, or in which
there has been any fine or alteration of salary, the number and date
of the letter conveying the Postmaster General's authority therefor
must be written at the foot of the list.

3. _Pay Lists for Mail Services_, accompanied by the necessary
receipts or vouchers, to be transmitted on the last day of each
quarter, and to include all services performed during the quarter. If
the exact amount due to a contractor cannot be ascertained, the
service should be entered in the proper place, and the figures left
blank. The voucher in such case should be transmitted to the
Accountant as soon afterwards as possible. The figure columns in the
pay list should always be added up, and the total entered in ink. The
distances entered in the vouchers or receipts for Mail Services
should, agree with the distances entered in the variation returns.

4. _Return of Variations in the Mail Service expenditure_ to be
transmitted on the last day of each month, and to include all new
contracts and Mail Services, all renewals and transfers of existing
contracts, and all variations in Mail Service taking effect during the
month.

As cheques are issued to the contractors on the entries in the pay
lists and variation returns, it is necessary that they should be
correct in every particular, and that both names and figures should be
distinctly written.

5. _Return of new Post routes established and of Post routes
discontinued_ to be transmitted not later than the seventh day of
each month, and to include all such changes in Mail Services taking
effect during the previous month.

6. _Return of New Post Offices established, Post Offices closed, and
changes of Names in Post Offices_, to be transmitted not later than
the seventh day of each month, and to include all operations under
this head up to the first day of the month on which the return is sent
in, inclusive.

7. _Weekly Journals of Railway Mail Clerks_ in your Division to be
transmitted every Tuesday morning.

8. _Return of Losses of and Abstractions of money and other articles
from letters_ to be transmitted on the first day of each month. This
return can be made out from the record of applications for missing
letters, and should include all supposed cases of loss and abstraction
entered in the record during the month which have not been erased, in
accordance with the instructions under the head of "Cases of Loss and
Abstraction." Those cases not erased should be consecutively numbered
and the number entered[1] in the return. In the event of a letter
being reported as lost which is subsequently found, you should state
in the next month's return "No. ----reported in the return for the
month of ---- found;" and erase from your record of applications for
lost letters.

9. _Return of transfer of Post Offices_ to be transmitted by the tenth
day of each month, and to include all transfers taking effect up to
the first of the month (on which the return is sent in), inclusive.

10. _Journal of Travel and Proceedings_ not later than six days after
the expiration of each month.

11. _Requisition for payment of Miscellaneous expenses_ to include
travelling allowances, telegraph bills, and all outlays, except
salaries and contractors' pay, not later than six days after the
expiration of each month. Only one requisition should be sent in each
month. Each requisition should be numbered consecutively throughout
each fiscal year. No. 1 should be the first requisition made, for
accounts the dates of which should embrace the month of July. On each
voucher it must be stated clearly for what object the expense has been
incurred. Further, each account must bear a certificate as to its
correctness in the hand-writing of the Inspector, and must be
accompanied by an official voucher on which must be written the number
and date of the authority for the expense.

Trademen's accounts should be included in the requisition made for the
last month in each quarter. All outstanding accounts should be
included in the requisition for the last month in each quarter, as it
is very objectionable that accounts for expenses incurred in one
quarter should be included in the requisition made for any following
quarter.

The vouchers for travelling expenses claimed by officers not entitled
to a per diem allowance, should bear your certificate that the amount
claimed is the amount of the actual expenses incurred.

The vouchers for telegraph accounts should bear your certificate that
all the telegrams charged for have been sent and received on official
business.

All accounts for advertising must be accompanied by copies of the
advertisement for which the accounts are rendered.

In making out the requisition the accounts should be entered according
to their amounts, the largest amount being entered first, and the
smallest amount last.

The accounts should be numbered consecutively in the above order on
the back.

The number on each account should correspond with the number of its
entry in the requisition.

The accounts and vouchers themselves should be placed and forwarded in
the order in which entered.

It is very important that the cheques received in payment of accounts
should be promptly acknowledged by returning the form sent with them,
and that when paid the vouchers should be always returned with the
printed letter of advice, in the same order in which entered in the
requisition, so that they can be readily checked.

12. _One copy of each Time Bill_ in use should be forwarded on the
first day of each quarter. The Bills sent to be classified according
to frequency of service, and arranged alphabetically.

Accompanying these Bills should be sent a memorandum of all changes
made during the past month in the Bills used.

13. _Returns of Railway and Steam Boat Service_ to be sent in on the
first of each month. These Returns to be personally examined by the
Inspector before they are sent in.

14. _Annual Return of all cases of loss or abstraction_ to be
transmitted on or before the 1st October in each year.

This return should include all cases of loss or abstraction occurring
within the year ended the 30th June last past, as well as all such
cases occurring at the end of the preceding year as it may not have
been possible to include that year's return.

Each case should be entered in order according to the date on which
the letter was posted. The Return should be divided into two parts.

The first part should include only Registered Letters, the cases of
entire loss of the letter being entered separately from cases of
abstraction of the contents of the letter.

The second part should include only unregistered letters, the cases of
loss being also entered separately from the cases of abstraction.

This return should be very carefully prepared. It constitutes the
material from which the annual statement for Parliament has to be
compiled, and the explanations given under the head of "Result of
Proceedings" should be such as fully to justify every step taken
during and subsequent to the investigations instituted.

15. A Return of the Mail Service in operation in your Division on the
1st day of July, in each year, to be transmitted by the first of the
following month.

The services in this return to be entered alphabetically and to be
classified according to frequency of service, the distances between
the termini of the several routes also, to be accurately stated.
Suspended winter services to be given as a supplement.




V.

SALARIES AND ALLOWANCES.


1. With the exception of Postmasters in the cities, Postmasters'
salaries are based on a commission on the amount of postage on matter
prepaid by stamps and posted at their offices, viz.: 40 per cent. on
the first $800 per annum or $200 per quarter, and 25 per cent. on the
balance, with a minimum salary of $10 per annum in cases where the
postage on the matter pre-paid by stamps is less than $25. These
salaries are to be revised every two years, but in very special cases
where there has been an exceptional increase of revenue or work, the
case may be reported on for the Postmaster General's consideration.

2. In cases where the Postmaster is required to perform duty between
the hours of 10 p.m. and 5 a.m., 50 per cent. instead of 40 per cent.
is allowed on the first $800 per annum, or $200 per quarter of prepaid
postage revenue, provided always that the Postmaster General considers
that there are sufficient grounds for such increased allowance.

3. Allowances for forward duty are made to Postmasters who are
required to re-mail letters and papers for and from other offices.

The amount of remuneration should be regulated according to,--

  1. The number of offices for and from which the Postmaster
  distributes mails.

  2. The number of mails per week despatched to and received
  therefrom.

  3. The average amount of matter _re-mailed_ each week,
  viz.:--number of

          Ordinary Letters,
          Registered Letters,
          Postal Cards,
          Newspapers,
          Books and Parcels, &c.

  It must be clearly understood that in the above must not be
  included the matter posted, or delivered, at the office to which
  the allowance forward duty is proposed to be made.

  4. The time occupied in the duty and the number of persons
  required to accomplish it.

  5. The hours at which the duty is performed.

  In no case, however, should the allowance for forward duty excel
  12 per cent. of the revenue of the offices--the correspondence for
  and from which is distributed.

4. When, in consequence of any change in the Mail arrangements the
forward duty performed by a Postmaster is either increased or
diminished, you should at once report to the Postmaster General what
corresponding increase or diminution in the forward allowance should
be made, so that the necessary adjustment may take effect from the
date on which the change goes into operation.

5. All reports regarding forward allowance should be accompanied by a
tracing from the Postal Map showing the Distributing Office, and the
offices dependent thereon.

6. Allowances for rent, fuel and light are regulated by the Revenue
collected at the office, as follows:--

      Annual Revenue.                    Annual Allowance.

      Over $ 800 and up to $1,200         $ 40 00
        "  1,200    "       1,600           60 00
        "  1,600    "       2,000           80 00
        "  2,000    "       3,000          120 00

and so on, the allowance increasing $40 per annum for every $1,000 or
fraction of $1,000 of yearly Revenue. No allowance for rent is made at
offices where the Revenue is loss than $800 per annum.

7. The scale of salaries of Railway Mail Clerks is as follows:--

-------+---------------+---------------+---------------+---------------+
Class. |     On        | After 2 years | After 5 years | After 10 years|
       | Appointment.  | service in    | service in    | service in    |
       |               | any class.    | any class.    | any class.    |
-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
       |  Day. | Night.|  Day. | Night.|  Day. | Night.|  Day. | Night.|
-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
 1     |  720  |  880  |  800  | 1,000 |  800  | 1,100 |  960  | 1,200 |
 2     |  600  |  720  |  640  |   800 |  720  |   880 |  800  | 1,000 |
 3     |  480  |  600  |  520  |   640 |  560  |   700 |  640  |   800 |
-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+

8. In all cases where a Railway Mail Clerk is entitled to an increase
of salary, a special report should be made and the Postmaster
General's sanction obtained previous to the increased salary being
entered on the monthly pay list.

9. Railway Mail Clerks, in addition to their salaries, are entitled to
half a cent for each mile travelled whilst on actual duty. Until,
however, a Railway Mail Clerk is reported to the Postmaster General as
fully competent to take charge of the Mails, he is to be paid only one
quarter of a cent for each mile travelled.

10. The scale of salaries of Clerks employed in city offices is as
follows:--

          1st Class from $1,000  to $1,600
          2nd   "           900  "   1,100
          3rd   "           600  "     800
          4th   "           400  "     520

In the 2nd, 3rd and 4th classes, the Clerks receive the lower salary
on appointment or promotion with an increase of $40 each year, until
the higher salary is attained.

In the first class there is no annual increase, the salary which is
fixed by the Postmaster General in each case, having regard to the
merits and services of the Clerks and the relative importance of the
duty entrusted to them.

11. Letter Carriers will receive such salaries and allowances for
uniforms as may be from time to time fixed by the Postmaster General.




VI.

NEW POST OFFICES.


1. In each report on an application for a new Post Office describe the
locality in which it is proposed to establish the office, giving name
of the township, number of lot and concession stating whether front or
rear of the concession, and county in which situated. In places where
land is not so divided give such particulars as may serve to indicate
the exact position. State further the number of churches, schools,
mills, stores, houses or other buildings in the immediate
neighborhood; the character of the surrounding land, whether well
settled, and the estimated number of families that the office applied
for would accommodate; its distance from all neighboring offices; its
estimated postal revenue; the mode and frequency of the service
proposed; the estimated annual cost; whether any previous application
for a Post Office in the same locality has already been reported on,
and such other information as may bear on the matter.

2. With each report on an application for a new Post Office should be
sent a sketch or tracing (from the map of your Division) shewing as
nearly as can be ascertained the position of the proposed office and
mail route, and the offices and mail routes already in operation in
its neighborhood.




VII.

MAIL ARRANGEMENTS.


1. The principal object of all mail arrangements is to ensure the
transit of the letters and papers to destination with the utmost
possible despatch.

2. The main routes throughout the Provinces should connect with each
other as closely as it is possible.

3. The branch routes should be so arranged as to form as close a
connection as possible with the main lines.

4. Through bags should be exchanged by all offices between which pass
a large number of letters and papers, including Travelling Post
Offices on different routes.

5. When, as a general rule, an office has a large number of registered
letters for another office with which it does not exchange a direct
mail, the registered letters may be enclosed in a sealed registered
packet, addressed to the office for which the letters are intended.
The address of the packet, however, should, in all cases, be entered
in the Letter Bill with which it is despatched.

When a packet is sent as above, it should be accompanied by a Letter
Bill containing at foot an acknowledgment for registered letters. This
acknowledgment should be filled up by the receiving office and
returned to the despatching office by the first post.

6. Where large numbers of registered letters pass between two offices,
it is desirable that bags secured with the lead seal should be used.

7. An Inspector should always be on the watch to ascertain what
improvements can be made in the postal arrangements in his Division.
It should be his aim to anticipate the wants of the general public,
and to combine, as far as practicable, efficiency of service with
economy of expenditure.




VIII.

MAIL SERVICE.


1. It is very essential that a strict supervision should be maintained
over the performance of the mail service; that all delays and
irregularities should be promptly checked, and, when necessary, fines
imposed and enforced.

2. On all the important routes there should be suitable Time Bills, in
which should be entered the hours of arrival and departure at each
office, the names of the couriers, and the No. of the mails received
and delivered.

3. These Time Bills should be carefully checked and fyled away, the
check clerk affixing his initials to each bill.

4. You should be ready at all times to receive suggestions for
improvements in the Mail Service, and, if desirable, submit them for
the consideration of the Postmaster General.

5. Leather bags should, as a general rule, be used on stage routes.

On the outlying routes, where the mails are exposed to the weather,
waterproof canvass bags should be used.




IX.

ESTABLISHMENT OF NEW ROUTES OR ALTERATIONS IN ROUTES ALREADY IN
OPERATION.


1. In making reports on proposed new mail routes, or alterations of
existing routes--state clearly--

Advantages to be obtained;

Additional cost per annum to be incurred;

Present revenue of the offices to be served;

Increased revenue which it is estimated would result from proposed
additional mail facilities;

Give tables also of the present and proposed routes, showing offices
served and intermediate distances. State, also, dates on which
contracts which it is proposed to discontinue would terminate provided
previous notice were not given by the Postmaster General.

2. With each report send a sketch or tracing from the Post Office Map
of your Division, showing all the offices affected by the proposed
arrangements, denoting the lines of existing routes which it is
recommended should be discontinued in blue, and the new routes which
it is recommended should be established in red.

3. All changes in Mail Services should--except in very special
cases--take effect on the first day of each mouth.




X.

CONTRACTS FOR MAIL SERVICES.


1. For every Mail Service there should be a written contract or
memorandum of agreement, which should be made out and executed in
triplicate, one copy being for the Department at Ottawa, one for the
contractor, and one for yourself.

2. All contracts for Mail Services should be made so as to terminate
at the end of a quarter, or if that is not possible, at the end of a
month.

3. The contracts terminating at the end of each quarter should be
entered in the record of expiration of contracts, a page or two pages
in this book as may be required, being appropriated for each quarter.

4. _Six months_ previous to the expiration of the contracts, the usual
printed circular should be issued to the Postmaster at each of the
termini of the several routes, asking whether any improvements can be
made in the service.

5. Should any change be desirable a report should be made thereon to
the Postmaster General, at least one month previous to the preparation
of the notices inviting tenders for a new contract.

6. Four months before the expiration of each Quarter separate reports
should be made to the Postmaster General.

  1. Of all contracts expiring at the end of the next ensuing
  Quarter in which no change of mail service is proposed.

  2. Of all contracts expiring at the end of the next ensuing
  Quarter in which an alteration is recommended.

  These reports should be accompanied by the usual notices of
  advertisement inviting tenders.

7. All advertisements for tenders and all contracts for Mail Services
should be carefully prepared, it being borne in mind that nothing more
than what is expressed therein can be legally enforced.

The advertisements should be dated a fortnight later than the date of
their transmission to the Department.

8. There should be at least six weeks between the date of the
advertisements and the date up to which tenders for the service are
receivable, and at least eight weeks between the day fixed on for the
reception of tenders and the date on which they are to take effect.

9. Duplicates of the notices inviting tenders for Mail Services,
should be fyled in the Guard Book provided for that purpose.

10. When the notices have received the approval of the Postmaster
General, one copy at least should be sent to each office on the route
to be advertised, to be posted up in a conspicuous place in the office
for the public information, and as many copies as may be considered
necessary to the office at each terminus.

11. The usual forms of tender should also be supplied to Postmasters
at those places where these forms of tender will probably be enquired
for by parties proposing for the service.

12. Unless there is any good and sufficient objection, contracts for
Mail Services must be made with parties whose tenders, being the
lowest, have been accepted.

13. It should, however, be ascertained that the party proposing to
undertake the service is able satisfactorily to perform it, and that
the sureties he names are good and sufficient for the penalty of the
required bond.

14. In the event of there being any serious objection to entering into
a contract with the parties whose tenders have been accepted, full
particulars of the objection should at once be reported to the
Postmaster General, and application made for the next lowest tender.

15. Full particulars should also be promptly furnished to the
Postmaster General of the action taken on tenders forwarded to you for
acceptance on certain conditions, or in cases where none of the
tenders received have been accepted in consequence of the high prices
demanded.

16. In dealing with accepted tenders for mail services, and in making
out the contract therefor, the greatest possible promptness should be
observed.

17. Contracts for Mail Services should be very carefully prepared, and
no contract should be forwarded for the signature of the Postmaster
General unless correct in all its terms and provisions.

18. The contract should specify all the offices served _en route_.

19. All contracts sent for the Postmaster General's signature must be
accompanied by the printed form or letter, in which should be entered
separately and alphabetically:--

  1. Contracts entered into without change of service;

  2. Contracts for new services.

Against each contract should be entered the number and date of the
letter under authority of which the contract was made.

Against the entry of each new contract it should be clearly stated
whether the service is entirely a new one. If not, the names of the
contract or contracts which it supersedes should be given.

20. Every contract made upon an accepted tender should (when sent to
the Department) be accompanied by the tender on which it is based.




XI.

BONDS.


1. Bonds must be taken from the following Officers:--

    Postmasters.
    Assistant Postmasters in City Offices.
    Money Order Savings Bank and Registration Clerks in City Offices.
    Railway Mail Clerks.
    Letter Carriers.

2. The amount of the penalty of the bond required from Postmasters
must be governed by the revenue collected, and the amount of business
transacted. Care must be taken to use the Money Order form of bond for
all Postmasters transacting Money Order and Savings Bank business. A
Postmaster's bond should in all cases be completed before he is placed
in charge of the office.

3. The amount of the penalty of the bond required

  From Assistant Postmaster in City Office, is
    from                                              $1,000 to $1,600
  From Money Order and Registration Clerks in
   City Office, from                                     600 "   1,000
   according to amount of responsibility.
  From Railway Mail Clerks                                         800
    "  Letter Carriers                                             400

4. Bonds can be accepted either from the Canada Guarantee Company, or
from two private parties whose sufficiency for the penalty must be
certified by a magistrate. Bonds from the Guarantee Company are
preferred.

5. Great care must be taken in the filling up and execution of the
bonds. The names in the body of the bond must be spelt in the same way
as they are in the signature. In the description of the residence of
the parties, the name of the judicial, and not the name of the
electoral, county must be inserted.

6. All erasures and corrections should be avoided, but, if made,
should be initialed by the parties whose signatures as witnesses are
attached to the bond.

7. The bond should be sealed.

8. The signature of the principal and the sureties should in every
case be witnessed by two persons. The witnesses should always sign
their names. Marks as substitutes for signatures of witnesses cannot
be accepted.

9. If, as sometimes, it happens through the removal of an office, the
township mentioned in the new bond as the residence of the Postmaster
differs from the township in which the office is situated, as shown in
the Postal Guide, a special report of the fact should be made to the
Postmaster General.




XII.

RAILWAY MAIL SERVICE.


1. This is a very important branch of the Postal Service, and will
require your constant supervision.

2. A Distribution Book should be supplied the Mail Clerks on each
road, which book should be corrected, at least, once in each month, or
oftener, should circumstances render it necessary.

3. Each Mail Clerk in your Division should be examined frequently with
the object of ascertaining if he has a proper knowledge of the
distribution and of the changes which have taken place in the
distribution on the railway on which he is employed.

4. On every railway route there should be a Time Bill which should
pass from one end of the line to the other, and in which should be
entered the particulars of all bags received and delivered by the Mail
Clerks.

5. You are not authorized to issue passes for travelling in a Postal
Car except to a Railway Mail Clerk actually going on duty.

6. No person, excepting Railway Mail Clerks on duty, the conductor of
the train (in the ordinary course of his duty), and the Post Office
Inspectors should be allowed access to the Postal Cars whilst _en
route_ with the mails.

7. You should make yourself acquainted with the conduct of the Railway
Mail Clerks, when off, as well as when on duty, and report to the
Postmaster General any Railway Mail Clerk who, to your knowledge, is
at any time under the influence of liquor or otherwise misconducting
himself.

8. Compensation is made to Railway Companies for Mail Service
performed in a Postal Car, at the rate of 6 cents per mile actually
travelled by mixed trains and 8 cents per mile for quick passenger
trains. Compensation is also made for the conveyance of bags in charge
of the company's servants at the rate of from 2 to 4 cents per mile
actually travelled by the trains performing such service.

9. When service by postal cars is necessary, the companies are bound
to furnish Travelling Post Offices suitably fitted up, and to see that
they are properly heated, lighted and cleaned, and supplied with
water.

10. All plans for the fitting up of these Travelling Post Offices
should, previous to being carried out, be submitted for the approval
of the Postmaster General.

11. No promise of remuneration for services performed in connection
with the Postal Service should be made to any person in the employ of
a railway company. For all such services, compensation is made to the
company in the regular allowance paid to them.

12. Canvas bags, as a general rule, should be used for the Railway
Mail Service. The necessary supplies will be furnished on application
to the Postmaster General.




XIII.

CIRCULATION OR DISTRIBUTION.


1. On the correct distribution of Mail Matter greatly depends the
efficiency of the Postal Service, and this is, therefore, a point
which requires your constant and careful supervision.

2. As a general rule all officers between which pass large numbers of
letters and papers should exchange direct mails, and the termini of
routes should be constituted forward or distributing offices.

3. Each Distribution Book or List should be prepared on a uniform
plan. Books and forms for Manuscript Distribution Lists can be
obtained on application to the Secretary.

4. You should see that all the Railway Mail Clerks and such
Postmasters as require them, are furnished with proper Distribution
Books, and that these books are from time to time revised and
corrected.

5. All changes in the distribution in your Division should be recorded
in a book kept for that purpose, and from this book the necessary
corrections in the several Distribution Lists affected should be made.

6. Changes in the distribution affecting offices in other Divisions
should be at once communicated to the Inspectors for the Divisions in
which the offices are situated.

7. Postmasters and Railway Mail Clerks should be instructed at once to
report to you any errors in the distributions which may come under
their observation, and prompt steps should be taken for a prevention
of their repetition.

8. When a Mail Clerk or Postmaster has a large number of letters for
any particular office with which he does not exchange direct mails, he
should tie them all up in one package, either addressing the package
or facing the top and bottom letters outwards.

9. Provision should in all cases be made for the direct transmission
of letters and papers between offices on the same route.




XIV.

TRAVELLING.


1. Visit and inspect each Money Order and Savings Bank Office in your
Division and make a report thereon to the Postmaster General on the
printed forms, as often as occasion serves, but at least once every
year.

2. Visit and inspect every other office in your Division as often as
circumstances permit.

3. Do not, unless with good and sufficient reason, pass a Post Office
without calling and inspecting it.

4. Keep before you a memorandum of cases requiring personal
investigation, so that in travelling you may be able to attend to as
many of these cases as may be in the direction of your journey.

5. In travelling ascertain, as far as you are able, if the service on
the several routes over which you pass is in every respect
satisfactorily performed, and make memoranda in your Pocket Memorandum
Book of any irregularities which you may observe, or of any changes
which you may think desirable.

6. Note and take down particulars of any locality at which it is
likely a Post Office may be required, so that when applied for, you
may be able to report thereon.

7. In visiting a Post Office the following points should engage your
attention:

  1. Is the office provided with--

    A Sign?
    A Letter-box?
    Pigeon-holes for letters and papers for delivery and despatch?
    Other necessary fittings?
    Forms and other necessary equipments?

  2. Is it conveniently situated and provided with proper
  accommodation for the public?

  3. Are the Postmaster and his assistants duly sworn, and do they
  understand their duties?

  4. Has the Postmaster proper stamps and material for post-marking
  letters, &c., and obliterating the stamps thereon?

  5. Are the Letter Bills properly post-marked and fyled?

  6. Are the Registered Letters and Mail Key kept in a safe place?

  7. Are the letters and papers for delivery properly post-marked?
  Are they all intended for the delivery of the office? Are they
  sorted into the proper boxes? Are there any which should have been
  sent to the Dead Letter Office?

  8. Are the newspapers for delivery all sorted in their proper
  pigeon-holes.

  9. Are all letters and papers posted for despatch as well as for
  delivery at the office properly pre-paid by stamp?

  10. Are the entries in the Book of Mails sent and received, and
  the Registered Letter Books properly made?

  11. Are the instructions and circulars received from the
  Department properly fyled?

  12. Are the notices sent for exhibition to the public properly
  posted?

  13. Is there a notice posted in the lobby indicating the office
  hours and the times at which mails are closed and received?

  14. Is the Postmaster supplied with postage stamps sufficient to
  meet the requirements of the public?

  15. Are the mails regularly received and despatched, and the
  provisions of the contracts under which the office is supplied
  properly carried out?

8. In the event of the office being a Money Order Office ascertain--

  1. If the entries in all the books are properly made.

  2. Whether the Cash Book at Offices where a Cash Book is kept is
  made up to date, and whether the date of the Deposit Receipts
  agree with the date for which credit is taken therefor.

  3. Whether the Postmaster has in hand the balance due on Money
  Order Account.

  4. Whether all the numbers of the Money Orders taken from the
  Order Book are properly accounted for.

9. You should take every opportunity of ascertaining and noting down
the character and standing of the several parties employed in the
Postal Service. The information thus obtained may be of value.

10. You should also take every opportunity of collecting accurate
information in regard to the settlement of the country, the position
of Post Offices, roads and distances, and with this object you should
carry a map of the section of country through which you pass, and mark
thereon as much as you can of the above information.




XV.

CASES OF LOSS OR ABSTRACTION.


1. All cases of alleged loss of mails or letters, or of abstraction
of money or articles of value from letters should be promptly and
thoroughly investigated.

2. The circumstances attending those cases are so various that it is
difficult to lay down any specific rule as to the mode in which the
investigation should be conducted.

This must be left to the judgment of the Inspector. The following
course, however, may be taken in ordinary cases.

3. The printed form of questions should be filled up by the applicant
in each case. If the applicant cannot supply all the particulars
required, they should be obtained from such other parties as may be
able to furnish them.

4. A "Tracer" should be filled up, and sent to the office at which the
letter was posted.

5. The particulars of the cases should be at once entered in the book
for the record of applications for lost letters.

6. The papers connected with each case should be enclosed in a printed
"Missing Letter Envelope." This should be docketed, the date on which,
and the name of the office to which the Tracer was despatched entered
thereon, and placed in a pigeon hole appropriated to Missing Letter
cases "awaiting answers."

7. A prompt return of the Tracer must in all cases be insisted on. On
no account should its unnecessary detention at any office be
permitted.

8. If on return of the Tracer it is shown that no loss has occurred,
the applicant should be so informed, a memorandum to that effect
written on the envelope in which the papers are enclosed, the papers
put away amongst cases of application for letters which have been
found, and the entry of the case in the record of applications for
Lost Letters scored out with a blue pencil.

9. If it is found that a loss has actually taken place, the names of
all the offices through which the letter passed, or should have
passed, should be carefully recorded in the book of record of
applications for missing letters. These offices should then be
carefully indexed and a minute examination made with the object of
ascertaining whether any of the offices through which the letter
passed, or should have passed, appears with unusual frequency in other
cases of loss, and whether in such event there is any reason either
from the resemblance in the character of the losses or the
circumstances attending them to suspect that the losses may be
attributable to the same office.

10. In the event of frequency of loss at a City Post Office, it should
be ascertained through whose hands the missing letter would pass, and
an endeavor should in this way be made to concentrate the several
losses on the guilty party.

11. It is a well established fact that a person who has once committed
theft will continue to steal, and a concentration of cases of loss, in
the manner pointed out, will certainly afford a clue to his detection.

12. Commencing each month, number each office consecutively, as it
appears in the record of cases of loss or abstraction. This will
show:--

  1st. The number of cases which have occurred at any particular
  office during the month; and

  2nd. In each case the relative number of cases affecting each of
  the offices through which any lost letter, or letter from which an
  abstraction has been affected, has or should have passed.

13. It should be borne in mind that losses or abstractions may have
occurred previous to the posting of the letters or after their
delivery, and that the occurrence of two or more cases applicable to
the same party posting or receiving letters is sufficient, at any
rate, to awaken suspicion that the loss may not have taken place in
the transit of the letters through the Post Office.

14. In cases of abstraction it is very important that both the cover
and the letter from which the alleged abstraction has taken place
should be obtained. A very careful and minute examination thereof
will, in many cases, enable the Inspector to determine whether any
abstraction has really occurred, or, if it has occurred, to narrow the
suspicion down to the office where it has actually been committed.

  1. Examine the flap of the letter, if necessary, by means of a
  magnifying glass, and ascertain if it shows the least sign of
  having been opened and re-fastened, either by slight tears in the
  paper, marks of dirt, or moisture, or the application of
  additional mucilage.

  2. Weigh the letter with its alleged contents and see if the
  weight corresponds with the amount of postage paid on the letter.

  3. Carefully examine the post-marks. If the impressions or
  indentations have penetrated from the cover to the letter inside,
  ascertain whether there has been any change in the position of the
  letter in the envelope between the time it received the post-mark
  of one office and the time it received the post-mark of another
  office.

  This will sometimes enable you to determine at which office the
  abstraction was affected.

  4. Ascertain if any of the post-marks have penetrated through the
  envelope from one side of the letter to the other. In such a case
  you may be able to determine whether, at the time the letter was
  stamped at any particular office, it actually contained an
  enclosure.

15. Cases of alleged abstraction have been brought to light in which
it has been proved that paper has been enclosed in letters by the
senders instead of the money purported to have been remitted.

The proof consisted of the impressions of the postmarks placed on the
letter at the office at which posted having gone through the envelope
on to the papers enclosed.

It is, of course, important to ascertain whether the stamps were
placed on the letter at the time it was posted.

16. Cases of alleged theft have also been brought to light by the
writing on the envelope being in a different hand to the writing in
the letter enclosed, by the date of the letter not corresponding with
the date of the post-mark of the office at which mailed, and by the
dates of the post-marks on the letter showing that it has been
subjected to some unusual delay. All these points should, therefore,
be closely looked into.

17. In all cases it would be desirable to ascertain at what point the
best opportunity for the alleged theft would have been afforded.

18. The evidence in each case of enquiry should be carefully taken
down in writing, and every circumstance, however trifling, which may
in the slightest degree bear on the case, noted. It is frequently by a
collection of apparently unimportant facts that important results are
arrived at.

19. Care should be taken in every case to avoid the formation of any
opinion until all the facts which it is possible to obtain in regard
to it are collected together. It is only from these facts and from the
character and antecedents of the parties who may have been concerned
in the loss, and not from some suspicion unsupported by facts, that
conclusions can with any safety be drawn.

20. All serious cases of loss or abstraction should be at once
specially reported to the Postmaster General, and the most prompt
action taken thereon.

21. In cases of ascertained loss or abstraction, the Inspector for
each Division through which the letter passed should be furnished with
full particulars thereof.

22. When there is no moral doubt of guilt, it is desirable that the
party suspected should be at once suspended from his duties.

23. It is not advisable however to take criminal proceedings in cases
of theft, unless there is a probability of such evidence being
obtained as will secure a conviction of the guilty party.




XVI.

ARREARS AND OUTSTANDING ACCOUNTS.


1. All outstanding accounts and arrears due from Postmasters and
ex-Postmasters must be entered in the book provided for that purpose.

2. This Book should be divided into three parts:

  1. For entry of arrears due from Postmasters in office.
  2. For entry of arrears due from ex-Postmasters.
  3. For entry of names of offices which have failed to render their
     accounts.

3. Prompt steps must be taken to obtain these outstanding accounts and
arrears.

Application should first be made to the Postmaster or ex-Postmaster to
send them in.

If he fails to do this within a reasonable time--say two weeks--a
letter should be addressed to each of his sureties. If this produces
no good result, a second application should be made to the sureties
informing them that if by a certain day--say in two weeks time--the
accounts and arrears are not forwarded, the matter will be reported to
the Postmaster General, who will probably order legal proceedings to
be taken against them.

4. If, after the expiration of the time given, the accounts and
arrears are not paid, this result should be specially reported to the
Postmaster General. In such case it would be desirable to ascertain
and report to the Postmaster General whether the Postmaster and his
sureties are good and sufficient for the amount of the arrears due.

5. When the accounts and arrears are sent in, the entry in the Arrears
Books should be erased in blue pencil.

6. On no account should outstanding accounts and arrears be overlooked
and neglected. In some cases, when the amounts involved are large, a
personal visit may be necessary.




XVII.

CONCLUSION.


It is very important that each Inspector should make himself
thoroughly conversant with the foregoing regulations, and it will be
the duty of the Chief Inspector, when visiting the several Divisions,
to ascertain whether these Regulations are properly observed and to
report to the Postmaster General such deviations as may come under his
notice.

                    ALEXANDER CAMPBELL,
                         _Postmaster General._

  OTTAWA, 1st August, 1879.




       *       *       *       *       *

Typographical errors corrected in text:

[1] On page 13, entry 8: "Those cases not erased should be
consecutively numbered and the number erased in the return." The word
'erased' is marked out and 'entered' is written in the margin. By the
context, the word clearly should be 'entered', so corrected and noted
here.

       *       *       *       *       *






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of General Instructions For The Guidance
Of Post Office Inspectors In The Dominion Of Canada, by Alexander Campbell

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK POST OFFICE ***

***** This file should be named 19414.txt or 19414.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/9/4/1/19414/

Produced by Jeannie Howse, Adrian Mastronardi, The
Philatelic Digital Library Project at http://www.tpdlp.net
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
generously made available by The Internet Archive/Canadian
Libraries)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
