The Project Gutenberg EBook of A Svmmarie and Trve Discovrse of Sir
Frances Drakes VVest Indian Voyage, by Richard Field

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: A Svmmarie and Trve Discovrse of Sir Frances Drakes VVest Indian Voyage
       Wherein were taken, the townes of Saint Iago, Sancto
       Domingo, Cartagena & Saint Augustine.

Author: Richard Field

Release Date: October 20, 2006 [EBook #19589]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SIR FRANCES DRAKES ***




Produced by Irma Spehar, Louise Pryor, The Kraus Collection
of Sir Francis Drake and the Online Distributed Proofreading
Team at http://www.pgdp.net





{Transcriber's note:

The spelling and punctuation in the original are inconsistent.
No corrections have been made except those that have been noted
explicitly at the end of the etext.

The maps referred to on the title page and after the Dedication were
not present in the original.}




  A SVMMARIE
  AND TRVE DISCOVRSE
  OF SIR FRANCES DRAKES
  VVest Indian Voyage.

  VVherein were taken, the Townes of
  _Saint Iago, Sancto Domingo, Cartagena,
  and Saint Augustine_.

  With Geographicall Mappes exactly describing each of the
  Tovvnes vvith their scituations, and the maner
  of the Armies approching to the vvinning
  of them: diligently made by

  BAPTISTA BOAZIO.

  [Illustration]

  Printed at London by Roger Ward dvvelling vpon
  Lambard Hill, neere olde Fish-streete.

  1589.




[Illustration: decorative page header]

  TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE
  ROBERT D'EVREVX, EARLE
  _OF ESSEX AND EVVE, VISCOVNT_
  of Hereford and Bourchier, Lord Ferrers of
  Chartley, Bourchier, and Louaine, Maister
  of the Queenes Maiesties horse,
  and knight of the most honorable
  order of the Garter. T. C.
  vvisheth increase of all
  honour and happinesse.


_Right Honorable, hauing by chaunce recouered of late into my handes
(after I had once lost the same) a copie of the Discourse of our late
West Indian Voyage, which was begun by Captaine Bigges; who ended his
life in the said voyage after our departure from _Cartagena_, the same
being afterwardes finished (as I thinke) by his Lieutenant Maister
Croftes, or some other, I know not well who. Now finding therein a most
true report of the seruices and other matters which happened in the said
voyage, the sight whereof is wonderfully desired of manie honest and
well disposed persons. I haue presumed to recommend the publishing
thereof, vnto your Lordships protection and fauour, for these two
causes. The one, for that your Lordships honourable disposition is in
the knowledge of all men that know your selfe, most thirstingly affected
to embrace in your owne person, the brauest enterprises, if the time
would once afford anie such fit occasion, as might be agreeable to her
Maiesties resolution: who wisely (and long may she do it) gouerneth all
thinges to the greatest aduantage of her selfe and people. The other,
because my selfe hauing bene a member in the said actions, and was
Lieutenant of Maister Carleils owne companie, whereby I can well assure
the truth of this report: I thought it my bounden duetie, hauing
professed my seruice to your Lordship before all men, to dedicate the
same rather vnto your Lordship then vnto any other. And although it be
now a yeare and a halfe sithence the voyage ended, whereby some man will
say, that it is now no new matter: yet the present time considered, how
doubtfull some of our meaner sort of people are of the Spanish
preparations, I thinke this Discourse a verie fit thing to be published,
that they may see what great victories a fewe English men haue made vpon
great numbers of the Spaniardes, euen at home in their owne Countries.
The beholding whereof will much encourage those, who by fame and bare
wordes are made to doubt much more then there is cause why they should.
Vpon which point, as there may be much said: so my selfe being no
Discourser, do desire to be held excused therein; and therefore doe
onely commend the trueth of this report vnto your Lordship: which will
be also auowed by diuers Captaines that were in the said voyage. And so
in all humblenesse do take my leaue, readie to do your Lordship all
faithfull seruice._

  Your Lordships souldier
  and humble seruant

  THOMAS GATES.




[Illustration: decorative page header]

_¶ The Reader must vnderstand, that this Discourse was dedicated, and
intended to haue bene Imprinted somewhat before the comming of the
Spanish Fleete vpon our coast of England: but by casualtie the same was
forgotten and slacked for a time of some better leasure._


  The Order and maner for the true placing
  _of the Mappes in this Booke_.

                      { S'. Iago in fol. 10.
                      { S'. Domingo in fol. 19.
  Place the Mappe of  { Cartagena in fol. 23.
                      { S'. Augustine in fol. 31.

  [Illustration]




[Illustration: decorative page header]

  A SVMMARIE AND
  TRVE DISCOVRSE OF SIR FRANCIS
  _DRAKES WEST INDIAN VOYAGE_,
  WHEREIN WERE TAKEN
  THE TOVVNES OF SAINT IAGO,
  _Sancto Domingo, Cartagena_,
  and Saint Augustine,


This vvorthie Knight for the seruice of his Prince and Countrie, hauing
prepared his vvhole fleete, and gotten them downe to Plimmouth in
Deuonshire, to the number of fiue and twentie saile of ships and
pinnaces, and hauing assembled of Souldiours and Marriners to the number
of two thousand and three hundred in the vvhole, embarqued them and
himselfe at Plimmouth aforesaid, the twelfth day of September 1585.
being accompanied vvith these men of name and charge, vvhich hereafter
followe.

  Maister Christopher Carleill Lieftenant Generall, a man of long
      experience in the vvarre as vvell by sea as land, and had formerly
      carried high offices in both kindes in many fightes, vvhich he
      discharged alvvaies verie happilie, and with great good reputation.
  Anthonie Povvell Sergeant Maior.
  Captaine Mathevve Morgan, and Captaine Iohn Sampson, Corporals of the
      field.

These Officers had commaundement ouer the rest of the land Captaines,
vvhose names hereafter follovve.

      Captaine Anthony Plat.
      Captaine Edvvard Winter.
      Captaine Iohn Goring.
      Captaine Robert Pevv.
      Captaine George Barton.
      Captaine Iohn Merchant.
      Captaine William Cecill.
      Captaine Walter Bigs.
      Captaine Iohn Hannam.
      Captaine Richard Stanton.
  Captaine Martine Frobusher Viceadmirall, a man of great experience in
      sea faring actions, & had caried chiefe charge of many shippes
      himselfe, in sundry voyages before, being novv shipped in the
      Primrose.
  Captaine Francis Knollis, Rieradmirall in the Gallion Leicester.
  Maister Thomas Venner Captaine in the Elizabeth Bonaduenture vnder the
      Generall.
  Maister Edvvard Winter Captaine in the Aide.
  Maister Christopher Carleill the Lieftenant generall, Captaine in the
      Tygar.
  Henry White Captaine of the sea Dragon.
  Thomas Drake Captaine of the Thomas.
  Thomas Seelie Captaine of the Minion.
  Baily Captaine of the Barke Talbot.
  Robert Crosse Captaine of the Barke Bond.
  George Fortescute Captaine of the Barke Bonner.
  Edward Carelesse Captaine of the Hope.
  James Erizo Captaine of the vvhite Lion.
  Thomas Moone Captaine of the Francis.
  Iohn Riuers Captaine of the Vantage,
  Iohn Vaughan Captaine of the Drake.
  Iohn Varney Captaine of the George,
  Iohn Martin Captaine of the Beniamin.
  Edward Gilman Captaine of the Skout.
  Richard Haukins Captaine of the Galliot called the Ducke.
  Bitfield Captaine of the Svvallowe.

After our going hence, which vvas the fourteenth of September, in the
yeare of our Lord, one thowsand fiue hundred eightie and fiue: & taking
our course towardes Spaine, vve had the winde for a fewe daies somevvhat
skant, and sometimes calme. And being arriued neere that part of the
coast of Spaine, vvich is called the Moores, vvee happened to espie
diuerse Sailes, vvich kept their course close by the shore, the vveather
being faire and calme. The Generall caused the Vizeadmirall to goe vvith
the Pinnaces vvell manned to see vvhat they vvere, vvho vpon sight of
the said Pinnaces approching neere vnto them, abandoned for the most
part all their shippes (being Frenchmen) laden all vvith salt, and bound
homewardes into France, amongst vvhich shippes (being all of small
burthen) there was one so vvell liked, vvhich also had no man in her, as
being brought vnto the Generall, he thought good to make stay of her for
the seruice, meaning to pay for her, as also accordingly performed at
our returne: vvhich Barke vvas called the Drake. The rest of these
shippes (being eight or nine) vvere dismissed vvithout any thing at all
taken from them. Who beeing aftervvardes put somevvhat further off from
the shore, by the contrarietie of the vvinde, vve happened to meete
vvith some other French shippes, full laden vvith Newland fish, beeing
vpon their returne homewarde from the saide New found land: vvhom the
Generall after some speech had vvith them, (and seeing plainely that
they vvere Frenchmen) dismissed vvithout once suffering any man to goe
aboord of them.

The day follovving standing in vvith the shore againe, vve discried an
other tall ship of twelue score tunnes or theraboutes, vpon vvhom
Maister Carleill the Lieuetenant generall being in the Tygar, vndertooke
the chase, vvhome also anon after the Admirall follovved, and the Tygar
hauing caused the saide straunge shippe to strike her sayles, kept her
there without suffering anye bodie to goe aboorde vntill the Admirall
vvas come vp: vvho foorthwith fending for the Maister, and diuerse
others of their principall men, and causing them to be seuerally
examined, found the Shippe and goodes to be belonging to the
inhabitantes of Saint SEBASTIAN in Spaine, but the Marriners to bee for
the most parte belonging to Saint IOHN de LVCE, and the Passage. In this
ship was greate store of dry Nevvland fish, commonly called vvith vs
Poore Iohn, vvhereof aftervvards (being thus found a lavvfull prize)
there vvas distribution made into all the shippes of the Fleete, the
same being so new and good, as it did verie greatly bestead vs in the
whole course of our voyage. A day or two after the taking of this ship,
vve put in within the Isles of BAYON, for lacke of fauourable vvind,
where we had no sooner anckered some part of the Fleete, but the
Generall commaunded all the Pinnaces with the ship boates to be manned,
and euerye man to be furnished with such armes as vvas needefull for
that present seruice; vvhich being done, the Generall put himselfe into
his Galley, vvhich was also well furnished, and rowing towardes the
Citie of BAYON; with intent, and the fauour of the Almightie to supprise
it. Before we had aduaunced one halfe league of our way, there came a
messenger beeing an English Marchant from the Gouernour, to see what
straunge Fleete we were, who came to our Generall, and conferred a while
with him, and after a small time spent, our Generall called for Captaine
Sampson, and willed him to goe to the Gouernour of the Citie, to resolue
him of two pointes. The first, to knowe if there were any warres
beetweene Spaine and England. The second, vvhy our Merchantes with their
goodes were imbarred or arrested. Thus departed Captaine Sampson with
the saide Messenger to the citie, vvhere he found the Gouernour and
people much amazed of such a suddaine accident.

The Generall with the aduice and counsell of Maister Carliell his
Lieuetenant generall, who was in the Galley with him, thought not good
to make any stand, till such time as they were within the shot of the
Citie, wher they might be ready vpon the returne of Captaine Sampson, to
make a suddaine attempt if cause did require before it were darke.

Captaine Sampson returned with his message in this sort. First, touching
peace or warres the Gouernour said he knevve of no warres, and that it
lay not in him to make any, he being so meane a subiect as hee vvas. And
as for the stay of the Marchantes with their goodes, it vvas the Kinges
pleasure, but not with intent to endommage any man. And that the Kinges
conter commaundement vvas (vvhich had bene receiued in that place some
seauennight before) that English Marchants vvith their goods should be
discharged: for the more verifying vvhereof, he sent such Marchants as
vvere in the tovvne of our Nation, who traffiqued those parts; vvhich
being at large, declared to our generall by them, counsell vvas taken
vvhat myght best be done. And for that the night approched, it vvas
thought needefull to land our force, vvhich vvas done in the shutting vp
of the day, and hauing quartered our selues to our most aduantage, vvyth
sufficient gard vpon euery straight, vve thought to rest our selues for
that night there. The Gouernour sent vs some refreshing, as bread,
vvine, oyle, apples, grapes, marmalad and such lyke. About midnight the
vveather beginnes to ouercast, insomuch that it vvas thought meeter to
repaire aboord, then to make any longer abode on land, and before vve
could recouer the Fleete, a great tempest arose, vvhich caused many of
our ships to driue from their anker hold, and some vvere forced to sea
in great peril, as the barke Talbot, the barke Hawkins, and the
Speedewell, vvhich Speedewel onely vvas driuen into England, the others
recouered vs againe, the extremitie of the storme lasted three dayes,
vvhich no sooner beganne to asswage, but Maister Carleill our Lieutenant
generall, vvas sent vvith his ovvne ship and three others: as also vvith
the galley and vvith dyuers Pinnaces, to see vvhat he might do aboue
VIGO, vvhere he tooke many boates and some Caruels, diuersly laden vvith
thinges of small value, but chiefly vvith houshold stuffe, running into
the high countrey, and amongst the rest, he found one boate laden vvith
the principal Church stuffe of the high Church of VIGO, vvhere also vvas
their great Crosse of siluer, of very fayre embossed vvorke, and double
gilt all ouer, hauing cost them a great masse of money. They complayned
to haue lost in all kind of goods aboue thirtie thowsand Duckets in this
place.

The next day the General vvith his vvhole Fleete vvent vp from the Isles
of BAYON, to a very good harbour aboue VIGO, vvhere Maister Carleill
stayd his comming, asvvell for the more quiet riding of his ships, as
also for the good commoditie of fresh vvatering, vvhich the place there
did afoord full vvell. In the meane time the Gouernour of GALLISIA had
reared such forces as he might, his numbers by estimate vvere some two
thowsand foot, and three hundred horse, and marched from BAYON to this
part of the countrey, vvhich lay in sight of our Fleete, vvhere making
stand, he sent to parle vvith our Generall, vvhich vvas graunted by our
Generall, so it might be in boates vpon the vvater: and for safetie of
their persons, there vvere pledges deliuered on both sides, vvhich done,
the Gouernour of GALLISIA put him selfe vvith two others into our
Vice-Admirals Skiffe, the same hauing bene sent to the shore for him.
And in like sort our Generall in his owne Skiffe, vvhere by them it vvas
agreed, vve should furnish our selues vvith fresh vvater, to be taken
by our owne people quietly on the land, and haue all other such
necessaries, paying for the same, as the place vvould affoord.

VVhen all our businesse vvas ended, vve departed, and tooke our vvay by
the Islands of CANARIA, vvhich are esteemed some three hundred leagues
from this part of Spaine, and falling purposely vvith PALMA, vvith
intention to haue taken our pleasure of that place, for the full
digesting of many thinges into order, and the better furnishing our
store vvith such seuerall good thinges as that affoordeth very
abundantly, vve vvere forced by the vile sea gate, vvhich at that
present fell out, and by the naughtinesse of the landing place, being
but one, and that vnder the fauor of many Platformes, vvell furnished
vvith great ordinance, to depart vvith the receipt of many their Canon
shot, some into our ships, and some besides, some of them being in very
deede full Canon high. But the onely or chiefe mischiefe, vvas the
daungerous sea surge, vvhich at shore all alongest, plainly threatned
the ouerthrovv of as many Pinnaces and boates, as for that time should
haue attempted any landing at all.

Novv seeing the expectation of this attempt frustrated by the causes
aforesaid, vve thought it meeter to fall vvith the Isle FERRO, to see if
vve could find any better fortune, and comming to the Island, vve landed
a thousand men in a valley vnder a high mountaine, vvhere we stayed some
two or three houres, in which time the inhabitants, accompanied vvith a
yong fellovv borne in England, who dwelt there with them, came vnto vs,
shewing their state to be so poore, that they were all readie to starue,
which was not vntrue: and therefore without any thing gotten, we were
all commaunded presently to imbarke, so as that night we put off to sea
South Southeast along towards the coast of Barbarie.

Vpon Saterday in the morning, being the thirteenth of Nouember, we fell
with Cape Blancke, vvhich is a lovve lande and shallowe vvater, where
vvee catched store of fish, and doubling the Cape, we put into the Bay,
where wee found certaine French shippes of warre, whom we entertained
with great courtesie, & there left them. The after noone the whole
Fleete assembled, vvhich was a little scattered about their fishing, and
put from thence to the Isles of Cape Verde, sailing till the sixteenth
of the same moneth in the morning, on which day we discryed the Island
of Saint IAGO, & in the euening we anckered the Fleete betweene the
towne called the PLAIE or PRAIE and Saint IAGO, where we put on shore a
thowsand men or more, vnder the leading of Maister Christopher Carleill
Lieuetenant Generall, who directed the seruice most like a wise
commaunder. The place where wee had first to march did affoord no good
order, for the ground was mountaines and full of dales, being a
marueilous stonye and troublesome passage, but such vvas his industrious
disposition, as hee woulde neuer leaue, vntill wee had gotten vppe to a
faire plaine, vvhere we made stand for the assembling of the armie. And
when vve vvere all gathered together vpon the plaine, some two litle
miles from the Towne, the Lieuetenant general thought good not to make
attempt till day light: because there vvas not one that could serue for
guide or giuing knovvledge at all of the place. And therefore after
hauing vvell rested, euen halfe an hovver before day, he commaunded the
Armie to be deuided into three speciall partes, such as he appointed,
vvhereas before vvee had marched by seuerall companies, being thereunto
forced by the naughtinesse of the vvay as is aforesaid.

Now by the time we wer thus raunged into a very braue order, daylight
began to appeare, and being aduaunced hard to the vvall, we saw no
enemie to resist, whereupon the Lieutenant generall appointed Captaine
Sampson with thirtie shot, and Captaine Barton with other thirtie, to
goe downe into the tovvne vvhich stood in the valey vnder vs, and might
verie plainly be viewed all ouer from that place vvhere the vvhole Army
vvas novv arryued and presently after these Captaines vvas sent the
great Ensigne, vvhich had nothing in it but the plaine English crosse,
to be placed tovvardes the Sea, that our fleete might see Saint Georges
crosse florish in the enemies fortresse. Order vvas giuen that all the
ordinance throughout the towne, and vpon all the platformes, vvhich vvas
aboue fifty peeces al ready charged, should be shot off in honor of the
Queenes Maiesties Coronation day, being the seuententh of Nouember,
after the yearly custome of England, which was so aunswered againe by
the ordinance out of all the ships in the fleete which novv was come
neere, as it was straunge to heare such a thondering noise last so long
together. In this meane while the Lieutenant general held still the most
part of his force on the hill top, till such time as the tovvne was
quartered out for the lodging of the whole Armie, which being done euery
Captaine toke his owne quarter, and in the euening was placed such
sufficient gard vpon euerie part of the tovvne that vve had no cause to
feare any present enemie.

Thus we continued in the Citie the space of fourteene daies, taking such
spoiles as the place yelded, which were for the most part, wine, oyle,
meale, and some such like thinges for victuall, as vineger, oliues, and
some such other trash, as marchandise for their Indian trades. But there
was not founde any trasure at all, or any thing else of vvorth besides.

The scituation of Sainct IAGO is somewhat strange, in forme like to a
triangle, hauing on the East and West sides two Mountaines of Rocke and
cliffie, as it were hanging ouer it, vpon the top of which two
mountaines was builded certaine fortifications to preserue the towne
from any harme that might be offered, as in this Plot is plainly
shevved. From thence: on the South side of the towne is the maine sea,
and on the North side, the valley lying betweene the foresayd
mountaines, wherein the towne standeth: the said valley and towne both
do grow verie narrow, insomuch that the space betweene the two cliffes
of this ende of the towne is estimated not to be aboue tenne or twelue
score ouer.

In the middest of the valley commeth dovvne a riueret, rill, or brooke
of fresh vvater, which hard by the sea side maketh a pond or poole,
vvhereout our ships were vvatered vvith verie great ease and pleasure.
Somewhat aboue the Towne on the North side betweene the two mountaines,
the valley vvaxeth somewhat larger then at the townes end, vvhich valley
is vvholie conuerted into gardens and orchardes well replenished vvith
diuers sorts of fruicts, herbes and trees, as lymmons, orenges, suger
canes, cochars or cochos nuts, plantens, potato roots, cocombers, small
and round onions, garlike, and some other thinges not now remembred,
amongst vvhich the cochos, nuts and plantens are very pleasant fruicts,
the said cochos hauing a hard shell and a greene huske ouer it, as hath
our vvalnut, but it farre exceedeth in greatnesse, for this cochos in
his greene huske is bigger then any mans two fistes, of the hard shell
many drinking cups are made here in England, and set in siluer as I haue
often seene.

Next within this hard shell is a vvhite rine resembling in shew verie
much euen as any thing may do, to the vvhite of an egge vvhen it is hard
boyled. And vvithin this vvhite of the nut lyeth a vvater, vvhich is
vvhitish and very cleere, to the quantitie of halfe a pint or there
abouts, vvhich vvater and white rine before spoken of, are both of a
very coole fresh tast, and as pleasing as any thing may be. I haue heard
some hold opinion, that it is very restoratiue.

The Planten grovveth in cods, somewhat like to beanes, but is bigger and
longer, and much more thicke together on the stalke, and vvhen it waxeth
ripe, the meate vvhich filleth the rine of the cod becommeth yellovv,
and is exceeding sweet and pleasant.

In this time of our being there, hapned to come a Portingall to the
Westermost fort, vvith a flag of truce, to vvhom Captaine Sampson was
sent vvith Captaine Goring, vvho comming to the said Messenger, he first
asked them vvhat nation they vvere, they aunswered Englishmen, he then
required to knovv if warres vvere betweene England and Spaine, to vvhich
they aunsvvered that they knew not, but if he would go to their Generall
he could best resolue him of such particulars, and for his assurance of
passage and repassage, these Captaines made offer to ingage their
credits, which he refused for that he vvas not sent from his Gouernor.
Then they told him, if his Gouernor did desire to take a course for the
common benefite of the people and countrie, his best way vvere to come
and present him selfe vnto our Noble and mercifull Gouernor Sir Frances
Drake; vvhereby he might be assured to finde fauor, both for him selfe
and the inhabitantes. Othervvise within three dayes vve should march
ouer the land, and consume vvith fire all inhabited places, and put to
the svvord all such liuing soules as vve should chaunce vpon: so thus
much he tooke for the conclusion of his answere, and departing, he
promised to returne the next day, but vve neuer heard more of him.

Vpon the foure and twentieth of Nouember, the Generall accompanied vvith
the Lieutenant generall and sixe hundred men, marched foorth to a
village tvvelue miles vvithin the lande, called S. DOMINGO, vvhere the
Gouernor and the Bishop vvith all the better sort vvere lodged, and by
eight of the clocke vve came to it, finding the place abandoned, and the
people fled into the mountaines: so vve made stand a vvhile to ease
ourselues, and partly to see if any vvould come to speake to vs.

After vve had vvell rested our selues, the Generall commaunded the
troupes to march away homewardes, in vvhich retreat the enemie shewed
them selues, both horse and foote, though not such force as durst
encounter vs: and so in passing some time at the gase vvith them, it
vvaxed late and towards night, before vve could recouer home to Saint
IAGO.

On Monday the six and twentieth of Nouember, the Generall commaunded all
the Pinnaces vvith the boates, to vse all diligence to imbarke the Armie
into such ships as euery man belonged. The Lieutenant generall in like
sort commaunded Captaine Goring and Lieutenant Tucker, with one hundred
shot to make a stand in the market place, vntill our forces were wholly
imbarked, the Vize-Admiral making stay vvith his Pinnace and certaine
boats in the harbour, to bring the said last companie aboord the ships.
Also the Generall willed forthwith the Gallie with two Pinnaces to take
into them the companie of Captaine Barton, and the companie of Captaine
Bigs, vnder the leading of Captaine Sampson, to seeke out such munition
as vvas hidden in the ground, at the towne of PRAY or PLAY, hauing beene
promised to be shewed it by a prisoner, vvhich was taken the day before.

The Captaines aforesaid comming to the PLAY, landed their men, and
hauing placed the troupe in their best strength, Captaine Sampson tooke
the prisoner, and willed him to shevve that he had promised, the vvhich
he could not, or at least vvould not: but they searching all suspected
places, found two peeces of ordinance, one of yron, an other of brasse.
In the after noone the Generall anckered the rest of the Fleete before
the PLAIE comming him selfe a shore, vvilling vs to burne the Tovvne and
make all hast a boorde, the which was done by sixe of the clocke the
same day, and our selues imbarked againe the same night, and so we put
off to sea Southwest.

But before our departurre from the towne of Saint IAGO, we established
orders for the better gouernment of the Armie, euery man mustered to his
Captaine, and othes ministred to acknowledge her Maiestie supreame
Gouernour, as also euery man to doe his vttermost endeuour to aduaunce
the seruice of the action, and to yeeld due obedience vnto the
directions of the General and his officers. By this prouident counsell,
and laying downe this good foundation before hand, all thinges went
forward in a due course, to the achieuing of our happie enterprise.

In all the time of our being here, neither the Gouernour for the King of
Spaine, (which is a Portugall) neither the Bishop, whose authoritie is
great, neither any of the inhabitantes of the towne, or Island euer came
at vs (which we expected they should have done) to intreate vs to leaue
them some part of their needfull prouisions, or at the least, to spare
the ruining of their towne at our going away. The cause of this their
vnreasonable distrust (as I doe take it) vvas the fresh remembrance of
the great wronges they had done to olde Maister William Havvkins of
Plimmouth, in the voyage he made foure or fiue yeares before, when as
they did both breake their promise, and murthered many of his men,
whereof I iudge you haue vnderstood, and therfore needlesse to be
repeated. But since they came not at vs, vve left written in sundrie
places, as also in the Spitle house, (vhich building was onely appointed
to be spared) the great discontentment and scorne we tooke at this their
refraining to come vnto vs, as also at the rude maner of killing, and
sauage kinde of handling the dead body of one of our boyes found, by
them stragling all alone, from whome they had taken his head and heart,
and had stragled the other bowels about the place, in a most brutish and
beastly maner.

In reuenge vvhereof at our departing vve consumed vvith fire all the
houses, asvvell in the countrey vvhich vve savv, as in the tovvne of S.
IAGO.

From hence putting ouer to the West Indies, we vvere not many dayes at
sea, but there beganne amongst our people such mortalitie, as in fevv
dayes there vvere dead aboue tvvo or three hundred men. And vntill some
seuen or eight dayes after out comming from S. IAGO, there had not died
any one man of sicknesse in all the Fleete: the sicknesse shevved not
his infection vvherevvith so many vvere stroken, vntill vve vvere
departed thence, and then seazed our people vvith extreme hote burning
and continuall ague, vvhereof some very fevv escaped vvith life, and yet
those for the most part not vvith out great alteration and decay of
their vvittes and strength for a long time after. In some that died
vvere plainly shevved the small spottes, vvhich are often found vpon
those that be infected vvith the plague, vve vvere not aboue eighteene
daies in passage betvvene the sight of Sainct IAGO aforesaid, and the
Island of DOMINICA, being the first Islande of the West Indies that vve
fell vvithall, the same being inhabited vvith sauage people, vvhich goe
all naked, their skin coloured vvith some painting of a reddish tavvney,
very personable and handsome strong men, vvho doe admit little
conuersation vvith the Spaniardes: for as some of our people might
vnnderstand them, they had a Spaniard or tvvaine prisoners vvith them,
neither do I thinke that there is any safetie for any of our nation, or
any other to be vvithin the limits of their commaundement, albeit they
vsed vs very kindly for those fevve houres of time vvhich vve spent
vvith them, helping our folkes to fill and carie on their bare shoulders
fresh vvater from the riuer to our ships boates, and fetching from their
houses, great store of Tobacco, as also a kinde of bread vvhich they fed
on, called Cassado, verie white and sauerie, made of the rootes of
Cassania. In recompence whereof, wee bestovved liberall revvardes of
glasse, coloured beades, and other things, which we had found at Sainct
IAGO, vvherewith (as it seemed) they rested verie greatlie satisfied,
and shevving some sorrowfull countenance vvhen they perceaued that vve
vvoulde depart.

From hence vve vvent to another Island Westward of it, called Sainct
CHRISTOPHERs Island, wherein vvee spent some daies of Christmas, to
refresh our sicke people, and to cleanse and ayre our ships. In vvhich
island vvere not any people at all that vve could heare off.

In vvhich time by the Generall it vvas aduised and resolued, vvith the
consent of the Lieftenant generall, the Vice-Admirall, and all the rest
of the Captaines to proceed to the great Island of HISPANIOLA, as vvel
for that we knevve our selues then to bee in our best strength, as also
the rather allured thereunto, by the glorious fame of the Citie of S.
DOMINGO, being the ancientest and chiefe inhabited place in al the tract
of countrey ther aboutes. And so proceeding in this determination, by
the vvay vvee met a small Frigot, bound for the same place, the vvhich
the Vice-Admirall tooke, and hauing duelie examined the men that vvere
in her, there vvas one founde by vvhome vve vvere aduertised, the hauen
to be a barred hauen, and the shore or land thereof to be vvell
fortified, hauing a Castle thereupon furnished vvith greate store of
Artillerie, vvithout the danger vvhereof, vvas no conuenient landing
place vvithin ten English miles of the Citie, to vvhich the saide Pilote
tooke vpon him to conduct vs.

All thinges being thus considered on, the vvhole forces vvere commaunded
in the euening to embarke themselues into Pinnaces, boates, & other
small barkes appointed for this seruice. Our souldiers being thus
imbarked the Generall put himselfe into the barke Francis as Admirall,
and all this night we lay on the sea, bearing small saile vntill our
arriuall to the landing place, which vvas about the breaking of the day,
and so we landed, being Newyears day, nine or ten miles to the
Westwardes of that braue Citie of S. DOMINGO: for at that time nor yet
is knowen to vs, any landing place, vvher the sea surge doth not
threaten to ouerset a Pinnace or boat. Our General hauing seene vs all
landed in safetie, returned to his Fleete, bequeathing vs to God, and
the good conduct of Maister Carliell our Lieuetenant Generall: at which
time, being about eight of the clocke, we began to march, and about
noone time, or towards one of the clocke we approched the towne, where
the Gentlemen and those of the better sort, being some hundred and
fiftie braue horses or rather more, began to present themselues, but our
small shot plaied vpon them, which were so sustained with good
proportion of pikes in all partes, as they finding no part of our troope
vnprepared to receiue them (for you must vnderstande they viewed all
round about) they were thus driuen to giue vs leaue to proceed towardes
the tvvo gates of the tovvne, vvhich vvere the next to the seavvard.
They had manned them both, and planted their ordinance for that present,
and sudden alarum vvithout the gate, and also some troopes of small shot
in Ambuscado vpon the hievvay side. We deuided our vvhole force, being
some thousand or tvvelue hundred men into tvvo partes, to enterprise
both the gates at one instant, the Lieftenant Generall hauing openly
vovved to Captaine Povvell (vvho led the troope that entered the other
gate) that vvith Gods good fauour he vvould not rest vntill our meeting
in the market place.

Their ordinance had no sooner discharged vpon our near approch, & made
some execution amongst vs, though not much, but the Lieftenant generall
began foorthvvith to aduaunce both his voice of encouragement, and pace
of marching, the first man that vvas slaine vvith the ordinance being
verie neere vnto himselfe, and thereupon hasted all that he might to
keepe them from the recharging of the ordinance. And notvvithstanding
their Ambuscadoes, vve marched or rather ranne so roundly into them as
pell mell vve entered the gates, and gaue them more care euery man to
saue himselfe by flight, then reason to stand any longer to their broken
fight, we foorthwith repaired to the market place, but to be more truely
vnderstood a place of verye faire spatious square grounde before the
great Church, vvhether also came as had bene agreed Captaine Povvell
with the other troope, which place vvith some part next vnto it, we
strengthened with Barricados, and there as the most conuenient place
assured our selues, the Citie being farre to spacious for so small and
weary a troope to vndertake to garde. Somevvhat after midnight they vvho
had the garde of the Castle, hearing vs busie about the gates of the
saide Castle, abandoned the same: some being taken prisoners, and some
flying away by the help of boates, to the other side of the hauen, & so
into the country.

The next day vve quartered a little more at large, but not into the
halfe part of the tovvne, and so making substantiall trenches, and
planting all the ordinance that ech part vvas correspondent to other, we
held this towne the space of one moneth.

In the vvhich time happened some accidents more then are vvell remembred
for the present, but amongst other thinges it chanced that the Generall
sent on his message to the Spaniardes a negro boy with a flagge of
vvhite, signifiing truce, as is the Spaniardes ordinarie manner to doe
there, vvhen they approch to speak to vs, vvhich boy vnhappily vvas
first met withall, by some of those who had bene belonging as officers
for the King in the Spanish Galley, vvhich vvith the Tovvne vvas lately
fallen into our hands, vvho vvithout all order or reason, and contrary
to that good vsage vvherevvith vvee had entertained their messengers,
furiouslie stroke the poore boy through the bodie vvith one of their
horsemens staues, with vvich vvound the boy returned to the Generall,
and after he had declared the maner of this wrongfull crueltie, died
forthvvith in his presence, vvherewith the Generall beeing greatly
passioned, commaunded the Prouost martiall, to cause a couple of Friers,
then prisoners, to be caried to the same place where the boy was
stroken, accompanied with sufficient gard of our soldiers, and there
presently to be hanged, dispatching at the same instant another poore
prisoner, vvith this reason wherefore this execution vvas done, and
vvith this message further, that vntill the partie vvho had thus
murthered the Generals messenger, vvere deliuered into our handes, to
receaue condigne punishment, there should no day passe, vvherein there
should not two prisoners be hanged, vntill they were all consumed vvich
vvere in our handes.

Whereupon the day following, he that had bene Captaine of the kinges
galley, brought the offendor to the townes ende, offring to deliuer him
into our hands, but it was thought a more honourable reuenge, to make
them there in our sight, to performe the execution themselues, vvhich
vvas done accordingly.

During our being in this towne, as formerly also at S. IAGO there had
passed iustice vpon the life of one of our owne companie for an odious
matter: so here likewise was there an Irish man hanged, for the
murthering of his Corporall.

In this time also passed manie treaties betweene their Commissioners and
vs, for ransome of their Citie, but vpon disagreements, we still spent
the early mornings in firing the outmost houses; but they being built
verie magnificently of stone, vvith high loftes, gaue vs no small
trauell to ruine them. And albeit for diuers daies together, we
ordained eche morning by day breake, vntill the heat began at nine of
the clocke, that two hundred Mariners did nought else but labour to fier
and burne the said houses vvithout our trenches, vvhilest the souldiers
in a like proportion stood foorth for their gard: yet did we not or
could not in this time consume so much as one third part of the towne,
vvhich Towne is here plainly described and set forth in this Map. And so
in the end, what wearied with firing, and vvhat hastened by some other
respects, we were contented to accept of fiue and twentie thousand
Duckets, of fiue shillings sixe pence the peece, for the ransome of the
rest of the towne.

Amongst other things which happened and were found at S. DOMINGO, I may
not omit to let the world know one very notable marke and token, of the
vnsatiable ambition of the Spanish king & his nation, vvich was found in
the kings house, vvherein the chiefe Gouernor of that Citie and countrey
is appointed alwaies to lodge, vvhich vvas this: In the comming to the
hall or other romes of this house, you must first ascend vp by a faire
large paire of staires, at the head of vvhich staires is a handsome
spatious place to vvalke in, somewhat like vnto a gallerie, vvherein
vpon one of the vvals, right ouer against you as you enter the said
place, so as your eye can not escape the sight of it, there is described
and painted in a very large Scutchion, the armes of the king of Spaine,
and in the lower part of the said Scutchion, there is likewise described
a globe, containing in it the whole circuite of the sea and the earth,
vvhereupon is a horse standing on his hinder part vvithin the globe, and
the other fore part vvithout the globe, lifted vp as it vvere to leape,
vvith a scroll painted in his mouth, vvherein vvas written these vvordes
in Latin _Non sufficit orbis_: which is as much to say, as the world
suffiseth not, vvhereof the meaning vvas required to be knowen of some
of those of the better sort, that came in commission to treat vpon the
ransome of the tovvne, who would shake their heades, and turne aside
their countenance in some smyling sort, without answering any thing, as
greatly ashamed thereof. For by some of our companie it vvas told them,
that if the Queene of England vvould resolutely prosecute the warres
against the Kinge of Spaine, he should be forced to lay aside that
proude and vnreasonable reaching vaine of his, for he should finde more
then inough to do, to keepe that vvhich he had alreadie, as by the
present example of their lost towne they might for a beginning perceaue
vvell inough.

Now to the satisfying of some men, who maruel greatly that such a famous
and goodly builded Citie so vvell inhabited of gallant people, very
brauely apparelled (vvhereof our souldiers found good store for their
reliefe) should afoord no greater riches then vvas found there, vvherein
it is to be vnderstood that the Indian people, which were the naturals
of this vvhole Island of HISPANIOLA (the same being neare hand as great
as England) were many yeares since cleane consumed by the tyrannie of
the Spaniards, vvhich vvas cause, that for lacke of people to vvorke in
the Mines, the gold and siluer Mines of this Island are vvholy giuen
ouer, and thereby they are faine in this Island to vse copper money,
whereof vvas found verie great quantitie. The chiefe trade of this place
consisteth of Suger and Ginger, which groweth in the Island, and of
hides of oxen and kine, vvhich in this wast countrey of the Island are
bred in infinite numbers, the soile being verie fertile: and the said
beasts are fed vp to a verie large growth, and so killed for nothing so
much, as for their hides aforesaid. Wee found here great store of strong
wine, sweete oyle, vineger, oliues, and other such like prouisions, as
excellent vvheate meale packed vp in wine pipes and other caske, and
other commodities likewise, as vvollen and linnen cloth, and some
silkes, all which prouisions are brought out of Spaine & serued vs for
great releese. There vvas but a little plate or vessell of Siluer, in
comparison of the great pride in other thinges of thys towne, because in
these hote countreyes they vse much of these erthen dishes finely
painted or varnished, vvich they call Parsellina, and is had out of the
East India, and for their drinking, they vse glasses altogether, whereof
they make excellent good and faire in the same place. But yet some plate
we founde, and many other good thinges, as theyr hosholde garniture very
gallant and rich, vvhich had cost them deere, although vnto vs they
vvere of small importance.

From S. DOMINGO we put ouer to the maine or firme land, and going all
alongest the coast, vve came at the last in sight of CARTAGENA, standing
vpon the sea side so neare as some of our barks in passing alongst,
approched vvithin the reach of their Culuerin shot, vvhich they had
planted vpon certaine platformes. The harbour mouth lay some three miles
tovvard the Westvvard of the town, vvhereinto we entered about three or
foure of the clocke in the afternoone vvithout any resistance, of
ordinance, or other impeachment planted vpon the same. In the euening
vve put our selues on land tovvardes the harbour mouth, vnder the
leading of Maister Carleill our Lieftenant generall, vvho after he had
digested vs to march forvvard about the midnight, as easily as foote
might fall, expresselye commaunding to keepe close by the sea vvash of
the shore for our best and surest vvay, whereby we vvere like to goe
through, and not to misse anye more of the vvay, vvhich once vve had
lost within an hower after our first beginning to march, through the
slender knowledge of him that tooke vpon him to be our guide, whereby
the night spent on, which otherwise must haue bene done by resting. But
as we came vvithin some tvvo miles of the towne, their horsemen which
vvere some hundred, met vs, and taking the alarum, retired to their
townevvard again vpon the first volley of our shot that vvas giuen them:
for the place where vve encountred being vvoody and bushie euen to the
water side, was vnmeet for their seruice.

At this instant vve might heare some peeces of artillerie discharged,
with diuers small shot tovvardes the harbour, vvhich gaue vs to
vnderstand, according to the order set downe in the euening before by
our Generall, that the Vice-Admirall accompanied with Captaine Venner,
Captaine White, and Captaine Crosse, vvith other sea captaines, and
vvith diuers Pinnaces and boates should giue some attempt vnto the litle
fort standing on the entrie of the inner hauen, neere adioining to the
tovvne, though to small purpose, for that the place vvas stronge, and
the entrye verie narrovve vvas chained ouer: so as there coulde be
nothing gotten by the attempt, more then the giuing of them an Alarum on
that other side of the hauen being a mile and a halfe from the place
where vve novve vvere. In which attempt the Vice-Admirall had the rudder
of his Skiffe stroken through with a Saker shot, and litle or no harme
receaued else where.

The troopes being novve in their march, half a myle behither the tovvne
or lesse, the ground we were on grew to be straight, and not aboue
fiftie paces ouer, hauing the maine sea on the side of it, and the
harbour water or inner sea (as you may tearme it) on the other side,
vvhich in this plot is plainely shewed. This straight was fortified
cleane ouer with a stone vvall and a ditch without it, the saide wall
being as orderly built vvith flanking in euery part, as can be set
dovvne. There vvas onely so much of this straight vnvvalled, as might
serue for the issuing of the horsemen, or the passing of carriage in
time of neede: but this vnvvalled part vvas not vvithout a very good
Barricado of vvine buts or pipes, filled vvith earth, ful and thick as
they might stand on end one by another, some part of of them standing
euen vvithin the maine sea.

This place of strength vvas furnished of sixe great peeces,
demi-Culuerins, and Sakers, vvhich shot directlie in front vpon vs as
vve approched. Novve vvithout this vval vpon the inner side of the
streight, they had brought likevvise tvvo great Gallies vvith their
provvesse to the shore, hauing planted in them eleuen peeces of
ordinance vvhich did beate all crosse the straight, and flanked our
comming on. In these tvvo Gallies vvere planted three or foure hundred
small shot, and on the land in the garde onely of thys place, three
hundred shot and pikes.

They in this their full readinesse to receiue vs, spared not their shot
both great and small. But our Lieftenant generall, taking the aduantage
of the darke (the day light as yet not broken out) approched by the
lovvest ground, according to the expresse direction vvhich himselfe
hadde formerlie giuen, the same being the sea vvash shore, vvhere the
vvater vvas somevvhat fallen, so as most of all their shot vvas in
vaine. Our Lieftenant generall commaunded our shot to forbeare shooting
vntill vve vvere come to the vvall side, and so vvith pikes roundlie
together vve approched the place, vvhere vve soone found out the
Barricadoes of pipes or buts, to be the meetest place for our assault,
vvhich notvvithstaning it vvas vvell tempted by vs: dovvne vvent the
buts of earth, and pell mell came our svvordes and pikes together, after
out shot had first giuen their volley, euen at the enemies nose. Our
pikes vvere somevvhat longer then theirs, and our bodies better armed,
for very fevve of them vvere armed, vvith vvhich aduantage out svvordes
and pikes grevv to hard for them, and they driuen to giue place. In this
furious entrie, the Lieutenant generall slue vvith his ovvne hands, the
chiefe Ensigne bearer of the Spaniards, vvho fought verie manfullie to
his liues end.

We follovved into the towne vvith them, and giuing them no leasure to
breath, vve vvanne the Market place, albeit they made head, and fought a
while before vve got it, and so vve being once seazed and assured of
that, they were content to suffer vs to lodge vvithin their towne, and
themselues to goe to their vviues, vvhome they had caried into other
places of the countrey before our comming thither.

At euerie streetes end they had raised verie fine Barricadoes of earth
workes, vvith trenches without them, as well made as euer vve savve any
vvorke done: at the entring whereof vvas some litle resistance, but
soone ouercome, it vvas vvith fewe slaine or hurt. They had ioyned vvith
them many Indians, vvhome they had placed in corners of aduantage, all
bovve men, vvith their Arrovves most villanously empoisoned, so as if
they did but breake the skinne, the partie so touched died vvithout
great marueill: some they slevve of our people with their arrowes, some
they likevvise mischieued to death vvith certaine prickes of small
stickes sharply pointed, of a foot and a halfe long, the one end put
into the ground, the other empoisoned, sticking fast vp, right against
our comming in the vvay, as we should approch from our landing tovvardes
the towne, vvhereof they had planted a vvonderfull number in the
ordinarie way, but our keeping the sea vvash shore, missed the greatest
part of them verie happilie.

To ouerpasse many particular matters, as the hurting of Captaine Sampson
at svvord blovves in the first entring, vnto vvhom was committed the
charge of the pikes of the Vantgard by his lot and turne, as also of the
taking of Alonso Brauo the chiefe commaunder of that place by Captaine
Goring, after the said Captaine had first hurt him vvith his sword, vnto
vvhich Captaine vvas committed the charge of the shot of the said
Vantgard.

Captain Winter vvas likewise by his turne of the Vantgard in this
attempt, vvhere also the Liefetenant generall marched himselfe, the
saide Captaine Winter through a great desire to serue by land, hauing
nowe exchanged his charge by sea with Captaine Cecill for his band of
footemen.

Captaine Povvell the Sergeant maior hadde by hys turne, the charge of
the foure companies vvhich made the battaile.

Captaine Morgan, who at S. DOMINGO was of the Vantgard, had now by turne
his charge vpon the companies of the Riergard.

Euerie man asvvell of one part as of another, came so vvillinglie on to
the seruice, as the enemie vvas not able to endure the furie of such
hote assault.

We staied here sixe weekes, and the sicknesse with mortalitie before
spoken off, still continuing among vs, though not vvith the same fury as
at the first, and such as were touched vvith the said sicknesse,
escaping death, very fevv or almost none could recouer their strength,
yea many of them vvere much decayed in their memorie: insomuch that it
vvas growen and ordinarie iudgement, when one was heard to speake
foolishlie, to say he had bene sicke of the Calentour, vvhich is the
Spanish name of their burning Ague: for as I tolde you before, it is a
very burning and pestilent ague. The originall cause thereof, is imputed
to the euening or first night aire, which they tearme _La serena_,
vvherein they say and holde very firme opinion, that who so is then
obroad in the open aire, shall certainly be infected to the death, not
being of the Indian or naturall race of those countrey people: by
holding their watch, vvere thus subiected to the infectious ayre, vvhich
at Sainct IAGO vvas most dangerous and deadly of al other places.

With the inconuenience of continuall mortalitie, vve vvere forced to
giue ouer our entended enterprise, to goe with NOMBRE DE DIOS, and so
ouerland to PANNAMA, vvhere vve shoulde haue stroken the stroke for the
treasure, and full recompence of our tedious trauailes. And thus at
CARTAGENA vve tooke our first resolution to returne homewards.

But vvhile vve vvere yet there, it happened one day, that our vvatch
called the Sentinell, vpon the Church steeple, had discouered in the sea
a couple of small barkes or boates, making in with the harbour of
CARTAGENA, whereupon Captaine Moone and Captaine Varney, vvith Iohn
Grant the Maister of the Tyger, and some other sea men, embarqued
themselues in a couple of small Pinnaces, to take them before they
should come nigh the shore, at the mouth of the harbour, least by some
stragling Spaniardes from the land, they might be vvarned by signes from
comming in, which fel out accordingly, notvvithstanding all the
diligence that our men coulde vse: for the Spanish boates, vpon the
sight of our Pinnaces comming tovvardes them, ran themselues a shore,
and so their men presently hid them selues in bushes hard by the sea
side, amongst some others that had called them by signes thyther. Our
men presently vvithout any due regard had to the qualitie of the place,
and seeing no man of the Spaniardes to shew themselues, aboorded the
Spanish barkes or boates, and so standing all open in them, were
suddenly shot at by a troope of Spaniards out of the bushes, by vvhich
volley of shot there vvere slaine Captaine Varney, vvhich died
presently, and Captaine Moone, vvho died some fevve dayes after, besides
some foure fiue others that vvere hurt: and so our folkes returned
without their purpose, not hauing any sufficient number of souldiers,
vvith them to fight on shore. For those men they carried were all
marriners to rowe, fevve of them armed, because they made account with
their ordinance to haue taken the barkes vvell enough at sea, which
they might ful easily haue done, without any losse at all, if they had
come in time to the harbour mouth, before the Spaniards boats had gotten
so neare the shore.

During our abode in this place, as also at S. DOMINGO, there passed
diuerse curtesies betvveene vs and the Spaniardes, as feasting, and
vsing them with all kindnes, and fauour: so as amongst others there came
to see the Generall, the Gouernor of _Cartagena_, vvith the Bishop of
the same, and diuerse of other Gentlemen of the better sort.

This towne of _Cartagena_ wee touched in the out parts, and consumed
much vvith fire, as we had done Sainct DOMINGO vpon discontentmentes,
and for want of agreeing with vs in their first treaties touching their
ransome, which at the last vvas concluded betvvene vs, should be a
hundred and ten thousand Duckettes for that which vvas yet standing, the
Ducket valued at fiue shillings sixe pence sterling.

This towne though not halfe so big as S. DOMINGO, giues as you see, a
farre greater ransome, being in verye deede of farre more importance, by
reason of the excellencie of the harbour, and the situation thereof, to
serue the trade of NOMBRE DE DIOS and other places, and is inhabited
with farre more richer merchantes. The other is chiefly inhabited with
Lawyers & braue Gentlemen, being the chiefe or highest appeale of their
suites in lawe of all the Islandes about it, and of the maine lande
coast next vnto it. And it is of no such accompt as CARTAGENA, for these
and some other like reasons, which I could giue you, ouer long to be
novv vvritten.

The vvarning which this tovvne receaued of our coming tovvardes them,
from S. DOMINGO, by the space of twentie daies before our arriuall
hither, was cause that they had both fortified and euery vvay prepared
for their best defence. As also that they had caried and conuayed away
all their treasure and principall substance.

The ransome of an hundred and tenne thousand Duckets thus concluded on,
as is aforesaid, the same being written, and expressing for nothing more
then the tovvne of CARTAGENA, vpon the payment of the said ransome, we
left the said tovvne, and drevv some part of our souldiers into the
Priorie or Abbey, standing a quarter of an English mile belovv the
tovvne vpon the harbour water side, the same being vvalled vvith a wall
of stone, vvhich vve told the Spaniards vvas yet ours, and not redeemed
by their composition: vvhereupon they finding the defect of their
contract, vvere contented to enter into another ransome for all places,
but specially for the said house, as also the blocke house or Castle,
vvhich is vpon the mouth of the inner harbour. And vvhen vve asked as
much for the one as for the other, they yelded to giue a thousand
Crownes for the Abbey, leauing vs to take our pleasure vpon the blocke
house, vvhich they said they vvere not able to ransome, hauing stretched
them selues to the vttermost of their powers: and therefore the said
blocke house vvas by vs vndermined, and so vvith gunne powder blowen vp
in peeces.

While this latter contract vvas in making, our whole Fleete of ships
fell dovvne towardes the harbour mouth, vvhere they ankered the third
time, and employed their men in fetching of fresh vvater aboord the
ships for our voiage homevvardes, which vvater vvas had in a great
vvell, that is in the Island by the harbour mouth, which Island is a
verie pleasant place as hath bene seene, hauing in it many sortes of
goodly and verie pleasant fruicts, as the orenge trees and others, being
set orderly in walkes of great length together. Insomuch as the vvhole
Island being some two or three miles about, is cast into groundes of
gardening and orchards.

After sixe vveeks abode in this place, vve put to sea the last of March,
where after tvvo or three dayes a great ship vvhich vve had taken at S.
DOMINGO, and thereupon vvas called the New yeares gift, fell into a
great leake, being laden with ordinance, hides, and other spoiles, and
in the night shee lost the companie of our Fleete, vvhich being missed
the next morning by the Generall, he cast about vvith the whole Fleete,
fearing some great mischance to be happened vnto her, as in verie deede
it so fell out, for her leake vvas so great, and her men were all tyred
vvith pomping. But at the last hauing found her and the Barke Talbot in
her companie, vvhich staied by great hap vvith her, vvas readie to take
their men out of her, for the sauing of them. And so the Generall being
fully aduertised of their great extremitie, made saile directlie back
againe to CARTAGENA with the vvhole Fleete, where hauing staied eight or
tenne daies more, about the vnlading of this ship, and the bestovving
thereof and her men, into other ships, vve departed once againe to sea,
directing our course towards the Cape S. ANTHONIE, being the Eastermost
part of CVBA, vvhether vve arriued the seuen and twentieth of Aprill.
But because fresh vvater could not presently be found, we weyed anker
and departed, thinking in few daies to recouer the MATTANCES, a place to
the Eastward of HAVANA.

After we had sailed some fourteene dayes, we vvere brought to Cape S.
ANTHONIE againe, thorough lacke of fauorable winde: but then our
scarcity vvas growen such, as neede made vs looke a little better for
vvater, vvhich vve found in sufficient quantitie, being in deede as I
iudge, none other then raine vvater nevvly fallen, and gathered vp by
making pittes in a plot of marrish ground, some three hundred pases from
the sea side.

I do vvrong if I should forget the good example of the Generall at this
place, vvho to encourage others, and to hasten the getting of fresh
vvater aboord the ships, tooke no lesse paine him selfe then the
meanest, as also at S. DOMINGO, CARTAGENA, and all other places, hauing
alvvaies so vigilant a care and foresight in the good ordering of his
Fleete, accompanying them, as it is said, with such vvonderfull trauell
of bodie, as doubtlesse had he bene the meanest person, as he vvas the
chiefest, he had yet deserued the first place of honour: and no lesse
happie do we accompt him, for being associated with Maister Carleill his
Lieutenant generall, by whose experiences, prudent counsell, and gallant
performance, he atchiued so many and happie enterprises of the warre, by
vvhom also he was verie greatly assisted, in setting downe the needefull
orders, lawes, and course of iustice, and for the due administration of
the same vpon all occasions.

After three daies spent in watering our ships, vve departed now the
second time from the Cape of S. ANTHONIE the thirteenth of May, and
proceeding about the Cape of FLORIDA, we neuer touched anie where, but
coasting alongst FLORIDA, and keeping the shore still in sight, the
eight and twentieth of May early in the morning, vve descried on the
shore a place built like a Beacon, vvhich vvas in deede a scaffold vpon
fowre long mastes, raised on ende for men to discouer to the seaward,
being in the latitude of thirtie degrees, or verie neare thereunto. Our
Pinnaces manned, and comming to the shore, we marched vp alongst the
riuer side, to see vvhat place the enemie held there: for none amongst
vs had any knowledge thereof at all.

Here the Generall tooke occasion to march vvith the companies him selfe
in person, the Lieutenant generall hauing the Vantgard, and going a mile
vp or somewhat more by the riuer side, vve might discerne on the other
side of the riuer ouer against vs, a fort, which newly had bene built by
the Spaniards, and some mile or there about aboue the fort, vvas a
litle towne or village without walls, built of vvoodden houses, as this
Plot here doth plainlie shevv: we forthwith prepared to haue ordinance
for the batterie, and one peece vvas a litle before the euening planted,
and the first shot being made by the Lieutenant generall him selfe at
their Ensigne, strake through the Ensigne, as vve afterwardes vnderstood
by a French man, vvhich came vnto vs from them. One shot more vvas then
made, which strake the foote of the fort vvall, which vvas all massiue
timber of great trees like Mastes. The Lieutenant generall vvas
determined to passe the riuer this night vvith fovvre companies, and
there to lodge him selfe intrenched as neare the fort, as that he might
play vvith his muskets and smallest shot vpon any that should appeare:
and so afterwards to bring and plant the batterie vvith him, but the
helpe of marriners for that sudden to make trenches could not be had,
vvhich vvas the cause that this determination vvas remitted vntill the
next night.

In the night the Lieutenant generall tooke a litle rowing Skiffe, and
halfe a dozen vvell armed, as Captaine Morgan, and Captaine Sampson,
vvith some others besides the rowers, and went to view vvhat gard the
enemie kept, as also to take knowledge of the ground. And albeit he went
as couertly as might be, yet the enemie taking the _Alarum_, grevv
fearefull that the whole Force was approching to the assault, and
therefore vvith all speede abandoned the place after the shooting of
some of their peeces. They thus gone, and he being returned vnto vs
againe, but nothing knowing of their flight from their fort, forthwith
came a French man being a Phipher (who had bene prisoner vvith them) in
a litle boate, playing on his phiph the tune of the Prince of Orenge his
song, and beeing called vnto by the gard, he tolde them before he put
foote out of the boate, vvhat he vvas him selfe, and hovv the
Spaniardes were gone from the fort, offering either to remaine in handes
there, or els to returne to the place with them that vvould goe.

Vpon this intelligence the Generall, the Lieftenant generall, vvith some
of the Captaines in one Skiffe, and the Vice-Admirall vvith some others
in his Skiffe, and tvvo or three Pinnaces furnished of souldiours vvith
them, put presently ouer tovvardes the fort, giuing order for the rest
of the Pinnaces to follovve. And in our approch, some of the enemie
bolder then the rest, hauing stayed behinde their companie, shot off
tvvo peeces of ordinance at vs: but on shore we vvent, and entered the
place without finding any man there.

When the day appeared, we found it built all of timber, the walles being
none other but whole mastes or bodies of trees set vppe right and close
together in manner of a pale, vvithout any ditch as yet made, but who
intended with some more time, for they had not as yet finished all their
worke, hauing begun the same some three or foure monethes before: so as
to say the trueth, they had no reason to keepe it, being subiect both to
fire and easie assault.

The platforme vvhereon the ordinance lay, vvas whole bodies of long Pine
trees, whereof there is great plentie, layed a crosse one on another,
and some litle earth amongst. There vvas in it thirteene or fourteene
greate peeces of brasse ordinance, and a chest vnbroken vp, hauing in it
the value of some two thousande poundes sterling, by estimation of the
kinges treasure, to pay the souldiers of that place vvho vvere a hundred
and fiftie men.

The fort thus vvonne, vvhich they called S. Iohn fort, and the day
opened, vve assayed to go to the tovvne, but could not by reason of some
ryuers and broken ground vvhich was betweene the tvvo places: and
therefore enforced to imbarke againe into our Pinnaces, vve vvent
thither vpon the great maine riuer, which is called as also the Tovvne
by the name of S. AVGVSTINE.

At our approching to land, there vvas some that began to shevve
themselues, and to bestovve some fevv shot vpon vs, but presently
vvithdrevv themselues. And in their running thus avvay, the Sergeant
Maior finding one of their horses readie sadled and bridled, tooke the
same to follovv the chase, and so ouergoing all his companie, vvas (by
one laied behind a bush) shot through the head, and falling dovvne
therevvith, vvas by the same and tvvo or three more, stabbed in three or
foure places of his bodie with swords and daggers, before any could come
neer to his reskue. His death vvas much lamented, being in very deed an
honest vvise Gentleman and a souldier of good experience, and of as
great courage as any man might be.

In this place called S. AVGVSTINE, vve vnderstoode the King did keepe as
is before saide, one hundred and fifty souldiers, and at another place
some dozen leagues beyond to the Northvvards, called S. HELENA, he did
there likevvise keepe an hundred and fifty more, seruing there for no
other purpose, then to keepe all other nations from inhabiting any part
of al that coast, the gouernement vvherof vvas committed to one Pedro
Melendez Marquesse, Nephevv to that Melendez the Admirall, vvho had
ouerthrovven Maister Iohn Havvkins in the Bay of MEXICO some fifteene or
sixteene yeares agoe. This Gouernour had charge of both places, but vvas
at this time in this place, and one of the first that left the same.

Here it vvas resolued in full assembly of Captaines, to vndertake the
enterprise of S HELENA, and from thence to seeke out the inhabitation of
our English countreymen in VIRGINIA, distant from thence some sixe
degrees Northvvard.

When we came thvvart of Sainct _Helena_ the shols appearing dangerous,
and we hauing no Pilot to vndertake the entrie, it was thought meetest
to goe hence alongst. For the Admiral had bene the same night in foure
fadome and a halfe three leagues from the shore: and yet we vnderstood
by the help of a knowne Pilot, there may and doeth goe in ships of
greater burthen and draught then any wee had in our Fleete.

Wee passed thus alongest the coast harde aboorde the shore, which is
shallowe for a league or tvvo from the shore, and the same is lovve and
broken land for the most part.

The ninth of Iune vpon sight of one speciall great fire (which are very
ordinarie all alongst this coast, euen from the Cape FLORIDA hither) the
Generall sent his Skiffe to the shore, where they found some of our
English countrey men (that had bene sent thither the yeare before by Sir
Walter Raleigh) and brought on aboord, by vvhose direction wee proceeded
along to the place, vvhich they make their Port. But some of our shippes
beeing of great draught vnable to enter, we anckered all without the
harbour in a vvilde road at sea, about two miles from shore.

From whence the Generall wrote letters to Maister Ralfe Lane, being
Gouernour of those English in VIRGINIA, and then at his fort about six
leagues from the rode in an Island, which they call ROANOAC, wherein is
specially he shewed how ready he was to supply his necessities and
wants, which he vnderstood of, by those he had first talked withall.

The morrowe after Maister Lane himselfe and some of his companie comming
vnto him, with the consent of his Captaines he gaue them the choice of
tvvo offers, that is to say: Either he woulde leaue a ship, a pinnace,
and certaine boates with sufficient Maisters and Mariners, together
furnished vvith a monethes victuall to stay and make farther discouerie
of the countrey and coastes, and so much victuall likevvise that might
bee sufficient for the bringing of them all (being an hundred and three
persons) into England if they thought good after such time, with any
other thing they vvould desire, and that he might be able to spare.

Or else if they thought they had made sufficient discouerie alreadie,
and did desire to returne into England, he would giue them passage. But
they as it seemed, being desirous to stay, accepted verie thankfully,
and with great gladnesse that which vvas offred first. Whereupon the
ship being appointed and receaued into charge, by some of their ovvne
companie sent into her by Maister Lane, before they had receaued from
the rest of the Fleete, the prouision appointed them, there arose a
great storme (vvhich they said vvas extraordinarie and verie strange)
that lasted three daies together, and put all our Fleete in great
danger, to be driuen from their ankering vpon the coast. For vve brake
many Cables, and lost manie Ankers. And some of our Fleete which had
lost all (of vvhich number was the ship appointed for Maister Lane and
his companie) vvas driuen to put to sea in great danger, in auoyding the
coast, and could neuer see vs againe vntill we met in England. Manie
also of our small Pinnaces and boates vvere lost in this storme.

Notwithstanding after all this, the Generall offered them (with consent
of his Captaines) another ship with some prouision, although not such a
one for their turnes, as might haue bene spared them before, this being
vnable to be brought into their harbour. Or else if they vvould, to giue
them passage into England, although he knevv he should performe it vvith
greater difficultie then he might haue done before.

But Maister Lane vvith those of the chiefest of his companie he had then
with him, considering vvhat should be best for them to doe, made request
vnto the Generall vnder their handes, that they might haue passage for
England: the vvhich being graunted, and the rest sent for out of the
countrey and shipped, we departed from that coast the eighteenth of
Iune.

And so God be thanked, both they and we in good safetie arriued at
Portesmouth the eight and twentieth of Iuly 1586, to the great glorie of
God, and to no small honour to our Prince, our Countrey, and our selues.

The totall value of that which was gotten in this voyage, is estimated
at three score thousand pounds, vvhereof the companies vvhich haue
trauelled in the voyage were to haue twentie thousand pounds, the
aduenturers the other fortie. Of which twentie thousand pounds (as I can
iudge) will redound some sixe pound to the single share.

We lost some seuen hundred and fiftie men in the voiage.

The men of name that died and were slaine in this voiage as I can
presently call to my remembrance, are these.

    Captaine Powell.
    Captaine Varney.
    Captaine Moone.
    Captaine Fortescute.
    Captaine Bigges.
    Captaine Cecill.
    Captaine Hannam.
    Captaine Greenefield.
  Thomas Tucker a Lieutenant.
  Alexander Starkey a Lieutenant.
  Maister Escot a Lieutenant.
  Maister Waterhouse a Lieutenant.
  Maister Nicholas Winter.
  Maister Alexander Carleill.
  Maister Robert Alexander.
  Maister Scroope.
  Maister Iames Dier.
  Maister Peter Duke.

With some other, vvho for hast I can not so suddenly thinke on.

The ordinance gotten of all sortes brasse and Iron were about two
hundred and fortie, whereof the two hundred and some more were brasse,
and were thus founde and gotten.

In S. IAGO some two or three and fiftie peeces.

In S. DOMINGO about foure score, whereof was verie much great ordinance,
as vvhole Cannon, Dimi-Cannon, Culuerins, and such like.

In CARTAGENA some sixtie and three peeces, and good stoore likewise of
the greater sort.

In the fort of S. AVGVSTINE vvere fourteene peeces.

The rest vvas Iron ordinance, of vvhich the most part vvas gotten at S.
DOMINGO, the rest at CARTAGENA.




_Pag. 17. Lin. 3. recharging._

_Pag. 21. lin. 21. of ordinance._

_Pag. 26. lin. 3. Pannama._




{Transcriber's notes:

The corrections indicated by the three errata notes have been made:

  'keepe them from the reaching of the ordinance' corrected to
  'keepe them from the recharging of the ordinance' on page 17.

  'vvithout any resistance, or ordinaunce,' corrected to
  'vvithout any resistance, of ordinance,' on page 21.

  'and so ouerland to PANNANIA' corrected to
  'and so ouerland to PANNAMA' on page 26.

The following corrections to obvious typographical errors have also
been made:

  'nnd therefore doe onely commend the trueth' changed to
  'and therefore doe onely commend the trueth' in the Dedication.

  'slacked for a time of some better leasure,' changed to
  'slacked for a time of some better leasure.' after the Dedication.

  'Captaine in the Elizabeth Bonaduentnre' changed to
  'Captaine in the Elizabeth Bonaduenture' on page 2.

  'willed him to goe to to the Gouernour of the Citie' changed to
  'willed him to goe to the Gouernour of the Citie' on page 4.

  'Maister Carleill our Lieuteuant generall' changed to
  'Maister Carleill our Lieutenant generall' on page 6.

  'On Mnnday the six and twentieth of Nouember' changed to
  'On Monday the six and twentieth of Nouember' on page 12.

  'being some hun dred and fiftie braue horses' changed to
  'being some hundred and fiftie braue horses' on page 16. The word
  'hundred' was split over a line break without a hyphen.

  'vwich was found in the kings house' changed to
  'vvich was found in the kings house' on page 19.

  'the gronnd we were on grew to be straight' changed to
  'the ground we were on grew to be straight' on page 22.

  'Our Lieftenant generall com maunded our shot' changed to
  'Our Lieftenant generall commaunded our shot' on page 22. The word
  'commaunded' was split over a line break without a hyphen.

  'fought a while beforevv egot it' changed to
  'fought a while before vve got it' on page 24.

  'when onewas heard to speake foolishlie' changed to
  'when one was heard to speake foolishlie' on page 25.

  'full recompence of our tedious tranailes' changed to
  'full recompence of our tedious trauailes' on page 26.

  'raken the barkes vvell enough at sea' changed to
  'taken the barkes vvell enough at sea' on page 27, by reference to
  the catchword on the previous page.

  'built of vvoodden houses,,' changed to
  'built of vvoodden houses,' on page 31.

  'then any wee had in our Fleete,' changed to
  'then any wee had in our Fleete.' on page 34.

One contraction has been expanded: in
'to the number of fiue and twentie saile of ships' on page 1,
the 'm' in 'number' was represented by a horizontal line over the 'u' in
the original.

}





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of A Svmmarie and Trve Discovrse of Sir
Frances Drakes VVest Indian Voyage, by Richard Field

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SIR FRANCES DRAKES ***

***** This file should be named 19589.txt or 19589.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/9/5/8/19589/

Produced by Irma Spehar, Louise Pryor, The Kraus Collection
of Sir Francis Drake and the Online Distributed Proofreading
Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
